MS. PARKER:
May it please the court?
You may proceed.
And Mr. Smith and counsel and ladies
We want to start by thanking
and gentlemen, good morning.
you for your service here.
All of us, myself and Emily Baker and Jordon
Patterson and our whole team, want to thank you on behalf of
ourselves and also on behalf of our client.
Y'all have been
here -- what was it, a week yesterday, you came in for jury
selection and y'all have been very attentive and we
appreciate that.
And I'm looking forward to going over now our
summary of what the evidence was and how we think you should
answer the verdict form in the case.
You know, y'all have heard a lot of evidence here
over this last week -- over a week.
But what I've tried to
do was boil it all down into just those few things that are
the most important that you need to remember when you're 105
evaluating the case, and those are the reasons why at the
end you should return a verdict in favor of Reynolds.
There are actually ten
So let me go over those.
And the first truth is
very simple truths about this case.
this case is only about one person, and that's Mrs. Wanette
Smith.
Every question on the verdict form asks about
It's not a crusade.
It's
Mrs. Smith.
not a chance for you to vote on how you feel about smoking,
because our society has already done that.
This is not a cause.
Our society, knowing full well that cigarettes are
risky and cause death, has decided that cigarettes should be
a legal product.
You heard a lot from the trial from Ms. Barnett,
and you heard from Ms. Barnett again this morning, general
statements about cigarettes, talking about other companies,
evidence about other companies, evidence about periods of
time before Mrs. Smith was ever born, evidence about periods
of time before she started smoking.
None of that has anything to do with this case.
What's important here is one smoker, and that's Mrs. Smith.
So that's the first simple truth.
Mrs. Smith.
You're only here about
The second truth is that Mrs. Smith knew the
risks, and she knew them the whole time she smoked.
When 106
you're trying to answer the questions on the verdict form,
you need to keep in mind the real Mrs. Smith.
You need to
keep in mind what was the evidence about what kind of person
she was, why she smoked.
We brought you a historian, Dr. Elizabeth Hoffman,
Dr. Hoffman researched
who testified yesterday.
Mrs. Smith's life.
Jacksonville and went to a number of other places.
conducted research so she could come in and show you
everything that Mrs. Smith had been exposed to.
Remember, she said she came here to
She
But here, in their effort to get money, they
They're
That's what they've been doing
And that's why Mr. Smith, in
have -- they are trying to repackage Mrs. Smith.
trying to repackage her.
throughout the whole trial.
his deposition, testified under oath that Mrs. -- you heard
him again this morning -- that Mrs. Smith did not know about
the health risks of smoking until she was told in 1993 about
the bronchitis and then when she was told in 1995 about the
lung cancer.
This is a lady who smoked.
Every single cigarette
Every single cigarette she
had a warning on the package.
This is not a case
smoked had a warning on the package.
where somebody started smoking back in the 1930s or the
1940s or 1950s or early 1960 before there were warnings.
That's a different situation.
This is a case where, again, 107
every cigarette she smoked had a warning.
missed those messages.
messages.
And Mrs. Smith didn't miss those
No one could have
I want to go over with you what -- the evidence
that you have heard in this case, in this courtroom, about
how Mrs. Smith knew about the health risks of smoking.
Let's start with her parents, if you'll follow
Her parents did not approve of smoking, and
along with me.
they told her and her brothers and sisters smoking was
unhealthy.
remember, he gave up cigarettes when he was saved, and he
made sure that his cigarettes -- that his children did not
smoke cigarettes and that they didn't drink.
Her father was a Baptist minister.
And,
Same thing with her mother.
The evidence is her
mother told her and her brothers and sisters when they were
growing up that they shouldn't smoke.
warnings to her.
Those are all
And then remember Barbara Selph.
She's the lady
who came in -- she's a sister-in-law, and she came and
And
testified -- I think it was last Thursday afternoon.
she testified that she told Mrs. Smith about her mother.
Her mother had cancer.
She told Mrs. Smith her mother's
cancer was caused by smoking.
that stand that that conversation happened in the 1960s.
Again, another warning to Mrs. Smith.
And she testified there from 108
When Mrs. Smith's father passed away in 1973, her
Nobody -- no
mother said, No smoking in this house.
visitors, no guests, nobody could smoke in the house.
And then when she became pregnant with their first
child, James Jr., back in 1973, you heard from this witness
stand that Mrs. Smith admitted in 1973 that she knew smoking
was bad for her baby and she knew smoking was bad for her.
That's what she admitted back in 1973.
And then we have medical records.
medical records we have about this are 1978.
actually have two records from 1978 where she was told by
her doctors to stop smoking.
Now, what more of a warning
can you get when your doctor tells you you should stop
smoking?
The earliest
And we
In 1980, we have a medical record that shows
Mrs. Smith told her doctor that she had a smoker's cough.
And, again, that's what she told her doctor.
There's an
admission.
See right there where she wrote it in?
And then you heard that Mrs. Smith told her sons
when they were growing up, when they were little, that they
shouldn't smoke.
And, in fact, she told her sons, I don't want to
catch you with a cigarette ever.
who's asking for money here, came in and testified.
And her son Brian, the one
He admitted that his mother had told him that he 109
Remember he talked about the incident at
shouldn't smoke.
the bus stop, that he said, Well, she only told me one time?
Well, that still is an admission by Mrs. Smith.
But, again,
that's another effort where they're trying to repackage her.
And, in turn, you heard Mrs. Smith told her --
that Mrs. Smith told her children and, in turn, her children
told her, Mom, we don't want you to smoke.
Another warning
to her.
This is really important.
And then remember the life insurance application.
It's marked
It's going to be with you when you go back to
In 1987, Mrs. Smith applied for life insurance,
This is from 1987.
in evidence.
deliberate.
and she had to fill out this form, and she signed it, not
just once, but twice.
page.
insured -- that's Mrs. Smith -- used tobacco in any form
within the past 12 months?
Okay.
what does that mean?
was still smoking back then.
And it has her name at the top of the
And it asks this question:
Has the proposed
And she answered, No.
So
Every witness who testified said she
Well, either that information is correct and she
had been able to quit for 12 months back in 1987, which
shows she -- that's proof that she could have quit earlier
than 1995, or she answered the way she did because she knew
that smoking had a higher -- people who smoked had a higher
That's why they're answering
rate for their life insurance. 110
that question.
Again, it shows her awareness.
Mrs. Smith kept up with current events.
There's
absolutely no question about that in this case.
You heard
from the stand that she read cover to cover the newspaper
here, the Florida Times-Union.
You heard that she watched
the news on TV every night.
subscription to Reader's Digest.
publications, like Dr. Hoffman showed you yesterday -- all
of those publications and what was on the news over and over
and over again about the health risks of smoking.
You heard that she had the
And all of those
And then, remember, her family members used the
Okay.
Now,
terms "cancer sticks" and "coffin nails."
somebody hears people talking about cancer sticks, that's
information that they know that cigarettes cause cancer.
So
And then that brings us up to the warnings.
these warnings are the ones that have been known since
January 1st of 1966.
And remember the story about how
Mrs. Smith started smoking, because her older sister Carmen
was driving and wanted her to light her cigarettes for her?
Well, I asked some questions of the family
Carmen was three
When Carmen
members so we could get this established.
years older than Mrs. Smith, three years older.
turned age 16, that was 1968.
driving.
for when Mrs. Smith started smoking.
1968 seems to be the best time -- the best date
Even if she started
1968 is when she started
Okay. 111
smoking a little while earlier, it was still with warnings
on every one of these packages.
And let's show the warnings.
This was the first
warning and then the second warning and then the warnings
now.
By the way, one of the things that Mr. Smith tried to
do as part of this repackaging -- remember, he had said in
his deposition, She didn't know; she didn't know; she didn't
know about the health risks of smoking up until 1993 or
1995.
meant was she knew, but she didn't know it caused lung
cancer.
When he came to court, he tried to say, Well, what I
Well, here -- look right here.
This warning from
1985 forward, that first warning specifically says smoking
causes lung cancer.
The evidence in this case is -- shows that it's
just not credible to believe that this lady, who read the
newspaper, watched TV, was told by all these family members
about smoking, told by her doctor, and had a warning on
every package -- it's just not credible to believe that she
did not know about the health risks of smoking.
Mrs. Smith did know, but she enjoyed smoking, and she wanted
to smoke anyhow.
The real
Now, I want to take a minute and talk to you about
what the evidence was about the low-tar cigarettes and about
filters.
Mr. Smith said on the stand -- and we showed you 112
his deposition testimony this morning.
who bought cigarettes for her, remember?
that she never smoked a low-tar cigarette or a light
cigarette.
There's been no evidence of that.
Mr. Smith said
Mr. Smith is the one
And then with respect to the filters, every one of
those filtered cigarettes -- she only smoked filtered, by
the way.
Every one of those had a warning.
There's not a single advertisement that has been
shown in this case that is tied to Mrs. Smith.
advertisements that anybody said, Hey, Mrs. Smith saw this
one or Mrs. Smith saw that one.
There are no
And that brings us to truth number three, and that
You're going to be
is Mrs. Smith was able to quit smoking.
asked on the verdict form in Questions 3 and 4 about
addiction.
you need to know about that.
And this information is the most important fact
Addiction was not the legal cause of any of
Mrs. Smith's problems, because she was able and she did
quit.
Was the evidence in this case that nicotine addiction
took over her brain and kept her from being able to quit so
she just kept on smoking until she passed away?
evidence that she became a robot because of the nicotine and
had no choice but to just keep on smoking, or was the
evidence in the case that Mrs. Smith had the ability to quit
but she just chose to continue smoking because that's what
Was the 113
she wanted to do, she enjoyed smoking?
Remember, 60 million people have quit smoking in
They are.
And that's been known for hundreds of
It's not about somebody else and whether somebody
this country, 60 million people.
Now, this case is not
about the general issue about whether cigarettes can be
addictive for some other people, whether cigarettes are
addictive.
years.
else is addicted.
Mrs. Smith addicted to cigarettes, and why did Mrs. Smith
smoke?
Was it because of her addiction, or was it because
she had a choice?
here?
It's only about Mrs. Smith.
What was the legal cause of her illnesses
Was
Mrs. Smith and the evidence -- the evidence about
the real Mrs. Smith just doesn't fit the profile of somebody
who tried over and over real hard to try to quit, somebody
who tried sincerely to quit, somebody who was persistent in
trying to quit but who wasn't able to.
You know, there may be some people out there like
Again,
That is not Mrs. Smith.
But that is not her.
that.
another effort to repackage her.
And, again, the most important thing -- the most
important fact about this whole addiction issue is that
Mrs. Smith did quit smoking.
She successfully quit smoking.
cigarette.
She successfully quit smoking.
She never picked up another
And she successfully quit smoking for six years 114
until she passed away.
she did quit.
We know she was able to quit because
Now, Ms. Barnett talked about these chemicals in
your brain, and you heard about some of that at the trial.
But here's what the evidence shows:
Nicotine does not
prevent smokers from understanding the health risks of
smoking.
Nicotine does not prevent smokers from quitting.
And every single witness that they called,
Dr. Burns, Dr. Cummings, every one of them admitted any
smoker can quit, including heavily-addicted smokers.
And, remember, Dr. Cummings showed -- we showed
He
that brochure he has, and we talked about his clinic.
has people who come to him, and he gives them a brochure
saying, Hey, you can quit; here's how; here's a brochure.
And then the very first witness that the
plaintiffs called was Dr. Burns.
testified many, many, many times for plaintiffs' lawyers
like this.
Remember him?
He's
But even Dr. Burns admitted -- when Ms. Baker was
asking him questions, even Dr. Burns admitted the smoker has
control of her own behavior, and addiction does not relieve
a smoker of responsibility for her own behavior.
And isn't that really the bottom line for this
If smokers had no choice, the way that they're
case?
talking about, you would not see all these fluctuations -- 115
remember all those fluctuations in sales that was talked
about?
You wouldn't see that up and down and up and down
and up and down if their theory were correct, that people
started smoking and nicotine took over their brain and that
was it.
Instead, people smoke because they have a choice
There are a lot of different
You have to make the decision for yourself.
here in the United States.
people -- a lot of different reasons why people then decide
And one of those reasons is if
they want to quit smoking.
they have a health concern.
And that's what happened with
But what's important is you have to want
Mrs. Smith here.
to quit.
You
And you have to really
have to be the one to decide that.
want to quit, because it may be hard at first.
You know,
You may not want to do it.
you may have some difficulty.
But you have got to have that sincere motivation.
If you
don't have it for yourself, it's not going to work.
not going to be able to quit.
You're
The fact is that Mrs. Smith enjoyed smoking.
you heard Mr. Smith admit on the witness stand that she
actually used those words.
She said, I enjoyed smoking.
of cigarettes.
She actually used those words.
She said, I enjoyed the taste
And
Addiction does not explain risky choices that all
of us make every day about how we want to live our lives. 116
Whether you -- we were talking about ordering lunch in.
You know, whether you eat something healthy or
whether you have potato chips, or if you go to McDonald's,
or, when you go home, you know, do you watch TV, or are you
going to go out and go for a walk, or do you drive, like, a
sporty little convertible that has a soft top, or do you
want something more substantial, like a heavy truck with a
hard top so it's safer -- those are choices that we make
every day about health risks.
And those choices aren't made because of
Those choices are made because of things like
addiction.
pleasure and relaxation, same as Mrs. Smith with her
smoking.
Mrs. Smith could have quit smoking
Truth No. 4:
Until she made up her mind that she was truly
earlier.
motivated to quit in 1995 when she was diagnosed with lung
cancer, she only made two -- you heard from her husband --
two efforts to quit before then.
And both of those efforts
were half-hearted.
This was over a 27-year period.
She started
smoking around 1968, and she didn't quit until 1995.
That
is 27 years where we only have evidence in this case of two
efforts to quit.
Now, can you really say that's somebody who has a
sincere interest to quit, somebody who is really persistent 117
and really trying to quit?
they only tried to quit twice?
Can you really say that when
And what happened those two times?
Well, one time
Remember, it was a full-day
is when she went to the class.
class here in Jacksonville about how to stop smoking.
And
Mr. Smith admitted she only went for a couple of hours, and
then she left.
And Mr. Smith said she just didn't want to
do it.
The other time she tried was when she went to the
She didn't go to the doctor to
doctor for her bronchitis.
say, Hey, help me quit smoking.
She went to the doctor, and
she was diagnosed with the bronchitis, and her doctor said,
Hey, you need to quit; I'm giving you a patch.
And remember, she only tried it for about a week.
And even then she did not throw away her ashtrays or her
lighters or anything like that.
testified she didn't stick with it.
that's somebody who was making a whole-hearted effort to
quit?
And, again, Mr. Smith
Can you really say that
And then in 1995, that is when she did become
motivated to quit.
That's when she was diagnosed with lung
cancer, and that's when she, herself, said, Hey, I need to
quit, and I'm going to quit.
She
stuck with it then, including wearing those patches off and
on for the period of time that she did.
And she was successful. 118
That is an example of somebody who was trying to
And she was successful.
quit.
cigarettes six years until she passed away.
She had no withdrawal.
And she stayed off
No withdrawal.
And, remember, you even heard from their witness,
You heard on the videotape this morning Mr. Smith
Dr. Cummings, withdrawal is a hallmark of addiction.
had none.
say, She seemed fine to me.
irritable?
Was she nervous?
they were the ones who were living together.
He was asked, Was she
No, no, none of that.
She
And
We know that Mrs. Smith was capable of quitting
because she did quit.
speculate on that at trial here when you're deliberating.
Now, the question on the verdict form asks you
And you're not going to have to
about addiction and legal cause.
cause."
It uses that word, "legal
So when you're considering that question, just
remember addiction did not prevent her from quitting.
Addiction did not prevent her from trying to quit earlier if
she had been really and truly motivated.
So that brings us to truth No. 5, which is
Every one of the
Mrs. Smith cannot establish legal cause.
plaintiff's claims in this case, every one of them -- and
they have the burden of proof on every one of their
claims -- every one of their claims requires legal cause. 119
It's going to be on the verdict form and in the instructions
you're going to get from Judge Huck.
And that means that there has to be a link between
There
Mrs. Smith and something Reynolds did or didn't do.
has to be a connection, not guesswork, but there has to be
legal cause there.
Okay?
This is not no fault.
You know, like, if
you drive a car, you can get no-fault insurance, and if you
go -- if you hit somebody, the insurance company has to pay,
and it doesn't matter whose fault it was.
the case is.
That's not what
In this case, they have to prove -- the plaintiffs
have to prove that there was a connection, that there was
legal cause between Mrs. Smith and whatever it is that
they're claiming, whatever that particular thing is that
they're claiming.
One is like cars, okay?
And it's kind of like -- you know, I was thinking
last night, working on my notes to talk to you today -- if
you think about -- I want to give you a couple of examples
to think about.
So most of us, I
guess, drove in this morning.
There's a speed limit, right?
It says 55 miles an hour, 30 miles an hour, wherever you're
But your car can go, what, 90, 100 miles an hour?
driving.
It's on the speedometer.
That
doesn't mean it's legal for you to go that fast.
Your car can go that fast.
It's up to 120
It's up to the driver.
you.
the choice.
The driver is the one who has
Another example for you to think about is, like,
compare that to prescription medicine.
prescription medicine, it's different.
choice.
taking medicine that's prescribed for you.
that, too.
You're not doing something voluntarily.
With
Okay.
You're not making a
You're
So remember
A lot
And that brings us to the next truth about this
case, and that is there was no reliance by Mrs. Smith on
anything that Reynolds did or said or failed to do.
of this evidence that you've heard from other companies -- a
lot of this evidence you heard was for periods of time when
Mrs. Smith didn't smoke.
A lot of this evidence that you've
heard, there's no connection that Mrs. Smith ever saw it,
ever heard it, ever knew anything about it.
Don't let --
don't let all of that -- put that aside.
Don't let any of
that evidence influence you.
the questions on the verdict form which has to do with
Mrs. Smith.
Don't let it distract you from
Dr. Cummings testified that there were 16 million
documents from tobacco companies that are now publicly
available.
have they done?
They have cherry-picked a few and pulled
out little sentences here and there to come into court to
They're on the Internet.
16 million.
But what 121
That is what is going on.
try to make us look bad.
they're trying to make us look bad so that you will be
distracted and you won't focus on Mrs. Smith.
question on the verdict form.
And that's a
Because
Let me give you some examples.
Some of the
Is that fair?
documents they showed you were drafts.
that have a connection to Mrs. Smith, when there's just a
draft document that she didn't even know -- that wasn't even
acted on?
Does
Some of the documents weren't even from Reynolds.
For example, they kept talking about -- with the deposition
of Dr. Gentry, this document that talked about -- that was
from a company in England.
England.
And remember I said, She's never even been to
She didn't smoke cigarettes from England.
And then Philip Morris -- remember, they played a
video of a lady who was on -- I think it was Nightline, and
she was asked about Philip Morris making contributions to
the movie to get Marlboro in the Superman movie.
Marlboro
Philip Morris is a competitor of
is not made by Reynolds.
Reynolds.
And then remember they had the list of all the
movies that they were trying to get placement of cigarettes
in?
That was Philip Morris.
That was not Reynolds.
And then, remember, again, there's another 122
document that they asked about over and over.
And they
said, Oh, the evidence is overwhelming; the evidence is
overwhelming.
that same paragraph that said, Hey, wait a minute; we're
also looking at air pollution and other things.
On cross-examination, we showed the rest of
And then, remember, they kept on -- when they had
their witness on the stand, they kept on showing this
document from 1959 by a Reynolds scientist named
Dr. Rodgman that talked carcinogens in smoke.
And they were like, Oh, there are carcinogens in
They knew in 1959.
smoke.
kept it a secret.
They knew.
They knew.
They
Reader's Digest had an article that exact same
Remember I said, Hey, it's the same month.
It was
month.
both in November.
Digest says the same thing.
November of that year, 1959, Reader's
That's not a secret.
And then Mr. Cummings tried to make a big deal
about a document that was written by a lady from Reynolds
named Diane Burroughs.
And, remember, he kept saying, Oh,
this proves that they're trying to market to kids, trying to
And, remember, when I cross-examined him, I
market to kids.
said, Hey, wait a minute.
That document talks about 18- to
24-year-olds.
where the period of -- that the age they're talking about is
18-year-olds to 24-year-olds.
And there were 200 places in that document
And it is legal for 123
18-year-olds to smoke cigarettes.
document was written, how old was Mrs. Smith?
Again, that has nothing to do with Mrs. Smith.
effort for them to try to make us look bad.
And at the time that
She was 29.
It's just an
And then remember they showed the video of the
And the CEO of
CEOs of the tobacco companies and they showed a little clip
where they were asked one after another about is smoking
addictive, and the CEO of Reynolds was cut off, he was not
allowed to finish answering?
And so when it was my turn to
ask questions, I played the rest of it.
Reynolds explained very clearly, you know what, there was an
earlier definition of addiction, something called the
classic definition of addiction, the definition that was
used in the 1964 Surgeon General's report.
definition for addiction required intoxication.
remember, he gave that great example.
about to get on a plane and take off and fly, do you want
your pilot to have smoked a cigarette, or do you want your
pilot to have snorted coke or shot up heroin or had a beer?
Cigarettes are not intoxicating.
The testimony he gave was
absolutely correct.
And that
And,
He's like, If you're
Again, they played a little snip and tried to make
us look bad.
Mrs. Smith?
of this?
None.
But overall, what does this have to do with
What evidence is there that Mrs. Smith saw any 124
If there is anything that Mrs. Smith actually saw,
actually relied on, actually heard, that's different.
there is no evidence like that in this case.
But
She didn't see any of these internal documents.
What was the
These documents have nothing to do with her.
evidence from her family members from the witness stand?
Here's what they testified:
That she never saw or
heard any kind of statement from a cigarette company, that
she never said anything a tobacco company did got her to
start smoking.
MS. BARNETT:
Your Honor, I object and ask to
reopen the evidence.
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
Overruled.
She never said that anything a
tobacco company said caused her to continue smoking.
family members said she had never heard of this TIRC.
had never heard of the Tobacco Institute.
of CTR.
She had never had any communications with any tobacco
company.
She never had any communications with Reynolds.
Her
She
She never heard
And Mr. Smith agreed that Mrs. Smith was her own
She was smart; she was intelligent.
He said she
person.
was not gullible.
But what did Ms. Barnett tell you this morning?
I would like to
Ms. Barnett said she fell for the lies. 125
respectfully submit to you that that's an effort to
repackage the real Mrs. Smith.
And then what about Dr. Cummings, the one who
Remember, he came in here and he had
testified on Monday?
this PowerPoint slide show that he went through?
remember, Ms. Barnett even asked him a question about Linda
Denton, who was the plaintiff in the last case that they
worked on together.
And I think I heard Ms. Barnett say
Linda Denton just a few minutes ago when she was going
through her closing.
And
Dr. Cummings goes around the country, he goes from
He has this PowerPoint set of slides
one place to another.
and he goes through them for everybody.
Let me go over and remind you what Dr. Cummings
Here's a set of all the depositions that
did not look at.
were taken in this case.
Dr. Cummings read this many, pages that were
selected for him by the lawyers for Mr. Smith.
And the medical records, there were 1400 pages of
medical records.
Dr. Cummings reviewed 15 pages pulled out and
selected for him by the lawyers for Mr. Smith.
Dr. Cummings did not know about the real facts of
He did not even know about that life insurance
He said,
Remember I asked him about it.
Mrs. Smith.
policy from 1987. 126
No, I don't know anything about that.
All he does is go around and give the same opinion
everywhere; everybody's addicted.
smoker who smokes even one cigarette a day, everybody's
addicted.
Remember, he said every
They showed you a few advertisements.
So let me
go back -- I know I talked about it a few minutes ago, but I
want to talk about it in a little more detail now.
She did not start smoking because of
All of the evidence is that she started smoking
Her older sister
There is zero, zero, evidence of that in
advertisements.
this case.
because her sister smoked.
after witness, everybody agreed to that.
is the one who was driving, asked her to light up her
cigarettes for her and then hand the cigarette to her.
That's why she started smoking, not because of any ads.
Remember everybody, witness
And remember we showed you the law -- if we could
It was illegal for Mrs. Smith to buy
pull this up.
cigarettes herself until she turned age 18.
1973.
And that was
And then Ms. Barnett -- her witnesses have tried
Remember
Oh, there are these coupons and, you know, all that
to make a big to-do about the coupons on Raleigh.
that?
you heard about coupons.
But what did Mr. Smith say?
Okay.
He was the 127
They were married for 29
What did
You heard him say this morning, She didn't smoke to
She smoked Raleighs, and
person who was living with her.
years, and he was buying the cigarettes for her.
he say?
get coupons.
it just happened that Raleighs had coupons on there.
didn't rely on anything on those coupons.
evidence.
She
That's not the
She liked Raleighs.
And, again, that's another effort to repackage her
in a way that just does not fit with the true facts of her
life.
By the way, those advertisements were all legal.
Every one of those
It was legal to advertise cigarettes.
advertisements you saw were legal.
There is zero evidence here that Mrs. Smith ever
saw or heard anything from Reynolds; zero evidence that
Reynolds had any impact on her smoking decisions; zero
evidence that Reynolds did anything that impacted or
affected Mrs. Smith's choices to continue smoking.
That brings us to the next truth, which is that
the government knows that cigarettes are dangerous.
the documents that y'all have seen in this case, our
government knows all about them.
cigarettes can cause death.
cigarettes can cause cancer.
Our government knows that
Our government knows that
All of
MS. BARNETT:
Objection, Your Honor.
Pretrial 128
ruling.
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
But our government has said that there are
Overruled.
Our government is aware of every bit
of that.
warnings on the cigarette packages, and those warnings are
adequate and sufficient as a matter of law.
They're set by
Congress to warn people.
None of this that you saw in the
trial is not already known by the federal government, by the
State of Florida, by the National Cancer Institute, by the
Surgeon General or any of those groups.
Our society has decided that cigarettes can be
legally sold.
Now, that is Truth No. 8:
Cigarettes are a legal
And Reynolds can't be held liable just for making
Can't be held liable just for making
Okay.
And Reynolds has complied with all -- there's
product.
cigarettes.
cigarettes.
absolutely no evidence otherwise.
with all federal and state laws the entire time Mrs. Smith
smoked.
Reynolds has complied
MS. BARNETT:
Your Honor, objection.
Violation of
that Kessler injunction.
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
Overruled.
You will not be asked on the verdict
form to decide whether or not cigarettes should be legal or
whether or not cigarettes should be sold, because that 129
decision has already been made.
This is America, and in America, we have freedom
to make choices, including sometimes choices that may turn
out not to be the best ones for your health.
Now, the first -- I'm going to transition.
And
the first couple of questions you're going to have on the
verdict form have to do with the medical issues.
to talk about those.
And here's the next truth:
is that Mrs. Smith had BAC.
So I want
And that
When you get to that question on the verdict form,
which is the first one, your answer should be no, she did
not have a non-BAC.
And they had the burden of proof on
this.
There are five things you need to know about the
You know, there's a lot of
medical case, and that's all.
complicated medical jargon that was discussed, but only five
things you need to know.
proof.
One is they have the burden of
They have to prove it; we don't.
No. 2:
The pathology is the deciding factor here.
Remember, Dr. Barsky said the tissue is the issue?
Any hospital, any doctor, if you have a question
about what type of cancer somebody has, that decision is
made by the pathologist.
That's a second thing you know,
pathology.
Third thing is, let's compare Dr. Barsky and 130
Dr. Barsky is a pathologist.
He's a cancer researcher.
Dr. Feingold.
170 articles.
committee that nominates people for Nobel Prizes.
cancer researcher who's gotten grants from the National
Cancer Institute, Susan G. Komen.
He's a professor in
pathology.
He's board certified in pathology.
He's on the
He has written
He's a
Compare him to Dr. Feingold.
Dr. Feingold is not
He cannot sign pathology reports at a
An insurance company will not reimburse him for
a pathologist.
hospital.
any time he spends on pathology opinions because he can't do
that because he's not qualified.
What has he published?
He's published three
papers about lawsuits that he -- he wrote with Mr. Wilner,
and then he wrote that book about birth control.
He's done
no cancer research.
He has no pathology training.
You heard him admit
that he even hires pathologists to help him in his
consulting business when he needs a pathologist.
And what does he do for a living?
He goes around
90 percent of his income comes from that.
and he testifies.
Remember, he said he and Mr. Wilner were best friends.
Fourth thing you need to remember is the
definition that matters about BAC is the one that was in
place back when she was diagnosed with cancer in 1995.
All that -- they tried to show Dr. Barsky 131
yesterday saying, Oh, no, that's not the right definition;
you ought to look at this other.
That was all recent.
And you remember he said, Oh, this is from
Chest -- you remember he put up there, This is Chest?
Those are pulmonologists.
Those are not
They're trying to say Dr. Barsky is wrong
pathologists.
because the pulmonologists have changed the way they define
BAC.
Okay?
But remember what Dr. Barsky said?
He said, I'm
still me even if they change my name.
they say I'm Fred McGilliCutty, I'm still me.
It's like even if
And that's the same with BAC.
BAC is a type of
Remember, there's small cell, non-small
Non-small cell is divided into different
adenocarcinoma.
cell cancer.
types.
of adenocarcinoma.
One of those is adenocarcinoma, and BAC is a subtype
And then here's the ultimate issue about the lung
When y'all go back there think about this.
And
cancer.
Ms. Barnett has some more time to talk to you after I
finish.
time I'll be able to talk to you.
because she has the burden of proof.
She's saved some of her time.
She gets to go last
But this is the last
And I'd like to challenge her, in her time that
she speaks to you afterwards, to give you a good reason
about this -- what I'm about to tell you; and that is, 132
Dr. Feingold admitted and Dr. Barsky explained there are two
tests that they could have done -- one is called KRAS and
one's called EGRF -- two DNA tests that they could have done
on the pathology for Mrs. Smith that would have shown
whether Ms. Smith had a cancer that was caused by smoking or
a cancer that was not.
And they have the burden of proof, and they did
Why not?
not run those tests.
didn't want the answer?
when their own witness admitted they're available and could
Why didn't they run those tests?
be run on the pathology?
Why didn't they run those tests
You think it's because they
And, by the way, BAC causes death, just like every
other type of lung cancer.
All right.
That was the lung cancer claim.
Let's
And this is the second
talk about the next claim they have.
question on the verdict form.
And Mrs. Smith had asthma.
She didn't have COPD.
She had
And there were
Remember the testimony -- she had lifelong asthma.
asthma starting back when she was a child.
55 different references in the medical records to her having
asthma.
Her
son had asthma.
Mrs. Smith had asthma.
Her sister had asthma.
There's just no dispute that she had --
She was on an inhaler.
Now, what is the evidence -- what was the evidence
about the COPD?
Because there is a reference obviously in 133
Well, she had one test.
She
And, remember, they
the medical record about it.
had one PFT, pulmonary function test.
gave her that test to see whether or not she could have
surgery to remove part of her lung.
postpone the surgery because she had such severe bronchitis
at the time.
And they had to
Remember, Dr. Farber testified yesterday and said
she had -- he used the word "nasty," that she had nasty
mucous secretions that were so bad that her surgeon said, I
can't operate on this lady, okay?
time that they gave her that pulmonary function test, okay?
That is the period of
But what happened?
It cleared up.
She didn't have continuing COPD.
cleared up.
up, and they were able to do that surgery on her.
All of that
It cleared
There is -- remember, there are no radiology
There was not a word in
findings in this case about COPD.
any pathology report that she had COPD.
And then Mr. Smith
has admitted when he testified here he didn't know she had
it.
So your answer to Question 1 on the verdict form
about lung cancer, your answer to Question 2 about COPD, the
plaintiff has the burden of proof on both of those.
And we
would like to respectfully submit that your answer to both
of those should be no.
No and no.
Now, you'll be given the verdict form when you go 134
And the verdict form has -- let's see how many
I want to go
It has a number of questions on there.
back, okay?
it is.
over it with you now.
I think all of those truths, those ten truths that
I went over with you, that is the information that you need
to be -- to be able to answer every one of these questions.
You're going to hear the instructions of law from
And Judge Huck is going to explain that the
Judge Huck.
plaintiff has the burden of proof on all of her claims.
And you're also going to hear from Judge Huck that
You know, it's always -- it's always sad, it's
you shouldn't decide the case based on sympathy or
prejudice.
always difficult, when somebody passes away.
And, of
course, we all have sympathy when something like that
happens.
But when you're reaching your decision in this
case, you're going to be instructed from Judge -- by Judge
Huck that you -- you have to put that sympathy aside.
Now, the first four questions on the verdict form,
And I'd like to ask if
the first two are the medical ones.
you'd answer no and no to those.
If your answers are no, you stop right there.
I -- part of my job, I've got to go over all the other
questions, as well.
But
The next two questions relate to this issue about 135
And, again, Mrs. Smith was able to quit smoking.
She didn't even make an effort other
addiction.
She did quit smoking.
than half-hearted ones to try to quit before then.
didn't smoke for any reason other than she wanted to,
knowing, knowing, knowing that the risks of smoking were out
there.
So we'd like to respectfully ask that you answer no
to those questions.
She
The next question on the verdict form has to do
And it's May 5th of 1990.
with a date, okay?
And here's --
this is a -- kind of an unusual question, because the first
question on the verdict form -- I mean, the second question
on the verdict form asked you about the COPD claim.
we're asking you to answer no to that, because she had
asthma, okay?
We're asking you to answer no.
And
But if -- if -- for whatever reason, if somehow
you go forward on that question, this one asks you, Well,
when did she have it?
And, again, our position is she didn't have it.
But if you disagree with us, she -- she knew -- she knew, or
had reason to know -- that's all the question asks -- that
there was a -- I'm going to read this to you:
Mrs. Smith
knew or should have known that there was a reasonable
possibility her injury was caused by cigarette smoking if
the injury manifested itself in a way that supplied some
evidence -- not a diagnosis, not proof, just some 136
evidence -- of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking
before this date in 1990.
Well, what do we know about what she knew before
We knew -- we've got two doctors' records that told
1990?
her to quit smoking.
1980 that showed that she went to the doctor and said she
had a smoker's cough.
MS. BARNETT:
Objection to misstatement of the
We've got another doctor's record from
law.
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
Overruled.
So, again, our position is, check no.
But if you happen to
She did not have COPD; she had asthma.
go forward, she knew about all that.
cough, she knew she had shortness of breath -- her
sister-in-law Barbara Selph testified to that -- well before
this cutoff period in 1990.
She knew she had a
The next set of questions on the verdict form,
And I've
Legal cause is not plain old
every one of them asked you about legal cause.
already talked about that.
cause like if, you know, we were talking, okay?
is a very special legal meaning that you're going to hear
about from Judge Huck.
Legal cause
So what does all that mean?
Well, for example,
Ms. Barnett talked this morning about some safety rules.
You remember she said, Oh, there would be safety rules? 137
You're not going to hear about any of that from Judge Huck.
Mrs. Smith -- Mr. Smith has to prove that
Mrs. Smith would not have developed these illnesses but for
Reynolds and negligence and design defects on the part of
Reynolds.
attacks that don't have anything to do with Mrs. Smith is
not enough.
And they failed to do that.
These general
The next questions on the verdict form --
actually, it's Questions 8 and 10 -- are going to ask you
specifically about reliance, specifically going to ask you
about reliance.
And that goes back to she didn't rely on something
Internal documents don't
she never saw and she never heard.
matter.
You're going to be asked some questions about the
date -- this date of May 5th of 1982 -- and you're going to
have the jury instructions from Judge Huck back there with
you.
about to read to you.
But be sure to pay attention to this one part I'm
It says in there that Mr. Smith has to prove to
you that Mrs. Smith relied on something between 1982 and
1994, okay?
at all of this.
So just remember those dates as you're looking
There's no evidence to support that.
And I want to take a minute and talk to you about
those Engle findings from the other jury, from Miami, a 138
I said this at the beginning of --
number of years ago.
when I first talked to you, when we had our opening
statements.
from that other jury do not answer the questions on your
verdict form here, okay?
But let me just tell you again:
Those findings
You're the only jury to hear about Mrs. Smith.
You're the only jury to hear about her smoking, about her
illnesses, her life, about what she knew, about the fact she
had a warning on every package of cigarettes.
jury did not hear any of that.
the questions on your verdict form here.
That other
You are the jury to decide
And then that gets us up to the question about
comparative fault, and it asks you to decide percentages
between Mrs. Smith and Reynolds.
Who decided whether she would start smoking?
So what does -- has the evidence been about that?
The evidence has been that Mrs. Smith smoked with her eyes
Who made all those decisions for her about her
wide open.
smoking?
Who
decided what brand she would smoke?
would switch and what she would switch to?
whether she would try to quit?
try to quit?
Who made all those decisions?
Who decided how she would
Who decided when she
Who decided
She did.
She made all those decisions for
herself.
No one forced Mrs. Smith to smoke.
No one forced 139
her to start smoking or to continue smoking.
made the choice to smoke.
diagnosed with lung cancer and she became motivated, she
made the choice to quit.
And in 1995, when she was
Mrs. Smith
Every time that Mrs. Smith lit up a cigarette with
There was
a warning on the pack, she made that choice.
nothing that Reynolds did other than make -- make those
cigarettes, and that is not enough -- we can't -- we can't
be held liable for just making cigarettes.
That's legal.
There's nothing that Reynolds did that caused Mrs. Smith to
start smoking or to continue smoking.
And that's why we're going to ask you to put 100
percent responsibility for Mrs. Smith.
MS. BARNETT:
Objection to that argument, Your
Honor, based on the law in Florida.
Overruled.
We're going to ask you to put 100
Mrs. Smith is the person who chose
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
percent by Mrs. Smith.
to smoke.
knowing there were warnings on every package.
the one who chose not to make a sincere, whole-hearted,
persistent effort to quit prior to when she was diagnosed
with lung cancer.
Mrs. Smith is the person who chose to smoke
Mrs. Smith is
So we're going to respectfully ask you, if you get
down that far, 100 percent of the responsibility in this 140
case is Mrs. Smith.
Now, I want to be -- I want to be clear about
We are not criticizing her.
We're not criticizing
She has that right.
this.
her for smoking.
Mrs. Smith had that right to make those choices.
saying she should -- her husband should not now be allowed
to come into court and get money from us for the choices
that she made about how she wanted to live her life.
That gets us to the question about damages.
In the United States,
But we are
And I
hate to even talk about this question -- the verdict form,
but I have to.
They are asking for $10 million.
That's a
windfall that they have pulled -- they've pulled that number
out of thin air.
They're asking for $10 million for a lady
who smoked --
MS. BARNETT:
Your Honor, objection.
There's a
pretrial ruling on this matter.
Overruled.
That's asking $10 million for a lady
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
who smoked with a warning on every package of cigarettes.
That's not right.
case should be zero.
damages.
You should award no damages, no
Our position is that the damages in this
And that gets us to the last question, which has
They aren't just asking for
to do with punitive damages. 141
They're also asking you to decide that they
$10 million.
are entitled to something called punitive damages, and we'll
come back for more witnesses and evidence if they have their
way about that.
Well, what's the evidence been about -- what is
the evidence and what's the law about punitive damages?
Well, first of all, punitive damages are not a right.
don't have a right to it.
proof.
of proof.
itself.
You
And that is the highest level of
Highest level
It's clear and convincing evidence.
You're going to see that on the verdict form
They have to prove that Reynolds' conduct as to
Mrs. Smith was gross and flagrant and recklessly discarded
her safety.
Now, what was the evidence about what Reynolds did
with respect to Mrs. Smith?
Well, you heard that Reynolds identified the
We did that research and
constituents in cigarette smoke.
identified that.
You're going to hear, or you heard, that
Reynolds identified suspect carcinogens and they tried to
reduce those.
You heard that Reynolds followed the suggestions
that were given to them by the Surgeon General and the
public health community to try to reduce -- low-tar,
low-nicotine. 142
Remember we showed you all those quotes from the
Surgeon General that said, Hey, these low-tar, low-nicotine
cigarettes are the way to go?
And Reynolds tried to follow
that advice.
Remember, you heard that Reynolds worked with --
for ten years worked with the federal government in
something called the National Cancer Institute Tobacco
Working Group.
And remember this document that I asked
Dr. Cummings about.
In 1968, the year that Mrs. Smith started smoking,
we have in evidence this document that you've seen where the
president of the company sent this memo to the chief
scientist at the company.
And that memo said start working with the
government to try to cooperate with others and push the work
about tobacco and health.
smoking.
That was the year she started
And then remember the green monster, all these
6,000 articles that Reynolds and the other cigarette
companies paid for, funded.
the Surgeon General starting back in 1964.
of that research that Reynolds and the other tobacco
companies funded, including here in Florida at the
University of Miami.
Have we got that?
And this research was cited by
And remember all
Yeah, the University of Florida, Florida State, 143
University of South Florida, University of Miami.
the places that are doing this research that they're
claiming is fraudulent.
And remember you heard seven of the
scientists who did this research -- seven of them went on to
get Nobel Prizes.
These are
Now, some of you may not like everything you heard
Some of you may think, You know
The cigarette companies should have said earlier
But that's not the issue you're asked here
You're only asked in this case about legal
about cigarette companies.
what?
about causation.
in this case.
cause as to Mrs. Smith.
And we'd like to respectfully submit that it would
She had asthma.
She personally knew the health risks of
just be wrong and unfair here to render a verdict in favor
of Mr. Smith, where Mrs. Smith had a cancer -- had BAC, a
cancer that's not caused by smoking.
The
only evidence of COPD is this one test that was done at a
time she was sick.
smoking.
that she smoked.
She never
chose to smoke.
made a serious effort to quit until she was diagnosed with
cancer.
successfully quit.
She was aware of the health risks, but she
She said she enjoyed smoking.
She had warnings on every package of cigarettes
And when she put her mind to it, then she
That is what we are here about.
Yet, Mr. Smith
has testified that Mrs. Smith did not know about the health 144
risks of smoking until 1993 or 1995.
Mrs. Smith was the only person who is responsible
for the decisions in her life about how she wanted to live
her life, her decisions about her smoking.
And under all
those facts, we respectfully submit this is not a case where
you should award money damages.
So I want to ask you, as you go back and
deliberate, obviously, you're all going to work as a group,
but each one of you have your own convictions.
And I want
to ask very respectfully for you to hold on to your
convictions and don't just give in and award any money in
this case.
I only have one more thing, only one final
All that they have
thought, and then I'm going to sit down.
to do -- all that they have done in this case is they've
hired somebody to go through a bunch of old documents, a
bunch of ancient documents.
They've pulled out snippets
here and there to make us look bad that have nothing to do
with Mrs. Smith.
And they're trying to get you so mad when
you see those documents that you won't stay focused on
Mrs. Smith.
If Mrs. -- if Mr. Smith can get money here, that
means anybody who uses a risky product, like eating at
McDonald's or drinking alcohol or anything like that, can
get damages because this case is really only about money. 145
That's all we're here about.
They're asking for money.
You're the ones who stand between us and Mr. Smith
trying to get money, when every cigarette that she smoked
had a warning on the pack.
As you go back and deliberate, we want you to use
And thank you so much for your attention
your common sense.
this morning.
appreciate it very much.
that y'all have done and your service as jurors here.
It's -- well, it's still morning.
All of us appreciate everything
I
That concludes my closing.
Thank you, Your Honor.
