MR. DIAZ: Thank you. If Your Honor please. Counsel, Mr. Trammell, Mr. Harris, Vernell, and once again, Reverend Smith.
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
I'm going to be brief. There is really not much more to say. But the little that I have to say is very, very important, because we are now in the second phase of this trial. You've already rendered a verdict on phase I. This phase, even though it's shorter, is equally and perhaps even more important than the first phase.
The first phase was to compensate Reverend Smith for his loss, damage or injury. The second phase is to punish, is to deter what we now know happened in the hands of this defendant for half a century, for a period of half a century. It's to make them feel the pain for what they did for the wrongs that they did.
You heard the corporate representative. Mistakes we made in the past. Mistakes? A mistake is when you go one or two miles over the speed limit because you're not paying attention.
A mistake is not lying to the American public, or equally, or worse yet, not telling what they need to know to make an informed decision before they pull five dollars out of their pocket to buy a pack of your cigarettes so you can make 40 cents on each and every one of those packages.
It's not a case about mistakes. It's a case
about intentional wrongs, massive, massive consumer fraud.
You know, whether you're from Winston-Salem, Marianna, Jackson County, rural Cottondale, it don't matter — a person's word is their bond. That's the principle of human life. That's the principle of business. If we can't trust one another, who can we trust? Who are these people who have no bond to their word? Who are they?
You have to use your reason and common sense.
Now, it's very important for me to explain to you — I'm going to show you some slides; not too many, just a few -- okay? -- and a little clip, a little video clip. Take five minutes. Okay?
Very important, though.
You cannot and you should not punish this defendant for what Philip Morris and the other companies did. Punish them for the reprehensible conduct — okay — in the overall conspiratorial activity. Okay?
So with no further ado, let me start and tell you that the first thing I want you to think about is what is the nature of the conspiracy. What is the nature of the wrong? It's consumer fraud.
It's massive consumer fraud. That's one of the
things you should consider. Okay?
Number 2. What was the duration? Did this just go on for a couple months because you had one wayward CEO or CFO at the helm and somebody caught it and stopped it after a couple months and we had some losses or injuries or deaths? No. This thing went on for 50 years. Fifty years.
And you know the one thing that we haven't heard in this harm reduction phase of this trial? I'm still waiting to hear it. I'm still waiting to hear somebody from RJR Company, either back then or here today say, we admit we did something wrong.
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, objection. Argumentative and improper argument.
MR. DIAZ: Harm reduction.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DIAZ: Five minutes. Go right through history.
Please. It all starts in 1953 when the scientific empirical evidence — you don't need to be a CEO or CFO or have Mr. Gentry's degree in science to know what that means. That is common sense, reason and common sense. Put the tobacco company, RJR, on notice that their product was
killing people in 1953.
What did they do? Did they come out and tell the truth? They didn't have a website back then. You know what they had? They had a mouth and they had a heart and they had a brain. They had no bond. Their word meant nothing. What was their word?
Next slide, please.
MR. HARRIS: Your Honor, can the court instruct Ms. Parker to contain her coughing while his closing is going on.
THE COURT: Mr. Harris, I'm not sure I can —
MR. DIAZ: If we need to take a break,
Judge --
MS. PARKER: Your Honor —
THE COURT: If we need to take a break, we'll take a break. I think that's — we're going to leave it at that. Okay?
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, may we approach?
THE COURT: Yes.
(Bench conference)
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, I make a motion for mistrial due to that very highly inflammatory comment.
MR. DIAZ: It is disturbing and it is
interfering. And I have no problem with her situation. But if that's the case, I think what she should do is rather than cough, which coincidentally always comes at a high point in my closings, is raise her hand and ask for a break. I'll be happy to interrupt my closing argument.
THE COURT: Okay. Counsel, we've come a long way here. We've come a long way.
MR. DIAZ: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: Now, you hear members of the jury coughing there, there may be people in the audience coughing, and, you know, that is what it is. But I certainly don't think that I can instruct Ms. Parker to stop coughing if she's coughing. Okay?
Now, so I'm denying the mistrial. I don't think that's highly inflammatory. But I don't want to hear that again. Okay?
MR. HARRIS: Okay.
THE COURT: If — if there is a problem, if we need to take a break or get some water, I think I have shown that I will accommodate everybody in this room to do that. But we don't need any more comments in front of this jury about me instructing Ms. Parker not to cough. She's had a
cough for the last week or so, week and a half of this trial, and that just is what it is. All right ?
MR. HARRIS: You've got to understand —
MR. DIAZ: Yes. That's okay.
(In open court)
MR. DIAZ: Okay. As I said, a person's word is their bond. It's no less your bond today than it was 50, 60 years ago. We can't trust one another on our word. You know, we're in 2012 and everything has to be a contract and witnessed and notarized. What has this society come to? We shouldn't have to require a notary seal or a witness from a company whose profits depend on our hard-earned dollars to tell us the truth.
What did they do? They came out on the attack and they said there is no proof. There is no proof and they want them to doubt, denial, and controversy.
Move forward, please. Next slide.
Here it is. Doubt is our product.
Do you know what should have been their product? Honesty. What is wrong with honesty?
Hey, honesty is, Those results are scientific. We're going to look at it. We're
going to do something about it. Let's put this product on hold for a while. Let's make sure nobody gets hurt.
Is there some reason why you can't do that? Take the products off the shelf? Let's put our scientists on it right away. Heck, it only took 12 months to do that experiment. Is that too much to ask, after what we now knew — we now know what was going to happen? You saw the chart, all the unnecessary deaths. Unnecessary deaths.
Necessary deaths occur when our servicemen, people who serve our country bear arms and they go across — overseas and they die in a war. That's an unfortunate but necessary death, so we can salute that flag.
All of this was preventible. That's the point. It was all preventible.
Ms. Parker got up here yesterday and said, Well, you came to a fork in the road. You could have smoked or not smoked.
They had a fork in the road in 1954. Your word is your bond. Let's do something about this. Let's take this seriously. After all, it's not just a defective product. It's a defective product that can kill people. And they chose the
road of dollars, death. Dollars. Dollars matters. Death doesn't matter.
Here it is. Doubt is our product. That's what we're going to sell. And here is how we can establish a controversy.
And then what do they do?
Next slide, please.
They obstruct justice. The Surgeon General wants to look into this —
MS. PARKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DIAZ: 1963, what do they tell the Surgeon General? Let's give them a report that's vague and incomplete and make it irksome to him.
Next slide, please.
Why did they do that? They needed to give the smoking American public a psychological crutch, a self-rationale to continue smoking.
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, I'd just like clarification that that's not a Reynolds document.
MR. DIAZ: And this is not a Reynolds document, folks. But guess what? They participated in a conspiracy. You heard the judge in the instructions on the law about how person's conduct in a conspiracy, how they become
responsible for the conduct of the others.
Next slide, please.
Oh, before we get to the next slide.
And then we have Robert Heimann, who, remember, 1986, he gave a deposition. He had stopped working at R.J. Reynolds in 1980. But here is what he said. Okay?
He said, if these warnings were not on the products, you wouldn't have put them on there, would you?
No .
Do you think it harms smokers so that there is no reason to put any warnings on them? Do you
ANSWER: I believe our product is not injurious to health.
Congress is wrong in requiring — in requiring these warnings?
We don't think they're justified.
So they're wrong?
They are wrong.
That was the position of R.J. Reynolds as of at least 1980 when their outgoing high executive command officer was still saying, They're making us put them on there. If we didn't, we wouldn't tell them nothing. We wouldn't tell them nothing
We only put them on because they're required. We wouldn't tell them even that. They're wrong.
Let's look at that doubt conspiracy.
Got about a one-minute clip, folks.
(A video clip was played for the jury as follows:)
A SPEAKER: I don't believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer.
A SPEAKER: Dr. Little, have any cancer causing agents —
(Interrupting)
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, I'd like a clarification. This is Philip Morris.
THE COURT: All right.
MR. DIAZ: Yes. The first one is Philip Morris.
THE COURT: All right.
MR. DIAZ: Go ahead.
(The video clip continued to be played as follows:)
A SPEAKER: None whatever.
A SPEAKER: We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that.
A SPEAKER: We don't know what causes the illnesses that have been attributed to cigarette
smoking, but I don't think that there is a causal relationship established between cigarette smoking and any disease. If there were, Diane, I don't think there would be a cause without the effect or the effect without a cause and we all know that that happens.
A SPEAKER: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. There have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces.
A SPEAKER: Mr. Johnston.
A SPEAKER: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxication.
A SPEAKER: We'll take that as a "no."
A SPEAKER: It is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine.
(End of video clip.)
MR. DIAZ: There you go. And that was the Surgeon General in 1988. And what did they do after he said that? They attacked him too.
Can you please put up the last — the last slide? Now, I'm actually going to put it up on the ELMO. Could we put it up on the ELMO, please?
I want to show you something. I'm sorry. Thank you. Does it take long to warm up?
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, I would like another limiting instruction that this is not Reynolds. It's limited to Reynolds.
THE COURT: All right. This particular document is not — obviously not limited to one particular manufacturer.
MR. DIAZ: That's correct, Your Honor. Okay?
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. DIAZ: Watch this, folks. All right. In 1953, when the mouse skin painting came out — you've seen those in evidence. That's right about here. Right about here. Somewhere in here is 1953. All right? Use your reason and common sense. If instead of the doubt and denial campaign and the controversy and the Frank Statement and the massive advertising campaign that you heard from Dr. Robert Proctor, which cause this — sales to go back up, and that's when the conspiracy begins, what do you think reason and common sense says would have happened here? These sales, they might have gone like this, it might have gone like this, it might have gone like this, but whatever that angle is, folks, it would
have stopped.
And look at this. Do you see how when consumption goes down, less people die? Well, if these sales had gone down here, less people were smoking, instead of this line going all the way here, this line would have started some line here And guess what. That's all the unnecessary — including Reverend Smith's — smoking-related diseases and deaths. It was preventible. It was money over morals. It was sales over safety. It was all about greed. It was all about the bottom line. How much money can we make?
Folks, I'm going to suggest to you — you'll get a verdict form. It will take 30 seconds.
What is an appropriate amount of punitive damages It's an amount of money that's going to punish them, teach them that at least in Jackson County, Florida, a jury is going to say, it's going to cost you. You began a conspiracy in 1953. We know it went at least until 1999.
And this is just a number. You can do more or less. We're not asking you to do more. But I can't invade your province, I won't try to do so now.
If you take 1999 and you go back to 1953,
from 1953 to 1999, that's the amount of punitive damages, it's 45 years of conspiratorial activity, it's 45 years of fraud and deceit, and we suggest respectfully that you award punitive damages in the amount of $45,000,000. $45,000,000.
You've heard Dr. Raffa testify. Dr. Raffa told you that at least in 2010 and 2011, they were netting, the tobacco company, five million dollars a day.
MS. PARKER: Objection, Your Honor. That's not in evidence. I have — I need to approach.
THE COURT: All right.
(Bench conference)
MS. PARKER: Your Honor, this is what we talked about yesterday, and Your Honor excluded it. So I have a motion for a mistrial for that evidence.
Also the over-the-top argument under State Farm and Williams. This is what Your Honor has told him yesterday not to do.
THE COURT: No, I don't think I ruled yesterday. In fact, Dr. Raffa did, in fact, provide the per diem figures for the net sales and for the net operating expense.
MR. DIAZ: That's right.
THE COURT: And that was testified to this morning. That's in evidence, right?
MS. PARKER: Not the way he just presented it
had.
MR. WALKER: The objection is the use of it in that manner.
THE COURT: Well —
MS. PARKER: He's taken it to the next step that Your Honor said yesterday he could not do.
MR. DIAZ: No, no.
MR. WALKER: That evidence was introduced under the pretext that it was part of a net worth calculation. And yesterday I said that that was a pretext, that what they really wanted to do was parade this information in front of the jury to suggest that they come up with an award that amounts to only one or two days worth of income or one or two days worth of sales.
I can't remember if Mr. Diaz disclaimed that yesterday or just didn't address it. But today we're seeing exactly the problem that led the excessive — extremely excessive award in the Naugle case. That's why we objected yesterday.
THE COURT: Well, I think the overall answer to all of this is there are certainly appropriate
post-trial remedies. And that's what a lot of those cases discussed. There are post-trial remedies available to the parties in the event.
And I did not, as I recall yesterday, rule that Mr. Diaz could not make that argument, but I think I was simply warning him that if he does make that argument and we do get into the dangerous territory, that there could be a remedy for that, so --
MR. WALKER: I understand your ruling, Judge. But I just think that there has to be some limit. He could come and ask for $6,000,000,000. If he had asked for $6,000,000,000, there wouldn't be an answer to that. Well, it could be remitted after the fact.
There are some limits on the types of argument that could be made, and we just don't believe the answer can always be, or certainly can't be here, that if they come back with an excessive award, it can be reduced.
THE COURT: All right. I'm going to overrule the objection and deny the motion for mistrial.
MR. DIAZ: Okay.
MS. PARKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
(In open court)
MR. DIAZ: All right. Folks, and to be sure -- just to be crystal clear -- okay? -- I am not saying, because we don't have the number, I am not saying that in March of 2012 that R.J. Reynolds was taking in $5,000,000 a day. We don't know that. We know what they were taking in, from Dr. Raffa's testimony, in 2010 and 2011. We also know that he testified that, in his opinion, based on the documents that he was able to review, that there were — there's an estimated — what are we off? Five percent? Ten percent? But there was an estimated five to five and a half billion dollars of net worth of R.J. Reynolds.
Folks, whether you — whether you go back to 2010 or 2011, or you go off Dr. Raffa's numbers, this is a damage award that they can clearly afford based on your reason, your common sense, what you heard from the testimony in this case.
You know all about the cigarette sales. And so we believe that that's a number that fairly and adequately --
It doesn't put them out of business. We can't ask you to do that. You may want to do that. Don't do that. I'm asking you, don't do
that. You may be very upset about what they did, about what you learned in this trial that they did. But please, in your verdict, do not award them more or — against anything more than $45,000,000.
I will have a minute or two, not too much, after Ms. Parker finishes her closing argument to come back to you just to touch on a couple of points. But once again, I want to thank you for your time and attention to this matter. Thank you.
