                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. WICHMANN:  Good morning, folks.
          You have heard evidence for the last two
     weeks about the Smiths, about Julius, about the
     family, about a good, patriotic, loving,
     religious family.
          You have heard evidence that Julius wrote 3183
     in his medical records -- I'll show you in a
     minute -- where was he born, "the good ole
     USA."
          Well, folks, Reynolds and the other
     cigarette companies intentionally got Julius
     and 20 million other Americans hooked into the
     cigarette epidemic beginning in the 1950s
     through the year 2000 and caused over
     20 million dead, and devastated the folks
     you're seeing out there, the Smith family.
          Now, Reynolds told you in opening
     statement this case was all about the Smith
     family and that it was Mrs. Smith who would be
     asking you at the end of this case to award her
     millions of dollars.
          Well, would you put slide number 1,
     please, Dan.
          This is one of the pieces of evidence that
     you will get to take back to you in the jury
     room.  A previously secret internal industry
     document that tells you all you need to know
     about these companies, about R.J. Reynolds, who
     put money -- money -- over morality for nearly
     50 years.
          And what were they writing?  Let's provide 3184
     consumers with the exquisiteness and the hope
     that they, our consumers, continue to remain
     unsatisfied, talking about this addictive,
     dangerous product -- cigarettes.  So the
     company wrote:  All we would want then is a
     larger bag to carry the money to the bank.
          Companies put money over morality.
          MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Not
     the legal standard.
          THE COURT:  Rephrase.
          MR. WICHMANN:  Companies put their profits
     over the health of the American people during
     the course of this conspiracy and this
     concealment campaign that y'all heard about.
          Go to slide number 2, please.  This is
     what the case is not about.  And this was from
     the Reynolds slide that they put up in opening
     statement.
          It's true, cigarettes are legal.  It's
     true, the case is not about sympathy.  We're
     here for accountability.  We're here so that
     the Smith family gets justice from this
     cigarette company, this Fortune 500 company,
     and its part of its concealment.
          MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor. 3185
     Assumes facts not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained on the "Fortune
     500."
          MR. WICHMANN:  This case is not about
     whether cigarettes can be addictive.  You will
     recall when Dr. Cummings came and testified,
     they showed the current Web site and what
     they're telling everybody now.
          They didn't admit that cigarettes were
     addictive until the year 2000.  They didn't
     admit it back when Julius and 20 million other
     Americans were starting smoking, smoking
     cigarettes before there were any cautions on
     the packs.
          This case is not about whether smokers can
     quit.  They can.  Everybody has admitted that.
     You can be addicted to cigarettes and still
     quit.  But the evidence has been that what was
     available to Julius in 2000, in the late
     1990s, was not what was available to Julius
     in the '50s, '60s, '70s and '80s.
          They told you that this case is not about
     whether nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco.
     It does.  We all heard from Dr. Hurt, who
     showed you the process.  And in the process, 3186
     they take the nicotine out and they put the
     nicotine back.  And I'm going to show you the
     evidence which you're going to get when you go
     back there that shows that they were
     manipulating the levels of nicotine to keep
     their consumers addicted.
          And they told you this case is not about
     whether smoking can cause disease.  Well, guess
     what?  That's another thing they never admitted
     until the year 2000.
          Now, what has been the overall result of
     this conspiracy and this concealment?  That's
     the next slide.
          The uncontradicted evidence in the case is
     from 1953 until the present, over 480,000 dead
     Americans a year from smoking, 20 million dead
     from 1964.  And we showed you the consumption
     chart.  And here it is.  And Dr. Hurt and
     Dr. Cummings went over it.  As the sales went
     up, the lag time, COPD/emphysema and lung
     cancer deaths went up.  And you will see the
     little spikes and recall all of those little
     spikes were when the government or public
     health community came out with warnings, came
     out with Surgeon General's Reports and, yes, 3187
     Americans took notice, and smoking consumption
     went down.
          But it went right back up because of the
     cigarette company campaign to create doubt and
     create controversy and market their cigarettes
     and put them out on the market so people would
     say, well, there must be -- there's got to be
     some doubt.  Or, if I smoke that filter, it's
     going to take the bad stuff out.
          Now, who did you hear from?
          And again, bear in mind Reynolds brought
     no witnesses.  These are the only witnesses
     that you heard from.  You heard from
     Dr. Michael Cummings talk about 30-plus years
     dealing with nicotine addiction and health, way
     before any of this litigation started.  He has
     published, he has researched, he has reviewed,
     he has taught, he has counseled.  He set up the
     New York State Quit Line.  He worked in
     prisons.  And he told you in Florida, under the
     law, the law didn't change until 2000 to outlaw
     smoking in correctional facilities.
          He volunteered, he told you basically --
     next slide, please -- told you about the cohort
     studies.  He said based on the science, they 3188
     can tell you today that white men born in 1939
     like Julius Smith out in Seville and out in
     Palatka, three out of four of Julius'
     contemporaries became smokers.
          Every single one of Julius Smith's high
     school classmates that were on the basketball
     team -- that's 12 -- you saw the high school
     picture.  Twelve people in his high school
     class.  Those five boys that were playing
     basketball, every single one was a smoker.
          He told you that they concealed from the
     American public, how their product, cigarettes,
     were engineered for nicotine addiction.  He
     told you they concealed, how they modified
     their product many times over decades.
          They never told Julius Smith that that
     Winston filtered cigarette he was smoking was
     two and a half times more toxic, more
     carcinogenic, than the Camel nonfilter
     cigarettes.  They never said that.  They just
     kept marketing them and marketing them and
     marketing them.
          They never told them, nah, this filter is
     not really going to work, but it looks good and
     it sounds good.  It's a good way for us to sell 3189
     you more cigarettes so we make more money and
     more Americans get sick.  They never told him
     that.
          They concealed that they were targeting
     and studying the smoking habits of young
     Americans, teenagers.  They never told the
     American public that.
          And Dr. Cummings told you that everything
     they did over the past 50 years had a major
     impact on affecting Americans.  It created an
     epidemic of disease that we're still suffering
     today.  And he also told you that as much as
     90 percent of COPD as we know it today -- of
     emphysema/COPD as we know it today is caused by
     smoking, caused by this highly engineered
     product that R.J. Reynolds and the other
     cigarette companies developed and marketed and
     misled the American people about and concealed
     the dangers from the American people during the
     course of the conspiracy.
          Now, folks, you're going to get a verdict
     form -- Dan.
          And I have limited time, so I would like
     to walk you through it.  The verdict form is
     going to be three pages.  I believe three or 3190
     four pages.  You take it back there, you fill
     it out.  And this is the roadmap that we like
     to give you on how the Smith family feels that
     the verdict form should be completed in this
     case.
          The first question for you to answer is:
     Was Julius Smith addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine; and if so, was such an
     addiction a legal cause of his emphysema/COPD?
          By the way, it's the same thing you heard
     from Dr. Hurt, you heard from Dr. Cummings, and
     you heard from Dr. Martinez.  Emphysema and
     COPD, it's the same thing.  We respectfully
     request y'all answer the first question yes.
     Because if you don't, if you answer it no, the
     case is over.
          Now, Mr. Praglin, my colleague, is going
     to talk to you about question 2 on the first
     page.
          Question 3 is:  Was smoking cigarettes
     manufactured by R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of
     Julius' emphysema/COPD?
          Respectfully, folks, the Smith family asks
     you to check that small box down there,
     number 3, yes.  The reason that is on the 3191
     verdict form is because y'all heard a little
     bit of testimony about Marlboro.  The
     uncontradicted testimony that you heard was
     that Julius Smith started smoking cigarettes,
     and Camel brand was his brand, years before
     there were any cautions or warnings on the
     pack, and Camel was manufactured by Reynolds.
          There was some evidence that when he went
     into the Service and came out, he might have
     smoked some Marlboro for a few years.  That's a
     Philip Morris product.  But there was some
     confusion by the witness.  And the witness
     said, well, Marlboro is a red and white pack
     and so is Winston, so I could be wrong.  But
     the uncontradicted testimony from the family,
     from Sherry, when she met him, tell when he was
     able to quit -- and I will get to that in a
     second -- was that he smoked Winston cigarettes
     manufactured by Reynolds in a red and white
     pack.  So that's why we are respectfully asking
     you to check box number 3 yes.
          Now, what evidence do we have on whether
     or not Julius was addicted?
          Started smoking at age 13 to 14.  Smoked a
     pack a day by the time he was 15 years old, 3192
     years before there were any cautions on the
     cigarette packs.  Smoked a pack and a half to
     two packs a day for over 45 years.  Bought
     cigarettes by the carton, sometimes two cartons
     a day.
          Smoked first thing in the morning.  You
     heard from Patti Jo say she used to go into her
     dad's bedroom and he wouldn't even have his
     feet on the ground, he would still be laying in
     bed lighting that first cigarette.
          He smoked through the day, one after
     another, and smoked before and right after
     church.  There's folks go to church Christmas
     and Easter.  Not the Smith family.  Every
     Sunday, Julius and Sherry and those kids went
     to church.  They went on holidays.  And they
     went on Wednesdays too.
          He smoked while he was coaching his son's
     baseball team.  Y'all heard -- he is out there
     in front of his son J.B., Julius Junior, they
     called him Bernie.  Marine Corps veteran.  He
     told you his dad said to him, I smoke these
     filtered cigarettes because they take the bad
     stuff out.
          Reynolds is going to tell you, no, don't 3193
     believe him, don't believe Bernie.  They're
     going to tell you, don't believe this Smith
     family.
          Well, y'all heard the testimony, and it
     was emotional.  And I submit it was straight
     from the heart.  And y'all decide.
          He smoked at family gatherings.  The
     medical records describe him as a heavy
     smoker.  He experienced withdrawal symptoms.
     I'm going to get into that.  You heard it from
     Patti Jo.  She told you what he went through
     when he wasn't smoking.  He was a very calm
     guy.  He was a very level-headed guy.  But he
     sure changed when he didn't get his nicotine.
          He had -- after he was able to quit -- I'm
     going to get into that in a second -- he had
     constant continual cravings.  You heard that
     from J.B. and you heard that from Patti Jo.  Up
     until the time when he got to the hospital in
     March of 1995, he could barely breathe, he
     still craved cigarettes.  He had strong urges
     to start to smoke again.
          Let's just go through a few of the medical
     records that you will have and you can take
     back there. 3194
          Slide number 8, please.
          Patient states that he smokes
     approximately a pack and a half of cigarettes
     per day for 35 years.
          He also quit.  And you're going to hear
     from Reynolds:  Oh, he could have quit whenever
     he wanted to quit.  It's all his fault because
     he didn't quit.  You're going to hear they're
     going to blame their best customer when they
     never did anything -- nothing -- to help him to
     quit during the course of the conspiracy.
          I'm going to get into that.  Well, did he
     quit?  He attempted in the 1960s.  He cut
     back in the '70s.  He tried quitting cold
     turkey.  He was given a prescription for the
     NicoDerm patch when it first became available
     in '92.  He tried hypnosis.  He tried nicotine
     gum.  He tried nicotine spray.  He tried to
     taper off the amount he smoked.
          He was only able to quit in 2002 when he
     was hospitalized with prostate cancer.  I'm
     going to get into that in a second.
          Let me tell you, they're like:  The
     nicotine patch?  Not Julius.
          Could we have slide number 10, please? 3195
          Well, there is the record.  It's back
     there.  I gave NicoDerm patches for 10 days,
     two 21-milligrams for the next two weeks.
     It's -- the prescription is in the record.
          And you heard from the family again.  You
     heard from Patti Jo.  You heard from J.B.You
     heard from Sherry.  He took the nicotine
     patches.  He tried.  And guess what.  He still
     wasn't getting enough nicotine in his body to
     sustain his addiction.
          They didn't bring a single witness on
     addiction.  I brought -- we brought Dr. Richard
     Hurt.  Let me get to that in a second.  And he
     told you all about the neurobiology of
     addiction and how it affects the brain.
          But let me tell you what Reynolds said in
     opening statement.  The evidence will show that
     Mr. Smith did not persistently try to stop.
          What?
          Is that what you heard from the family?
     He didn't persistently try to stop?  They told
     you at the beginning he was not a tortured
     smoker.  Remember that?
          They told you he was not a hopeless
     addict; said smoking relaxed him on a product 3196
     that gave him COPD/emphysema and led to this
     misery at the end of his life.  They told you
     in opening statement that product, that
     cigarette, it relaxed him.  He enjoyed it.  He
     enjoyed socializing.
          They talked about the quit attempts.  They
     said, This is what you're going hear about
     them.  They called them "These so-called
     attempts, if you can even call them attempts,
     were not motivated."  Those were their words.
          Well, let me summarize for you what
     Patti Jo told you.
          She prayed for her daddy to quit.
     Everybody in the family prayed for him to quit.
     He asked them:  "Pray for me to quit.  This is
     how hard it is for me."
          He begged -- those were her words -- he
     begged for cigarettes when he was in the
     hospital in 2002, when smoking was prohibited,
     for his prostate cancer.  She told him when he
     was medicated in the hospital, he was begging
     for cigarettes.  His words, according to Patti
     Jo.  They are going to tell you:  Don't believe
     her.  Well, it's up to you.
          It was as if he was being tortured.  He 3197
     wanted a cigarette so bad.  That's what that --
     daughter, Patti Jo, the Smith daughter, told
     you:  It was as if he was being tortured.
          He would say how bad he wanted a
     cigarette.  He was very, very agitated.  She
     told you this is the way it was every day.  She
     told you that she took care of him when he got
     him, when he was discharged.  He had a suture
     that came open.  She was with him every single
     day.
          She said she and her mom, Sherry, made his
     favorite foods, snacks, candy, to take his mind
     off of this.  But he would still continue to
     want cigarettes.  And she said, in her words,
     "This lasted weeks, weeks, and weeks."
          All right?
          Most important, let me read this to you,
     of her testimony.
          After he was discharged from the hospital,
     couldn't get cigarettes, was medicated, got
     medicine for that, got his prostate cancer
     done, when he came home, he was, in her words,
     "extremely agitated, extremely fidgety, and
     always, always asking for a cigarette.  We
     would just continue to tell him he couldn't 3198
     have one; we wouldn't give him one."
          And she said:  "He would have
     conversations with me about how he could just
     smoke -- he could smoke a cigarette and eat a
     whole pack of them."  Those were her words from
     the witness stand.  She said:  "He just wanted
     them so bad.  It was like he was desperate.  It
     was every day.  It was every day that I saw
     him."
          That's not a tortured smoker?  That's not
     somebody who is trying everything he can to
     quit?
          What does that tell you about this product
     that Reynolds manufactured, this product that
     Reynolds misled the American people and misled
     smokers like Julius for -- for decades?  What
     does it tell you about that?  That this is what
     he has to go through to get off of a product
     that is so deadly that the evidence in the case
     has been it caused the deaths of 20 million
     Americans.
          Now, slide 11, please.
          This is the record I told you about.
     Julius goes to the hospital.  He fills it out.
     Country of birth:  "The good ole USA."  This is 3199
     Julius from Seville in Putnam County, who went
     into the Air Force.  12 people -- imagine that,
     12 people in his high school class served his
     country.  And this is what cigarettes did to
     Julius.
          Y'all recall they were shopping for their
     granddaughter's wedding, and this is how his
     life changed as a result of his addiction and
     his disease and his smoking.
          Now, what is our burden of proof, folks?
     Greater weight of the evidence.  At a
     basketball game, if someone gets 51, the other
     team gets 50, they win.
          But in this case, the evidence is
     overwhelming that he was addicted to cigarettes
     and that his addiction caused his COPD.
          Let's start out with Dr. Hurt.  Came down
     from -- started the smoking cessation clinic at
     the Mayo Clinic and has treated over 53,000
     addicted smokers, written articles published in
     the Journal of the American Medical
     Association, testified before Congress, board
     certified.  He put Julius to the test, the
     Heaviness of Smoking test, and told you all
     about that.  Why does he want to know whether 3200
     they smoked first thing in the morning in an
     addicted smoker?
          Because nicotine goes from the cigarette
     to the brain in a nanosecond; doesn't stay up
     there long.  So smokers, right before they go
     to bed, they smoke a cigarette to get that
     nicotine up in their brain; and when the
     nicotine wears off, they get up at night, which
     Julius did, smoke cigarettes.  And then first
     thing in the morning when they wake up, it's
     their brain -- it's their addicted brain
     telling them:  I have to have that nicotine.
          So what do they do?  First thing in the
     morning they have their cigarette.  And you
     heard the evidence from -- it's uncontradicted.
     Not only did he smoke first thing.  He smoked
     when he was in bed.
          Now, he also -- the second test is:  How
     much did he smoke?
          You heard the evidence.  It's in the
     record.  It's pack and a half to two packs.
     The family says two packs.  The family says
     more than two packs.  Dr. Hurt came and told
     you addicted smokers often underreport.  Pack
     and a half, that's a lot of smoking.  That's a 3201
     lot of smoking for 40-plus years.
          Now, just going to talk about it.  Talked
     to you about what addiction was, that it was a
     brain product -- relapsing brain disease.
     There's no evidence to the contrary.  That's
     it.  That's medical science.  They didn't bring
     anybody because that's medical science.
          Remember the film we put up that shows you
     about the receptors and shows you how the human
     brain reacts?  That's human science.
          Now, Dr. Hurt also told you:  Addiction
     keeps a smoker smoking.  Addiction fuels the
     smoking.  Why?  Because some smokers smoke to
     get the nicotine to the brain like I just told
     you.  Some smokers smoke because they want to
     avoid the symptoms of withdrawal.
          The family told you he was a very calm
     guy.  But when he wasn't smoking, when he was
     trying to quit, his demeanor changed
     completely.
          That's why some people smoke.  They don't
     smoke because they like it.  They don't smoke
     because they're out there socializing with
     their sister on the porch.  There's no evidence
     about that. 3202
          But here is what Dr. Hurt said:  You don't
     get COPD from smoking 10 cigarettes.  It's
     basically a long period of time.  Smoking
     cigarettes over a long period of time, in high
     dosages.
          Think about a cigarette as a dose.  If you
     smoke 20 or 30 cigarettes a day for 25 or 30 or
     40 years, then all of those toxins that you're
     getting in your body affect the body and create
     disease.
          And here we have another slide.  He
     started smoking as an early teenager.  You
     heard from Dr. Hurt, because the human brain is
     not fully developed.  If you bathe it in
     nicotine when you're a teenager, the studies
     show it's harder -- later in life it's harder
     for people to quit.  Smoked for 13 years before
     there were any cautions or warnings on the
     packs.  He kept increasing his cigarette use.
          Dr. Hurt told you about tolerance, how
     people don't start out smoking a pack a day in
     the first week they started smoking cigarettes,
     because the first cigarette you have is harsh
     and you have to develop a tolerance and you
     have to keep smoking.  And as you keep smoking, 3203
     your brain wants more nicotine.
          He talked all about the things he went
     through, tried multiple quit attempts, smoked
     while sick, tried hypnosis.
          And so -- the next slide please, Dan.
          No.  This is how the evidence has been.
     This is how the scales of justice tilt in this
     case, all on one side.  Nothing on the other
     side.
          Now, next slide please, Dan.
          Dr. Hurt told you all about cigarettes,
     how they're engineered; how they put flavorings
     in them so that the smoke can go down; how they
     put the false filters, part of the filter flaw
     on there so folks would think that a filter
     would make a difference; where the disease
     comes from.  It comes from the smoke.  It
     doesn't come from the nicotine.  How addictive
     nicotine is.
          He went through all of that, and he also
     told you the following:  Smoking cigarettes
     causes emphysema and many other diseases --
     why?  Because of the thousands of chemicals.
     And get a load of this:  Over 65 percent,
     according to Dr. Hurt, 65 percent, of all 3204
     long-term smokers will die from a
     smoking-related disease.
          Do you think R.J. Reynolds disclosed that
     to Julius Smith in 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990?
          No.
          Now, they're also going to tell you:  We
     put the warnings on the packs, so we're off the
     hook.
          Would you play the video.
          (The video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
     Q.   Would you put that warning on if Congress
didn't require it?
     A.   No.
     Q.   So American disagrees with the warning,
doesn't it?
     A.   We certainly do.
     Q.   You don't think it harms smokers, so
there's no reason for the warning on there, is
there?
     A.   We believe our product is not injurious to
health.
     Q.   As far as you concern -- as far as you're
concerned, sir, is the Surgeon General simply wrong
in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung 3205
cancer?
     A.   I would use the term "misguided."
     Q.   If it's misguided, then I take it your
opinion is he is wrong?
     A.   I was simply trying to be polite about it.
     Q.   But not being informed about it, in your
opinion, he is wrong; correct?
     Q.   Dead wrong.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. WICHMANN:  That was he -- he was
     retired at the time, but he was speaking on
     behalf of the American Tobacco Company,
     R.J. Reynolds.  They didn't want -- they didn't
     think the labels were -- the warnings were
     needed on the cigarettes --
          MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Preemption.
          MR. WICHMANN:  We just talked about it.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. WICHMANN:  You just heard him say:
     The government made us do it.  We didn't think
     it was appropriate.
          Now 1988, Surgeon General's Report, there
     it is.  Dr. Hurt told you; Dr. Cummings told
     you:  Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that 3206
     causes addiction, and the whole behavioral
     processes is similar to drugs like heroin and
     cocaine.
          Big surprise.  That's what the
     uncontradicted evidence in this case was.  That
     nicotine to some people, not to everyone -- and
     Dr. Hurt explained to you differently.  But to
     some people, it's every bit as addictive as
     heroin and cocaine.  Think about that.  Think
     about what Julius went through.  Think about
     what Patti Jo told you quitting was like for
     him.  That's not addiction?
          Now, what did they know about addiction.
          22, please.
          You will see internal documents.  They
     knew, 1967, if someone is addicted, it's no
     longer a matter of free choice.
          In 1980, if someone is addicted, no longer
     a matter of free choice.
          And then we have the Surgeon General
     writing in 1989, two factors refute; smoking is
     free choice because the younger you start, the
     more likely you are to get addicted, the harder
     it is to quit.
          So the law of the case -- y'all find 3207
     Julius Smith was addicted.  The law of the case
     is --
          MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Objection to standard law of the case.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. WICHMANN:  If you find Julius
     addicted, these are the findings that apply.
          Smoking causes emphysema.  Nicotine in
     cigarettes is addictive.  They put cigarettes
     on the market that were defective and they
     conceal -- they block material information not
     known or otherwise available.  Okay?
          Now, go back up to the verdict form.
          Third page, please.
          I'm sorry.  I stand corrected.
          Second page.  These are two more questions
     that we submitted that the evidence has proved
     that you need to check "yes."
          The first one is:  Did he rely on the
     conspiracy?  And the second one was:  Did he
     rely on the concealment?
          And let's hear what the industry expected
     Julius to do while he was smoking.
          (The video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:) 3208
     Q.   Does advertising play a role in the
person's selection of a cigarette?
     A.   We hope so.  When we advertise, it's
difficult to confirm this, but we do make the
effort.  And I think it's fair to assume that the
expenditure of large funds for advertising does give
status to a brand and, therefore, influences some
people to select that brand.
     Q.   Would you expect a consumer to rely on the
advertisements?
     A.   Yes.  Our advertising is truthful, and we
would anticipate that they would rely on it if they
chose.
     Q.   That's your promise as to what the
consumer can expect from your product, isn't it?
     A.   Yes, it is.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. WICHMANN:  There you have it.  We
     expect folks to rely.  All right.  Our
     advertising is totally truthful.
          Well, you heard last two weeks it wasn't.
     It was false.  Let's show you what they didn't
     disclose.
          26.
          They didn't disclose that this new filter 3209
     brand that they had that they introduced in the
     1950s that became the most popular cigarette
     in America and that Julius Smith smoked, they
     didn't disclose that it had two and a half
     times more carcinogenic properties in the smoke
     than the Camel that they had before that.
          And by the way, here we are again.  2010
     Surgeon General Report:  The powerful addicting
     effects of commercial tobacco products are
     mediated by diverse actions of nicotine at
     multiple types of receptors in the brain --
          This is all the science that Dr. Hurt told
     you about.  They never disclosed that nicotine
     was their key chemical in cigarettes that would
     cause an addiction -- would cause a result,
     that would cause a reaction, that you heard
     about from Patti Jo about her daddy, when
     someone tried to quit.  Now, here is what they
     did about addiction.
          Next slide please, Dan.
          We see this.  They say they deliberately
     downplayed the role of nicotine.  Confidential.
          Here is the next slide, 29.
          They wanted to manipulate the nicotine
     levels -- and you will get these documents back 3210
     there -- to determine the minimal level of
     nicotine that will keep people smoking.
          They said, We can regulate fairly
     precisely the nicotine in our product.  We saw
     the black slurry that they take out in the
     factory and they spray right back on.  This is
     not -- they'd have you believe that people go
     out and they pick the tobacco leaf and they
     roll it up and put it in a cigarette and that's
     what you smoke -- no.
          Dr. Hurt told you about that.  No.  This
     is highly engineered.  They take the nicotine
     out, spray it back on so it's all uniform so
     they can regulate and manipulate exactly how
     much nicotine it takes to keep people smoking.
          And let's talk about quitting.
          Let's talk about what they could have done
     for Julius.
          Would you play the video, please, Dan.
          (The video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          We have no program that I know of to try
     to help people stop smoking.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. WICHMANN:  That was 1978.  You'll get 3211
     a record back there that shows Brown &
     Williamson 1978 document that says:  We have to
     design products to intercept people who are
     trying to give up smoking.
          So they had no program, but they're going
     to come and tell you now that it's Julius'
     fault for not quitting sooner, their own best
     customer.  Never once did they say to him:
     Don't buy two packs a day, please.  Don't buy a
     pack a day, please.  You're going to get
     addicted.  You're going to get sick.
          No.  They never told him that.  But
     they're going to say even though they didn't
     have any programs to help their consumers that
     got sick during the conspiracy, now they're
     going to say it's all his fault.
          Now, number 31, again, on reliance, they
     had to, according to their own documents, give
     people a psychological crutch and
     self-rationale to continue to smoke.  He
     said -- and you heard Sherry on the witness
     stand, raise her right hand and say "yes, sir"
     every time the question was asked.  "Yes,
     ma'am" every time the question was asked.
          This family, I would submit, is honest as 3212
     the day is long.  And they're going to get
     criticized -- you're going to hear it in a
     minute -- what did she say?  He got coupons
     from the cigarette companies to go out and buy
     their product.  Coupons.  Does this sound like
     a company that's warning people, that wants
     people to stop?  No.
          You have tote bags, Winston tote bags.
     You heard about how when the government said,
     "Don't put ads on TV anymore," that
     R.J. Reynolds now starts sponsoring events like
     the NASCAR 500 because they didn't have to put
     warnings anywhere and they could distribute all
     these products that encourage people to
     continue to smoke.  And I'm getting to the end
     of my presentation here before Mr. Praglin
     picks up.
          But -- 33, please.
          They advertise their filtered cigarettes
     as being safer, as being the -- if you had any
     doubts about whether smoking was bad, buy a
     filter, because it would protect you.  You're
     going to get literally a stack of filter ads at
     the time.  You can go and look through and see
     all about how they marketed this and made 3213
     people think that filters were safe.
          Next slide, please.
          So what about -- what about Julius?  You
     have the document.  They say in their own words
     in a secret document:  The filter is just an
     illusion.  It's just a marketing device.  It's
     an illusion of filtration.
          Well, again JB told you -- and there he
     is.  JB said, My daddy told me when I was a kid
     he smoked with filters to take the bad stuff
     out.
          Here we go.  You have more documents on
     how they knew that filters were just a
     marketing device and they didn't disclose that.
          Now, I'm going to talk briefly about
     percentages of fault.
          Could you turn back up the ELMO, please,
     Dan?
          On that page 2, you're going to have right
     here -- right here, right there -- you are
     going to have the opportunity to decide what
     the percentage of fault is in this case.
          Now, maybe you think that Julius should
     have tried harder; he should have tried sooner
     to quit.  Well, that's where you assess fault. 3214
          We respectfully submit 75 percent of the
     blame should be on Reynolds.  And if you feel
     that Julius is some way at fault, it shouldn't
     be any more than 25 percent.
          But I would like to make this clear.  For
     what Reynolds did intentionally, for what they
     did on purpose, for their manipulating the
     nicotine levels, for their marketing filters as
     a fraudulent device, for their not disclosing
     to Julius that their cigarettes had two and a
     half times more carcinogens than Camel, we
     don't accept any responsibility because there's
     no way he ever could have known that.
          Now, the last question on the verdict
     form -- and I'm going to be brief here so I
     leave Mr. Praglin with some time -- is another
     very important one, and that is number 9.  And
     that is:  Under the circumstances of this case,
     do you find that Reynolds should be responsible
     for what are called punitive damages --
     punishment damages.
          And, folks, the evidence shows the answer
     to that question has to be -- it's in your
     discretion, y'all are the jury -- but I urge
     you, it has to be yes. 3215
          Why?
          Would you put up slide 36.
          You heard from Dr. Cummings about how this
     company denied publicly that they were
     interested in getting kids as smokers, but that
     the internal industry documents -- and you will
     get them back there -- we must get our share of
     the youth market, we must induce a pre-smoker
     or a nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker,
     talking about the 12- to 14-year age group --
     14 years old, that's who they're looking at;
     that's who they're studying; that's who they
     are trying to get as customers.
          Why?
          Because in their own words, you heard it,
     uncontradicted -- they're looking for
     replacement smokers, replacement customers.
     Because they know -- they knew that more than
     half of people who regularly smoke their
     cigarettes, like Julius, would get sick and
     die.
          So it's all a business model to them.
          It's profits over people.  It's a business
     model.  How can we continue to make money --
     and y'all saw the consumption chart.  It keeps 3216
     going up.  How could it keep going up so we can
     make that money to the roof if our product that
     is used exactly the way they intended it to be
     used is going to kill our customers?  And what
     do we do?  So they went shopping for more kids.
          Number 37, please.
          And there he is.  They got one.  Right?
     They got one.  And this is what they did during
     the course of the conspiracy, and this is why
     they need to be punished and why y'all need to
     answer number 9 yes.
          Now, last but not least, slide 40.  You're
     going to get the 2014 Surgeon General's Report.
     You heard about it.  Look back at what the
     Surgeon General did, what Dr. Hurt and
     Dr. Cummings told you, they both got all of
     these secret documents, they studied them all,
     and they told you that the tobacco epidemic
     that caught Julius Smith and devastated the
     Smith family was initiated and has been
     sustained by the aggressive strategies of the
     tobacco industry which has deliberately misled
     the public on the risks of smoking.
          Folks, thank you for your time and
     attention.  Mr. Praglin is going to talk to you 3217
     now.  Thank you very much.


          MR. PRAGLIN:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          May it please the Court, counsel, ladies
     and gentlemen of the jury.  First of all, I
     want to thank the Court and the court staff and
     our court reporters for all of your courtesies
     for the last couple of weeks.  This has been a
     wonderful experience to try the case here in
     this courtroom.  You have made it very easy for
     us.  You have been patient with us, and it
     makes it easy for us as lawyers.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you
     for your jury service.  We know that you have
     sacrificed time from your families, from your
     work, so we can hear this civil dispute.  This
     is the greatest system in the world for
     resolving cases where parties like this have a
     dispute, and we cannot do this without you.  So
     hopefully some day, if you all have a dispute,
     someone will pay it back to you so that you can
     have your dispute resolved in the same way that
     you're doing it for these parties, so we thank
     you on behalf of Ms. Smith.  We really
     appreciate it.
          I want to start with talking about Julius
     Smith.  And if we have learned anything about 3222
     him, it's that he was honest and patriotic and
     religious.  And because he was religious, I'm
     going to quote from Isaiah 1:18.
          MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  May we
     approach?
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          MS. BAKER:  Two things.  Number one, I
     think that's at least the fourth or fifth
     reference to Mr. Smith being patriotic.  I know
     Your Honor asked not to make it a feature of
     closing, and I think that should apply going
     forward.  And more importantly, I don't think
     we should be quoting scripture during closing
     argument.  It's not relevant.  It's not
     probative, and any focus on scripture or
     references to the Bible should not be made in
     closing arguments.
          THE COURT:  What's the legal objection to
     that?
          MS. BAKER:  It's 403.
          THE COURT:  What is the quote?
          "Let us come, let us reason together."
     That's the quote.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to let that -- so
     I'll overrule.  Make sure on the patriotic, 3223
     okay, not too much more.
          MR. PRAGLIN:  Yes, sir.
          MS. BAKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. PRAGLIN:  This is a quote from Isaiah
     1:18 is:  "Come now and let us reason together,
     sayeth the Lord."
          That is part of what deliberations is
     about.  It's a reasoning process, because it's
     your job to evaluate the evidence and come to a
     decision.
          I thought we had a paper here.  Somehow
     it's gone.  Other side.
           Sorry, ladies and gentlemen.  So let's
     reason together on the evidence.  That's what
     we're going to do.  We're going to look at the
     facts, the testimony, and the evidence.
          What we know is that all of the witnesses
     came from the Plaintiffs.  The Defense brought
     no witnesses.  It's unrebutted testimony.  That
     means there's nobody from the other side.
          What else do we know?  We know it's your
     job to weigh the evidence.  Mr. Wichmann
     touched on that, and we're going to cover that.
     So this is your task, among others.  And I'm 3224
     going to have a slide show and I'm going to go
     through it.
          So on unrebutted testimony, this is one of
     the jury instructions that you're going to get.
     It's on believability of the witnesses.  And
     His Honor read it, and I want to focus on the
     second line, which is:  Consider the demeanor
     of the witness while testifying, the frankness
     or lack of frankness of the witnesses.
          So you heard the witnesses.  And I'm going
     to suggest to you that the witnesses that you
     heard, the Smith family, Dr. Hurt,
     Dr. Cummings, Dr. Martinez, were all completely
     credible, believable, and truthful.
          And if you think that on each one of them,
     they may have stumbled here and there, they may
     have made a couple of mistakes, but when you
     take the core of their testimony, they were
     believable witnesses.
          And the family witnesses, I will take
     those witnesses every day and stack them up
     against everybody.  They took the witness
     stand, they took the oath, and they were
     truthful.
          You heard from Ms. Smith.  She gave 3225
     testimony for over an hour.  She may not have
     remembered everything, but she testified from
     the heart about everything, and she was
     truthful.
          Now, you're going to hear some argument
     from the Defense about Mrs. Smith having had
     inconsistent testimony.  And she did.  And she
     explained how she gave inconsistent testimony.
     And the issue was whether she had said that
     filters take out the bad stuff in her
     deposition.  And she explained what happened in
     her deposition.  And she said, I made a
     mistake.  She said it was a three-day
     deposition.  It was videotaped.  She was
     nervous and she made a mistake.
          And the testimony that was read was
     that -- she said:  "I said that he hadn't
     talked to me about it in my deposition.  I got
     home.  I was stretching in my room and I was
     thinking about the whole deposition.  I was
     very nervous.  I wanted to tell the truth, and
     I realized that we hadn't talked about filter.
     And so I knew I had -- I wanted to correct it,
     and I was told that I could correct it."
          Then the question: 3226
          "And you came back and did so on the next
     day of your deposition?
          "Answer:  Yes, ma'am."
          So she made a mistake.  How many of us
     have not gone back at home, thought about
     something and said, I think I made a mistake,
     and come back and corrected it?
          There's a difference between making a
     mistake and not being truthful.  She made a
     mistake.  So keep that in mind when you hear
     from the Defense that Ms. Smith had an
     inconsistent statement.  One inconsistent
     statement.
          What about weighing the evidence?  We
     talked about the scales and tipping the scales
     and how we have to tip the scales in our favor.
     Look at the evidence.  On the right, the
     Defense.  Did they bring any evidence?  On the
     left, you have Dr. Hurt, you have Dr. Martinez
     Salas.  Think about his credibility.  He sat up
     here -- if you are in the ER and you have a
     belly full of blood and you're dying and
     someone is trying to figure out how to save
     your life, I would want Dr. Martinez in there
     trying to figure out what the heck is going on 3227
     with me.  That man knows medicine.  It may have
     been his first time testifying, but he
     withstood cross-examination from a very good
     lawyer, and he held his ground and he didn't
     waver, and he figured out the cause of death.
          So look at the scales.  Look at the
     evidence.  And the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company, don't you think that if there was a
     doctor out there that could rebut --
          MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  No
     burden.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PRAGLIN:  Don't you think if there was
     a doctor out there that could rebut
     Dr. Martinez on these issues that they would
     have brought him in here?  They didn't bring
     somebody.  They didn't bring anybody.  There is
     nothing on their side of the scales.
          Unrebutted evidence.  And what we do know
     from Dr. Hurt and Dr. Martinez is that
     emphysema is one type of obstructive disease
     that is under the umbrella of COPD.  And
     Dr. Martinez was very clear that emphysema is
     the disease that Julius Smith had; it was
     diagnosed in '94; and that's the disease he had 3228
     his entire life, for the 21 years until he
     passed at 1:55 on March 30, 2015; that he
     suffered for 21 years and passed away.
          So when you consider that evidence, this
     will answer questions 1 through 3 on the
     verdict form that Mr. Wichmann talked about.
     And I will take you to the verdict form.
          Is it on the ELMO?
          Thank you.
          Question 2:  Was Julius B. Smith's
     emphysema/COPD a legal cause of his death?
          We suggest that the answer should be yes,
     that you should check the "yes" box, and that
     that should be your answer.
          I will talk to you in a minute about
     questions 7 and 8 as well.
          I want to talk to you for a second about
     other illnesses, because you heard testimony
     about other illnesses:  Chronic kidney disease,
     heart disease, diabetes, urinary problems,
     prostate cancer, neck injury and headaches.
     What was the testimony on that?
          We know that Mr. Smith took medication for
     all of those illnesses.  The prostate cancer
     was cured by surgery.  The neck injury and the 3229
     headaches cured over time.  You heard Ms. Smith
     testify about that.
          But none of those diseases killed him.
     And none of those diseases are an issue in this
     case insofar as his death or the pain and
     suffering that he had over his lifetime for
     those 21 years.  You didn't hear any evidence
     from the Defense on that.
          Again, it's unrebutted testimony because
     the evidence was from Dr. Martinez.  This was
     his testimony.  You can see this.  Smoking
     causes COPD.  COPD is a contributing cause to
     the death and pain and suffering.  And under
     the law, it only needs to be a contributing
     cause -- not the only cause.  That's the law as
     His Honor has already instructed you.
          And Dr. Martinez ruled out these other
     causes of emphysema and COPD.  You heard his
     testimony.  He ruled out -- he had a laundry
     list of things that he said in a differential
     diagnosis, he ruled these out:  Asthma,
     bronchiolitis, bronchiectasis.  He ruled out a
     false positive for a tall, healthy, athletic
     man.  And he ruled out mold and bleach.
          And this is where I want you to think 3230
     about this.  I mentioned this in opening
     statement.  I said keep your eye on the ball.
     And I will talk to you about that in a minute.
          Let me sort of shift gears and talk to you
     about Julius Smith.  I'm going to take you
     through this quickly because I know you were
     paying attention about his life.  We know he
     was born in Seville, that he had a large
     family, a simple home life.
          You heard testimony about the home-place,
     that he worked at an early age.  We know about
     him being in the Air Force, his early life with
     Sherry, how they met, how they married, their
     kids.  They had a 50-year marriage.  How many
     people are married nearly 50 years?  They had
     plans to retire together and stay retired.
          Sherry is going to live a long time, God
     willing.  They would have planned to live
     together, enjoying their lives together for a
     long time.
          You heard the testimony about how
     Mr. Smith would call his son just so that he
     could be with Sherry when he was so sick that
     he couldn't stay with her and walk with her in
     the stores and he would say, I'm waiting on a 3231
     woman.
          They're a singing family.  Mr. Smith would
     sing at weddings, funerals, spending every day
     together.
          So you saw photographs of Mr. Smith
     smoking in the house, around kids.  Ask
     yourself:  Mr. Smith loved his family, he loved
     his kids, he loved his voice.  He smoked around
     Sherry when she was pregnant.  If Mr. Smith
     really thought that smoking was dangerous,
     would he jeopardize a fetus?  Would he
     jeopardize his expecting family?  There's
     evidence he was smoking around kids.
          Now, you're going to hear from the Defense
     that there was a niece who had asthma, and when
     she came over, he didn't smoke around her out
     of respect or because he thought it would make
     her ill.  But she only came around
     occasionally.
          So this is Mr. Smith here in his uniform.
     We know that he was family-oriented, he was
     hard-working, protective of his wife,
     trustworthy.  And you heard the testimony about
     how, when he had the fern business and he was
     making good money, it was good for the family, 3232
     but it was so hard on him.  He would leave on
     Sunday nights, tearful Sundays.  Then he would
     come back on Thursday and they would be
     reunited.
          And so they made a family decision.  They
     had a family meeting and decided it was better
     to give up the business so that they could all
     be together.
          He put family first.
          So I want to talk to you -- when I say
     "keep your eye on the ball" -- because you're
     going to hear about this from the Defense.  You
     saw a lot of questioning of Dr. Martinez about
     this and then Mrs. Smith, this mold plan.
          I invite you to look at this document in
     your deliberations because we're going to look
     at it now.  It's just a few pages.  When you
     look at the document, look at the top line, it
     says "accident date."  There's only two dates
     there, June 4, '02, eight years after the
     emphysema diagnosis.  June 6, '02.  And it says
     describe the accident:  Exposure to sick
     building, mold, toxic substances, chemicals.
     It does not say what kind of mold.  It could be
     any kind of mold.  It could be a harmless kind 3233
     of mold.
          MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Assumes facts not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PRAGLIN:  There's no specific type of
     mold listed.
          Toxic substances.  What kind?  It doesn't
     say anything.  Doesn't say what kind of
     chemical.
          But Dr. Martinez testified there isn't
     enough information here to say anything.  And
     there's nothing here that says that it causes
     emphysema or COPD.
          And then look at the section -- it's
     pretty hard to read here.  I think I have it at
     the table.
          It says:  Parts of the body, respiratory
     and sinus symptoms.  Nothing about lungs.
     Nothing about what Dr. Martinez talked to you
     about on Exhibits 54 and 55, with
     hyperinflation or attenuation of the vascular
     markings.  Nothing about obstructive lung
     disease.
          Dr. Martinez said that mold could cause a
     restrictive problem, which is different -- 3234
     sinus, in the nose -- but not about
     obstructive.
          And don't you think, using your common
     sense as jurors, that if this mold issue had
     caused Mr. Smith some problem, that he would
     have gone to a doctor?  If you're sick and you
     have a problem, you go to a doctor.
          Well, what does the form say?  That would
     be important.
          It says on the right-hand side, under
     "work being performed when injury occurred,"
     right underneath that "according to doctor" and
     there's handwriting there.  And it says "no
     authorizing doctor."  You will not find the
     name of a doctor or anything about a doctor on
     this form.
          So if he didn't go to a doctor and we
     don't know the kind of mold or the toxic
     chemical or the toxic substance and you don't
     have any information, how is this any cause of
     anything that Mr. Smith had a problem from
     emphysema that was eight years before?  Don't
     you think that he would have gone to a doctor
     for it?
          Then it says "bleach."  Dr. Martinez says 3235
     bleach doesn't cause emphysema.
          So what are we talking about?  This is a
     smoke screen to take your eye off the ball when
     they don't have a witness or any evidence.  So
     they throw it up, and they try and take your
     eye off the ball.
          Keep your eye on the ball and look at the
     evidence; the evidence about emphysema and COPD
     and 21 years of medical treatment.
          And so the law on this, which is jury
     instruction 17-C, which you will have, says:
     "However" -- I should read the whole thing.
          "You have heard that Julius Smith may have
     been injured in two events.  If you decide that
     Julius was injured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company and was later injured by another event,
     then you should try to separate the damages
     caused by the two events and award Julius B.
     Smith money only for those damages caused by
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company; however, if you
     cannot separate some or all of the damages, you
     must award Julius B. Smith any damages that you
     cannot separate as if they were all caused by
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company."
          Now, even if you thought mold or bleach 3236
     played a role, how could you ever separate?
     There's no evidence.
          So let's go back to the verdict form.  The
     verdict form --
          Dan, let's go back for a second.
          Your first question is whether "after
     addiction," and then you get to cause of death.
     We suggest that you answer cause of death
     "yes."  But if you were to think that the cause
     of death was not COPD, that is not the end of
     it because we still believe that Mr. Smith
     suffered for 21 years from his COPD.
          And so really what you have is a fork in
     the road that, if you believe it's death, the
     fork goes right and you go down the wrongful
     death path on the verdict form.  But if not,
     you go to the left and it's the pain and
     suffering.
          And on the verdict form, the question for
     pain and suffering is question 7 -- it would be
     question 7.  And so question 7 would be the
     question for damages for wrongful death.
     Question 8 would be the question for pain and
     suffering.
          So if you take the fork for wrongful 3237
     death, question 7; if you take the fork for
     pain and suffering, it's question 8.  It's
     alternative.
          Under this verdict form, you should not
     answer both questions 7 and 8.  It's one or the
     other, depending upon how you view the
     evidence.
          So let's look at the evidence for wrongful
     death.  This is the last hospitalization.  And
     what we know from Dr. Martinez is that patients
     who have had prior hospitalization are at a
     higher risk.  He testified to that.
          And we know that Julius Smith was
     hospitalized on January 2nd, 2015, with COPD
     exacerbation.  And then he had the second
     hospitalization on March 24th.  And this is
     what was written on the emergency room
     admission form.
          We know on March 28th he had atrial
     fibrillation.  His heart rate raced up to
     240 beats her minute.  Dr. Martinez said, "That
     is not good.  You're a very sick man," and he
     was put in ICU.
          And the attending cardiologist, Dr. Wang,
     wrote in the medical records here on the 3238
     bottom -- this is Dr. Wang.  This isn't even
     Dr. Martinez.  This is the treating doctor, who
     said, "I do think the underlying COPD
     contributed to onset of atrial fibrillation."
          So now you have two doctors saying that
     the COPD contributed to the AFib.  Dr. Martinez
     from the witness stand and Dr. Wang.
          And let's be real clear about one thing:
     We are not blaming the hospital for anything
     that they did.  They had a dying man when
     Mr. Smith presented to them on March 24th.
     They did the best that they could insofar as
     the medical care that they gave.  So here is
     the chronology of what happened to Mr. Smith.
          March 24 he comes in.  March 28 he has the
     AFib that sends him to the ICU.  This is what
     Dr. Wang said in quotes.  And then on March 29
     is the aspiration.
          Here is what we know about aspiration.  We
     showed you this in opening statement.
     Everybody has had this experience.  Something
     goes down the wrong pipe.
          We know that Mr. Smith was not breathing
     well; that he was drinking Ensure or an Ensure
     supplement for diabetics called Glucerna. 3239
          And I invite you to look at Exhibit 1 in
     this case, and it's the medical records just
     from the composite.  It's not all of
     Mr. Smith's medical records, but it's a
     composite.
          And it shows the progression of his
     disease, and it has some of the last
     hospitalization.  And you can see in there that
     he had trouble breathing.  He coughed up a
     chocolate drink, and there is no evidence that
     anything other than aspiration occurred at
     11:00 at night on March 29.
          And so Dr. Martinez testified -- this is
     from the transcript.
          "Question:  Are patients with COPD at
     higher risk of aspiration?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          So the aspiration was caused by the COPD.
     That's what then sent him into his multi-organ
     system failure.
          And then on March 30, they put an NG tube
     in him after he goes into cardiac arrest.  You
     heard the testimony about the Code Blue.
     Everyone came running.  They do compressions
     on his chest trying to save his life.  And the 3240
     NG tube goes into him.
          And what do they find?  Now, Mr. Gordon
     and I actually have the same idea because I
     have a measuring cup too.
          And what did we hear?  That there was
     1500 milliliters -- maybe even 1700 milliliters
     of coffee ground material that they suctioned
     out of Mr. Smith.  Imagine that having been so
     much more fluid in your belly than you're
     supposed to have with the equivalent of 5 Coke
     cans of gastric contents that they had to
     suction out.
          That's how sick he was as his body was
     stressed as a result of his deteriorating
     condition.  That much fluid sucked out through
     the nasogastric tube.
          But that's not what the Defense told you
     in their opening statement.
          The R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company told you
     this in opening statement.  They told you:  "So
     how did Mr. Smith die?  The evidence will show
     that during a hospital stay in March 2015 --
     and you heard about that hospital stay a little
     bit from Mr. Praglin" -- and I'm quoting.
          "Mr. Smith aspirated a massive amount of 3241
     blood into his lungs, at least a quart and a
     half, which means -- that means he vomited
     blood that was in his stomach and then inhaled
     that blood into his lungs.  And that caused an
     infection, and that's what killed him."
          We know that didn't happen.
          Ms. Smith testified there was no vomit.
     There was no blood.
          This is what was in as he had his cardiac
     arrest.  And Dr. Martinez testified to that.
          So what we know is that he died -- as
     Dr. Martinez said on the death certificate --
     this is what Dr. Martinez says.
          This is how the death certificate should
     have been filled out.  On the left is how it
     is, and we highlighted everything that was in
     complete.  Dr. Martinez testified this is how
     it should have read:  Sepsis with hemorrhage --
     on the right-hand side -- aspiration on line B,
     COPD exacerbation, COPD, and then atrial
     fibrillation.
          And Dr. Martinez testified that not only
     was this death certificate incomplete; but it
     was incomplete and wrong on tobacco use,
     because if you look at the left, it said, "Did 3242
     tobacco use contribute to death?  Answer:  No."
          And why did it say that?  Because they
     didn't take a tobacco use history when
     Mr. Smith went into the hospital.  It has a
     tobacco use grid.  And they don't have any
     information about quantity of smoking, nothing
     about packs per day, nothing about years of
     use, nothing about when tobacco was last used.
          So Mr. Smith could have smoked a pack of
     cigarettes when he was a teenager; and looking
     at the chart, Dr. Kayyal never would have known
     because he didn't ask.
          So when he went to fill out the death
     certificate, he wrote "no."  So a death
     certificate, it's a statistical document.  It's
     not legal proof in a court of law as to the
     cause of death.
          Let me talk about loss of companionship.
     Because what we know is that Sherry Smith --
     she lost her world.  That was the testimony of
     Patti.  They were best friends.
          There was so much pain and suffering.  You
     heard about the 21 years of pain and suffering.
     Mr. Smith had lost 2/3 of his lung capacity.
     He could only walk half a block in the year 3243
     before he passed away.
          You heard the testimony about how he had
     all of his breathing apparatus that he had to
     use; that he was not the same person; and that
     she did everything for him.
          He was a young, athletic man when she met
     him.  And this is the way he looked in the
     months before he died, not even able to walk
     through a store when he was shopping.
          And so you have a choice.  Is it wrongful
     death?  Is it personal injuries?
          And how do you evaluate the damages for
     the loss of a life on a 50-year marriage?
          It's not an easy thing to do.  And I can't
     tell you how to do it.  All I can do is to give
     you some ideas and some guidance.
          And I thought about it this morning.  I
     woke up this morning, and there was a beautiful
     sunrise.  And I thought about Sherry and all of
     the beautiful sunrises that she's not going to
     have with Julius.
          She has got 18 years without Julius.  So
     there's no test for how you evaluate loss of
     companionship.  But I think that your verdict
     has to be fair and just compensation.  It 3244
     should be something that, when you close your
     eyes at night, you can feel like you did
     justice; when you talk to your friends and
     family, you can tell them that you did justice.
          And so what I'm going to suggest to you
     is, that, as a society, we place high value on
     things.  Paintings go for millions of dollars
     sometimes.  Homes go for millions of dollars.
          But now we're evaluating human life, human
     life that was erased from the Smith family.
          So if Sherry Smith could have Julius back
     here today, she wouldn't want any money.  But
     we know we can't do that.  We know that can't
     happen.  So we have to place a value on the
     loss of his life and the suffering that he went
     through for those 21 years.
          So the number I'm going to suggest to you
     in your collective wisdom that I think would be
     fair and just compensation is $10 million.
          And you may know better.  It may be more.
     But that's what I think would be fair and just,
     after the evidence that you have heard and
     under the law as His Honor has instructed you.
          And there is the choice on the upper box
     for either -- not for both, but for either 3245
     wrongful death or pain and suffering.
          And then if you check the box under clear
     and convincing evidence, then there's punitive
     damages.
          I want to thank you, on behalf of Sherry
     Smith, so much for your attention.  I know this
     case has been long, and I know you will do the
     right thing.  Thank you, each and every one of
     you.


             REBUTTAL CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. WICHMANN:  Nobody is claiming Reynolds
     is responsible because they sold a legal
     product.  What we're saying is, it's not right
     to lie; it's not right to conspire; it's not
     right to conceal; and it's not right to deceive
     the American people for as many years as they
     did.
          Reynolds will tell you this is all about
     choices and people have to own up to their own
     responsibility, personal responsibility.  Let's
     talk about choices.  And let's talk about
     corporate responsibility, the responsibility of
     the manufacturer, who the evidence was knows
     the most about their product, more than anyone
     else.  What responsibility did they have?
          Dan, would you play the video clip,
     please?
          (The video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          SPEAKER:  To this question, it must be
     answered insofar as the correlation -- to this
     question, it must be answered insofar as the 3327
     correlation --
          MR. WICHMANN:  What did they know?  And
     when did they know it.  Do you have that clip?
     Is that this?
          THE TECHNICIAN:  Yes.
          (The video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          SPEAKER:  To this question, it must be
     answered:  Insofar as the correlation between
     lung cancer and cigarette smoking are
     concerned, no one knows.  It may.  It may not.
          SPEAKER:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
          SPEAKER:  I don't know if they do or not.
          SPEAKER:  I'm not in a position to give
     you a "does" or "does not" answer.
          SPEAKER:  I have to disagree with you in
     that we don't know what causes the illness that
     has been attributed to cigarette smoking.  The
     jury has not come out.
          SPEAKER:  It may not be harmful.  We're
     not convinced.
          SPEAKER:  It may or it may not be.  We
     don't know.
          SPEAKER:  Does cigarette smoking -- no
     causal relationship between cigarette smoking 3328
     and emphysema?
          SPEAKER:  Despite all of the research to
     date, there has been no causal link
     established.
          SPEAKER:  No causal relationship between
     cigarette smoking and heart disease?
          SPEAKER:  No.  As a matter of fact, there
     are studies that, while we are accused of being
     associated with heart disease, there have been
     studies conducted over 10 years that would say,
     again, that science is still puzzled over these
     courses.
          SPEAKER:  We don't know what causes cancer
     in general right now.  So I think that we may
     find out what causes cancer, and we may find
     out there's some relationship, which has yet to
     be proven.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. WICHMANN:  So I guess it's okay they
     can lie about that product that caused the
     deaths of 20 million people and blame
     Mr. Smith, who they never helped -- they had no
     programs, never did anything to help him to
     quit -- during the course of the conspiracy.
          And I want to clear something up on the 3329
     verdict form.  There are two lines on the third
     page for you to award damages.
          Please don't fill them both out.  Please
     look at the bottom of page 2.  And it will tell
     you which element of damage applies to which of
     the particular claims that Sherry Smith has for
     you.
          Also, talked a lot about choice and how
     all of this was Julius Smith's choice.  Y'all
     heard evidence that he started smoking years
     before there were any cautions on the packs.
          But let's look at what Reynolds knew about
     where choice fits into the use of their product
     and what they didn't disclose and what
     Dr. Hurt, who spent his life trying to help
     addicted smokers, didn't know at the time -- he
     said we have helped the treatment community
     to -- to treat people like Julius, had they
     known.
          Please put up slide 22.
          So here they're telling you in 2016:  It's
     all a matter of choice.  He just should have
     chose in 1980 to put it down, '85 to put it
     down, 1967 put it down.
          Well, this is one of the internal 3330
     documents.  It's got a PT number on it, 3870,
     from Reynolds, and it says:  "Smoking is no
     longer a matter of choice for him, a person who
     smokes heavily and gets addicted."  That's what
     they knew then.  That's what they still know
     today.
          Please keep your eye on the ball.
          PT2184.  You will get this document back
     there.
          In 1980, they were writing in secret
     amongst themselves:  "We can't continue to
     defend smoking as free choice if the person was
     addicted."
          Here is what the Surgeon General wrote in
     1989:  "These two factors refute -- refute the
     argument that smoking is a matter of free
     choice.  Most smokers start smoking as a
     teenager," just like Julius, "and then become
     addicted," just like Julius.
          Dr. Hurt told you:  When you get addicted,
     it affects your ability to choose to quit.
          Yes, he did quit in 2002 when he was
     medicated in the hospital where he spent five
     days for prostate cancer.
          Dr. Hurt told you the things available to 3331
     doctors to help addicted smokers.  In 2002,
     there's a world of difference with what was
     available for doctors in the '70s, in the '80s,
     and in the '90s.
          And, by the way, you saw the cigarette
     company executive on tape saying:  We don't --
     In the '70s, we don't have any programs.  We
     don't have one, any program to help our
     customers to quit.
          You saw the document.  It's back there.
     By Brown & Williamson.  It's now owned by
     Reynolds.  It says:  Let's intercept -- let's
     intercept the smokers that want to quit.
     Intercept them.  Stop them.  Stop them from --
     stop them from quitting.
          Why?  Because they want to sell their
     product that they knew was killing people and
     make more money.  They put money over morality.
          He talked about the Public Service
     Announcements.  Yes.  Yul Brynner, yes, the
     poor guy that was the opponent for Perry Mason,
     telling people on TV:  "Don't smoke."  Well,
     guess what.  Those weren't blacked out in the
     state of North Carolina.  They -- and did they
     come forward when those were being put on the 3332
     air by the public health authorities and
     saying, "You're exactly right.  Let's show you
     what we know, and let's see if we can help
     folks so they don't get sick"?  No.
          They blocked the message.  They put out
     the false message like you saw before.  They
     lied.  They lied to the American public.  They
     got in front of the Congress in 1994 and lied.
     And they raised their right hand and lied.
          But it's okay for them to do that.  It's
     not okay for Mr. and Mrs. Smith -- and
     Mrs. Smith to have brought this lawsuit.
     That's their position today.
          Reynolds' lies over the years matter.  The
     statistics show that:  20 million dead
     Americans.  90 percent of COPD caused by
     cigarettes, the modern cigarette that they
     developed, designed, and marketed.  That's the
     evidence.
          The fact that Julius smoked, because --
     you heard from his sister, by deposition:  It
     was peer pressure.  Everybody else smoked.  All
     the guys in his 12-student high school class
     started smoking.
          All right.  Then as time went on, he took 3333
     up filters, just like the vast majority of
     American smokers did, and smoked Winston.  Why?
     His son got up and told you, and Sherry got up
     and told you:  He said filters take the bad
     stuff out.
          Y'all are going to get all of the filter
     ads back there to look through, and you will
     see that they put that out and they falsely
     marketed that product.
          And it's right, like Dr. Cummings said.
     At a certain point in time, the government
     said:  Well, if can't quit and you are worried
     about your health, smoke a filter.  But the
     government was fooled too, Dr. Cummings told
     you.  The government got fooled too.
          They can't do that today.  They can't make
     those representations today.  Why?  Because it
     was false, and they knew it was false.  And
     that's all in their papers back there.  They
     knew that it was an illusion of filtration,
     just a marketing device so we could keep
     selling cigarettes to addicted smokers who are
     going to smoke them, get sick, and die.
          Folks, we're not telling you to go one way
     or the other on the verdict form, that this is 3334
     an absolute wrongful death case or that it's an
     absolute survival action.  We are going to
     leave that in your hands.  Y'all can decide.
          And as you look through it, it will tell
     you where to go, if you think that smoking
     caused his death or not.
          The one thing that's not in dispute and
     that is, is that his COPD was caused by his
     smoking addiction, and that COPD resulted in an
     absolutely horrible death.  Had nothing to do
     with a neck injury from a car crash; nothing to
     do with breathing mold and bleach over at the
     old jailhouse; nothing to do with any of that.
          A man's life and the family was devastated
     by COPD from smoking and from addiction to
     Reynolds' products.
          Thank you, folks.  I know it has been a
     long trial, but we appreciate your attention.
