MR. BYRD:  Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court, ladies and gentlemen of the
jury.
This will be our last time to talk to you before you
begin your deliberations.  So the first thing I want to do is,
on behalf of Mr. Starbuck, thank you for being here and for the
time you've taken in this case.  I can't promise you that every
bit of evidence you heard was invigorating and exciting, and
sometimes you had to hear a lot more stuff than maybe, you
thought, we're getting the point; you don't need to keep going
on and on.  But this did stem from another case, and we did try
our best to try to compact the information best we could to
make sure you have it.
What's going to be great about this process is that,
although I've tried to build this timeline from what our
experts said and Mr. Starbuck said, this will not be able to go
back with you to the jury room.  But you're going to have the
actual documents, the actual evidence that they referenced to
look at.  I encourage you to do that and to take all the time
you need with doing that.
It really is an amazing thing.  The judge talked
about it when we first started this process, that, you know, we  47 have disputes.  People have disputes with people or companies
or whatever in this country.  And you know there's eight
people.  There are eight people here that are going to go into
a room and be the voice of the community and come in and
decide, you know, what's wrong, what's right.
And that's how our process works.  It comes down to
eight people making that decision in this country.  It's not
some -- you know, the President doesn't decide that; the judge
doesn't decide that.  You are the people that are going to make
this decision.  You're the only people anywhere that will make
this decision.  And so it's important.  It's a very important
case to the parties.  It's extremely important.  And we
appreciate your time in doing that.
I will point out, just as the judge said, I'm going
to speak to you for a few minutes; then Mr. Walburg is going to
come up here and handle the first question on the verdict form
that you're going to deal with; then you're going to have to
suffer me.  I'm going to come back and talk some more.  I'm
going to break it up so you don't get totally bored of me
throughout the entire time.
But I do want to harken back a little bit to when we
first did this process.  You remember, you know, you all were
sitting up here and everybody sitting back there, and we all
were asking these questions that the judge talked about voir
dire, to speak the truth.  And we appreciate your answers in  48
that.
And in that process there were a lot of questions
that the judge went over.  And I hope you remember them.  When
you're back in the jury room, if they come up, I hope you
remember that there were a lot of biases and questions about
potential bias.  Not just against us, but to Philip Morris and
R.J. Reynolds as well.
There were questions to make sure that, you know, you
don't just disagree with lawsuits like this.  You don't think
it's wrong for people to sue.  You don't think it's improper
for Mr. Starbuck to bring this claim in the first place.  You
don't think it's wrong to award the type of damages that, you
know, we're seeking.
Those kind of things, everybody took an oath and
swore and said they don't have preconceived biases on those
topics.  So we appreciate that.  But we want to make sure, you
know, when you get back in the jury deliberation room and you
go over these, you know, just look at the instructions that the
judge gave you.
I mean, anytime, if you have a question, you just go
back to those instructions that he's given you and base
everything on the evidence and the facts that you've heard and
the jury instructions that the judge gave you.  And if somebody
tries to start bringing in, "Yeah, I just don't believe in
things like this; I think it's wrong to do X" -- MR. GERAGHTY:  I object to the commentary to the
    49
jury's deliberation process.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  -- don't be afraid to say, you know,
"Remember, we're supposed to just follow the jury instructions.
We're not supposed to have these biases."  And the judge will
tell you the process.  If you need to send a note to the judge,
you can do that as well.
You're going to hear a lot about freedom to choose in
this country and choices.  And I suspect, when the defendants
get up here, there's going to be a lot of discussion about
Mr. Starbuck and his choices.
I tried to build a timeline.  I suspect you're going
to see a timeline from Mr. Starbuck's life and things that were
going on.  And I tried to build a timeline that includes -- the
green ones have Mr. Starbuck's information on it, but also
information what the cigarette companies industry was doing at
the same time.  You're going to get to the question of
comparative fault if we find ourselves -- if we've shown --
we've put ourselves in Engle class.  I'll get to that later.
But as you weigh the conduct of the parties, just remember, you
know, the jury instructions are going to say that a corporation
should be treated equally and like people.  They need to be
treated like people.
So if Mr. Starbuck has -- makes choices and then has  50 to be held accountable for the choices he makes, the flip side
of that is that cigarette companies make choices, and they have
to be held accountable for the choices they make.  It goes both
ways.  It's two sides of the same coin.
So when you look at these -- I said this at the
beginning, but I hope you will look at the choices that both
sides made and their age and sophistication when they made it.
You're going to hear -- I presume you will hear
arguments about what Mr. Starbuck knew or believed when he was
14.  But I want you to think about the fact, when you weigh
that, about him being a 14-year-old versus the sophistication
of companies that, I think we showed you over those decades,
became the most powerful countries in the world.  I mean, the
amount of money they could spend, the amount of, you know,
influence, that they had in the culture.  They were everywhere.
We showed you the FTC report.  Nobody could have avoided their
messages that were all over the place.  That's what the FTC
report found.  So I want you to remember that.
And also remember, I mean, we -- coming into this
case, it is an extension of the prior case which, you know, I
do think it helps to, you know, have some bases for why we're
here.
You know, I do think that Mr. Starbuck -- I think
that we submit, the plaintiff submits, that, you know, there
are some things that corporations just should not engage in.  51 And I think when they violate them, they should be accountable,
and I think they violated them here.  I don't think they should
engage in needlessly endangering the public.
MR. GERAGHTY:  Objection.  Not in evidence, Your
Honor.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  We submit that that's one thing a company
should not do, needlessly endanger the public.  We submit that
companies should not lie about dangers that it knows in its own
product.  Companies shouldn't do that.  When they do things
like that and they profit off it, they need to be held
accountable.
They should market their products in responsible
ways.  I don't think that's too much to ask for in this
country, to be responsible in how you market if you want to be
treated like a person when you come into court.
And, you know, I think a final reason is, I think
that something that -- an expectation is if you have a
dangerous product, don't target that product to children and
underage, especially when it's addictive, especially when you
know that it's so hard to quit, it's addictive.
You know, I tried to think of, like, an analogy.  I
told you that we have to take you back in time.  And I think we
tried to do that.  You saw a lot of old TV clips and things
like that, to understand, you know, the 1950s, from that 1953  52 date, when the conspiracy started that Dr. Burns talked about,
all the way up to 1999.  To understand that history, you really
have to go back and understand how different the culture was.
The only analogy I've ever been able to come up with
is like imagine, you know, everybody uses cell phones today.
They're all over the culture.  Everybody uses them.  And, you
know, they're marketed everywhere.  They're advertised
everywhere.  Everybody has them.  You constantly put them up to
your head and all that.
But I'm sure -- you know, people have heard -- every
now and then, you've heard reports, there's reports out there,
those cell phones cause brain cancer.  Now, nobody -- I mean, I
don't know what people believe about it, but it's out there.
You've heard; right?  I mean, it's in news reports.  But people
keep using the cell phones.
And imagine if, you know, the cell phone company that
made the product, the Apple and BlackBerry and all these
companies, whatever they are, the people that make the cell
phone, what if they came out right now and said, "You know
what?  It's true.  These things we're making, we've studied it,
and they cause brain cancer.  Okay?  If you keep using them,
you're going to get brain cancer."
Imagine the impact that would be if the manufacturer
said it, instead of just some news report somewhere or
whenever.  Then imagine if we find out 30, 40 years from now,  53 okay, we take this 1953 line, push it forward, 2030, 2050.  We
look back and, lo and behold, documents finally come out from
the manufacturers of these cell phones.  And we find out they
knew.  They knew for decades and didn't tell us.  They had done
all the research.  They had done the studies.  They had done
brain studies, brainwave studies.  They had done all this stuff
and didn't tell us.
And then what if that industry tried to come in and
say, "But you knew.  Hadn't you read about it?  Hadn't you read
about it in the newspaper?  Hadn't you heard?"  
Even though that wasn't the same type of modern
science, today -- you know, we haven't seen the same type of
this modern scientific consensus reached and studies done.
What if they just said, "You read about it in the Florida
Times-Union.  Don't say we didn't tell you something you didn't
know."  But they hid it for years.
And then what if the government, for these 40 years,
tries to start warning people, "Quit using your cell phones.
It's a problem."
And the cell phone industry is over there going,
"Don't believe them.  That hadn't been proven.  That's not
true."
Get together and they form a conspiracy to sit there
and tell everybody, "Keep using your phones."  You know?  And
then when you get -- and then, worse, try to come back and  54 rewrite history.  Rewrite history.  And 30 or 40 years from
now, tries to come back and tell you that in 2014, people
weren't --
MR. GERAGHTY:  You're not allowed to comment on the
defense of the case.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  People weren't using cell phones back in
2014 to this degree.  They all knew what they were doing when
they were putting their cell phones to their head.  They all
knew.  And rewrite history.  You know, everybody running around
scared.  That's what was going on in 2014.  Everybody was --
you know, anybody who had any sense was putting their cell
phone way far away and never used it.  But the people that
didn't know what they were doing, they were doing this.
The story we've tried to tell, okay, is a story --
it's taken some time because it's such a long period of time
that they did this.  It is a story from 1953 on that -- it's
the type of conduct, hiding and concealing information,
actively telling customers that the science is not right and
science is not wrong.  It was over and over and over.  It was a
campaign of doubt.  That's their words.  It was a campaign of
doubt that they continued on and on.
And what's worse, they got into the -- you know, this
'82 year is important, as the judge has instructed you.  Okay?
And the importance of that is it's a year the judge will decide  55 something about.  Keep in mind, this '82 year is important
about what they did before and what they did after.
And in '82, we showed you this Exhibit 72.  And,
again, you're not going to have this board back there with you.
But I encourage you to read these exhibits yourself.  Take the
time to do it.
Exhibit 72 is a 1982 document, December of 1982.  And
in it, the industry is saying to themselves that we can't be --
one of the things they say is we can't be comfortable selling
our product.  We cannot ever be comfortable selling a product
which most of our customers would stop if they could.  This is
in '82.  They know people are going to stop.  "If the exit
gates were ever opened, we'd be out of business overnight."
That's in their own document.
What happens after '82?  We start seeing things
like -- there's, like, a new thing that starts happening.  And
if you look at some of the evidence, I think you'll see this.
In their marketing and their efforts, the Great American
Smoker's Kit we showed you.  There comes this new language that
you start hearing from Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.  
And I don't mean to -- you know, everybody in this
country has a right to -- you know, companies have a right to
make money, advertise, profit.  No one suggests otherwise.
Every company has a right to do all those things.
We're not suggesting you can't do that stuff.  That's  56 good, but it should be done appropriately.
But, you know, there's starting to be -- this
terminology starts coming into the lexicon.  And I think you'll
see it that, you know, America -- you know, in America, you can
choose.  And in America, you have a right to be an American and
tell people, "Quit telling me to quit.  I'm a smoker.  I'm a
great American smoker."
And there's this concept that, you know, everyone's
flooding away.  And that '82 line Dr. Kyriakoudes showed you,
the sales of cigarettes finally starting to decline in '82.
There is a desperate attempt by the industry to intercede on
things like Dow Chemical and Nicorette gum marketing, to Great
American Smoker's Kit.  They ramp up their -- anybody, the
American Cancer Society trying to warn people.  They ramp up
this American message, that in America you have a right to
choose.  And, therefore, it's all on you.  It's all on you,
smoker.  And the end of that sentence is, it's all on you.
But it's done in this sort of draping -- kind of
draping themselves in the flag a little bit.  And I think if
you look at the marketing and advertising, you'll see that.
Now, the instructions will tell you about the burden
of proof you need to meet.  Mr. Walburg is going to come up in
a second and talk about the first question on that form, which
is whether he's addicted or not.  Okay?  That we have to prove
that he was addicted and that addiction caused the lung cancer to get anywhere in this case.  That's the initial elements of
    57
the case.
The judge, I think, can show us the burden of proof
issue.  The question is by the greater weight of the evidence.
That's what the judge has instructed you.  And if you can pull
this up, the judge tells you what greater weight of the
evidence means.  It's proof that, in fact, it is more likely
true than not.  We talked about that.  Proof that -- we just
have to slightly tilt the scales.  I think the Court had
mentioned that, you know, we don't have to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt.  
But if we tip the scales and say that it's more
likely true than not that he was addicted and that his
addiction caused the disease, that's our burden of proof.  And
so make sure, when somebody says, "Well, I have some doubt.
You know, I don't know.  There's some things we heard from
Dr. Ticknor or Dr. Frazier or whoever you want to reference
that they brought in here."
It's okay to have doubt.  You can have doubt.  This
isn't a criminal case, a reasonable doubt issue.  You can have
doubt.  The question is, taking all the evidence, what's more
likely true than not?
And the first question that Mr. Walburg is going to
come up here and address is whether Mr. Starbuck was addicted.
He's going to take 10 or 15 minutes.  Then I'm going to come back and walk you through the rest of the questions.  But I
want you to listen to Mr. Walburg for a few minutes on that
issue, the first question you're going to deal with.



MR. WALBURG:  Thank you, Mr. Byrd.
Your Honor, we're going to have a PowerPoint.
So, Roger, if you wouldn't mind dimming the lights a
little bit.
Okay.  Looks good.
Thank you all very much, ladies and gentlemen, for
your patience in listening to this evidence.  I know it's been
a long couple weeks, and we appreciate your attention.
So addiction is what I'm here to talk to you about.
It's the first question that you're going to be asked on the
verdict form.  And I contend that the answer is easy.  Think
back to what you've heard about Mr. Starbuck.  40 years of
nicotine use, multiple quit attempts, he survived cancer twice
and then went back to smoking again.  It wasn't until he was
put into a medically induced coma that he was finally able to
wean himself off the nicotine and quit.
This is an important question, so we're going to go
through it carefully.
First, we're going to look at the jury instruction
from Judge Bennett.  This is No. 6.  It deals with addiction as
part of the first elements.  It says, "In order to assert his
claims, Mr. Starbuck must first prove both of the following  59 initial elements by the greater weight of the evidence."
And as Mr. Byrd just told you, "greater weight of the
evidence" means more likely true than not.  So, like he said,
it's not like a criminal case, where it's the more strict
standard.
So No. 1 is what I'm dealing with.  "Mr. Starbuck was
addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine on or before
November 21, 1996."  And that's a date that's just important
for legal reasons.
And I think here it will be easy, because we know that
Mr. Starbuck smoked up until 1995.  So then your first question
on the verdict form, this is what the verdict form looks like,
and it's a simple question.
"Addiction.  Has Mr. Starbuck proved by the greater weight
of the evidence that he was addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine on or before November 21, 1996, as explained in
Instruction No. 6?"
This is the first question, and we ask that you check
"yes" here.
So in looking at addiction, it's helpful to determine what
the definition of addiction is.  And you heard from
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns about the appropriate definition of
addiction.  And that's from the National Institute on Drug
Abuse.  We'll call it NIDA.  That's a federal agency that put
forth this definition.  60 It says, "Addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing
brain disease" -- and "relapsing" means going back to the --
going back to the drug, back to smoking -- "that is
characterized by compulsive drug-seeking and use, despite
harmful consequences, consequences like cancer, pneumonia.  It
is considered a brain disease because drugs change the brain."
We heard about that.  The nicotine receptors.  They change
its structure and how it works.
And here's a -- some diagrams of how nicotine gets from
the cigarette to the brain.  Because, as I said, nicotine is a
brain disease.  As you heard from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns,
once you puff on that cigarette, it only take 7 to 10 seconds
to deliver the nicotine from the cigarette to your brain after
it goes into your lungs and then up into your brain.  And
that's something that the company studied and perfected, the
speed of delivery.
And once it's in your brain, it changes permanently the
nicotine receptors in your brain.  So that's why NIDA refers to
this nicotine addiction as a brain disease.
We also looked at the key characteristics of addicted
smokers.  And some of the primary features are persistent daily
use.  And we have that with Mr. Starbuck because we know that
he smokes every day for 40 years.
Time to first cigarette.  That's when you start smoking
each day.  And for Mr. Starbuck, he started smoking first thing  61 in the morning.  He had an ashtray right next to his bed.
And then the amount smoked per day.  Mr. Starbuck started
out with a lower amount, went to a half a pack, then a pack,
pack and a half, two packs.  And then at the height of his
smoking, he went all the way up to three packs a day.  And
that's a lot.
Other features are early age of initiation.  And we'll
talk about that.
Difficulty refraining from smoking.  That's frequent
nicotine dosing.  That's the eight doses per cigarette, the
doses of nicotine that get to the brain.
And failed quit attempts.  And Mr. Starbuck told us about
how he tried many times to quit and couldn't do it.  Some of
those were of short duration, like it says right here.
And then withdrawal symptoms and craving upon quitting.
We heard about how Mr. Starbuck got irritable and his family
didn't want to be around him.  That's withdrawal.
And cravings.  He craved that dose of nicotine.
And then the final feature is use despite knowledge of
harms or actual harms.  Well, here that's pretty obvious
because he had cancer twice and he continued to smoke because
the nicotine pulled him back in.
Moving on.  Mr. Starbuck was clearly an addicted smoker.
And we have -- we heard from Dr. David Burns, the pulmonologist
who has worked with the Surgeon General and been in public  62 health for decades.  He said for Mr. Starbuck, yes, he was
addicted to nicotine.
Then we heard from Dr. Michael Cummings, the researcher
and behavioral scientist who has studied the issue of addiction
for decades.  He says, "He was addicted, heavily addicted.  I
don't think there's any doubt, in my professional opinion,
about that."
And then from Mr. Starbuck himself, "I was an addict."  He
admits that.
So in the key features we talked about early age of
initiation.  And some of the expert witnesses talked to you
about that.  It's important in this case because Mr. Starbuck
was just a little teenaged boy when he started.
So Dr. David Burns stated, "If nicotine is presented
during adolescence, when the brain is developing and changing
very rapidly, that brain is much more likely to become
addicted, and that addiction is likely to be more powerful."
That's Dr. Burns.
Dr. Cummings, "Age of initiation is important because the
earlier the human brain gets exposed to nicotine, the more
likely it is that the smoker is going to struggle as an adult
to quit because the changes in the brain are more profound with
earlier exposure."
And we know from the testimony that Mr. Starbuck started
very young.  He did try a few cigarettes when he was even  63 younger.  But for our purposes here -- you know, we've heard
about how he took a cigarette from his aunt and so forth.  But
he really started smoking at age 13 to 14.  And he became a
regular smoker at age 14.  And that's young.  And he smoked all
the way until age 55.
So the evidence showed that Mr. Starbuck was addicted from
age 15 to age 55.  And that's the 40 years we're talking about.
That's a long time.  That's about how long I've been alive.
And, again, going back in time, like Mr. Byrd referenced,
here is a school picture when Mr. Starbuck was a teenager.
Here he is in the corner.  And this -- this is Mr. Starbuck
from that picture when he was around age 14 or 15, but probably
more likely he was about 14 here.  And by that time, this
little boy was already a regular smoker.  And his brain at that
time was still developing and forming.  And that early smoking
had a permanent impact on his ability to quit as an adult.
We next looked at the Heaviness of Smoking Index.  The
first question there was, "How soon after you wake up do you
smoke your first cigarette?"
For Mr. Starbuck, it was within five minutes.  That's a 3,
the highest.  Because we know he smoked first thing in the
morning when he got out of bed.  He had an ashtray right next
to his bed.
Then the next question, "How many cigarettes do you
smoke?"  That's how many per day.  64 And here he scored the highest number again, No. 3, 31 or
more.  31 would be a pack and a half.  And we know that he
smoked at least a pack and a half, all the way up to three
packs per day at some times.
So when you add up the 3 from the first question and the 3
from the bottom question, he rates as a 6.
And down here at the bottom, you see 5 to 6, high
dependence.  So Mr. Starbuck was at the top of the scale.
Mr. Starbuck made many quit attempts.  He tried to quit
smoking.  There are times that he didn't want to smoke, but he
kept doing it.  Here's some of the methods that he tried.
The Great American Smokeout.  You heard about that.
That's the annual day when people try to quit for just one day.
One day at a time.
And you heard about how he stopped for short periods of
time.  We know that his wife and his stepdaughter urged him to
quit.  He tried to quit, and he couldn't do it.  There's
testimony where he told them that he just couldn't do it.
He tried the Nicorette gum.  That didn't work.
He tried the nicotine patch.
And he also tried eating candy and Life Savers, which
sounds strange, but that's a common thing that we see smokers
trying to do to try to replace -- you know, it's something in
their mouth orally.  Also chewing gum, the same concept.
In addition, he was hospitalized several times for the  65 two different cancers.  And he stopped when he was in the
hospital, but then his addiction brought him back to smoking
even after the serious medical conditions.
And when he did make these quit attempts, he suffered
withdrawal.  And here's a quote -- here's something that was
said during the trial.
He reported, when he refrained from smoking, feeling
nervous, upset, aggressive, disagreeable, having strange bodily
feelings, hand tremors, a little lightheadedness, and that when
he went back to smoking again, he felt mild euphoria.
Those are all classic withdrawal symptoms.
And that also explains the concept that the defense may
raise about, "Oh, he enjoyed smoking."  Well, he enjoyed
smoking because he wanted to get rid of the withdrawal and get
that euphoria that he could get when he went back to smoking.
That's not really enjoying smoking.
So the defendants didn't bring any of their scientists or
company representatives to talk about addiction.  They did
bring Dr. Ticknor.  This is him from his website.
And the DSM-5, very, very controversial.  We know from
Dr. Ticknor's cross-examination by Mr. Byrd, in his view,
almost no one that he sees is addicted, which is totally --
goes totally against the statistics from the Surgeon General.
Yet he prescribes dangerous drugs like Chantix to his patients.
MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  403.  66 THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. WALBURG:  He prescribes these dangerous drugs to
his patients, even when he doesn't think they're addicted.  So
that just doesn't make sense.
Then we went through the 11 factors on the DSM-5.
And Dr. Ticknor gave Mr. Starbuck 5 out of 11 factors.  But
then when we went through the rest of the factors with him, he
had to admit that several of those factors from the DSM don't
even apply really to smoking.  And, actually, the DSM-5 says
only 2 out of 11 are required.  But then Dr. Ticknor explained
that still, even though Mr. Starbuck had 5 out of 11, he's
still not addicted.
So DSM, like I said, it's controversial.  It's only
used by psychiatrists.  It's used for billing insurance
companies.  And NIDA that we talked about before is used by
primary care doctors and pulmonologists who see smokers in
their daily practices.  They're the ones who see the smokers on
the front lines.
Moreover, NIDA is a federal -- a United States
federal agency.  And they properly defined addiction like we
said before, a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is
characterized by compulsive drug-seeking behavior and use
despite harmful consequences.  That's Mr. Starbuck.
And then we have the Surgeon General.  1988, the
Surgeon General's report which focused on the subject of  67 nicotine addiction.  It was a groundbreaking report.  This is
the time of the famous Surgeon General, Dr. C. Everett Koop,
who you can see here.  The conclusion of the 1988 Surgeon
General's report was as follows:
"After carefully examining the available evidence,
this report concludes that cigarettes and other forms of
tobacco are addicting.  Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that
causes addiction.  The pharmacologic and behavioral processes
that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that
determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine."
In the meanwhile -- so this is what the Surgeon
General said in '88.  But meanwhile, the cigarette companies
were secretly studying nicotine addiction going back many
years.  And here's some of the quotes that I showed you before.
1962.  "As a result of these various researches, we
now possess a knowledge of the effects of nicotine far more
extensive than exists in public scientific literature."
1966.  "A cigarette that does not deliver nicotine
cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to
habituation and therefore would almost certainly fail.  Health
claims alone without flavor of nicotine cannot sell cigarettes.
Most smokers would rather quit than switch."
The bottom line is from 1974.  That was from the
study where the cigarette companies were looking at
hyperkinetic children as possible future cigarette smokers.  68 And they were focusing in on those children as a subgroup.
They said, "It would be good to show that smoking is an
advantage to at least one subgroup of the population."
And, you know, there's further evidence of them
studying addiction.  We talked about the -- we saw the document
with the analogy of the rat pressing the lever.  Consider the
smoking -- smoking is the lever press.  The effect of the fact
upon his person is the reward.  They talk about the rat pushing
the lever just like the smoker takes his dose of nicotine.
They acknowledge that very few consumers are aware of
the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature, and that
nicotine is a poison.
And there's evidence that they knew they were selling
an addictive product.  Here's from a couple internal documents
that we showed you before.  "Moreover, nicotine is addictive.
We are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive
drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms."
And they went on.  "The tobacco product is, in
essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine, designed to
deliver the nicotine in generally acceptable and attractive
form."
And they manipulated those nicotine levels to keep
people hooked.  There's evidence from that in the documents.
Here's one.  "The physiological requirements of the
smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application  69 of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco."
We saw videos about how they genetically modify.
In '63, they said, "I think we can say even now that
we can regulate fairly precisely the nicotine and sugar levels
to almost any desired level management might require.  Of this,
I am confident."
And they talked about how the cigarette is a system
of nicotine delivery.
So, in summary, when you look to answer the final
question here, the primary -- the primary reason, or one of the
primary reasons, either way, that Mr. Starbuck smoked was
because he was addicted to nicotine.
His addiction was obvious.  He had over 40 years of
nicotine use.  He smoked first thing in the morning.  He had
numerous quit attempts.  He had withdrawal symptoms.  He smoked
when he had pneumonia.  And that's not to be confused with
aspiration pneumonia.  He beat cancer twice and still returned
to smoking.  He always needed that next dose of nicotine.  And
only a medically induced coma allowed Mr. Starbuck to free
himself from his nicotine addiction.
So zeroing in on the verdict form, we've showed that
he started smoking on a regular basis in 1953, he had lung
cancer surgery in '95.  And he stopped smoking in 1995.  So he
clearly meets the requirement of being addicted on or before
November 21, 1996.  70 And for these reasons, we submit that you should
check "yes" to the first question.  Thank you very much.


MR. BYRD:  I'm back.  I'll try to be quick.  We have
a lot to go through on the verdict form.
The second question you're going to be asked is
whether addiction caused the lung cancer.
And, Jeff, you can pop that -- we don't really
need -- you guys have the verdict form and instructions.  So I
don't want to keep popping stuff up on the screen and take
time.
But the second question is whether addiction caused
the lung cancer.  And you're going to get a definition of what
legal cause is.  And the defendants are going to talk to you a
lot about legal cause as well.  Let's put up that one
instruction.  It goes on for two pages about, you know, "It
must have directly in a natural, continuous sequence produced
or contributed substantially to producing the injury."
I don't think there's any doubt that addiction -- I
think we showed from several witnesses.  Dr. Amgott talked
about it.  Dr. Burns talked about it.  Even Dr. Frazier
conceded as well that smoking, the repeated exposure to
cigarette smoke, caused the lung cancer.  It's not something
that happens overnight by some lightning strike; it's  71 repeated -- Dr. Burns went through it and explained why it's
repeated exposure to those cells over time.
Jeff, can you pull up -- the last part of this
instruction talks about it does not have to be -- can you pull
that up bigger.  Yes.
It does not have to be the only cause of the lung
cancer.  Something may have been a legal cause of the injury,
even though it operated in combination with the act of another,
some natural cause, or some other cause if it contributed
substantially to producing the injury.  Okay?  
So I think the defendants are going to try to explain
to you, "Well, there's other reasons he didn't" -- you know, he
had his others reasons why -- it wasn't just addiction; it was
also because he didn't try enough, that he didn't quit.
And to the extent -- you know, there's no question in
here that says, did he try to quit or how hard he tried to
quit.  The questions about whether he tried to quit, we submit,
belong in the comparative fault instructions.  I mean --
MR. GERAGHTY:  I object, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  If you think Mr. Starbuck didn't try to
quit hard enough or early enough or didn't do all the things he
should have done to try to help himself quit, you may very well
think that.  But we would submit that goes in the comparative
fault.  And I'll talk to you about that in a second, about where you put percentage of fault on different people.  That's
    72
it.  
But without a doubt, addiction was one of the
reasons, was a legal cause.  Because every -- virtually every
witness agreed that smoking, the repeated exposure to cigarette
smoking -- every witness did agree that the repeated exposure
to cigarette smoking caused the lung cancer.
And, you know, you can believe there's some other
reasons.  Well, I think it's also because he enjoyed it, or I
think it's because he didn't quit early enough, even though he
didn't quit early enough partly because of his addiction.
You know, an analogy is like -- there can be -- you
can put that down, Jeff -- but there can be more than one
cause.  Try to think of it like a baseball game.  Let's assume
a pitcher has a no-hitter, you know, against another baseball
team.  So the other team doesn't score, doesn't do anything.
And the team wins the game.  Okay?
Well, was the pitcher the substantial contributing
cause?  Of course it was.  He pitched a no-hitter.  He was the
cause of the win.  But, you know, there's fielders who stopped
the ball from -- you know, the base hits from happening,
anybody getting on base.  They also contributed to the injury,
to the cause.
And, don't forget, somebody on his team had to hit
maybe a home run or circle the bases and score or they would  73 have never won.  So they all worked together to be a legal
cause of the injury, even though, sure, the pitcher was kind of
like addiction.  In my mind, the major cause of it, you know,
biggest cause of it.  But there's also other big causes that if
you didn't have it wouldn't have happened.  If somebody hadn't
scored the run, they wouldn't have won.
So that's why we say, you know, each one of these,
you're going to be asked.  And I won't go back into that again.
Each one of these claims, you're going to have the strict
liability, the negligence.  But then you have the intentional
tort, the fraud, fraudulent concealment, and the conspiracy
claim.  They can all operate together to be a legal cause of
what happened.  Doesn't need to just be, you know, which one of
those.  All of them operate together, much like a baseball
analogy, to cause the situation.
And so we think there is no question that the
addiction is what caused the lung cancer.  Because what causes
repeated exposure to cigarette smoke?  Addiction.  And so that
question, we submit, is it more likely right than wrong?  Of
course.  Because why do you keep smoking?  
And then there's a couple follow-up questions of
which cigarette brands caused it.  I won't go into that in
detail, but I think we showed -- the only evidence in the case
comes from Dr. Burns, Dr. Amgott, I believe as well, is that
all the cigarettes contributed to the disease, each and every  74
one.
So the early ones, the Lucky Strikes and Camels and
Pall Malls that he smoked early, they were the ones that
initially got him hooked and addicted.  They began the
addiction.  But they also started doing the cell damage one by
one.  Each one of those cigarettes froze the cilia and damaged
cells over time.
And so it was Philip Morris brands as well as the
R.J. Reynolds brands, because they all worked together over 40
years to create this lung cancer.  So when you get to those
questions, I want you to mark "yes" to Philip Morris and R.J.
Reynolds causing the injury.
Now, they're going to get to a question about whether
the defendants have showed that Mr. Starbuck's own conduct
caused his injury.
You certainly are well within your bounds to say
that, you know, really, it was just the addiction; it wasn't
Mr. Starbuck.  I mean, remember, this isn't like -- you know,
this is -- of course he could have -- of course he could have
quit early.  We wish he had quit early.  But, you know,
addiction was constraining his so-called free choice that they
want to talk about.
So if you find -- they will talk to you about their
burden of proof, whether they met their burden of proof to show
that he also was a cause, in addition to their own cigarettes.  75 And if you find yes, then you're going to do a comparative
fault percentage analysis.  If you find no, then frankly it's
all 100 percent, we would submit equally divided between Philip
Morris and R.J. Reynolds.  Anytime you do anything here on
percentage, we would submit it's equal between Philip Morris
and R.J. Reynolds for cause.
Sure, he smoked Philip Morris brands for a lot
longer, but those early brands when you're a teenager are
really also very, very important because they're what got you
going, got you hooked.
So let's look at the comparative fault question.  If
you get to the comparative fault, then you're going to assign
it to everybody, not just the cigarette companies.  Let me
submit to you just briefly some options here, suggestions of
what I think is appropriate.
When you weigh the conduct of the parties, just
remember, you know, again, to weigh what Mr. Starbuck was doing
you have to go back and start in 1953 when he's 14 years old.
And remember, the first cigarette warnings didn't
even happen till '66.  The first time the warning ever said
that it caused lung cancer, ever, first time the warning ever
said that was '85.  So you're talking, like, 32 years out of
his 42-year history, there was no warning on the pack that said
it caused lung cancer.  That's, like, three-quarters of his
smoking history.  76 And just remember, when you're weighing the conduct
of the parties, you'll note the cigarette companies had all the
knowledge and all the power.  You know, you heard Mr. Walburg
talk about all the things they were doing they were doing with
addiction that they knew that they didn't release.  They didn't
tell people about filters not working.  They didn't tell people
about manipulating pH levels.  The didn't say that they were
doing brain waves studies and all this stuff.  They didn't do
all that.  Versus, you know, Mr. Starbuck's knowledge when he
was 14 years old.  How low is that?
Now then, as he tries to get knowledge over time,
sure the government and people are warning him, but the
cigarette industry is doing everything they can through their
conspiracy to try to keep his knowledge as little as possible.
I would suggest that, look, you know, if you're going
to put any blame on Mr. Starbuck, and I've known Mr. Starbuck
for quite a while --
MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to that
comment.  It's an inappropriate personal comment.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  I've known Mr. Starbuck for quite a while
and, you know, it may be that we put some blame on a smoker, of
course.  But when we go back to -- when we look at that blame,
I think we need to look at, you know, a 14-year-old.  We need
to think about what we do with 14-year-old kids when they see  77 everybody else in their neighborhood and community and their
teachers and their doctors doing it, and they're going to
vending machines and they're getting -- everybody's doing this
thing to get Kool, like pennies back, and they're seeing all
these -- everywhere that the entire culture does it, they're
seeing military -- wanting to go into the military and seeing
glamorous visions of the people in the military, that this is
what you do, this is how you get older, this is what you do.
I don't think, I submit, that in -- that the eight
people, and we're going to come out of our community and sit
down together and make a decision.  I think that needs to be
taken into consideration about a 14-year-old and where that is.
I would submit to you if you find him at fault at
all, that you put the blame where it actually belongs, maybe
13, 14 percent.  He was 13 or 14 years old when he started.
And that you don't go any higher than 25 percent, because
three-quarters of his time smoking, all the way up to 85,
didn't tell him anything other than --
MR. GERAGHTY:  I would object, that's preemption,
Your Honor.  Barred by preemption.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  And don't forget he was trying to quit all
that time too.  Is there any evidence -- look at the evidence
in the record to see were the cigarette companies trying to
quit what they were doing, or were they ramping it up?  Were  78 they increasing their money?  Look at 365:1.  Now, I've never
figured out the percentage of that.  But the evidence is that
365:1 was the advantage that the cigarette industry in their
marketing and advertising had over the public health
authorities what they could spend in one day.  Right?  The
cigarette industry spent in one day what the public health
authorities had spent in a year trying to warn people.
And remember the people that are trying to warn
people, the American Cancer Society and all those people, what
was the cigarette industry saying at the same time?  When they
did it, they said, "They're wrong.  They're crazy."  Okay.  
They tell two different stories.  They tell one story
back when Mr. Starbuck was smoking and when people weren't
looking.  And then they tell a different story when they're
being held to account and people are looking.
Now, so we -- that's the percentage.  You know,
14 percent I would suggest is appropriate, if anything, on
Mr. Starbuck, somewhere between the 14 to 20 percent.  And
that's for your decision.  You-all decide that.  That's your
type of decision.  You need to get in there and weigh the
evidence, look at everything, and that's what we want to hear
from you of what you say.
Then you get to the intentional torts.  Okay?  And
I'm going to take the intentional torts together.  There's a
fraud claim and a conspiracy claim.  Basically the fraud  79 claim -- you'll see the instructions -- the fraud claim talks
about did Mr. Starbuck rely to his detriment on statements they
made.  Okay?  Now, they'll tell you what reliance means and
what detriment means.  But, of course, Mr. Starbuck, I think
there's plenty of evidence on the record that Mr. Starbuck
relied to his detriment.  He relied to his detriment because he
got a lung cancer.  He kept smoking over and over.
Every time he opened this pack -- he went to filtered
cigarettes hoping that it would keep the nicotine away.  Well,
if it keeps the nicotine away from your lips, guess what you
are saying too, that it keeps it out of your lungs.  And so, of
course, he relied to his detriment on their statements and
frankly their concealments, what they didn't say.  None of
their advertisements that you look at back in this time told
him he should quit smoking.  Not once did the cigarette
industry ever tell him he should quit smoking.
Then you're going to be asked -- you know, I think
you saw the evidence that virtually every American -- you know,
you could not avoid the advertising that was going on at that
time.
Jeff, can you show the 2010 Surgeon General Report.
The 2010 Surgeon General Report did an analysis from
1940 -- it's not exactly perfect -- it goes from 1940 to 2005,
but that covers a good bit of time that Mr. Starbuck would have
been alive or looking at advertisements and smoking.  And what  80 they concluded was that the cigarettes -- right there in the
middle, "Cigarettes remain one of the most heavily marketed
products in the United States with more than $250 billion
expended between 1940 to 2005."
MR. GERAGHTY:  Objection as previously stated.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  $250 billion.  Now, one has to ask
ourselves, would an industry really spend $250 billion if it
didn't work?  If it wasn't working, were they just throwing
money away?  No, because they know advertising works.  And we
will not go into it because I do want to hurry up on my time.
This exhibit, the 2010 Surgeon General Report, is
going to be in evidence.  Portions of it you can read; not the
whole thing, portions of it.  It's Exhibit 237.  Look at the
chapter on nicotine addiction.
The 2012 Surgeon General Report -- I don't have a
hard copy of that -- it's Exhibit 1302, 1-3-0-2.  Read that and
see what it says about how marketing influences children to
take up smoking.  We didn't show you that in trial but it's in
evidence, and read it.
And, you know, just to be clear, these Surgeon
General reports we've gone over and over, this side,
Mr. Starbuck.  Okay?  And on this side and out, we stand with
the Surgeon General of the United States.  Okay?  We agree with
the science and the science that has happened over the years in  81 the Surgeon General reports, and the peer-reviewed, hyper
peer-reviewed articles that come out of here and then the
modern science that they represent.  Okay?  All -- 1964
forward.
Where does the cigarette industry stand?  The
evidence you saw there was attack the Surgeon General every
time they come out.  Attack the Surgeon General before they
read the report to say it's wrong.  And in 1988 when the
Surgeon General came out and said that they were addictive,
that cigarettes are addictive, they came out with a press
release that same day saying, "How dare you scare children.
How dare you scare the youth in this country and scare them
trying to claim that cigarettes are like heroin and cocaine.
What a disservice to children."
Ask yourself -- this '82 line, ask yourself why in
1988 -- this is late, folks.  This isn't the '40s and '50s.
1988 the Surgeon General called cigarettes addictive and said
nicotine addiction is the reason people are smoking.
Why in their first statements out of their mouth are
they worried about the impact on children?  Why?  They could
have just said, we disagree, we don't think it's addictive.
Read their press release.  Why did they insert children into
that debate?  And the reason is because they know that the only
replacement smokers are youth and children.  They know that.
They know that 90 percent of regular daily smokers.  Okay?  82 They know, start when they're teenagers.  90 percent.
So look at their conduct as well, both before and
after '82.  You're going to have the questions.  And the same
as with the conspiracy.  The conspiracy questions are the same.
Did he rely on the conspiracy?  Of course he did.  Was it a
legal cause?  Sure, it was a legal cause.  It was like the
fielding team.  You know, you have the fielding team, the
batters have to score the run, the pitchers did their job, they
all worked together because, from 1953 when the conspiracy
started at the Plaza Hotel through 1999, they agreed on a
message and they executed it.  They sent out truth squad
members to go to television and say, "It's not true.  It's not
true.  It hasn't been proven."
Now, remember, today the argument is from Philip
Morris and R.J. Reynolds, "Well, Mr. Starbuck should have
known."
You know, there's Reader's Digest articles out there.
He said things like coffin nails.  And you hear this other
evidence, "Well, you know, he drank alcohol."  Ask yourself,
there is no evidence in this record what -- why are they
talking about a time in 1960s when he was in Alaska serving our
country and in college?  You want to look at the credibility of
witnesses, Mr. Starbuck is not up here giving you canned,
prepared speeches.  This guy puts the truth with the bark on it
out there.  He just comes right out and says, "This is it.  83 This is what I did.  I lied to the doctors."  He's telling you
the truth.  You have every reason to -- he could have fashioned
some answers in a lot better ways, trust me.  But he's telling
you what's going on.
So, yeah, he drank some in the 1960s.  What does that
have to do with anything?  Are we just going to try to put in
your head out there, even though all the other medical records
said he drinks 1 or 2 once a day.  It's not an issue.
Dr. Amgott, his treating doctor, said it's not an issue.  There
is no problem with that.  It didn't do anything.  Why is that
trying to be inserted in a case like this?  With no evidence to
back up anything other than just conjecture.
So the conspiracy -- you know, the question is on the
conspiracy claim, of course they all contribute because they
all work together to have the same message to attack the
Surgeon Generals in the same way, to have their campaign of
doubt.  Two, you heard evidence to get the American Medical
Association.  Remember that?  Let's buy off the American
Medical Association.  That's what they did.
Now, I don't know what the argument is going to be.
They didn't bring any corporate representatives in here to
explain their conduct --
MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I object.  We've shown
that.
MR. BYRD:  -- during this time.  84 THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  We didn't hear from any witnesses from the
cigarette industry that they brought you to explain this type
of conduct over this time.  But, you know, buying off the
American Medical Association to make sure they're not standing
with the Surgeon General in 1964, Mr. Starbuck, age whatever he
was in '64, was he buying off anybody?
I mean, what is that?  Now, we brought you Mr. Jupe
and Mr. Gentry because they were -- and you can take their
credibility and what they had to say as well into account.  But
this concept of, you know, what Mr. Starbuck's life and what he
did, don't forget, every time they talk about the choices
Mr. Starbuck made to ask what choices were they making at the
same time.
Now, did it happen before 1982 and after 1982?  Of
course.  Here's the line of '82.  Okay?  We showed you.  The
lies continued.  They went to Congress in 1994.  End of story
right there.  In Congress in 1994, held up their hand and said,
"Smoking's addictive -- smoking is not addictive.  We don't
believe cigarettes are addictive."  In 1994.
So what?  So Mr. Starbuck should have known?  You
know, I'm an executive of Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and
I'm going to tell Congress, lie to Congress, say that I don't
think cigarettes are addictive despite all this knowledge.  But
you know what?  Mr. Starbuck should have known.  It's on him?  85 So the answer to those questions, you'll see, was it
before or after, and we submit that you need to check both,
that it's both before and after.  Okay?  We need to show that
they did it in both times, both before '82 and after '82.  And
of course they continued to lie.  The conspiracy went all the
way through at least 1999 here, or 2000 when they finally admit
it's addictive and finally that it caused disease.  It wasn't
until 2000 when they admitted that cigarettes caused any
disease whatsoever.  After Mr. Starbuck is suffering from lung
cancer.
Now, they were not -- you get to damages then, would be
the next section.  And damages, you're going to see some
instructions and I'll talk about this in a minute.
There is no question that the repeated exposure to the
cigarette smoke and smoking causes the lung cancer.  Nobody is
going to tell you otherwise up here.  I don't think -- they're
not going to dispute that either.  Cigarette smoking caused the
lung cancer.
And there is a question on damages, where this issue with
Dr. Frazier and he and I went back and forth, and I did give
him a hard time on not saying the heart stops, and he did say
the heart stops, so I got that wrong.  But we went back and
forth on an issue that's going to only come up in damages,
which is, do we also get damages for his ARDS and his pulmonary
fibrosis that he continues to suffer from?  86 But, of course, he gets the damages for his lung cancer
and surgery, which was horrible, and the fact that he has lost
a lung that he will never get back.  The fact that he has the
back injury and issues of falling -- the fact that he has a
back injury from when his rib cage was opened, of course he
gets all those damages.  So I'll address the ARDS issue in a
minute, but I think -- that is -- there's no question that the
lung cancer damages and the surgery, that he gets those.
I think the question that the defense is going to try to
raise, and the only reason Dr. Frazier was here, because he
agreed with us on virtually everything else, was what caused,
then, his ARDS.  And all I'll tell you is -- and I won't lie on
it for too long, but Dr. Amgott, the treating doctor.  Okay?
Only testified one other time, not even in a tobacco case.
This is his first tobacco case he's ever testified.  And he
doesn't even treat Mr. Starbuck anymore.  He came in here just
because he had treated him during some relevant time periods
with Mr. Starbuck.  He came in here, no bias, no anything, and
said, "I have no doubt in my mind that it was the lung cancer
surgery that led to the large-volume aspiration."  Okay?  
I mean, it's in the records.  He had this huge aspiration
two or three days after the surgery, and that's what led to the
ARDS, which is what led to the pulmonary fibrosis.  There is no
doubt in my mind.  And I asked him questions like, "Oh, what
about the alcohol?  What about the whatever?"    87 Well, let's look at the instruction, Jeff, on the damages
section.  You know where I'm talking about, Jeff?
It's page 25.  24, 25.  Got it.
Yeah, that -- but go on down.  Right here.  I'm sorry.
The next page.
Here's the deal.  When you read the instructions, make
sure you read these instructions closely.  Because the
cigarette company -- doesn't really matter what Dr. Frazier
says.  Okay?  The cigarette company is -- if you find the
defendant liable for damages on one or more of Mr. Starbuck's
claims, the defendant is responsible for all of the elements of
damages that its conduct legally caused.
This is the important part.  And make sure, you know, that
this is looked at when you're making this determination.  Even
if some of Mr. Starbuck's injuries were not foreseeable to that
defendant or arose because he was unusually susceptible to
being injured.
So, okay, their argument is that he had neck cancer
before.  Okay.  Too bad.  He's unusually susceptible to this
then.  I guess that's their argument.  But they're still on the
hook for that.  Their argument is --
MR. GERAGHTY:  I object, Your Honor.  Inconsistent
with your instructions.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  Their argument is that, okay, he drank  88 some alcohol from time to time.  Or he -- I don't know, they
raised -- any other things they're going to raise about what he
had in the past.  Fine.  That made him unusually susceptible to
having aspirations, then they're responsible for it.
And then the instruction goes on to talk about this
same concept.  "If you find that the defendant legally caused a
bodily injury and that the injury resulted in aggravation of an
existing disease or physical defect" -- okay, not having part
of an epiglottis -- "of a latent disease or physical defect,
then you should award any damages that are proved for the
aggravation or activation as well as for the lung cancer
surgery."
So all the parties agree.  Dr. Frazier agrees.  You
know, even if you don't take Dr. Amgott at his word and
Dr. Burns and all the medical records that tied the ARDS issue
and the aspiration to his lung cancer surgery, even if you
don't believe that and you believe well, he was already at
higher risk -- remember, I asked Dr. Frazier, "You mean he was
more susceptible to it?"  He said, "Yeah, he's more susceptible
to these aspirations."  If he's more susceptible to it, then
those two instructions mean they're still responsible.
MR. GERAGHTY:  I object to the argument.  That's not
what the instructions say.
THE COURT:  Sustained.  It's unusually susceptible.
MR. BYRD:  If he's unusually susceptible, which all  89 those events, that's exactly what you can take from
Dr. Frazier's testimony, then they're still responsible.  So
it's lot of hubbub about nothing, frankly.  Because whether the
lung cancer surgery did it or whether he was just at a high
risk, they're still responsible for all the damage.
MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GERAGHTY:  Same objection, Your Honor.
Inconsistent with Your Honor's instructions.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. BYRD:  When we look at the amount of damages,
okay, is the next thing you're going to look at, you know, it's
hard -- I said at the beginning of trial that we'd be asking
for a significant number and that I would suggest a number to
you in closing, and it's not really an easy thing to do to put
a number on harms like this, okay.  
I mean, if somebody had some sort of injury or car
accident or whatever and like hurt their leg, and couldn't use
their leg for a little while and they're out of commission for
a little bit, but then they fully recovered and it was -- you
know, they got back, needed maybe a little bit of
rehabilitation but they got back fully, made a full 100 percent
recovery, and so it's a smaller injury and a shorter amount of
time that you're impaired, then I would be in here asking for,
you know, thousands, or tens of thousands of dollars, depending
on all of that.  90 But if you start getting injuries that are more
severe and deeper, lifelong, you know, and the harms last
longer and your impairment lasts longer, then I've got to start
asking for more dollars and more money.
And, you know, let's say Mr. Starbuck took his -- had
a big injury on his leg or car accident or something that took
out a leg, you know, his leg was going to be, you know -- he
wasn't going to get full use of his leg ever again, he had to
go through lengthy, lengthy rehabilitation and he could just
walk a little bit and hobble around, then maybe I'd be asking
for --
MR. GERAGHTY:  Improper argument again.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  -- then maybe I would be asking for
hundreds of thousands of dollars.  Okay?  
But when you take the severity of what Mr. Starbuck
went through, okay, damage over time, every cigarette reached
the cilia, damaging the cells, one by one by one, over 40
years.
MR. GERAGHTY:  That's not the claim in this case,
Your Honor.  I object to the damage --
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  When you take that kind of damage, over
and over until it causes the ultimate damage here of lung
cancer, and then you lose a part of your lung that you never  91 grow back, okay, you're not cured from lung cancer, any more
than an amputee would be cured of whatever leg infection
created -- left that.  The lung is gone.  It's not going to
grow back.  That's not cured.  And then the fact that he has --
that he doesn't have part of his lung, regardless of what you
think about the ARDS and all that stuff, Dr. Amgott told you it
effects his ability to breathe forever.  It will effect it
forever until he dies.
And you heard him talk about he can't fall, it's a
death sentence.  He can't catch stuff from other people, it
could be a death sentence for him.  He lives in that fear all
the time.  Okay.
Then I have to start asking in the millions.  Because
this is lifelong, fatal stuff.  He's tied -- you know, the rest
of his pulmonary diseases that we believe stems entirely from
the lung cancer surgery has left him with an oxygen tank that
he's tethered to 24 hours a day.  That's the kind of harm that
you have to ask for a significant amount of money.
And in this case, I think -- you know, we've talked about
puffs per cigarette and how many puffs he had.  Even if you
take one and a half packs of cigarettes a day, okay, then it's
somewhere between, you know, depending if you call it 10 puffs
per cigarette, we're talking about around 4 million or so puffs
of a cigarette over time.  Each one leading to slow damages to
the cells that led to the cancer.  If you take it at two packs  92 per day, we're up to, like, 6 million puffs of a cigarette.
Okay?  
So what I would submit to you is that there's this concept
that you have of the pain and suffering that you can consider
and the past harms that occurred in the past, and then in the
future.  And I would submit that everything he suffered up to
today is somewhere around $5 million.  
That's just -- it might be a little bit more.  You might
find more than that.  Okay?  You might find a little bit less.
But that's your decision to make.  You're supposed to do what's
fair and just.  And I would submit that that kind of number is
the right amount.
Now, for future pain, for the future harms and loss of
enjoyment of his life in the future, I would suggest I think
that's another 5 million.  He's going to suffer this till the
day he dies.  So I think it would be 5 million and 5 million.
Or maybe it's a little bit -- you know, in total, maybe it's a
little bit more, maybe it's a little bit less.  But that's the
number that you decide and that you work together as a
community to decide.
Now, the last question is going to be on whether punitive
damages are warranted.
And we submit that they are.  Okay?  
There's different -- I will not go through the
instructions because it takes time to put everything up.  But  93 please read the instructions carefully.
There is the intentional conduct that you can consider,
and then there is the reckless indifference.  Two different
pathways to determine are punitive damages warranted.  And in
this case, we have to prove it by clear and convincing
evidence.  Okay?  And that is a higher standard.  And we think
that we've met that.
There's no doubt that this conspiracy was formed in 1953
and continued on all the way through Mr. Starbuck's smoking
history and his lung cancer.
And what you're going to see at the beginning of the
punitive damages instruction, though, is that punitive
damages -- Jeff, can you just -- let's do bring up that, the
first two bullet points on page 28.
Punitive damages are justified -- those two bullets
points, thanks -- for two reasons, really.  I mean, this is the
broad category of why punitive damages happen.  As punishment
for each defendant you find liable on the fraud, fraudulent
concealment claims and conspiracy, and as a deterrent to
others.  To others.  To other companies as a deterrent to --
not just cigarette companies, to other companies.  A deterrent.
It's a place where you say, "We need to deter and stop this
behavior."
Now, when you look at what the cigarette industry did and
whether it needs to be deterred, I've given you the evidence on  94 the years.  And I think you should look at it.  Look -- I mean,
they were surveying and studying kids way back when.  And then
they were targeting and marketing their products to kids.  And
read Exhibit 1302 about how effective that was.
And the reason they were doing it is because today -- what
they had was, "Today's teenager is tomorrow's regular
customer."  That's what they said when nobody was looking.
When the files were sealed and it was all secret, that's what
they said in 1981 when nobody was looking.  "Today's teenager
is tomorrow's regular customer."
I want you to also look at after '82 as well, before and
after '82, what happens when those cigarette sales start to
fall?  What happens when the exit gates start to open.  Look at
what they did when Nicorette gum -- I mean, they're -- the
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds argument is, throughout all
this time, it's Mr. Starbuck's choice.  It's America.  You have
a free choice to do this.  Anybody can quit.  All you have to
do is just put them down.  It's cold turkey.  You know, you can
quit.
Well, then, why were they so concerned about Nicorette gum
hitting the market if it was so easy?  It's because they knew
it wasn't.  Why did they go to Dow Chemical and strongarm them
to say, "Listen, if you're going to put this Nicorette gum out,
I'll tell you what.  You're only going to give it out to sick
people."  95 Now, when you think about punitive damages and do we need
to deter conduct, please consider this evidence.  We'll let you
market Nicorette gum, but only to people after it's too late,
after they're sick.  They were doing this in the early '80s.
Imagine what life would have been like if the marketing
had gone to everybody.
MR. GERAGHTY:  I'll object, Your Honor.  It's
improper argument.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  What if everyone had just stood up -- what
if the manufacturer of a product in the early 1980s stood up
and said, "You know what?  It's right.  It's addictive.  It
causes all this stuff."  Didn't fight with the Surgeon
General's office, didn't fight with any of them.  Stood up and
said, "It's right.  It causes this.  Nicorette gum needs to go
everywhere if you want to quit.  And, by the way, start taking
the stuff now before you're sick."  
What would the difference have been?
So we think that we've shown that punitive damages
are warranted in this case.  And I will get back and do any
rebuttal that I need to in a few minutes.  But, you know, as
you look at whether -- Mr. Starbuck is proud to have submitted
this case to you.  And you eight were carefully selected by
both sides after you answered the questions that said you could
be bias-free and come in here and look at the evidence and see  96 what's more likely true than not, and that you can award
damages if we prove our case.
And, you know, we are not suggesting that the
cigarette companies don't have a right to make a product, sell
it, and advertise it.  Okay?  They have every right to do that.
They can, you know -- but when you look at some of this
conduct, you know, starting a conspiracy in 1953, going to the
American Medical Association.  You know?  Mr. Starbuck is 14
years old.  Okay?  Here's what he's facing.  An industry that
has no qualms about marketing to him and creating this culture
through their advertisement, spending billions of dollars on
advertising.
As he grows up, he goes and serves in the military,
in the Air Force.  What are they doing?  They're buying off the
American Medical Association.  They're starting a conspiracy.
They're engaging in a campaign of doubt.  Okay?  He gets older
and older, 20s and 30s.  What do they do?  They start targeting
the kids.  They're redesigning the product to make it more
addictive.  How can we affect pH levels?  How can we make this
thing more addictive?  How can we put additives in, vent holes.
They're doing all this stuff.  
And you heard from Mr. Gentry; right?  Addiction
doesn't cause -- you know, they have these word games.
Addition doesn't cause disease --
MR. GERAGHTY:  I would object to this.  Objection,  97
Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  Addiction doesn't cause disease.  It's the
smoke.  It's all the carcinogens and the smoke.  Well, yeah.
But they've known forever that they can't take those out.  So
what do they do?  They put filters on them.  What kind of
statement is that?
I mean, I think I told you at the beginning of this
case that you're probably going to get to see a lot and learn a
lot that a lot of people didn't know.  And I'll tell you what.
You know, the fact that filters are no safer for you is a new
thing.  Mr. Starbuck didn't understand it.
And when you put a white filter on the thing, and
then you're telling everybody that we can take the bad stuff
out if it's bad, that can work together to make a guy like
Mr. Starbuck, and certainly people in this time period, maybe
people now, to say, "This is -- this filter is better.  If I'm
going to smoke, I'm going to smoke filtered.  It must be
helping me.  It must be a little bit safer.  You know, it's
recessed.  It's even better."
So they can do all this stuff.  Okay?  And they can
continue to do it.  They get into the '80s.  The can
continue -- Dow Chemical.  Okay?  Companies have a right --
strongarm other companies that are trying to find a way to help
people get to the exit gates, while Mr. Starbuck is starting to  98 have his first cancers.
All this stuff, Mr. Starbuck faced.  But all -- but
what's great about this system, it's amazing, is that all that
can happen, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds can do all those
things, but they still have to come here, and eight people get
to say it's wrong.
I'll wait for my rebuttal, Your Honor.


MR. BYRD:  Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I'm
going to pop around from a couple topics that I heard.  So it
will be a little bit -- will be even more disjointed than my
original closing, but I'll try to be as together as I can.
Thank you, Mr. Spragens.
You just heard -- and so I'm going to cross off --
I've taken notes as I've gone through.  So that's why it won't
be necessarily in some order, but in response to some things
that I've heard.
You just heard Ms. Baker say that the cigarette
companies' position changed over a decade ago.  She made that argument.  She said the people aren't around that did these
things.  But you heard from Mr. Jupe and Gentry.  They're still
   177
around.
What do they say about addiction?  Did they
acknowledge a chain of causation?  You know?  We talked about
the chain -- Mr. Jupe didn't even want to acknowledge what a
chain of causation was.  So, sure, they now, as Ms. Baker said,
now, today, well after Mr. Starbuck's cancer, okay, in 1999 or
later, they acknowledged that smoking causes a disease and that
cigarettes can be addictive.  But what they do not admit is
that it's the addiction that is causing the disease.  Why?
Because that's their business.  If they ever -- if they ever
end addiction, then the exit gates are open.
You know, they talked about, well, but if you're
addicted to, like, a patch, or the gum that's not a problem
because there's no risk.  But cigarettes do have risk.  What if
you're addicted to something that does have risk?  They don't
want addiction to be a problem because they know the only
reason that people continue to smoke in their business, like
the 90 percent of them or more -- Dr. Ticknor knows it too --
is because of addiction.  That's why people keep smoking.  Most
smokers want to quit.  That's what they've said.  Most smokers
want to quit.
Do you remember this document here as well?  Do you
remember they -- this one right here.  Exhibit 94.  That's the 178 one to read.  That's a good one to read when you're back at the
evidence room -- the evidence comes back to you.  Okay?  "The
lawyers remind us we can't defend smoking as free choice if the
smoker was addicted."  They said that in 1980.  They know what
the problem is if they admit addiction.  They know what the
problem is.
I mean, yeah, sure, in America -- you heard a lot
about it.  I thought you would.  You can't use the concept of
freedom in America.  Of course we value freedom of choice and
personal choice in America.  Nobody disputes that.  Of course
we value that.
That doesn't mean companies get to go off and do
whatever they want.  That's not American.  There's nothing
American about he has to have responsibility for his actions
but they don't have to have responsibility for their actions.
That's not the freedom that is America that they're talking
about.
And they can drape themselves in the flag all they
want.  But just because we have free choice in America does not
mean they get to go, you know, "Don't look at us.  Don't look
at our actions.  Only look at Mr. Starbuck."
I mean, did you hear some of the -- I wrote this
down.  Okay.  So Florida banned cigarettes for a couple years
because of the temperance movement.  Long time ago.  For, like,
two years.  That's one of their defenses.  So therefore, it's 179 not -- they get to do whatever they want after that because
Florida banned it for a couple years in the early 1900s.
Therefore, they had cart blanche to do all this.  And it's all
on Mr. Starbuck because he should have known Florida banned it
for two years.  I mean, Reader's Digest -- a couple Reader's
Digest articles came out.  Coffin nails are being talked about.
Let me ask you about that.
Did the cigarette company executives just not
subscribe to Reader's Digest?  Did they go like -- so they get
to go, like, Mr. Starbuck should have heard it all.  But the
executives sitting in their boardroom got to just cover up
their eyes and their ears and not hear any of that?
I mean, if it was so darned obvious to everybody out
here in this time, why were they lying to Congress in 1994?
Why?  If all they had to do was open up a Reader's Digest
article, then what were they doing over here, in '94, lying to
Congress?
You know the arguments that they're making -- and I
want to use one example.  But the arguments they're making -- I
want to you think about this -- could be used against any
person, any smoker in any of these cases.  They could use this
same argument against everyone.  Okay?  They try to say that
this is unique to Bill Starbuck, but the arguments they are
making --
MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Assumes facts not 180
in evidence.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  And I'll give an example.
Mr. Geraghty said you should answer "no" to Question
No. 2 because any smoker can quit.  We don't dispute that.
They're trying to put questions on your verdict form that are
not there.
MR. GERAGHTY:  I would object to that comment.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  They are trying to put questions on your
verdict form that aren't there.  No one disagrees that everyone
can quit.  But Mr. Geraghty's argument was since -- because any
smoker can quit -- you heard it from Burns and Cummings -- then
it can't be the legal cause.  Guess what, folks?  Take that to
the logical conclusion.  That means no one ever could ever
prove No. 2.  Any smoker in any setting at all.
You heard Ms. Baker talk about there might be other
cases.  There might be another smoker, but that's not
Mr. Starbuck.  Not under these arguments.  These arguments
could go -- the arguments they're making could go to anybody
who smoked during this generation, during these generations,
the World War II era, from 1940s, 50s, starting to pick up
cigarettes, and on.
Because what are you going to do?  Of course they're
going to say he can't point to an advertisement that he relied 181 on.  And they're very creative.  I mean, they spent a lengthy
deposition, they told you, with Mr. Starbuck.  They asked him,
for hours and hours and hours, questions.  And of course you
can find some answers like, "Oh, I didn't rely" -- and, by the
way, some of the stuff that was put up here on these things,
this is what Mr. Starbuck said, it was what counsel said.  And
then Mr. Starbuck either said yes or no.  Okay?  But what
counsel says isn't evidence.
But this -- like -- for an example, he wasn't waiting
on information from the tobacco companies to make a choice.
Think about that.  I mean, that's a big -- he flashed it up on
the screen.  It's a big argument.  Think about that.  He's just
answering the truth honestly about back when he was smoking was
he waiting for more information?  And he's was being honest,
saying, "No, I wasn't waiting for information from the tobacco
companies."
It's a clever question.  Doesn't really make much of
a point.  Is anybody waiting on cell phone companies to tell us
more before we use our cell phone?  No.  We're not sitting here
waiting on it.  But if there is information, by God, we want to
know about it.  Let us know.
But down the road, if you ask me, of course I'm going
to be truthful and say, "No, at the time, I wasn't waiting on
information.  Hell, I didn't know it was out there."
You know, there's a -- they point to this instruction 182 in the jury instructions, about -- you know, on the part that
they have to prove, the affirmative defense on him, whether his
actions were voluntary and deliberate.  And I want to make this
point for a second.
Okay.  Free choice, I will meet them on the field
here of free choice in America.  Okay?  I am happy to take it
on with them and I'm happy to debate it.  And if I need to take
a few minutes with it, I'm sorry for extending your time.  I am
happy to take free choice on against the cigarette companies as
long as they'll take their choice and responsibility with it.
And, you know, this isn't like true voluntary
actions.  Like, if you find out all the sudden red cars are
more dangerous than blue cars.  Okay?  And you find that
information out.  It's really easy to buy a blue car and stop
buying the red car.  That's true voluntary free choice.  Okay?
I mean, no one questions that.  That's a free choice in the
marketplace.  That's choosing.  Blue cars are safer; red cars
aren't.  I'm going to go with blue.  There's nothing
restricting you or constraining you.
But here, we have let -- Philip Morris and R.J.
Reynolds have created a culture in which they bring in
Dr. Ticknor -- and free choice has become, like -- you know, I
pay $115 an hour to Dr. Ticknor.  Who has to pay $115 an hour
to go choose a blue car over a red car?  I got to go see a
psychiatrist.  He's going to probably prescribe me Chantix or 183 prescribe me these other things that are available now.  Oh,
but they're still not addicted.  They still have free choice.
Is that what free choice has come down to?  It's like
your greatest accomplishment you've ever had?  I mean, yes,
free choice isn't the same as the hardest thing I've ever done.
That's not free choice.  That is constraint.  That's not true
voluntary choice, like we see in other products on the
marketplace.  This is constrained choice.
Okay.  I heard this.  So, now, Mr. Geraghty pointed
to the '64 Surgeon General report and all the warnings?  So,
now, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds is going to hold up the
Surgeon General of the United States?  Really?
Is that what they did in 1964?  Is that what they did
every other time the Surgeon General came out with a report?
No.  They attacked them.  They said they're wrong.  They said
they're dead wrong.
Mr. Heimann, you heard him on the videotape.
Remember, he's the guy who says, "I know better than doctors
about whether cigarettes cause disease.  They don't cause
disease."  You know what else he talked about was
advertisements.  We wouldn't spend money on if it didn't work.
I mean, they would have you -- who could actually go
back and point to -- all of us are confronted with
advertisements throughout from the culture.  It's all over TV.
It's all over media.  Do we really think that all this money is 184 being spent on Super Bowl advertising and all this stuff
because it doesn't work?  Nevertheless, can you really point?
I mean, Mr. Starbuck is not a -- can you really point to a
specific advertisement that made you do it?  Probably not.  I
don't think a lot of people do that.  But does that mean that
it's not effective in getting people to do things as a whole?
Like Mr. Starbuck was just the one guy that it didn't have an
impact on?
And let's go back to the comparative fault question.
Okay.  The comparative fault question.
Oh, they read to you some statements -- you know,
they said that they read the depositions the other day.  You
know, they had to bring -- read the depositions of the family
members and we didn't bring them.  Well, there's all sorts of
reasons we didn't bring family members.  And you don't need
to -- that's not something -- you don't have the evidence on
reasons why we didn't bring family members.  It's something you
don't need to consider.
Jurors -- so they read you portions of those
transcripts.  There were other portions too that were read
yesterday at the end of the day.  For example, "Do you think
that an ad influenced you to smoke Parliament?"  Mr. Starbuck
had said, "Yeah."  
"Why do you think that?"  
"Because it kept the nicotine away from your lips." 185 So in that instance -- there are other instances you
can find in those hours and hours of depositions where he said,
"Yeah, I do think it influenced me.  I bought them because I
liked the look of those ads," and things like that.  And then,
sure, you can find their conclusory sort of statement later.
Eddie Starbuck, you know.  They talked to you about a
portion of what they read.  But the rest of what was read the
other day, "Did Bill smoke while he was working?"  
"Yes."  
"Did he smoke during breaks, or was he able to
actually smoke while doing the glass work?"  
Her answer was, "Both."
They also read that testimony to you, not just the
snippets that they're trying to get you to read and think about
now.
They also asked her before -- Bill -- you know, they
said he hadn't proved to his wife that he wanted to quit.
Well, here's some more testimony that was read to you that they
didn't mention in their closing.
"Before Bill quit smoking for good, were there any
other times Bill chose to quit smoking for any period of time
even for a day?"
Answer, "Yes."  From his wife.  "He would try, but he
would just have to go right back."
"How many instances do you recall?" "Quite a few."
So there's more evidence in the record than you're hearing
   186
right here.
Mr. Geraghty -- I mean, Mr. Geraghty talked about the fact
that he should -- I mean, he -- forget this 14 years old,
Mr. Geraghty went all the way back to 10-year-old Bill
Starbuck.
So here's the deal now.  So if you don't listen to your
mom and your dad when you're 10 years old, then we get to do
whatever we want.  Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, we can do
whatever we want and it's all on you, 10-year-old.  That's
their argument.  Their argument was by 10, he knew.
Well, what do they mean by that?  Is that where we are?
Is that what we're going to do?  When we get down to eight
people left, we're just going to say, "He knew when he was 10.
Tough cookies."  That's not the end of the analysis here.  It's
not.
That's why I said look at the age when people made
decisions.  We don't just blame 10-year-olds in America.  Not
when sophisticated corporations and companies are targeting
them, marketing to them.  They know that 90 percent of their
business comes from them.
They said he has a right to make a choice, you know, that
they don't criticize him for the choices that he made.  But
they want you to put a hundred percent down.  I call that 187 criticizing his choices.  You know, a lot of people certainly
have -- you know, his wife, his kids, Mr. Starbuck himself.  A
lot of people have the ability and should be running around
saying he should have quit, he should have quit, he should have
quit.  But it strikes me as completely hypocritical for the one
group of people that should not be telling him he should have
quit.
MR. GERAGHTY:  Object to the comment, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  You know, the one group of people that
should not be able to now tell Mr. Starbuck, you should have
quit earlier, are the people that were saying "smoke, smoke,
smoke, smoke," in every advertisement, $250 billion worth, 365
times to one of the warnings.  That's what their advertisements
did.
So in the relevant time period, they were telling him
to smoke.  They weren't telling him to quit or he should have
quit.  They never did that.  Today is the first time they did
that with regards to Mr. Starbuck.
Let me ask you about this -- well, I think I've
covered a good bit.
The ARDS, the issue -- and you're going to get to
answer that question.
Jeff, can you bring up the slide we have from medical
records.  Okay. 188 Let me just say this:  We don't need to get in a
heated debate about this Dr. Frazier issue of ARDS, because
read the jury instructions.  Read the jury instructions and you
decide what they say.  But we -- the damages that flow from his
lung cancer surgery and the complications are damages that we
submit you should award.  And if he was at a higher risk or
unusually susceptible to any of these aspirations, and he was,
okay, that's what the evidence was, then we also get the
damages.  Read the instructions yourself.
But they're trying to contradict -- Dr. Frazier is
trying to contradict the medical doctors that were there at the
time, that wrote this stuff at the time.
"The patient has a history of pulmonary fibrosis
secondary to ARDS after a lung cancer surgery a number of years
ago."
There's another reference, a separate one.
"Mr. Starbuck, 65-year-old white man, who is very
well-known to me from extremely complex hospitalization that he
had following a right lower lobectomy for squamous cell
carcinoma.  He had prolonged postoperative respiratory
insufficient and, really, on a number of occasions, we didn't
think he was going to make it at all.  He has been left with
fairly severe pulmonary disease to the extent that he uses
oxygen almost" -- they tied it to his lung cancer surgery.  The
treating doctors there at the time did.  What about this last 189
one?  
In the mid '90s, he had a squamous cell carcinoma
removed from his right lung.  This then precipitated an episode
of ARDS.  They're making the tie.  Dr. Amgott says there's no
doubt in his mind.  Dr. Burns says there's no doubt in his
mind.  They brought you Dr. Frazier.  That's all -- you know,
Dr. Frazier, who wants you to believe that every time bacteria
goes down your throat that that's technically an aspiration.
And that's not.  The records in the past talked about
pneumonias.  He certainly had pneumonias.  Those are caused by
smoking, according to Dr. Frazier.  They damage the epiglottis.
The cigarette smoking damages your airways and the epiglottis.
He had to acknowledge that.  It's all linked.
You know, they talked to you about Dr. Cummings and
Dr. Burns about -- you know, and Dr. Kyriakoudes that, you
know, they got paid for their time.  So did the defense
experts.
By the way, Dr. Ticknor, who you've heard, their
addiction expert, he agreed that the NIDA definition was
totally valid for medical doctors to use.  He all but endorsed
the NIDA definition that medical doctors use.  That endorses
Dr. Burns' opinion.  That endorses Dr. Cummings' opinion.
But this idea that they get paid.  Yeah, because
there's only a few people who have been able to go pile through
all this stuff.  Dr. Cummings is one of them.  Dr. Burns is another.  But is there any suggestion that just because they've
had to do so many cases, so, therefore, they made money over
time.  Is there any indication that these documents don't say
   190
what they say?
Where is the representative from the cigarette
companies to testify to question any of this?  They're talking
we didn't bring family witnesses.  Where is Philip Morris and
R.J. Reynolds --
MS. BAKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  -- saying that these documents say
something different?  
Where is Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds executives
in here saying -- I mean, do you think, if Dr. Cummings has
been paid to say something that's wrong or untrue, don't you
think they'd have had somebody waltz in here and show it to
you?
The -- when you look at the different conducts of the
company, when you weigh the comparative fault of each party
here, you remember they said one thing you have to do when you
try to quit is you got to pick a date to quit; right?  That's
one thing you should do, you should pick a date and quit.  Oh,
yeah, like maybe -- I don't know -- the Great American
Smokeout.  That's a date.
So when you're comparing fault -- and, by the way, a 191 lot of this stuff they asked you to look at, these questions
that I submit to you are not on the verdict form, if they're
anywhere, I think they're in the comparative fault section.  It
you want to blame -- they're not questioning whether he was
addicted or whether addiction caused disease.  If you want to
blame Mr. Starbuck, fine.  Do it.  Put the blame at the level
you think.  I think it's low; they think it's high.
But that's where a lot of those questions and their
argument is about.  You know, should have quit, didn't quit,
should have quit harder.  That goes in the comparative fault
section.
But what were they doing at the same time?  So
Mr. Starbuck is trying to do the Great American Smokeout,
picking a date to quit, as they say you should do.  What do
they do?
Exhibit 1501.  They send out to all the customers,
"Don't nag me.  I'm a great American smoker."  This is in the
mid 1980s.  This is what -- this is -- when you pick a date to
quit, this is what they do with that date.  They target it too,
and tell you, "Don't stop smoking.  And here's how to tell
people, like your wife that is trying to warn you to quit,
here's how you respond:  Don't nag me."
That was their conduct.  That's the conduct you have
to consider too at the same time.
Now, real quick.  Just about three more things.  The 192 fraudulent concealment findings, the Engle findings for the
intentional tort.
If you find that Mr. Starbuck is a member of the
Engle class, okay, there are certain findings that apply that
are binding.  Okay?  Now, despite what Mr. Geraghty says, they
do inform the decisions that you're going to have to make
because you cannot question them, you have to accept them as if
you found them yourself.  And the judge has instructed you on
that.
And if you find that he's member of the class, then
it has been decided, okay, that cigarettes are addictive or
dependence-producing, that smoking cigarettes causes lung
cancer, okay, and that R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris USA, and
the other coconspirators, did the following.  This has already
been determined.  You must accept it as true if you answer
"yes" on the first two questions.
"That Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds concealed or
omitted material information not otherwise known or available
about the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the
proven health effects or addictive nature of smoking, or
both" -- or they did both -- "knowing that the incomplete
disclosure was false and misleading."  
That has been determined and found.  And it cannot be
questioned.  And that they conspired.  They entered into an 193 agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health
effects and/or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes.
With the intention -- this has been found already, if we're an
Engle class member -- that smokers and members of the public
relied to their detriment.
So of course these findings apply.  You have to apply
them.  You're going to be told by the judge to apply them.
Take that down, Jeff.
Two more things.  The truck analogy.  Mr. Geraghty
talked about how, you know, we don't know who's wrong.  If
somebody gets hit by a truck in the middle of the road, we need
to know more information about whether that's the legal cause
or not.  And his analogy was, you know, if you're walking into
the street, we need to know, were you on your phone, maybe you
were texting, you didn't pay attention.  We need to look at all
that.
But you also need to look at the information that the
driver had or what the driver was doing.  You know it becomes a
little bit of a different analogy when you see that the
cigarette industry understood that 90 percent of their smokers
are coming from teenagers.  They're making it look glamorous
and popular.  They're denying any health risks during this
whole time period at all, from 1950 -- in the early 1950s to
1999.  And then they're marketing and targeting the youth to
take up smoking. It's a little bit more like a truck driver sitting
there seeing somebody about to step into the road and deciding
   194
whether you're going to push the gas or not --
MR. GERAGHTY:  Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BYRD:  -- looking at them and going, "Come on" --
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  -- "Cross the road.  You'll be safe.  It
will be safe over here."
On the -- the last thing, on punitive damages.  I
told you that -- at the very beginning of this case, I
mentioned that there's an American tragedy.  I'm trying to draw
the line.  No lung cancer.  No consumption of cigarettes.  And
how they followed and tracked each other.
You know, I can't -- all these documents are going to
be back in the jury room for you to review and see.  But, you
know, by 19 -- and I believe there will be -- the videos -- and
any of the videos you want to see, that can be accommodated as
well.
But in 1983, there's a document, Exhibit 210.  It's
after '82.  And you have to understand, when you add all this
stuff up, how they've already figured out how to set the
optimum levels of nicotine in cigarettes, set it at just the
right amount, not too high, not too low to sustain addiction,
manipulate people.  They've done all the -- by the time they
get to 1983, and you read this Exhibit 210 document, they're at 195 a research conference.  And all their scientists are together.
And they're, like, lauding how they've perfected the design of
the cigarette.  And they're basically high-fiving by 1983.
They're getting, like, poetic about it.  They start quoting
authors, Shakespearean era type of authors.  They're excited
about how far they've come to engineer this product.
And what they say is, you know, the only problem
we're going to ever have is getting a big enough bag to carry
all the money to the bank.  That's what they're doing in '83.
That's how proud they are of how far they've gotten in 1983.
Meanwhile, at the same time, you heard -- you saw
these lines.  We drew the lines.  The evidence is in.  And they
know it.  Mr. Gentry and Mr. Jupe testified to it too.  Over
400,000 -- cigarettes kill over 400,000 people each year.
20 million premature deaths.  Those are real people.
And, you know, during this whole time, they read you
some quotes that Mr. Starbuck said during his smoking time.  I
want to read a couple back to you.  Mr. Starbuck's quotes that
they read to you, I want to read them back to you and see if
they apply to the cigarette companies during this time, too.
"Mind your own business.  Leave me alone.  I don't
want to hear it."
I think some of those statements are, in effect, a
lot of the same of what the cigarette industry was telling the
public, health community, during that same time.  "Mind your 196 own business."  They certainly minded their business.  "Leave
me alone.  Don't interfere with what I'm doing."
That line goes on and on and on.  And people that
smoke -- you know, the 480,000 number, I think you see, most of
those people, or 90 percent, according to the numbers, would
have started when they were teenagers.  
When you look at this case, this case, it's true, is
it about one person.  And one of those -- do we have the
picture?  One of those kids that started smoking in early 1950s
was this guy:  Bill Starbuck.  That's 14.  It may look
incredible, but that's what it was in the 1950s.  That's 14
years old.
Do we need to deter others -- other companies from
doing this type of conduct that they did from 1953 through
Mr. Starbuck's lung cancer?  Yes.  You bet.  That needs to be
stopped.
And we appreciate your time.
And there's this talk too about, you know, just check
a box, and you go home.  Just check No. 2 and you can go home.
If you award any punitive damages, you know, we got to come
back.
If we come back for punitive damages, it's, like,
less than half a day testimony.  And you know how to multiple
that by lawyers.  It's like less than half a day.  You're a
better jury than that, than to check a box and go home. MR. GERAGHTY:  Object to the argument.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. BYRD:  Take the time you need to read the
   197
evidence.  Read all the jury instructions.  Each decision you
make, apply each jury instruction.  You're a better jury than
just checking a box to go home.  Nobody else is ever going to
do this.
We're sorry.  Nobody wants you here.  I know they
commented on the days and days of testimony the plaintiff put
you through.  You have to hear it.  Nobody else is going to
hear it.  You're it.
Thank you, Your Honor.
