          MR. SCAROLA:  Ladies and gentlemen, I want
     to begin by making absolutely certain that when
     I do run out of time at the conclusion of this
     case, and I will run out of time at the
     conclusion of this case before I have said
     everything that I want to say, that I have not
     taken the time to say thank you.
          You folks have made an extraordinary
     sacrifice.  You have been with us with amazing
     patience.  You have given us your undivided
     attention throughout this very difficult
     ordeal.  And on behalf of Joseph Surico, on
     behalf of Darryl and Laurie, and I am sure in
     this regard I speak on behalf of every lawyer
     in the courtroom, we are extremely indebted to
     you for your sacrifice and we thank you.
          If we think back three weeks, you will
     remember that we went through a pretty
     difficult jury selection process.  It was long,
     it was tedious, and it was a selection process
     that demonstrated that there were a lot of
5684 people that had very strong feelings about --
          MR. STERN:  Objection.  The voir dire is
     not evidence in the case.
          THE COURT: Very strong feelings about
     cases like this.
          You remember that a lot of people were
     asked to stand up if they thought that they
     could not be fair and impartial --
          MR. STERN:  Same objection.
          THE COURT: -- and were unable to follow
     the court's instructions to base their verdict
     solely and exclusively upon the evidence
     elicited during the course of this trial and
     the court's instructions on the law.
          Those people were excused.  You remained.
     And you remained because you made a commitment
     and swore to keep that commitment.  A
     commitment to base your verdict on the evidence
     in this case, to use your good, sound, common
     sense, and most significantly, at this stage of
     the trial, you made a commitment to follow the
     law.
          And you have already heard some
5685 indications about some things that are going to
     be difficult for you to do in following the
     law.  And I want to call your attention during
     the course of these instructions to some of
     those things that will, we acknowledge, be
     difficult, but which you are obliged to do what
     you have sworn an oath to do, and which if not
     done will frustrate this entire process and
     produce an unjust result instead of the justice
     that we are here to seek through this lengthy
     proceeding.
          What do I mean?  You folks had an
     opportunity to ask questions during the course
     of the trial, and you asked some excellent
     questions, some reasonable questions.  And many
     of those questions focused on the concern about
     what Joe Surico did to stop his wife from
     smoking.  There were a lot of questions about
     that.  How much support did you give?  Why
     didn't you give support?  What did you do and
     what didn't you do?
          And as a lay person, it is understandable
     that those would be concerns.  How much
     responsibility does Joe bear for the ultimate
     death of his wife because Phyllis Surico
5686 continued to smoke?
          But what's the law going to tell you about
     that?  Somewhere I have the law.
          MR. LEWIS:  Over there, Mr. Scarola, on
     the machine.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you very much.
          MR. LEWIS:  Yes, sir.
          TECHNICIAN:  You want me to turn it on?
          MR. SCAROLA:  If you would, please.  Thank
     you very much, Robert.
          You heard this instruction in the middle
     of trial, in the middle of trial you were given
     an instruction, and I suggest to you the reason
     was because there was a perception that you had
     begun to think in a direction that the law says
     you ought not to think about, that the law says
     is not relevant to the performance of your
     tasks.
          And this is what the court told you:
     "Evidence has been admitted regarding whether
     Phyllis Surico's family members attempted to
     intervene in her smoking behavior.  However, a
     family member has no legal duty to take action
     to stop another person from smoking.
     Therefore, the evidence may not be considered
5687 to conclude that any member of Phyllis Surico's
     family is legally at fault."
          And when you get your verdict form, the
     responsibility that you will have as jurors,
     and we're going to go through the verdict form,
     the responsibility that you will have will be
     to apportion fault, not between Phyllis Surico
     and Joe Surico, not between Phyllis Surico and
     her daughters, not between Phyllis Surico and
     her mother and father or siblings, but to
     apportion fault between only two identified
     persons or entities, between Phyllis Surico and
     Philip Morris USA Incorporated.
          And when you apportion that fault, the
     numbers have to add up to a hundred percent.
          So what I am suggesting to you is while
     the thought process that you were going through
     was reasonable, it was not an irrational
     concern for any of you to have about what those
     surrounding circumstances were.  As a matter of
     law, all of those concerns are improper
     concerns.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT: And when you get back into
5688 the jury room, if somebody starts saying, well,
     Joe Surico never did anything to stop his wife
     from smoking, your responsibility as jurors in
     this case are to say, now, wait a second, stop.
     Let's go to page number 18 of the jury
     instructions, and this is the law we are sworn
     to follow.  That's an improper consideration.
     That's not something we should be talking
     about.  That's not part of the job we swore an
     oath to do.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT: Because we swore an oath to
     follow the law.
          Now, that's one example, but let me give
     you another.  "During the trial" -- and I'm
     down at the bottom -- "you have heard evidence
     regarding Joseph Surico's remarriage.  The
     court instructs you that this evidence may not
     be considered by you in mitigation of damages
     for loss of Mrs. Surico's companionship and
     protection and for his" -- meaning Joseph
     Surico's -- "mental pain and suffering."
          Mitigation means reduction of the damage,
     repair of the damage.
5689 The law recognizes that one spouse can no
     more replace another spouse than if you lose a
     child, having another child replaces that
     child.  They may be twins, they may be
     identical twins, but the fact that you still
     have something like what you had before the law
     says may not be considered as reducing the loss
     that you have suffered.
          That's a tough instruction to follow.  The
     thought is, he's moved on with his life, he's
     got another wife.  He's got a wife who he says
     is in many respects like the wife he had, and
     how fortunate for Joe Surico that he has found
     that source of solace.  But the law says it is
     no replacement for Phyllis Surico.
          And if you get back in the jury room and
     you're talking about damages and what a fair
     and reasonable amount of damages are for the
     loss that Joe Surico has sustained, for the
     pain and suffering of the loss of his soulmate,
     which Mr. Lewis is going to be talking about in
     a little while, if somebody starts talking
     about that, you say, now, wait a minute, let's
     go to page 20, and let's see what the court
     says about that.  Let's take a look at the oath
5690 that we swore to follow as jurors in applying
     the law.  That's not something that we can
     consider.  That's not something that we can
     consider.
          So while it may seem natural to take it
     into consideration, it is not lawful to take it
     into consideration.
          Following these instructions is not an
     easy task, but you were chosen because you were
     willing to swear an oath to say that you would
     take on that responsibility when others stood
     up and said, no, I'm not going to do that.
          And the only way that justice can be done
     in this courtroom is by doing what the court is
     going to tell you repeatedly you must do.
          "You may use reason and common sense to
     reach conclusions, you may draw reasonable
     inferences from the evidence, but you should
     not guess about things that were not covered
     here, and you must always apply the law as I
     have explained it to you."
          That's one of the first instructions
     you're going to hear, and it's also one of the
     last instructions you're going to hear.
          After the court has finished telling you
5691 what the law is, what Her Honor is going to say
     is "That is the law you must follow in deciding
     this case."
          You will all have your own copies of it.
     You can refer back it as much as you need to to
     make sure that you are fulfilling your oaths as
     jurors.
          And I've done something that I hope might
     be helpful for you.  And I certainly recognize
     the fact that just listening to me is an added
     burden for you, and I don't want -- I don't
     want to waste your time.
          And I have tried to structure the comments
     that I am going to make to you in a way that
     will help to make your job easier and make up
     for the time that I'm taking from your getting
     to do your job.
          So one of the things I did was I have
     written down the specific jury instructions
     that relate to each of the seven questions that
     you will be called upon to answer in the
     verdict form.  And my suggestion to you is that
     it may be helpful for you to make a notation of
     this, because you don't get to take my notes
     back into the jury room with you, wish you
5692 could, but you're not going to get to do that.
          And so what this is, is a summary of the
     instructions that are applicable when you get
     to each of the questions on the verdict form.
          I will tell you that there are preliminary
     instructions that relate to all --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. SCAROLA:  -- of the questions on the
     verdict form.  And you need to --
          MR. STERN:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  The
     court will instruct which instructions are
     applicable.
          THE COURT: You need to take into
     consideration all of the instructions.
          And one of the first things you may want
     to do when you get back there, because the
     court's instructions on the law are going to be
     separated by a lot of lawyer talk from your
     performance of your duties, so it might make
     sense that the first thing you do together as a
     group is you go through the legal instructions.
     Make sure you understand the task that you are
     going to be called upon to perform.
          Then you are going to have the verdict
5693 form in this case.  This is the verdict form.
     And it asks questions and gives you directions
     as to what you need to do after you have
     addressed each question.
          It's important that you take these
     questions in order, because under some
     circumstances, the answer to your question will
     tell you whether you need to answer the next
     question or not.  And those instructions are
     all included on the verdict form.
          So you've gone through the jury
     instructions.  You have the verdict form in
     front of you.  My suggestion is then before you
     answer question number one, go to pages six,
     eight and nine.  Those are the instructions
     that relate specifically to question number
     one.  So now you've narrowed your focus, you're
     looking at what does the law tell us we need to
     know in order to answer the first question.
          You will note that I have put pages two
     and 23 for every one of these questions,
     because those are the instructions that say,
     you must follow the law.  Okay.  So they're
     clearly extremely important instructions with
     regard to every question that is asked.
5694 When you go to question two, it's pages
     four, eight, nine and 12 that relate directly
     to answering that question, and so on down the
     line.  Those are the numbers of the pages that
     relate to the questions, and I think it will
     make your job easier if you take it in pieces
     like that, after you've looked at the whole,
     and made sure that you reorient yourself as to
     specific instructions that need to be followed
     in order to properly answer those questions.
          So, that's an overview of the law.
          I also did something that I hope will be
     of some assistance to you in your review of the
     evidence.  Because the task is to apply the law
     to the facts as you find them.
          And what I have done in that regard is I
     have broken down some of the more important
     exhibits that relate to various questions on
     the verdict form.  And what appears there is a
     very brief summary of the highlights of those
     documents.  We're going to get to some of them,
     we're sure not going to get to all of them.
          If you're not frightened enough already,
     about how long I might talk, these are the
     PowerPoint slides that I have the unrealistic
5695 aspiration of being able to get to.  We're not
     going to get there.  No way.  And it would
     probably also be of some relief to you to know
     that there are time limits that are set on how
     long we can speak to you.
          The total limitation involved is two hours
     per side.  As Her Honor told you a long time
     ago, because the plaintiff has the burden of
     proof, we go first, and we have the opportunity
     to go last as well.
          We've divided up our time, I'm going to
     try to speak to you for about 45 minutes.
     Mr. Lewis is then going to speak to you for
     about 15 minutes.  I'm probably going to run
     over on that front end.  We want to save about
     an hour to respond to whatever the defense
     arguments may be.  We'll wind up spending less
     time than that, I suspect.  But so you know
     what's coming.  That's what, unfortunately, we
     are in store for for the balance of the
     afternoon.
          So what I have done here is I've given you
     some exhibit numbers.  And again, these are
     broken down as they relate to particular
     questions on the verdict form.  The first
5696 question is the question of addiction, and
     these are the some documents that I suggest you
     might want to look at with regard to addiction.
     PT02061 -- and you probably only need to take
     down those last four digits.  2044, 4791, 1809,
     02203, 2184, and 1820.
          The next question on the verdict form
     relates to disease causation.  And the
     documents that I suggest to you may be most
     significant for review with regard to disease
     causation are 3608, 3289, 2378, 3709, and 3615.
          The next category has to do with really
     two questions that are closely related.  There
     is a claim for fraud and a claim for conspiracy
     to commit fraud.  The legal instructions will
     distinguish between those two things, but they
     are closely related issues, and so I have
     combined them here.  Documents 1608, 1933,
     2027, 2130, 1941, 719, 2050, and 2268.
          This case presents itself to you in an
     unusual procedural posture.  And it was a
     matter that also understandably was of concern
     to you as jurors.  How does it happen that
     Phyllis Surico dies in 1993, and we are here in
     this courtroom in 2014 trying a lawsuit
5697 relating to a death that occurred more than 20
     years ago?
          Well, the jury instructions answer that
     question.  They tell you about a lawsuit that
     began in 1994, and continued through I think
     2006 or 2007, the Engle case, E-N-G-L-E.
          And the Engle case was brought, the
     instructions tell you, as a class action.  It
     was bought on behalf of a defined group of
     Florida residents, including Phyllis Surico, we
     contend, that is, Phyllis was a member of the
     Engle class.  She is a member of the Engle
     class if we establish two basic things --
     three.  We need to prove that she was a
     resident of Florida at the time, but that's a
     stipulated fact so that's not an issue that you
     need to be concerned about.  But we need to
     demonstrate that she was addicted to nicotine
     in cigarettes, and that her addiction was a
     substantial contributing cause, a legal cause,
     a legal cause of her cancer and her death.  If
     that is established, that Phyllis Surico was a
     member of the Engle class, then all of these
     jury findings resulting from that proceeding
     that began in 1996, and lasted through 2004,
5698 all of the findings by a prior jury in that
     case, become binding upon you and must be
     accepted.
          So, as difficult as your task is, a large
     portion of what otherwise would have been your
     responsibility has been carried out by another
     group of Florida citizens who also didn't stand
     up when they were asked --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
     not in evidence at all.
          THE COURT:  I'll sustain.
          MR. SCAROLA:  I'm sorry, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Another group of Florida
     residents --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Sustained.
          MR. SCAROLA:  -- who also were willing to
     take on --
          THE COURT: -- who also were willing --
          MR. STERN:  I disagree with --
          THE COURT:  I overruled; did you not hear
     me?
          MR. STERN:  I thought you said sustained,
5699 Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  I sustained on the first, I
     overruled on the second.  He rephrased it.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Who also were willing to
     raise their hands and swear to fulfill the
     responsibilities to apply the law in that case
     to the facts as they found them to exist.  And
     these are the results of their hard labor.
     We'll talk about the significance of that in
     just a moment.
          But let's focus some attention, briefly,
     if we could, on some of the evidence in this
     case.  And I want to begin with some evidence
     the defense presented.  It was a video clip of
     a very highly respected newsman by the name of
     Harry Reasoner.  And it followed the
     publication of the Surgeon General's report
     that clearly and unequivocally recognized the
     link between smoking and cancer.  And
     Mr. Reasoner, at the end of his newscast on
     that particular night, looked into the camera
     and spoke about his own personal journey with
     cigarettes.  He told his audience that night:
     "It's like being told that an old friend has
     betrayed you.  And in that circumstance, you
5700 give that old friend every chance.  You search
     for reasons to disbelieve, to disbelieve that
     you have been betrayed."
          I don't know if any of you happen to be
     Simon and Garfunkel fans, but I'm a Simon and
     Garfunkel fan and there's a song that Simon and
     Garfunkel sing that is called "The Boxer,"
     written by Paul Simon.  And it's the story of a
     young man who is attracted to the glamor of New
     York City, and he's heard a lot of terrible
     things about New York City, but he's heard a
     lot of really good things as well.  And the
     verse in that song is:  "All lies and jest,
     until the man hears what he wants to hear, and
     disregards the rest.  Lie-la-lie, lie-la-lie,
     lie-la-lie.  All lies and jest until the man
     hears what he wants to hear and he disregards
     the rest."
          And Mr. Reasoner was talking about the
     same thing.  I don't want to believe that these
     are bad for me.  I don't want to believe that
     I'm addicted to cigarettes.  I want to believe
     everything that they have been telling me about
     there being no link.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
5701 not what Mr. Reasoner said.
          THE COURT: I want to believe everything
     that the cigarette industry has been telling me
     about there being no proof.  And I want to give
     my cigarette every chance I can, and then even
     more before I will believe that I have been
     betrayed and I have to give them up.  And Harry
     Reasoner, we know, died of lung cancer.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, there's
     absolutely no evidence of that.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  I don't believe
     there is any evidence.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Your Honor, there --
     respectfully, there was.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I will allow it, then.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
          Phyllis Surico was a victim of the same
     natural, reasonable desire not to hear what you
     don't want to hear, cognitive dissonance.  We
     heard about that, two ideas existing in your
     mind and you've got to get rid of the conflict
     and so you throw away any information that
     conflicts with what you want to believe, a
     psychological crutch, a psychological crutch.
5702 And the cigarette companies knew exactly,
     exactly how smokers would react if they were
     successful in creating a false controversy.
          The longer we can keep the controversy
     alive, the more we will enable smokers to
     justify their continued use of the substance to
     which they are addicted because they don't want
     to have to give it up.  They don't want to go
     through, whether it is psychological pain,
     whether it is physiological pain, they don't
     want to go through the painful process of
     withdrawal if there isn't any reason to.  And
     as long as there's no scientific proof that
     links smoking and cancer.  And as long as
     there's a controversy.  As long as they are
     promising me in this statement that gets
     repeated over and over again, that if there's
     ever anything found that is dangerous in
     cigarettes, we'll take it out.  We'll go out of
     business before we continue to sell a product
     that kills people.  Over and over again.
     That's the promise they made.  And while there
     may be some concern in your minds about some
     matters about which you have heard during the
     course of this trial, there are some things
5703 that I suggest to you absolutely no reasonable
     person can doubt.
          Before you even get to these findings,
     which you are obliged to accept, there can be
     no reasonable doubt in the minds --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, that's
     an incomplete statement of law.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  This is argument,
     sir.
          MR. SCAROLA:  There can be no doubt in the
     mind of any reasonable person today that
     nicotine in cigarettes is highly addictive.
     That cigarettes, after hearing the evidence
     that you have heard, unrebutted in this
     courtroom, absolutely unrebutted, that
     cigarettes are intentionally designed to
     maximize their addictive properties.  They are
     designed so that the nicotine is free-based.
     They are designed by taking out the nicotine
     and putting it back in at levels that are
     intended to be sure that smokers remain
     addicted.  There can be no doubt because the
     evidence is absolutely unrebutted, no doubt
     that today's cigarettes, with their filters and
     their low tar and nicotine claims, and their
5704 light claims --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Objection with respect to low tar.
          THE COURT:  Well, skip the low tar.
          MR. SCAROLA:  There can be no doubt that
     the claims about filtered cigarettes being a
     safer alternative are a lie.  They are
     absolutely unquestionably false.  They are not
     only not safer, they are more dangerous.  You
     have to seen the scientific statistics that
     prove that adenocarcinoma -- adenocarcinoma is
     on the dramatic increase as a consequence of
     filtered cigarettes gaining prevalence in the
     market.
          If it's ever proven that our product is
     dangerous, we'll take out whatever is
     dangerous, as soon as it's identified, or we
     will go out of business.
          You saw the Philip Morris internal
     documents.  300-some-odd Congressmen on their
     side -- I think that was the number, don't hold
     me to that, the document is there -- a majority
     of the U.S. Congress supporting tobacco, a
     majority of the Senate supporting tobacco.  It
     is legal to manufacture, to sell and to
5705 advertise cigarettes, now with some
     restrictions on the advertising part.
          Congress has not acted to ban this
     substance.  It is legal to manufacture, to sell
     and to advertise cigarettes.  It is not and
     never has been legal to place cigarettes on the
     market that were defective and unreasonably
     dangerous.  It is not and it never has been
     legal to place a product on the market that is
     negligently designed.
          And so, if the defense gets up here and
     they suggest to you, it is legal for us to do
     what we are doing, it is not legal to kill
     almost half a million people every year.
          To know that you are killing them through
     your defective product and to continue to do
     it.  And nobody else has acted, but you have
     the opportunity in this case --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT: -- to hold Philip Morris
     responsible for the damage that it has
     knowingly and intentionally been doing for over
     half a century, and continues to do today.
          That's an awesome power and an awesome
5706 responsibility.  And we've taken a tremendous
     amount of time to provide you with as much help
     as we possibly could to assist you in
     fulfilling that responsibility.
          Who did we bring to you?  We brought
     Dr. Michael Cummings.  We pay Dr. Cummings a
     significant amount of money to share his unique
     knowledge with you.  There is no one, not only
     in this country but in this world who is better
     qualified to speak to those issues than
     Dr. Cummings spoke to.  And that unique
     qualification has been recognized not only by
     us, but has been recognized by the federal
     government, by State Attorney Generals, over
     and over again because there is no one better.
          Dr. Burns.  Dr. David Burns,
     Harvard-educated pulmonologist.  Involved in
     the writing, a senior editor of virtually every
     Surgeon General's report over the course of the
     last 30 years.  There is -- there is no one
     better qualified in the world to address those
     issues about which Dr. Burns spoke than
     Dr. David Burns.
          And Joseph Surico and Phyllis Surico
     deserve nothing less than the best in this,
5707 their one day in court.  And we brought you the
     best we could find.  And we presented them to
     you methodically, probably in the perception of
     some of you, painstakingly methodically.  But
     we wanted to be absolutely certain that you
     understood the significance of the documents
     that Dr. Cummings was presenting.  And the
     significance of the medical evidence and the
     Surgeon General's findings.  And now they're
     all laid out before you, like the pieces of a
     jigsaw puzzle, there for you to piece together,
     to show you the picture that I suggest compels
     a verdict in favor of Joseph Surico as a
     consequence of the needless loss of his
     soulmate, of the love of his life that he has
     sustained.
          What if the defendants had told Phyllis
     Surico, and everyone with influence over
     Phyllis Surico, everyone in a position to try
     to help her with her addiction?  What if they
     had told the truth in 1953, '54, '55,
     throughout the '50s and the '60s and the '70s
     and the '80s and the '90s?  What if long before
     they were forced to put a Surgeon General's
     cautionary statement on cigarettes, that
5708 cigarettes may be hazardous to your health?
     What if Philip Morris said, you know, we really
     do have a corporate responsibility.  We really
     do have an obligation to tell the truth.  We
     know what the truth is, our own internal
     documents demonstrate that nicotine is
     addictive.  Our own research demonstrates,
     confirms what all the other scientists are
     saying.  We acknowledge it in our papers
     internally.  Cigarette smoking causes cancer.
     What if they did what the Frank Statement
     pledged that they would do and began
     cooperating with public health officials to get
     the message out?  What would have happened?
          Well, we know what would have happened.
     We know what would have happened because we
     know what did happen when the message began to
     get out.  We saw the significant drop in
     cigarette sales.  We saw cigarettes stock
     prices begin to fall through the floor.  And
     then we saw a telegram that gets sent out
     saying, we've got a really big problem on our
     hands, and we're going to interrupt our
     Christmas vacation, we these big executives of
     all of these cigarette companies, we're going
5709 to go to The Plaza Hotel in New York and we're
     going to do something about this because we're
     in big trouble.
          And what do they decide to do?
     Philip Morris agreed to conceal or omit
     information regarding the health effects of
     cigarettes, or their addictive nature, with the
     intention that smokers and the public would
     rely on this information to their detriment.
          And then they concealed or omitted
     material information, not otherwise known or
     available, knowing that the material was false
     or misleading, or failed to disclose a material
     fact concerning the health effects or addictive
     nature of smoking cigarettes, or both.  That's
     what they did.  That's the unrebutted
     testimony.  You didn't hear anything --
          May we approach the bench for just a
     moment, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Members of the jury,
     plaintiff always has the burden of proof in a
     case and the defense does not have the burden
     of proof, they do not have to present any
     evidence in a case; it is the plaintiff that
     has the burden of proof.  Okay?
          MR. SCAROLA:  Ask yourselves, if there
     were some explanation, some innocent
     justification for that Plaza Hotel meeting in
     1953, for all of the concealment, the
     misleading conduct that has gone on for decades
     since then, wouldn't some -- somebody from
5713 Philip Morris be here to talk to you about
     that?  Be willing to sit up on that witness
     stand and at the conclusion of his testimony
     answer the questions that you would have for
     him or her?  Where is that person?  Where is
     that person?
          And instead of cooperating with public
     health officials, instead of acknowledging the
     responsibility that it had, Philip Morris gives
     away free samples of their addictive product to
     soldiers.  They buy the endorsements of sports
     heros, TV and movie stars and other
     celebrities.  They spend a billion dollars a
     year promoting the sex appeal, power,
     sophistication of a product Philip Morris knew
     to be addictive and lethal.  They create a
     false controversy about the health risks of
     smoking to discredit the science that proves
     the product is lethal.  They deny addiction.
     They demean the public health officials,
     including the Surgeon General, who are trying
     to educate the smoking public.  They manipulate
     the nicotine levels of cigarettes to increase
     their addiction levels.  They addict children
     when their brains are most susceptible.
5714 STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, may we
     approach.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  No.
          MR. SCAROLA:  To the physiological changes
     that promote the strongest addictions.  They
     promote filtered cigarettes as a safe
     alternative to quitting while concealing
     knowledge that filters don't work.  They
     promote low tar and nicotine cigarettes --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, there's
     no evidence in this case about lights or ultra
     lights.
          THE COURT:  Exclude the low tar.
          MR. SCAROLA:  So what are we going to do
     with evidence like that?
          First question:  Was Phyllis Surico
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and,
     if so, was this addiction a legal cause of her
     cancer and death?
          We know that by far more than the greater
     weight of the evidence Phyllis Surico was, in
     fact, addicted and to create doubt, to create a
     false controversy about Phyllis Surico's
     addiction, what does the defense present to us?
     Dr. Rosman.  And the testimony --
5715 STERN:  Objection to the reference of
     litigation, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  He testified.
          MR. STERN:  Your Honor --
          THE COURT:  He was called as a witness.
          MR. STERN:  Understand, Your Honor, but
     it's the prefatory comment.
          THE COURT: And the testimony of two
     very nice ladies who had a casual acquaintance
     for a short period of time with Phyllis Surico,
     decades ago, who said, everybody was smoking
     back then, I don't know whether Phyllis Surico
     was smoking or not, everybody smoked.  You're
     asking me 46 years later to try to remember
     that?  I just can't tell you.
          Anything to attempt to create a false
     controversy.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT: And on the other hand, we
     have Dr. Michael Cummings, Dr. David Burns,
     Dr. Teufel, Dr. Yuvienco, Joe Surico, Madeline
     Surico, Joanne Surico, and the medical records.
     The entries in the medical records long before
5716 anybody was talking about contemplating,
     thinking about in any way anything having to do
     with a lawsuit, telling us that Phyllis Surico
     was a pack-and-a-half-a-day smoker for over 40
     years.
          Her treating physicians, who aren't being
     paid experts by anybody, have told us, Phyllis
     Surico was addicted.  She was addicted.  False
     controversy.
          Was Phyllis Surico nicotine; and, if so, was this
     addiction a legal cause of her cancer and
     death?  The answer to that question is yes.
          Note something of significant here.
     Question number one asks:  Was Phyllis Surico
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?  It
     doesn't say anything about what brand she
     smoked.  It doesn't matter.  Doesn't matter
     what brand she smoked.  Was she addicted to
     nicotine in cigarettes?  That's all we need to
     know, to answer question number one, yes.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. STERN:  Your Honor, may we approach?
          THE COURT:  No.
5717 SCAROLA:  Question number two:  Was
     smoking cigarettes manufactured by
     Philip Morris USA, a legal cause of Phyllis
     Surico's cancer and death?
          Now we need to relate Phyllis Surico's
     smoking to a particular brand.  Any particular
     brand manufactured by Philip Morris.  And
     there's an instruction, I'm not going to take
     the time to pull it out right now, that tells
     you the brands that are Philip Morris brands
     and, for purposes of this case, the significant
     ones are Philip Morris and Parliament.
          And we know, from the unrebutted
     testimony, that those were Phyllis' primary
     brands.  We know from the testimony that every
     cigarette Phyllis smoked contributed to her
     addiction and to her disease process.  But in
     order for smoking Philip Morris cigarettes to
     be a legal cause of Phyllis Surico's cancer and
     death, they need to be a substantial
     contributing cause.
          I'm not going to have the opportunity to
     pull out that instruction for you right now,
     but the instruction tells you that smoking
     Philip Morris cigarettes need not be the only
5718 cause.  It can act in combination with other
     causes.  A genetic predisposition to cancer.
     It can act in combination with smoking other
     brands of cigarettes when she went to the store
     and something else was on sale.
          But as long Philip Morris USA manufactured
     cigarettes were not the substantial
     contributing cause, but a substantial
     contributing cause, if they were one of the
     substantial causes, the answer to this question
     must be yes.
          Was the concealment or omission by
     Philip Morris USA of material information about
     the health effects or addictive nature of
     smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of
     Surico's cancer and death?
          The court in its instructions defines for
     you what "material" means.  It means
     information that would make a difference in
     someone's decision-making process.
          I'm paraphrasing that.  The exact wording
     is in the instruction.  Material is referenced
     in two different places.  In that list of
     instructions I give you, both of those places
     are referenced.  So you will be able to go to
5719 the pages and look specifically at what
     "material" means.
          But note this:  Philip Morris concealed or
     omitted material information.  They concealed
     or omitted information that made a difference.
     So you don't need to ask yourself, would it
     have made a difference to Phyllis Surico if she
     knew these things?  We know that because --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  He can make the
     argument.  You will have your opportunity.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Because it has already been
     determined that Philip Morris concealed or
     omitted information that would have made a
     difference to all of those smokers from whom it
     was concealed.
          MR. STERN:  Same objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT: The answer to this question
     is yes.
          Was the agreement to conceal or omit
     material information about the health effects
     or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or
     both a legal cause of Phyllis Surico's cancer
     and death?
5720 And you ask yourself here, well, what's
     the difference between number three and number
     four?  Number three relates specifically to the
     actions of Philip Morris.  Number four relates
     to the actions of Philip Morris and all of the
     other people who participated in the conspiracy
     with Philip Morris.
          And that whole group is listed for you in
     the jury instructions.  And we know from the
     evidence who those people were that were at
     that meeting in 1953 and then continued to work
     together for half a century in fulfillment of
     their commitment to one another to create a
     false controversy, to engage in this filter
     fraud, to conceal information that was material
     to the smoking public, and they did it for one
     reason and one reason only, because they put
     profit over the lives of half a million people
     a year.
          TECHNICIAN:  55 minutes used.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
          The answer to this question is yes.
          For the first time you are now called upon
     to consider, because up until now it hasn't
     mattered, doesn't matter when we're talking
5721 about addiction, you can't get back there and
     talk about, well, how much of this addiction
     was Phyllis' fault and how much was
     Philip Morris' fault or somebody else's fault?
     That doesn't make any difference.  The only
     question is was she addicted, not how much
     fault -- not how many quit attempts she made.
     Not how hard she tried.  Not whether she ever
     tried at all.  The only question to answer in
     question number one is, was she addicted?
          But now, now we begin to focus on
     apportioning fault between Phyllis Surico and
     Philip Morris.  And when you come to the point
     of doing that, what you are asked to determine
     is whether Phyllis Surico acted reasonably
     under the circumstances, and did Philip Morris
     act reasonably under the circumstances, and
     compare the conduct of Phyllis Surico with the
     conduct of Philip Morris.
          We have come into this courtroom admitting
     from the outset of this legal proceeding that
     Phyllis Surico bears some degree of fault.  She
     was negligent to some extent.  But I suggest to
     you that if we look at Phyllis Surico's conduct
     in the light of the circumstances that existed
5722 when she engaged in that conduct, that Phyllis
     Surico's degree of fault, when compared to the
     intentional, malicious, 50-year history of the
     defendants, is minimal.
          I suggest to you a number that at the
     absolute maximum should not exceed 10 percent.
     10 percent Phyllis Surico, 90 percent or more
     for Philip Morris.  I'm going to put 10 and
     90 --
          TECHNICIAN:  You --
          MR. LEWIS:  The other way.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Excuse me.  Thank you all
     for paying attention.
          You will then be asked to fill in a number
     for the total amount of the damages.  You
     don't -- you don't do the percentage reduction.
     The court takes care of that for you.  The
     court will apply the appropriate law as
     necessary in order to take into account the
     finding that you make with regard to question
     number five.
          You are then going to be asked, and
     Mr. Lewis is going to speak to you just for a
     little while about filling in that next blank
     with the number, you are then going to be asked
5723 under the circumstances of this case whether
     you find by clear and convincing evidence,
     we're no longer talking about just 51 percent.
     When we talk about punishment, we have an
     increased burden.  We must demonstrate, not
     beyond a reasonable doubt, but by clear and
     convincing evidence, clear and convincing
     evidence, that punishment in this case is
     appropriate.
          And I suggest to you that there cannot be
     a clearer case in the context of the civil law
     warranting the imposition of punitive damages
     than in a case where a corporate defendant
     knowingly engages in conduct that is killing
     almost half a million a people a year and
     continues to engage in that conduct, not only
     that, but knowingly, knowingly increases the
     danger of the product that's killing all those
     people.
          No one else, no one else is going to stop
     them.  But you have the power to punish and
     deter by answering that question yes.
          TECHNICIAN:  One hour used.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you for coming with me
     this far on this journey.  I do so very much
5724 appreciate it.
                  CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. LEWIS:  Thank you very much.  May it
     please the court.  Good afternoon.
          THE PANEL:  Good afternoon.
          MR. LEWIS:  You know, the question is
     often asked, who are we?  And what I would say
     to that is we are an issue of an ancestry who
     have offered a legacy.  And by their deeds and
     declarations, the people in Mr. Surico's
     generation have caused our nation to pause and
     to ponder and ask, what manner of people were
     they?
          They were hard working-people.  Our
     grandmothers, parents, great-grandparents, they
     grew up in a generation, and I asked you when I
     got to stand up here at the beginning of this
     case, to understand it, you had to come back
     with me in a time machine and look at this case
     from the eyes of someone who grew up and was
     born in 1930, 1931, lived in the '40s, '50s and
5730 '60s, because if you didn't, you wouldn't have
     the same context that they had at that time.
          So members of the jury, in a little while
     you're going to go back into that little room
     and you're going to have three jobs.  And one
     of your jobs, as Mr. Scarola has explained to
     you, is to take that verdict form and fill out
     the answers to the questions that the court
     asked.
          And your second job, members of the jury,
     as Mr. Scarola pointed out also, is for you to
     follow the law that the judge gives you.
     Because everybody, every citizen, every entity,
     has a right to have their case decided under
     the law, and nothing else.
          And your third job is to reason together
     and explain to each other why you feel the way
     you feel under the law.  Not for any other
     personal reasons or this type of feeling, no.
     It's under the law.
          So now for the next few minutes, I want to
     discuss with you the part of that form, that
     verdict form, that verdict means to speak the
     truth under the law, that talks about the
     amount of money, if you get to that point, that
5731 it will take to compensate, to equalize, to
     balance the harm that was caused to Mr. Surico
     in this case.
          And so number six on the verdict form is a
     pretty simple question.  It says:  "What is the
     total amount of any damages sustained by Joseph
     Surico for the loss of his wife's companionship
     and protection and for his pain and suffering
     as a result of Phyllis Surico's death?"
          It's going to go on to further say that:
     "In determining the total amount of damages,
     you should not make any reduction because of
     the responsibility that you charge to Phyllis
     Surico, and the court will make any reductions
     that is appropriate based upon the facts that
     you find."
          I'm not going to go back over what the
     instruction was that Mr. Scarola gave to you
     about the evidence with respect to the fact
     that Mr. Surico is married to Gail Surico at
     the present time.  You have to follow the law.
          So what your job is, members of the jury,
     is to equalize.  It's to compensate.  It's to
     balance.  And so the question that is raised to
     you, how do you equalize, how do you compensate
5732 and balance for what I would submit to you is
     the greatest harm.  You can't be harmed any
     more than to contribute to the death, not an
     injury, to the death, the ultimate harm of his
     wife.  I can't think of a greater harm.
          Now, in this particular case, members of
     the jury, it's your call to action.  It's your
     call to action to determine what you believe is
     fair and what's appropriate and what's
     reasonable under that circumstance for the
     ultimate loss that a human being can suffer.
          Now, the evidence in this case, as
     Mr. Scarola has pointed out, has not only shown
     that we believe more likely than not, but
     beyond and to the exclusion of any reasonable
     doubt that these cigarette companies, this
     cigarette company, Philip Morris, and the other
     cigarette companies and legal entities, these
     co-conspirators, knowingly and blatantly
     devalued human life.
          So when they get up and tell you that the
     numbers that we suggest are inappropriate, we
     know how the company -- they have a right to
     defined themselves, but we know how the
     companies value human life.  Because they asked
5733 the question, how are we going to distract the
     public from their concern about health and keep
     our sales growing?
          So we know what's important to them and
     how much money they are willing to spend on
     what they believe is important to them.  And
     those numbers were astronomical.
          MR. STERN:  Improper compensatory
     argument, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. LEWIS:  And so the evidence in this
     case is clear:  There was an obligation, there
     was a duty, there is a mandate to be truthful.
     You got to tell the truth.  You can't just
     knowingly lie and not tell the truth, and then
     request a gold star be pinned on your chest for
     that conduct.  They got to equalize the harm in
     this case.
          So members of the jury --
          MR. STERN:  Objection.  Improper
     compensatory argument.
          THE COURT:  I'll sustain on that.
          MR. LEWIS:  Equalize the harm with respect
     to the loss of Mr. Surico in this case.
          And so members of the jury, it's not done
5734 in this case like politicians do, we hear them
     all the time on television spinning facts.  You
     can spin a fact.  We expect that.  We expect
     spin.  But not someone to know something is
     true, and in their formerly secret documents
     tell you, for instance, that we want to create
     doubt.
          The illusion of filtration is as important
     as filtration, when they knew it was an
     illusion, they knew it was a lie.  You got to
     equalize Mr. Surico's harm, members of the
     jury.
          Now, I say these things to you so that you
     can understand that what Mr. Surico lost, what
     was the evidence on who Mrs. Surico was?  And
     the reason I tell you this is so you'll have
     some understanding of what it was that he lost.
          Mr. Surico took the stand.  We heard his
     two daughters take the stand.  We heard these
     two nice women on video.  And were some of the
     things that they said?
          Mrs. Surico, she was a friendly woman.
     She was an intelligent woman.  She was a nice
     woman.  She was a good friend.  She had a
     positive attitude.  She was happy.  She was
5735 intelligent.  She was a hard worker.  She
     enjoyed her family and they enjoyed her
     company.  And she was easy to talk to and they
     had a nice family.  She was a little quiet.
     She was Italian.  She was very pleasant.  Joe
     and Phyllis didn't squabble like most of the
     people were doing.  They had a good
     relationship.
          They sent me Christmas cards for years
     even after I never seen them.  These are good
     people.
          She was a wonderful woman, she was a
     wonderful mother, and she was wonderful wife.
          And so members of the jury, I say to you
     that watching Phyllis die for Joe was very
     painful.  As he testified, it was one of the
     worst weeks of his life.  At times he would be
     at the hospital, he said he sat alone agonizing
     over the fact that his wife of 39 years at that
     time was suffering.  He would go back to that
     hospital, and when he had to tell his daughters
     that she was gone, he said that was the worst
     day of his life.
          And Mr. Surico said that the last gift he
     ever got from his wife was when his wife, who
5736 is dying a slow, agonizing and painful death
     from cancer, asked their daughters to buy him a
     Christmas gift because "I can't get out and go
     shopping."
          So the kids went out and got him a chain.
     And that chain is something that Mr. Surico
     carries in his heart to this day.  That's
     important to Mr. Surico.  That's a loss that
     can never be replaced for Mr. Surico.
          As Mr. Scarola said, it's like if you lose
     a child, you say you can replace a child, that
     doesn't mean that you don't suffer and have
     pain and suffering as a result of having
     another child [sic.].  Members of the jury,
     that's the ultimate harm in this case.
          So I ask you in this case that if you want
     to understand the case, and for them to take
     the full responsibility to pay the full harm to
     Joe Surico, then all you have to do from their
     perspective is follow their money trail.  And
     when you follow their money trail to see what's
     important --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor,
     improper compensatory argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
5737 STERN:  I would like to make a motion.
          THE COURT:  He wants to make a motion.
          MR. STERN:  Your Honor --
          THE COURT:  You want to come up to the
     bench?
          MR. STERN:  Yes, Your Honor.
          (Thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:)
          MR. STERN:  Your Honor, we move for a
     mistrial.  He repeatedly made the same improper
     argument even after the objection was
     sustained.  That's all I have to say.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  On your amount of
     damages, you talk about the --
          MR. STERN:  I move for a mistrial, Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I hear you.  I'll --
          MR. STERN:  I just wanted to make sure --
          THE COURT:  How many we got now?  18
     maybe?
          MR. STERN:  I've lost track.  I don't
     know, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  You can talk about the
     implication of the punitive damages on the
     verdict form.  That's not what we're talking
5738 about now.  We're not talking about punitive
     damages.
          When you're talking about compensatory,
     you don't relate it to the wealth of the
     defendants.
          MR. LEWIS:  Yes, ma'am.
          THE COURT:  You talk about the law and
     what is compensable under the law -- on the
     loss.
          MR. LEWIS:  Yes, ma'am.  I was not -- I
     was going to relate it back to Mr. Surico, but
     I didn't get to before he stood up.  But I'll
     move on --
          THE COURT:  You said, "Follow the money
     trail."
          MR. LEWIS:  I know, but I was going to
     explain how and relate it to what they thought
     was fair and reasonable and the amounts that
     they paid to the experts, and then start
     quantifying the amounts that we were asking for
     Mr. Surico.  But I understand the court and I
     will do it another way and I'll move on.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  That motion is denied.
     Make your motion for a mistrial now.
          MR. STERN:  If I may just say, Your Honor,
5739 just so the record is clear, the argument that
     Mr. Lewis suggested I would submit is improper.
     I understand he's not going make it.  But just
     so we're clear, it is improper.
          THE COURT:  You want to say what?
          MR. STERN:  I understand he's not going to
     make the argument he just suggested, Your
     Honor, but I just wanted the record to reflect
     that in our view, that would be a completely
     improper argument.
          THE COURT:  That it's improper argument?
          MR. STERN:  Yes.
          MR. LEWIS:  We disagree.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. LEWIS:  Yes, ma'am.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar conference was
     concluded and within the presence of the jury:)
          MR. LEWIS:  May it please the court.
          THE COURT:  You may.
          MR. LEWIS:  Now, members of the jury, when
     a person you love more than yourself is taken
     from you, and when they're taken from you in
     the way that Mrs. Surico was taken from
     Mr. Surico; as Mr. Scarola said, you have a
5740 rare opportunity that you may never, ever get
     again.  And for Mr. Surico, if you give damages
     that are token damages and not full damages, if
     you get to that point on the verdict form, then
     that is just as injust as anything that he
     could also experience.
          So Mr. Surico is asking that, from his
     perspective, you recognize the loss that he
     suffered in this case.  And I would suggest to
     you, members of the jury, in this case,
     Mr. Scarola put up the life expectancy tables.
     And the court is going to instruct you on what
     the life expectancy tables are used for.
          And, as you saw, when Mrs. Surico died,
     she was 63 years old.  She died in 1993.  And
     Mr. Surico is coming up on "the week that was,"
     his birthday is this weekend, his anniversary
     is coming up, the day he got his second
     lieutenant bars, the day he married Mrs. Surico
     is coming up as "the week that was."
          And so you can take the life expectancy
     that Mr. Scarola showed the members of the jury
     was 23 years, and he's got another 5.8 years,
     that's 28 years.
          So, members of the jury, the evidence
5741 dictates that it is a fair verdict if you
     return a verdict for $2.5 million.
          And I say $2.5 million, members of the
     jury, not as a lawyer who says that if I tell
     them 2.5, what I really mean is 1.225.  No.  Or
     what I really mean is 2.6.  That's not the
     right verdict in this case.  2.7 million,
     3 million, it's not the right verdict, nor is
     1.225 the right verdict.  In this case, the
     right verdict is $2.5 million.
          And, members of the jury, if you have any
     question at all with respect to whether that
     ultimate loss, ultimate harm to Mr. Surico is
     excessive, is something that's unreasonable,
     all I ask you to do is to look how
     Philip Morris --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. LEWIS:  -- valued their money.
          MR. STERN:  Objection.  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  I've instructed
     counsel.
          MR. LEWIS:  So that you can take the
     hourly rate that they agree and they think is
     reasonable to pay people.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
5742 May we approach.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Overruled, sir.
          MR. LEWIS:  And if you took that hourly
     rate for Mr. Surico, for his pain and suffering
     for the ultimate loss of his spouse, it would
     be in the millions and millions and millions of
     dollars.  And that's not what he's done.
     That's not what we've done.
          So, members of the jury, the right verdict
     in this case, for this portion of the case, in
     the compensatory damage case is $2.5 million.
          And as I take my seat, Mr. Scarola gave me
     a note before we started and he had given you
     some exhibit numbers to write down, and I
     believe he said PT3608 -- and I think most of
     you wrote it down.  I think that exhibit number
     was incorrect, so you can cross that exhibit
     number out.  The Exhibit Number 2044 was the
     incorrect exhibit number, and you can cross
     that out.  2203 and 2027.
          And we'll get the opportunity, either
     Mr. Scarola, I believe, or myself, but I
     believe Mr. Scarola, will get back up after
     they have had an opportunity to speak with you,
     and I thank you, just like Mr. Scarola did, for
5743 always being very, very kind and respectful and
     listening to me and all of us also.
          Thank you all.


5826         CLOSING REBUTTAL
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you very much.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I want to begin with
     a very brief video clip just as a reminder to
     you.
          (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
          "MALE VOICE:  Take the controversy about
     cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress, a House
     Committee heard testimony from leading experts
     on smoking and health.  The record shows that
     many of the country's most respected doctors
     openly challenged anti-cigarette claims.
          "FEMALE VOICE:  I have to disagree with
     you that we don't know what causes the ailments
     that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
          "MALE VOICE:  Cigarette smoking does not
     cause cancer, yes or no.
          "MALE VOICE:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer.  It has not been
     causally established.
          "MALE VOICE:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
     relationship between cigarette smoking and
     emphysema.
          "MALE VOICE:  Despite all of the research
5827 to date, there has been no causal link
     established.
          "FEMALE VOICE:  The case is still open.
     The jury has not come in.
          "MALE VOICE:  It may not be harmful.
     We're not convinced.
          "FEMALE VOICE:  It may be or it may not
     be, we don't know.
          "MALE VOICE:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
     I don't know if they do or not.
          "FEMALE VOICE:  I'm not in a position to
     give you a does or does not answer.
          "FEMALE VOICE:  Well, I think that's a
     good question, and I think it's worth pointing
     out that all the links that have been
     established between smoking and certain
     diseases are based on statistics.  What that
     means is that the causative relationship has
     not yet been established.
          "MALE VOICE:  Yes, they may be --"
          MR. STERN:  May we approach?
          (Thereupon, the video paused.)
          THE COURT:  You may approach.
          (Thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:)
5828 STERN:  This video was not itself
     introduced into evidence, Your Honor.  It's a
     splicing together.
          THE COURT:  It is -- it's putting together
     evidence.  He can play each one of them.
          MR. STERN:  Well, he's not playing the
     entirety of -- he's spliced together -- he's
     spliced together the videos as they were
     introduced into evidence.  We would object to
     that.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  What's your response?
          MR. SCAROLA:  All of this is in evidence.
     We're just playing excerpts from a number of
     different clips, all of which are in evidence.
          MR. STERN:  Excuse me.  Lower your voice.
          MR. SCAROLA:  All of which are in evidence
     which we are certainly entitled to do.  There's
     no rule of completeness in closing argument.
          THE COURT:  I agree.
          MR. STERN:  Understood, Your Honor.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar conference was
     concluded and within the presence of the jury:)
          MR. SCAROLA:  Robert, back it up just a
     little bit, and then we'll finish it off.
5829 (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
          "FEMALE VOICE:  I think it's worth
     pointing out that all the links that have been
     established between smoking and certain
     diseases are based on statistics.  What that
     means is that the causative relationship has
     not yet been established.
          "MALE VOICE:  Yes, I may be convinced.  We
     don't know what causes cancer in general right
     now, so I think that we may find out what
     causes cancer and we may find out some
     relationship which has yet to be proven.
          (Video ended.)
          MR. SCAROLA:  You are told in closing
     argument, there is no evidence that Phyllis
     Surico saw any of these documents, saw any of
     these particular programs.
          And what opposing counsel clearly fails to
     discuss is the fact that this is a case about
     concealment.  The arguments that were made have
     nothing to do with the charges against
     Philip Morris.
          It is not that Philip Morris wrote a
     letter to Phyllis Surico and lied to her in a
5830 letter.  It is not about the fact that
     Philip Morris delivered the Frank Statement to
     Phyllis Surico.
          It is about the fact that Philip Morris
     concealed material information not otherwise
     known or available, knowing that the material
     was false or misleading.
          It is about the fact that they agreed to
     conceal that information intending that smokers
     and the public would rely on this information
     to their detriment.  They hid the truth.  The
     documents that we have seen were secret
     documents that remained secret until almost a
     decade after Phyllis Surico was buried in
     Arlington Cemetery.
          To suggest to you that this case needs to
     be decided based upon proof that Phyllis Surico
     saw some particular document, when all of the
     evidence is that what Philip Morris did was to
     hide the truth is clearly, clearly an
     unfortunate misrepresentation of what this case
     is all about.
          So let's get back to talking about what
     this case is all about.  And I want to point
     out some very important things that relate
5831 directly to this argument about whether the
     information concealed, whether the information
     concealed would have made any difference.
     Would it have changed the ultimate outcome for
     Phyllis Surico?
          And the answer to that question is we know
     it would have.  And how do we know it would
     have?  We know it would have because
     Philip Morris concealed or omitted not just any
     information, they concealed or omitted material
     information.  And now we get back, again, to
     talking about how important the law is in order
     for you to perform your duties, to fulfill your
     responsibilities as jurors.
          Because this is what is the law says:
     "Material information is information of such
     importance that Mrs. Surico would not have
     acted as she did but for the concealment,
     omission, or failure to disclose."
          Philip Morris concealed or omitted
     information of such importance that Mrs. Surico
     would not have acted as she did.  It would have
     changed the way she acted.  It would have made
     a difference.  Because it was material.
          And the court has told us what the law
5832 defines as material information.  Indeed, "a
     material fact" at page 16 of the instructions:
     "A material fact is one that is of such
     importance that a reasonable person would
     consider the same significant in their
     decision-making process."
          So, did it matter to Phyllis Surico that
     the truth was concealed from her?
     Philip Morris concealed or omitted material
     information with the intention that smokers and
     the public would rely on the omissions and make
     decisions other than what they would have made
     if they knew the truth.  That's what the law
     is.  And it's so important that you understand
     and you follow the law.
          Because if you were to accept the
     representations of defense counsel, then the
     only way that a case like this could ever be
     proved, is if this pointer were a magic wand,
     and we could -- we could resurrect Phyllis
     Surico and she could tell us what she saw and
     what she didn't see.  If after half a century
     she could remember, even with the help of a
     magic wand.  But it isn't, and that's not the
     way it works, and that's not what the law
5833 requires.  There is no obligation that we prove
     that Phyllis Surico saw any particular document
     at any time.  That's simply not the law.
          I want to respond to the arguments that
     were made by opposing counsel about addiction
     and class membership.  Please remember, class
     membership is not about fault, it's not about
     awareness, it's not about choice, it is only
     about whether Phyllis Surico was addicted.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
     an incomplete statement of the law; that's just
     the first half of the question.
          MR. SCAROLA:  I'm  getting to the second
     half, I promise.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Go ahead.
          MR. SCAROLA:  The first part of the class
     membership issue has nothing to do with fault
     or awareness or choice, it is strictly about
     whether Phyllis Surico was addicted.
          And defense counsel is absolutely right,
     there is no definition in the instructions that
     you have received about addiction.
          But what did the defense "expert"
     Dr. Rosman tell you?  He told you there are two
     kinds of addictions; there are physiological or
5834 physical addictions and there are psychological
     addictions.  And whether it's physiological or
     psychological, whether it meets the Fagerstrom
     test or the tests that have been accepted by
     the World Health Organization and the Surgeon
     General and Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, and the
     treating physicians who diagnosed Phyllis
     Surico while she was alive, and while she could
     be spoken to, and while she could be clinically
     examined, the way the DSM-IV says you must, if
     you are to apply DSM-IV standards, the way
     those treating physicians said she was
     addicted.
          Regardless of which of those definitions
     you apply, Phyllis Surico was, indeed, addicted
     to nicotine in cigarettes.  And the only way
     that conclusion is avoided is if you do what
     Dr. Rosman did.  You take the DSM-IV and you
     take the parts that you want to talk about, you
     interpret them the way you want to interpret
     them, and not the way the American Psychiatric
     Association says they are to be interpreted and
     applied, and you distort and make up your own
     definition without regard to the criteria that
     the DSM-IV expressly tells you must be applied.
5835 There simply is no way that someone can
     take an addictive substance, the number of
     times that Phyllis Surico took that addictive
     substance, over 40 years -- and you remember we
     did the math and showed you how many doses of
     addictive nicotine administered in a highly
     efficient free-base fashion, intended to cause
     addiction, designed to cause addiction, and
     then, say, Phyllis Surico was immune to
     nicotine.  That just doesn't make any sense.
     That's just not in conformity with the
     evidence.
          We know Phyllis Surico was addicted
     because she smoked a pack and a half of
     cigarettes a day for 40 years.  She lit up
     first thing in the morning, she smoked when she
     got up at night to use the bathroom, she smoked
     while she was pregnant, she started young, she
     had to leave situations, and there it says such
     as church, but we know movies.  She didn't
     smoke during the one-hour --
          MR. STERN:  Objection.  Objection to "such
     as church," Your Honor.
          THE COURT: We know that during the
5836 one-hour of a church service she smoked just
     before she got in the door, and she smoked
     right after she got out of the door, but we
     also know from Dr. Rosman's own admission, that
     she would have to get up and leave the movies
     after you could no longer smoke in the
     balconies to get a cigarette.
          She tried repeatedly to quit.  She tried
     cold turkey.  She tried the nicotine patch.
     And remember what the testimony was about the
     nicotine patch.  It is a substantially less
     efficient means by which to administer nicotine
     than inhaling it deep into your lungs.
     Substantially less efficient as a consequence
     of which she experienced withdrawal symptoms,
     even while on the patch, and had to return to
     cigarettes to satisfy her nicotine addiction.
          She smoked despite harm.  The warnings on
     those packages were ignored because she didn't
     want to believe them.  She says she wished she
     had never started, but she couldn't stop.  She
     was embarrassed that she couldn't stop.  She
     wakes up from her eye surgery, in intensive
     care, and the first words she speaks are, "I
     want a cigarette."  She is so addicted, that
5837 the nurses write in the hospital record, "let
     her smoke."
          Now, is there a notation after it says
     "let her smoke" that she, in fact, smoked?
     Well, no, that notation isn't in the hospital
     record.  But why is the notation in the record
     to begin with if she wasn't being given
     permission to smoke, because she needed to
     satisfy her nicotine craving.
          We know that she went through significant
     withdrawal symptoms on the multiple occasions
     when she tried to stop.  Phyllis Surico was
     clearly addicted to nicotine in cigarettes.
          So what is the significance, then, because
     opposing counsel addressed this.  What is the
     significance of the limiting instruction that
     the court gave you?  That the evidence may not
     be considered to conclude that any member of
     Phyllis Surico's family is legally at fault?
          What is the significance of the fact that,
     admittedly, Joe Surico did not attempt to
     intervene in his wife's smoking for many years
     until 1993?  Well, there appears to be
     absolutely no conflict in the evidence that in
     order to overcome an addiction, to the extent
5838 that it goes into remission for whatever period
     of time it may be, it requires motivation and
     external support plus one.  The balance has got
     to -- has got to tip in favor of motivation and
     external support in order for there to be a
     successful quit attempt.
          Philip Morris knew that, Philip Morris
     acknowledges that in its papers, and it says,
     if we ever open the gate to allow addicted
     smokers to leave, we're out of business.  So,
     we've got to do something to prevent that from
     happening.  We increase the addictive
     properties of our cigarettes, and we do
     something else, we attack motivation and
     external support.  We attack the external
     support that is coming from the public health
     community.  We attack and discredit the Surgeon
     General.  We attack motivation by telling
     smokers they don't need to stop.  And what's
     the effect of that?  What is it that prevented
     Joe Surico from providing the external support
     sooner that Phyllis Surico needed?
          Well, ladies and gentlemen, that's an easy
     question to answer.  It's an easy question to
     answer.  What prevented Joe Surico from
5839 providing the external support that his wife
     needed in order to be motivated sufficiently to
     give up smoking, is exactly the same
     deprivation of material information hidden from
     Phyllis Surico.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
     There's no evidence to that effect.
          THE COURT: The same concealment, the
     same lies, the same conspiracy that affected
     smokers affected the public.
          While Joe Surico was a smoker, it was
     affecting him.  When Joe Surico was no longer a
     smoker and member of the general public it was
     affecting him.  Can you imagine, ladies and
     gentlemen, that anyone who loved Phyllis
     Surico, as much as her husband and her children
     loved Phyllis Surico, would not have done
     absolutely everything in their power if they
     knew the truth that was being hidden by
     Philip Morris and its coconspirators.
          Can you imagine that it would not have
     made a difference to Joe Surico and to the
     Surico's lovely daughters, if they had known
     the whole truth that when Phyllis Surico was
5840 switching to filters they weren't any safer,
     they were more dangerous.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT: Would it have made a
     difference if they knew that Phyllis Surico was
     being perceived by Philip Morris and the
     coconspirators as a lab rat.  That the levels
     of nicotine in cigarettes were being boosted,
     that nicotine was being free-based, that
     filters didn't make any difference at all, they
     were more dangerous.  And that, in 1953,
     Philip Morris knew cigarettes caused cancer.
     In 1953 Philip Morris knew that cigarettes were
     addictive, and concealed that information at a
     time when we know it would have made a
     difference to both Joe and Phyllis Surico,
     because what they hid is material information.
     Information that would have, could have, should
     have indeed, unquestionably would have, made a
     difference.
          So, what does tobacco do?  The industry
     spends $250 billion on a campaign of deceit,
     deception, fraud, call it whatever you like, to
     hide the truth, to bury the facts so that they
5841 can continue raking in their profits from the
     sale of their knowingly lethally defective
     products.
          $250 billion spent destroying motivation
     and support.  Firing missiles at the ability to
     quit.  Smoking is not addictive, there's no
     scientific proof that smoking is harmful, we
     will filter out all harmful substances, filters
     are safer, low tar and nicotine cigarettes are
     safer, we will go out of business voluntarily
     if we ever find out that we are selling a
     product that hurts anybody.  Material
     information concealed from the public.
          Phyllis Surico was addicted to nicotine in
     cigarettes.  There it is.  We weigh the
     evidence.  There simply can be no reasonable
     doubt about Phyllis Surico's addiction.
          So let's move on.
          THE COURT:  You do need to watch your
     time, counsel.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Yes, thank you very much,
     Your Honor.
          Let's talk about whether Philip Morris
     cigarettes caused cancer in Phyllis Surico.
     This is part of the evidence, it was read
5842 during the course of the trial, it is not a
     jury instruction, it is a stipulation in the
     evidence that was read to you.  So you're not
     going to find this in your package.  But this
     is what the court told you the parties agreed
     to:  Joseph Surico and Philip Morris stipulate
     that any smoking by Phyllis Surico of any
     cigarettes, manufactured by Lorillard, Liggett,
     Vector, R.J. Reynolds was minimal and did not
     directly and in natural and continuous sequence
     produce or contribute substantially to
     producing any injury sustained by Phyllis
     Surico, if any that was caused by smoking
     cigarettes.
          No other major manufacturer of cigarettes
     contributed to Phyllis Surico's smoking.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
     There's no testimony about who the population
     of major manufacturer of cigarettes is.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Your Honor --
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Go ahead.
          MR. SCAROLA:  No other major manufacturer
     of cigarettes contributed to Phyllis Surico's
     addiction and death by stipulation.  That
     leaves only one brand left.
5843 STERN:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Only one --
          MR. STERN:  Objection.
          THE COURT: That leaves only one major
     manufacturer left, and that's the manufacturer
     of Philip Morris and Parliament cigarettes.
     The brand that the unrebutted testimony
     establishes was Phyllis Surico's first brand,
     it was the brand that --
          MR. STERN:  Objection.
          MR. SCAROLA:  -- that Philip Morris
     manufactured that Phyllis Surico switched to --
          THE COURT: -- it was the brand that we
     know Phyllis Surico continually purchased, and
     would only switch to other brands on those
     occasions when she had coupons; but
     continuously returned back to this defendant's
     negligently designed, intentionally defective
     product.
          You remember seeing the picture in the
     lower left-hand side, there's that pack of
     cigarettes that's blown up, and there is a pack
     of Philip Morris-brand cigarettes.
5844 Defense counsel wanted photographic proof.
     There's the photographic proof.  Were there
     True cigarettes on the left-hand side of
     Phyllis Surico, who is a right-hand dominant,
     person?  Yes.  Does it make any difference
     whether they were hers or somebody else's?  No,
     because by stipulation, True-brand cigarettes
     manufactured by Liggett, were not a substantial
     contributing cause to Phyllis Surico's
     addiction and her death.
          Time check, Robert?
          TECHNICIAN:  15:40 left.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you very much.
          MR. STERN:  What?
          MR. SCAROLA:  So let's move on and let's
     talk about the evidence that relates to whether
     Phyllis Surico had a primary lung cancer.
          I urge you to compare the qualifications
     of pulmonologist, Dr. David Burns, with the
     qualifications of anyone else who has addressed
     this subject.  There is no more eminently
     qualified pulmonologist that could have been
     brought to you to speak about the relationship
     between smoking and lung cancer than Dr. David
     Burns.
5845 And Dr. Burns told us that Phyllis Surico
     was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, she
     had primary lung cancer.  Her cancer was caused
     by her addiction to nicotine.  Her death was
     caused by her addiction to nicotine.  Every
     cigarette Phyllis Surico smoked contributed to
     her addiction and her lung cancer.  But,
     obviously, there needed to be a significant
     number of cigarettes smoked of any particular
     brand in order for it to be a substantially
     contributing factor to meet the legal cause
     standard repeated multiple times in the court's
     instructions.
          Addiction to nicotine must be a
     substantial contributing -- a substantial
     contributing factor.  Not the legal cause, as
     opposing counsel repeatedly referenced, not the
     legal cause but a legal cause.  Which acting
     together with whatever other causes were
     involved, produced the result.  A substantial
     contributing cause.  Caused lung cancer, caused
     death.
          Did Phyllis Surico have primary lung
     cancer?  Dr. Michael Cummings, yes; Dr. David
     Burns, yes; Dr. Teufel, her treating physician,
5846 yes; Dr. Yuvienco --
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, there's
     no substantive evidence of Dr. Yuvienco.
          May we approach?
          (Thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:)
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. STERN:  Dr. Yuvienco's testimony was
     never admitted as substantive evidence, Your
     Honor, it was only used during examination of
     the expert, by way of examining him on the
     basis of his opinion.  There was never any
     deposition, there was obviously no live
     testimony of Mr. Yuvienco admitted, there was
     no deposition testimony admitted substantively.
     It's improper argument.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Dr. Rosman expressly
     acknowledged that he relied upon Dr. Yuvienco's
     opinion, and expressly acknowledged that
     Dr. Yuvienco's opinion was, this was a primary
     lung cancer.
          MR. STERN:  That was hearsay testimony,
     Your Honor, this is the whole point.  It was
     not admitted substantively.
          MR. SCAROLA:  That is evidence that's
5847 before this jury and the subject of fair
     comment.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar conference was
     concluded and within the presence of the jury:)
          MR. SCAROLA:  Dr. Yuvienco, primary lung
     cancer; Dr. Matthew, primary lung cancer.
          MR. STERN:  Objection to Dr. Matthew, Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT: The medical records, primary
     lung cancer that metastasized to other
     locations from its primary site.
          On the other side we have Dr. Andrews.
     Dr. Andrews builds his opinion upon one crucial
     foundation:  Mrs. Surico had a normal chest
     x-ray four to eight weeks before being
     diagnosed with lung cancer.  A normal chest
     x-ray.  No cancer.  But what did Dr. Andrews
     admit in cross-examination?  Remember we went
     through the little doubling time demonstration
     with the Play-Doh?  And after we had gone
     through the little doubling time demonstration
     with the Play-Doh with Dr. Andrews, Dr. Andrews
5848 admitted the bronchial lesion, the cancerous
     node in Mrs. Surico's bronchial tube was
     there -- what did he say?  For a long time.
     Not for weeks.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, that
     mischaracterizes the testimony.
          THE COURT: He expressly and repeatedly
     stated and reaffirmed, that lesion was there
     for a long time.  It was --
          MR. STERN:  Same objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT: It was missed on x-ray, not
     because we are speculating about that, but
     because the science proves it was missed on
     x-ray.  It could not have been the size that it
     was, based upon Dr. Andrews' general knowledge
     of doubling time, if it had not been there for
     a long time.
          No one is faulting the radiologist who
     read this x-ray, but a cancer that was there
     was missed.  We know that the cancer that was
     there was missed, because all of the treating
     physicians, all of the treating physicians who
     knew about this x-ray, who knew that it was
5849 "read normal," all of them still concluded this
     was primary lung cancer.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, hearsay, Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          TECHNICIAN:  Ten minutes.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
          So how does Dr. Andrews get to his
     opinion?  Well, he gets to his opinion this
     way.  And you will remember this testimony from
     his cross-examination.  He had testified before
     you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, that
     this cancer was a metastatic cancer of unknown
     origin.  And he told you, in this courtroom,
     that he had reached that conclusion beyond and
     to the exclusion -- excuse me.  By a
     preponderance of the evidence within his area
     of expertise.
          Is that an opinion that you hold to a
     reasonable degree of certainty within your area
     of expertise?  And his answer was, yes, here in
     trial.
          You will remember that phrase repeated
     over and over again with expert witnesses, is
     that an opinion that you hold to a reasonable
5850 degree of certainty, within your area of
     expertise?   And the opinions that get admitted
     are opinions that must meet that legal
     standard.
          MR. STERN:  Objection,Your Honor.
          MR. SCAROLA:  A reasonable degree of
     medical probability or medical certainty within
     your area of expertise, and that's what he told
     you here at trial.
          THE COURT: What did he say during his
     deposition?  What he said during his deposition
     was:
     "Question:  And what do you believe was the
cause of her cancer?
     "Answer:  I don't know the exact cause of her
cancer.  My suspicion is that it was a metastatic
process.  And if we take the pathology reading, as
most consistent with adenocarcinoma, then I would
have to propose possibilities for a metastatic
manifestation in her chest."
          To a reasonable degree of medical
     probability or medical certainty within his
     area expertise?  No.  All he had when he was
     deposed, when he is required to state all of
5851 his opinions, was a suspicion about a
     possibility.
          I want to address this issue.  It has been
     suggested that there was a conflict between the
     testimony of Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings with
     regard to permanent changes in the brain as a
     consequence of nicotine addiction.  There is no
     conflict.  Receptors never return to normal,
     not because the receptors themselves continue
     in a damaged state.  Nobody said that.  But
     because the neural pathways between those
     receptors have been permanently rerouted.
          Brain plasticity.  The pathways in the
     brain have been permanently changed.  That's
     what the testimony was.  No conflict between
     the testimony of Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings.
          Defense counsel:  It was not Philip Morris
     that was the legal cause of Phyllis Surico's
     addiction.
          Remember that the first question is:  Was
     Phyllis Surico nicotine, no matter who manufactured
     them; and we don't talk about the legal cause,
     we talk about a legal cause.
          Defense counsel:  "Dr. Rosman told you
5852 that he uses the DSM-IV to diagnose addiction."
     No, what Dr. Rosman told you was that he uses
     his own standards, he doesn't accept the
     standards of the American Psychiatric
     Association.
          MR. STERN:  Objection, Your Honor, that
     mischaracterizes the evidence.
          THE COURT: If Mrs. Surico could have
     quit then addiction was not the legal cause of
     her injury.  Addiction did not prevent her from
     quitting.
          Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, if the
     standard was whether addiction prevents someone
     from quitting, then there would be no
     litigation against any of the cigarette
     manufacturers because, as Dr. Cummings --
          MR. STERN:  Objection.
          THE COURT: -- and Dr. Burns, and every
     other witness have acknowledged to you, every
     addict can quit.  Heroin addicts can quit,
     cocaine addicts can quit, alcoholics can quit,
     nicotine addicts can quit.  It takes
     motivation, plus external support, and nobody
5853 aiming missiles to try to eliminate both
     motivation and external support in order to get
     the job done.  That's just not the legal
     standard.  That doesn't conform with the law.
          So, Mr. Stern suggests to you that when
     you're back there, or while you've been
     listening to me you ought to be asking what
     would Mr. Stern say; and I think that's a good
     idea.  What would Mr. Stern say to 450,000
     people, to the survivors of 450,000 people
     killed every year as a consequence of the
     ongoing misconduct of his client?  What would
     Mr. Stern say?
          MR. STERN:  Objection to the form of this,
     Your Honor, that was not the intent or meaning
     of my remark.  Mr. Scarola knows it.
          THE COURT:  I'll sustain.
          MR. SCAROLA:  I'm sorry, was there -- was
     that an objection?
          MR. STERN:  That's an objection, Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT:  I sustained the objection.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Okay.
          You ask yourselves, ladies and gentlemen,
     how Mr. Stern could possibly answer for the
5854 misconduct in which his clients had --
          MR. STERN:  Same objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled on this one.
          MR. SCAROLA:  In which his client has been
     engaging for more than half a decade and
     continues to engage in today, after promising
     that it would stop, over and over and over
     again, so that people would rely upon those
     material promises and continue to buy the
     intentionally engineered system of nicotine
     delivery, remain addicted, and continue to feed
     the coffers of Philip Morris USA Incorporated.
          TECHNICIAN:  Two minutes.
          THE COURT:  Can you wind it up now?
          MR. SCAROLA:  Yes, ma'am.  I'm going to do
     that right now.
          We have all seen the statute of lady
     justice.  She is depicted as a woman holding
     the scales of justice in one hand, and a sword
     in the other.  She is blindfolded.  Blindfolded
     to power, blindfolded to wealth, and sensitive
     only to imbalance in that scale.  And when
     there is an imbalance in that scale, she has
     the courage to lift her sword and to restore
     balance using whatever reasonable force is
5855 necessary in order to do that; and I ask each
     of you ladies, and you gentlemen, to have that
     same courage to follow the law, to restore the
     balance that has been so grossly upset by the
     conduct of the defendant that has been proven
     to you in this case.
          Thank you again so very, very much.  And
     thank you, Your Honor.
