                  CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. STERN:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
          THE PANEL:  Good afternoon.
5744 STERN:  Addiction to cigarettes
     manufactured by Philip Morris did not cause
     Mrs. Surico's illness and death.
          Addiction to cigarettes manufactured by
     Philip Morris was not the legal cause of
     Phyllis Surico's illness and death.  Nothing
     that Philip Morris said or didn't say was the
     legal cause of Phyllis Surico's death.
          That, ladies and gentlemen, is what the
     evidence has shown you.  And that's how you
     will know that the plaintiff has not met its
     burden of proof on those questions or any of
     the other questions you will be called upon to
     answer in this case.
          How do you know that addiction to
     cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris was
     not the legal cause of Phyllis Surico's illness
     and death?  You know that from the evidence.
     You know that from the evidence that it was
     Mrs. Surico who was in control of her decisions
     to smoke.
          You know that from the evidence that it
     was Mrs. Surico who was in control of her
     decisions when to smoke, where to smoke, and
     how much to smoke.
5745 The evidence has shown you, ladies and
     gentlemen, that Mrs. Surico was in control of
     those decisions.  And it's Mrs. Surico who is
     responsible for those decisions, not
     Philip Morris.
          And I'm going to talk you about that
     evidence.  Before I do, I want to take a look
     with you at the verdict form that's already
     been put up on the screen.  But before I do
     that I want to bring us back to opening
     statement.
          You may recall that in opening statement I
     had a request.  And that request was, keep your
     eye on the ball.  That request was, ask
     yourselves when evidence is presented in the
     trial, what does that have to do with
     Mrs. Surico?  That was my request.  And I know
     you did it and I'm going to renew that request
     right now.  Because you just saw, when counsel
     listed off all those documents that he said
     would be helpful to you in answering the
     question, "Was Phyllis Surico addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine," not a single
     one of those documents, ladies and gentlemen,
     had anything to do with Mrs. Surico.  Not a
5746 single one of those documents is a document
     that any witness got up here on the stand and
     said, Mrs. Surico knew about that document.
     Something about that document caused
     Mrs. Surico's illness or her death.
          That's what I meant when I asked you to
     keep your eye on the ball, ladies and
     gentlemen.  And I'm going to talk about the
     evidence this afternoon, and I want you to hold
     me to that standard, too.
          Am I talking about Mrs. Surico, or am I
     talking about somebody else?  Am I talking
     about a document that Mrs. Surico saw, or am I
     talking about a document that there's no
     evidence she ever saw, read or heard?
          So let's turn to the verdict form.
          And, Marie, can I get the class membership
     slide?  Okay.  Good.  Oh, wow, that's small.  I
     may have to use this.  If you could -- Marie,
     if you could call out that question.
          So, I want to make a comment about this
     question.  This is the class membership
     question.  And if you look -- you don't have to
     call it out, I'm just going to read -- if you
     look up here, that's for the instructions that
5747 you're going to have.
          And it says:  The first issue for your
     determination is whether Phyllis Surico was a
     member of the Engle class.  And that question,
     then, breaks down into a couple different
     parts.  But before I get to that, I want to
     emphasize something that Her Honor has
     instructed you on and will be in the
     instructions you take back with you.  And that
     point is this:  For purposes of answering this
     question, those Engle findings that you heard
     about in the instructions and that you heard
     about in Mr. Scarola's argument, forget them.
     Totally ignore them.
          For purposes of answering this question,
     Her Honor has instructed you, and you will see
     in the instructions, for purposes of answering
     this question and all its subparts it's as if
     those findings don't even exist.  Those
     findings do not apply unless and until you can
     answer yes to this first question, which we
     will respectfully submit you cannot do because
     the plaintiff has not met his burden of proof
     on that question.  But there is no dispute that
     in answering this question, it's as if those
5748 findings don't exist.
          The only other thing I will say about the
     findings that you have heard and you will see
     in the instructions is that those findings in
     and of themselves do not establish that
     Philip Morris is liable.  So we put those
     findings completely to the side in answering
     this first question.
          And the question on the verdict form is:
     "Was Phyllis Surico nicotine"; and then it's got a
     second part.  "And, if so, was this addiction a
     legal cause of her cancer and death."  And
     perhaps I misunderstood, or misheard counsel
     when he was arguing, but if you heard counsel
     to say that you can check yes to this question,
     if you find that Phyllis Surico was addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine, that's wrong.
     The only way you can check yes to this question
     is if you conclude that you can answer yes to
     both parts of the question, not just "Was
     Phyllis Surico nicotine," but the second part also
     "that addiction was a legal cause of her cancer
     and death."
5749 And I'm going to be talking to you about
     what that means.  And the first instruction
     that we have from the jury instructions on
     that -- on what that means comes up here in the
     highlighted part on the right.
          Could you call that out, Marie, in order
     to be a member.
          This is the instruction that relates to
     this question.  "In order to be a member of the
     Engle class, the plaintiff must prove," three
     things.  There are three subparts to this
     question one on the verdict form.  The three
     things that the plaintiff must prove by the
     greater weight of the evidence are, number one,
     did Mrs. Surico have lung cancer?
          And you know from the testimony we heard
     just recently that in the context of this case,
     lung cancer means primary lung cancer, a cancer
     that originated in the lung as opposed to a
     cancer that originated somewhere else and
     spread or metastasized to the lung.
          So question number one, or subpart one of
     question number one, requires that the
     plaintiff prove by the greater weight of the
     evidence that Mrs. Surico had primary lung
5750 cancer.
          The second subpart of question number one
     requires that the plaintiff prove that
     Mrs. Surico was nicotine.
          And the third part requires the plaintiff
     to prove that this addiction was a legal cause
     of her cancer and death.
          And we submit to you, ladies and
     gentlemen, that the plaintiff has failed to
     meet that burden of proof.  But I would like to
     take each of the sub questions, one by one, and
     talk to you about the evidence on that sub
     question that relates to Mrs. Surico.
          And you will recall that in however long
     plaintiff's counsel took to argue, they never
     once addressed the question of whether
     Mrs. Surico had primary lung cancer.  And they
     never once addressed the question whether
     addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and
     death.  I am going to address those questions
     with you now.
          And I'm going to start with -- let me just
     say one more thing about this.
          Can we get the full instruction down
5751 there, Marie?  If you answered no.
          In order to answer yes to this question,
     all of you have to agree that each of the three
     sub questions has been proved.  I'm going to
     say that again.
          In order to check "yes" in that box, every
     member of the jury has to agree that the
     plaintiff has proved that Mrs. Surico had
     primary lung cancer.  And, every member of the
     jury has to agree that Mrs. Surico was addicted
     to cigarettes containing nicotine.  And every
     member of the jury has to agree that this
     addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and
     death.
          If there's agreement on one of them, but
     not on the others, that's not good enough.  If
     some people can agree on one, and some people
     can agree on two, but not everybody agrees on
     one and two, that's not good enough.  Everybody
     has to agree on all three.
          And then the instruction is, "If you
     answered no to question one, your verdict is
     for the defendant and you should proceed no
     further, except to date and sign the verdict
     form and return to the courtroom."
5752 So this is one of those questions where
     there's an instruction that tells you, if the
     plaintiff has not met his burden of proof,
     over, done, you've done your job, you can go
     home.
          So let's talk about the evidence on each
     of the three subparts.  We submit to you,
     ladies and gentlemen, that the evidence has
     shown that Mr. Surico has not proved, by the
     greater weight of the evidence, that
     Mrs. Surico had primary lung cancer.
          And starting with that first sub
     question -- to use some of the medical terms
     we've heard -- Marie, can you put up the next
     one?
          Mr. Surico has to prove that the cancer
     was a primary lung cancer and not a cancer that
     started elsewhere and metastasized to the lung.
          And, actually, Marie, take that down for a
     minute.  I'm going to talk about this in just a
     second, because you'll recognize that as the
     slide that was used in Dr. Andrews' testimony.
          But before I talk about Dr. Andrews I want
     to talk about Dr. Burns.
          You heard from Dr. Burns on this issue.
5753 Dr. Burns says that he believes that
     Mrs. Surico's cancer originated in her lungs.
     Dr. Burns believes that Mrs. Surico had a
     primary lung cancer.  But what did you learn
     about that opinion?  You learned about the
     basis of that opinion.  You heard the testimony
     about the medical records and the medical tests
     that the doctors conducted.  And you know that
     some time in August of 1993, the doctors took a
     chest x-ray, and you learned that the results
     of that chest x-ray were -- and it was phrased
     slightly differently in different ways -- no
     significant abnormalities, within normal
     limits -- but the bottom line is that that
     x-ray showed that there was no tumor present in
     Mrs. Surico's chest.
          Now I'm going to talk to you a bit more in
     a few minutes about Dr. Andrews' testimony.
     But you know from the testimony that the
     absence of a tumor on the x-ray is one of the
     ways that Mrs. Surico's -- that we know, and
     Dr. Andrews knows, that Mrs. Surico's cancer
     did not originate in the lung.
          But, of course, there was a dispute about
     what I just said.  Because I just said that the
5754 x-ray showed no tumor and that means there was
     no tumor present.
          Dr. Burns had a different idea.  What
     Dr. Burns says is, that the absence of a tumor
     on that x-ray doesn't mean that there wasn't a
     tumor.  He says it's possible that there could
     have been a tumor.  It's possible that the
     doctors missed a tumor that was actually there.
     And that means, to accept Dr. Burns' opinion
     that Mrs. Surico had primary lung cancer, you
     have to accept his testimony that there was a
     tumor present when we know the x-ray did not
     show a tumor.
          And what does that mean?  That means that
     to accept Dr. Burns' opinion, you have to
     speculate.  Am I standing up here trying to
     tell you that it is impossible that that x-ray
     missed a tumor?  I'm not telling you it's
     impossible, ladies and gentlemen, but keep your
     eye on the ball of the burden of proof.  The
     plaintiff has the burden to prove that this is
     a primary lung cancer.  And in the context of
     Dr. Burns' testimony, that means there has to
     be proof that there was a tumor there, not just
     it's possible, maybe, could be, but by the
5755 greater weight of the evidence, this is primary
     lung cancer.  That is the plaintiff's burden of
     proof.
          And I'm going to say something about
     statistics in just a few minutes.  But before I
     get to the question of statistics overall, I
     will throw one out here.
          You heard the evidence elicited on
     cross-examination that 30 percent of the time a
     tumor could be missed.  So let's just take that
     number.  What does that mean?  That means
     70 percent of the time, if the x-ray doesn't
     show a tumor, it means there is no tumor.
     That's what that statistic means.  That
     70 percent of the time that the x-ray shows no
     tumor there is no tumor.
          So if we were going to talk about
     statistics, we would say, based on the
     statistics, there was no tumor.  But I would
     submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, we don't
     have to talk about statistics we just talked
     about evidence.  Evidence in a court of law.
     And what is the evidence that there was a tumor
     present?
          The evidence isn't evidence at all.  It is
5756 Dr. Burns' speculation that perhaps this thing
     doesn't mean what it looks like it means.  And
     that, ladies and gentlemen, is not sufficient
     for the plaintiff to meet his burden of proof.
          And then you heard from Dr. Andrews -- can
     we get that slide, Marie?  Thank you.
          Dr. Andrews -- and I'm not going to try to
     go through all of his testimony again, this
     testimony, I know, is fresh in everyone's mind
     and I was going to say my thanks for the end,
     and I'll still give them at the end, but I want
     to make an observation.  I've been doing this
     for a long time.  I don't know the last time I
     saw a jury this attentive to some evidence that
     at times was tedious and at times was very
     technical.  So, under other circumstances I may
     take more time breaking down and reciting
     testimony like this, but I know that you were
     paying close attention and that you got it and
     that you got the three main points that
     Dr. Andrews made, timing, the normal chest
     x-ray, rapid decline and presentation.
          And Dr. Andrews explained to you that his
     opinion was this was not a primary lung cancer,
     and he explained why he held that opinion.  And
5757 I would ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to think
     about Dr. Andrews.  Think about what kind of
     witness he was.  Her Honor has instructed you
     on some of the things that you can consider in
     deciding whether to believe a witness and how
     much weight you should give to the testimony of
     the witness.  And when you're thinking about
     that instruction, think about Dr. Andrews.
     What kind of witness was he?  Did he struggle
     on cross-examination?  Did he seem evasive to
     you?  Did it seem like he was trying to win a
     battle with the cross-examining lawyer, with
     plaintiff's counsel, or did it look like he was
     giving thoughtful, well-informed answers to all
     of the questions regardless of who asked the
     question.
          We would submit to you that when you think
     about whether Dr. Andrews is a credible and
     reliable witness, you will conclude that he
     was.
          I expect that if this issue does get
     addressed in rebuttal, which I won't have an
     opportunity to respond to, that one of the
     things that you might hear is that there is
     testimony from treating physician.  I want to
5758 point one thing out, first.
          There was no testimony from Dr. Yuvienco.
     So nothing that may have been put to
     Dr. Andrews about what Dr. Yuvienco said is
     admissible evidence for your consideration.
     It's not substantive evidence.  It's something
     you can use in evaluating the weight to give
     Dr. Andrews' opinion, but you didn't -- bottom
     line Surico didn't hear from Dr. Yuvienco.  So,
     that's not before you.
          Dr. Teufel.  You know from Dr. Teufel that
     he didn't consider other risk factors.  And we
     know from Dr. Burns that there were other risk
     factors, he talked about the radiation of the
     thyroid and he talked about some other things.
          The bottom line, though, is what
     Dr. Andrews told you.  And what Dr. Andrews
     told you was, look, yes, it would be important
     in treating Mrs. Surico to figure out the
     origin of the cancer, if you could.  But what
     was more important was treating her condition
     at the time.  This was not an exercise, an
     academic exercise, for these treating
     physicians to go back, for the purposes of
     writing a medical journal article, or for the
5759 purposes of testifying in court, to figure out
     what the origin of the cancer was.  That's not
     what they were about.  They were about treating
     Mrs. Surico.
          Dr. Andrews, with the benefit of
     hindsight, is able to do an analysis that
     showed you clearly, we would submit, that the
     plaintiff has not proved, by the greater weight
     of the evidence, that this was a primary lung
     cancer.
          Can we get back to the first slide, Marie?
          So, if you conclude that Mrs. Surico --
     that the plaintiff has not proved that
     Mrs. Surico had a primary lung cancer, you're
     done.  You don't need to go any further.
     Because if that's your conclusion, then you
     have concluded that you cannot all agree that
     class membership has been proved, and that's
     the end of that.
          But I'm going to go on, I'm not going to
     stop there.  I'm going to go on to talk about
     the other questions that relate to class
     membership, and I'm going to go on to talk
     about the other questions on the form.  But,
     please bear in mind, that we believe you don't
5760 even get past the lung cancer question.
          But let's keep going.  The next question
     is whether Mr. Surico has met his burden to
     prove by the greater weight of the evidence
     that Mrs. Surico was nicotine.
          Now, I'm not going to try to run through
     all of the testimony on this point because
     there was a lot of it.  I would like to review
     the key points of that testimony, but before I
     do, I want to point out something that I know
     you're all aware of by now, but it's an
     important point.  And the point is this:  There
     is no legal definition of addiction.  There's
     nowhere in these instructions that you're going
     to get from Her Honor that says, for the
     purpose of this case, addiction means X or Y or
     Z.  You're not going to get a legal definition
     of addiction.
          You also know from the witnesses you heard
     from that lots of different people have
     different ideas about what addiction is.  And
     in fact, the plaintiff's own witnesses,
     Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, both testified that
     according to that 2010 Surgeon General's
5761 report, and I'm quoting now, "There is no
     established consensus on criteria for
     diagnosing nicotine addiction."
          And Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both agreed
     with that statement, and they explained that to
     them, that means that different people have
     different ways and different approaches to
     diagnosing addiction.
          And I want to say one other thing about
     addiction, ladies and gentlemen.  And this goes
     back to my original request.  You ask
     yourselves, what does the evidence have to do
     with Mrs. Surico?  Because we believe that what
     the undisputed evidence showed you is addiction
     is different for different people.  And whether
     or not one person is addicted is a different
     question from whether or not another person is
     addicted.
          And when I get to the next question, I
     will suggest to you that what addiction might
     cause or not cause with respect to one person
     may be very different from the experience of
     another person, and that's why it's so
     important that you focus on the evidence that
     relates to Mrs. Surico.
5762 So when we come back to addiction, the
     bottom line is that Dr. Rosman, who we called,
     is the only witness that you heard from who is
     a medical doctor.  He is a psychiatrist who
     actually diagnoses and treats patients today.
          Dr. Cummings and is not a medical doctor,
     Dr. Burns has been retired for some time.
     Dr. Andrews doesn't treat -- he treats
     patients, but not for addiction.
          Dr. Rosman is the only medical doctor you
     heard from who is actively involved in
     diagnosing and treating patients with addiction
     problems and who has throughout his career done
     that actively.
          And he told you how he diagnoses
     addiction.  He told you that he uses the
     criteria for diagnosing addiction that are
     found in that DSM, the Diagnostic and
     Statistics Manual that we heard so much about,
     statistical manual.  And that's the very same
     manual that plaintiff's own experts agreed was
     the authoritative source for psychiatrists who
     actually diagnose and treat patients.
          And without reviewing all of that
     evidence, I know you were paying close
5763 attention, Dr. Rosman explained to you how he
     applied those diagnostic criteria to
     Mrs. Surico.
          He talked about the definition in the DSM
     of addiction as "a maladaptive pattern of
     substance use that leads to clinically
     significant impairment or distress."
          And he explained how his analysis of the
     factors that make up that major criterion, when
     applied to Mrs. Surico, yield his opinion that
     Mrs. Surico was not addicted.
          And we would suggest that when you review
     that opinion testimony, when you review all the
     other evidence, you will conclude that the
     plaintiff has not met his burden to prove by
     the greater weight of the evidence that
     Mrs. Surico was nicotine.
          But I'm going to go -- and if that is your
     conclusion, as we submit it should be, again,
     you stop, you are done.  If the answer to any
     one of these three sub-questions is no, then
     the answer to question number one must be no,
     and that ends the case.
          But I'm going to talk about the third
5764 sub-question as well, and that sub-question is
     whether addiction to cigarettes containing
     nicotine was a legal cause of Mrs. Surico's
     cancer and death.  And this is the one that
     plaintiff's counsel didn't refer to or discuss
     at all in his opening argument.
          And I'm going to go ahead and address that
     question.  It uses the phrase "legal cause."
     And plaintiff's counsel articulated a
     perspective on legal cause.  I'm going to
     submit to you that what you will find in the
     jury instructions is that in order for
     something to be a legal cause, it must
     reasonably be said to be a but-for cause.
     B-U-T, F-O-R.
          And what that means is you have to be able
     to say, but for addiction, Mrs. Surico would
     not have become ill or died.  In other words,
     it is a necessary component of that chain of
     events.
          And as I will discuss for the next few
     minutes, we don't believe that the plaintiff
     has met his burden on that point.  And I would
     submit to you that the best way to think about
     this legal cause question, this but-for
5765 question, is to ask yourselves this question.
     And the question is:  Could Mrs. Surico have
     quit smoking, even if she was addicted, could
     she have quit smoking in time to avoid her
     injury?
          And if the answer to that is yes, if the
     answer is that even if she was addicted,
     Mrs. Surico could have quit in time to avoid
     her injury, then addiction was not the legal
     cause of her illness and death.
          And as I predicted a few minutes ago, I
     want to pointed out again that in answering
     this question whether even if she was addicted,
     could Mrs. Surico have quit, you have to look
     at the evidence not about other people, but
     about Mrs. Surico.  Because the answer to
     whether an addicted smoker can quit may be
     different for one person than another.
          We know for sure that addicted smokers can
     quit.  We know that because we heard that from
     experts.  We know that because of Mr. Surico's
     experience.  He was addicted to smoking.  He
     says he was addicted to smoking.  The
     plaintiff's expert says he was addicted to
     smoking.  And he was able to quit.
5766 There may be addicted smokers who can't
     quit, but we know that millions of addicted
     smokers are able to quit because we know that
     millions of addicted smokers have quit.
          I'm talking about statistics, I'll zip my
     own lips and I'll talk about Mrs. Surico.  We
     know -- let's assume for the sake of this
     discussion that Mrs. Surico was addicted.
     That's what the plaintiffs say they proved.
          Well, if that's true, what do we know?  We
     know that Mrs. Surico did quit smoking.  We
     know that even if she was addicted, she did
     quit smoking in 1993.  So either she wasn't
     addicted at all and that's why she was able to
     quit, in which case you've answered no to the
     second sub-question, or, we know if she was
     addicted, she still had the ability to quit.
          So there is no question about whether or
     not Mrs. Surico had the ability to quit.  The
     question is, did she have the ability to quit
     in time to avoid her injury?
          So put a little differently, we know that
     addiction did not prevent Mrs. Surico from
     quitting in 1993.  If she was addicted, that
     addiction did not prevent her from quitting.
5767 So that brings us to the question, what,
     if anything, prevented her from quitting before
     1993, and in particular, in time to avoid her
     injury?
          And Dr. Burns gave some testimony on this
     point, and he gave testimony from sort of both
     ends of the spectrum.  On one end of the
     spectrum, he said that in his opinion, an
     addicted -- a smoker who quits -- a regular
     smoker who quits by the age of 35, so for
     Mrs. Surico, that would have been 1965, has the
     same excess risk of getting lung cancer as a
     never smoker.
          So in that case, clearly, if a person
     quits by the time they're 35, according to
     Dr. Burns' opinion, then they have quit in time
     to prevent their injury, to avoid their injury.
          Then on the other end he said, if you quit
     15 years before your diagnosis, 15 years or
     more, then it's medically more likely than not
     that you would have avoided getting the injury
     at the time that you did.
          So let's analyze that question.  Could
     Mrs. Surico have quit in time to avoid her
     injury, and since we know that addiction did
5768 not prevent her from quitting in 1993, what, if
     anything, prevented her from quitting before
     1993?
          So how do you know that addiction to
     smoking was not a but-for legal cause of
     Mrs. Surico's illness and death?  How do you
     know from the evidence that addiction did not
     prevent Mrs. Surico from quitting before 1993?
          You will know -- you know that from the
     evidence that relates to the question that I
     suggested to you in opening statement, and that
     question is this:  Did Mrs. Surico control her
     smoking or did her smoking control her?
          And the answer to that question, ladies
     and gentlemen, is clear from the evidence about
     Mrs. Surico.  Not about statistics, not about
     populations, not about other people, but about
     Mrs. Surico.  And we learned most of what we
     know about Mrs. Surico from Mr. Surico.  And
     you heard what he had to say on this very
     point.
          He told you that Mrs. Surico's decisions
     to smoke were her decisions.  He told you that
     from his perspective, Mrs. Surico could decide
     for herself whether to smoke, when to smoke,
5769 and how much to smoke.  And you know that
     Mr. Surico's testimony is confirmed and
     corroborated by the evidence of Mrs. Surico's
     smoking history because that evidence clearly
     establishes that what Mr. Surico said was
     exactly right.  She was in control of her
     decisions, those were her decisions, and it was
     up to her.
          And what was that evidence?  That evidence
     is the evidence that came out in the testimony
     about Mrs. Surico's smoking history.
          You learned that Mrs. Surico was able to
     control her smoking when she cut down on her
     smoking back in 1964 at the England Air Force
     Base in Louisiana.  And the evidence is clear,
     ladies and gentlemen, we know we have a smoking
     history that begins in October of 1951 because
     everybody agrees, there was no evidence from
     any witness with personal knowledge of anything
     before that time.  That's the time that
     Mr. Surico met Mrs. Surico.
          And the evidence is clear that at no time
     between 1951 and 1964 did Mrs. Surico even
     attempt to quit smoking.  And Dr. Burns told
     you that addiction never prevented anyone from
5770 attempting to quit smoking.  So we know that
     addiction was not a but-for cause that
     prevented Mrs. Surico from trying to quit
     between 1951 and 1964.
          And what else do we know about that
     period?  We know that Mrs. Surico didn't make
     an effort to quit despite the fact that at
     least from the time Mr. Surico met
     Mrs. Surico's mother, she was telling
     Mrs. Surico to quit.
          We know that in 1954, there was a Gallup
     poll, Dr. Burns testified that there was Gallup
     poll that asked this question:  "Have you heard
     or read anything recently to the effect that
     cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer to
     the lung?"
          And 90 percent of the people who responded
     to that poll said yes.  But you know what, I'm
     going to take it back.  Because the question is
     not whether 90 percent said something or
     80 percent said something, the question is,
     what did Mrs. Surico know?  What did
     Mrs. Surico know?
          And here's how statistics can be
     misleading, ladies and gentlemen.  Mr. Surico
5771 told us that in 1954, he had never heard
     anything, I'm not talking about believing
     anything, he had never heard anything as of
     1954 about cigarette smoking being a cause of
     cancer to the lung.
          Well, if we were just to look at
     statistics and we were to say, well, Mr. Surico
     was an adult in 1954.  Let's try to figure out
     what he knew.  Let's look at this poll.  If we
     looked at this poll, we would say, Mr. Surico,
     you knew in 1954 or you read or heard something
     in 1954 to the effect that cigarette smoking
     may be a cause of cancer to the lung.
          But you know what?  Maybe Mr. Surico is in
     that 10 percent.  He says he is.  We have no
     reason to doubt that.  And that's how
     statistics can be misleading, ladies and
     gentlemen, because if you're going to go by the
     statistic, we would say, oh, no, Mr. Surico,
     you must have known, because 90 percent of the
     people knew.
          Well, Mr. Surico would say to us, well,
     wait a minute, that's fine for those
     90 percent.  I'm in the 10 percent.  You have
     to know about me.  It's not enough to know
5772 about the people who filled out a survey or
     took a poll or who were in a study.  You have
     to know about the person you are talking about.
     The evidence has to be about Mrs. Surico.
          So coming back to 1964, you heard that
     along with her neighbor, Ms. Conway,
     Mrs. Surico cut down on her smoking, and after
     a period of time, she resumed smoking.  And as
     Mr. Surico put it, once they got into the
     coffee drinking or the wine drinking in the
     afternoon, that was the end of it.
          So what does that tell you?  What else did
     you learn about the episode in 1964?  You
     learned what Mrs. Surico said to Mr. Surico at
     the time and you learned how he responded.
          But before I go on, I want to make one
     point absolutely, completely crystal clear.  We
     are not blaming Mr. Surico for Mrs. Surico's
     illness and death.  We are not blaming Joanne
     Surico or Madeline Holzem for Mrs. Surico's
     illness and death.  And we are certainly not
     making any suggestion at all that Mrs. Surico
     or Ms. Joanne -- that Mr. Surico or Ms. Joanne
     Surico or Madeline Holzem had any legal fault.
     We are not saying those things.
5773 But what plaintiff's counsel told you,
     with all due respect, was wrong.  Those are not
     improper concerns, those are highly relevant
     concerns, and that's why the evidence was
     admitted in court.  It was admitted in court
     because it was relevant.  It was admitted in
     court because it is evidence that you can and
     should consider in evaluating Mrs. Surico's
     conduct and her smoking behavior.  And it is
     evidence that you can and must consider in
     evaluating how you're going to answer these
     questions.
          So let me say it again:  We are not asking
     that you put Mr. Surico on the verdict form.
     We are not asking that you put Joanne Surico or
     Madeline Holzem on the verdict form.  We are
     not blaming them.  We are not saying they are
     at fault.  But what they had to say to
     Mrs. Surico and whether she was encouraged or
     discouraged in her efforts to quit smoking are
     not only not improper concerns, they are
     probably the most critical concerns in the
     whole case.
          And counsel referred to the notes that you
     all had written, the questions you all had
5774 written, and I would agree, there were some
     excellent questions.  And that focus was not
     improper.  That focus was completely proper.
     And important.  And we would respectfully
     submit to you that you should keep that focus
     on that evidence as it relates to the issues
     that you are being called upon to decide.
          And that issue does not include whether
     Mr. Surico is legally at fault, and it does not
     include whether Mr. Surico should be blamed for
     Mrs. Surico's illness and death.  And we are
     not doing any of those things.  But let's talk
     about that how that evidence relates to
     Mrs. Surico.
          And you know from the testimony of the
     plaintiff's experts that motivation is a key in
     answering this question whether and when an
     addicted smoker can quit and whether addiction
     prevents a smoker from quitting.
          And we would suggest that the evidence
     showed that not only is motivation a key, but
     you may conclude that motivation is the most
     important key to the question whether a smoker,
     addicted or not, can successfully quit smoking.
          And Dr. Burns, plaintiff's expert, made
5775 crystal clear that to go with that motivation,
     if you're going to have success, the smoker
     must have two very important things.  He called
     them the hallmarks or the characteristics of
     overcoming addiction.
          And what did he say those two things were?
     Sufficient internal resources and sufficient
     external support.  Sufficient internal
     resources, sufficient external support.
          And Dr. Burns' testimony was clear that in
     his expert opinion, as the plaintiff's expert,
     as the person who according to plaintiff's
     counsel knows more about these issues than
     anyone in the entire solar system, Dr. Burns
     told you that to him, family support was a
     very, very important component of that external
     support.
          And that is why it is entirely proper and
     extremely important that you consider the
     evidence whether Mrs. Surico's family members
     attempted to intervene in her smoking behavior
     and that you do it consistently with the
     court's instructions on that point.
          What's the evidence with respect to the
     1964 episode?  The evidence is that when
5776 Mr. Surico saw that Mrs. Surico was smoking
     again, all he had to say to her was, "You
     didn't make it."  That's all he said.  And he
     explained to us that he just didn't feel like
     discussing it with her.  He explained that from
     his perspective, Mrs. Surico could decide for
     herself whether, when, and how much to smoke.
          And again, ladies and gentlemen, this
     isn't about blaming Mr. Surico.  That
     explanation made some sense.  But the question
     is, what was it that prevented Mrs. Surico from
     quitting?  Was she waiting to hear something
     from Philip Morris, or was she waiting for just
     a bit more encouragement, a bit more support
     from those around her?
          So when you ask yourselves the question,
     did Mrs. Surico have the ability to quit
     smoking in 1964, the answer is clearly yes.
          What she lacked was not the ability to
     quit smoking in 1964, what she lacked was a
     component of the motivation.  Motivation, which
     Dr. Burns tells us, comes from external support
     including the support of family members.
          So that question of motivation is
     something we also have evidence on from what
5777 Mr. Surico told us about these various times
     that Mrs. Surico stopped smoking for certain
     periods of time.  Because he told us that she
     didn't throw away her ashtrays in 1964, she
     didn't throw away her cigarettes, she didn't
     throw away her lighters.  She did not do any of
     the things that she would have done if she was
     truly motivated to quit.
          And that period in 1964 is the only time
     between 1951 and 1978 that Mrs. Surico even
     attempted to quit smoking.  She made the
     decisions to continue smoking.  She made the
     decisions not even to try to quit.  Because
     again, there is no suggestion by any witness in
     this case or any expert you heard from that
     addiction prevents somebody from trying to
     quit.
          The reason she didn't try to quit was she
     was making her own choices and her own
     decisions.  She didn't try to quit in -- well,
     she didn't try to quit in 1962 when Mr. Surico
     successfully quit smoking.  She didn't try to
     quit in 1966 when those warnings came on the
     packages of cigarettes sold in the United
     States.  She didn't try to quit in 1970 when
5778 those warnings came on.  She didn't try to quit
     in 1975 when Dr. Burns told us everybody -- and
     I want to make sure I get this quotation
     right -- Dr. Burns told us that he gave a
     speech in 1975 in which he said -- take that
     down, please, Marie.
          Is this the one, Mr. Philipson?
          TECHNICIAN:  Yes, sir.
          MR. STERN:  Dr. Burns told us that what he
     said in 1975 was:  "More Americans know that
     cigarette smoking is dangerous for them than
     know the name of the President of the United
     States."
          She didn't quit or even attempt to quit at
     any of those times.  The next time she stopped
     smoking was in 1978.  We learned that in 1978,
     the Suricos moved to their new home in
     Beavercreek.  And Mr. Surico told you that
     Mrs. Surico didn't want the new house to start
     smelling like smoke as soon as they moved in.
     So what did she do?
          The evidence shows that for eight to ten
     days when the Suricos first moved into that
     house, Mrs. Surico stopped smoking.  After
     smoking what the plaintiff contends was a pack
5779 a day for 25 years, give or take, Mrs. Surico
     stopped smoking.  Overnight she went from a
     pack a day for 25 years to zero.  No gum, no
     patch, she just stopped smoking.  And zero
     again the next day and zero again the day after
     that until some eight to ten days later she
     apparently resumed smoking.
          And there was a not a shred of evidence,
     ladies and gentlemen, that Mrs. Surico had any
     withdrawal symptoms during that time.  And we
     know that's not unusual.  We know that from
     Dr. Cummings' pamphlet Smart Move.
          Do we have that on the screen?  If not, I
     have a hard copy.  I'm going to do it with the
     ELMO.  Let me do it with the ELMO.
          TECHNICIAN:  Do you want me to do it?
          MR. STERN:  Yeah, please.
          Actually, before I talk about the text of
     that -- I'm sorry to do that to you, ladies and
     gentlemen -- I want to talk about the pamphlet
     itself.  The Smart Move pamphlet.
          You okay?
          And you all saw this when I was asking
     questions of Dr. Cummings.  And this pamphlet
     is a very important resource.  It's an
5780 important resource for smokers who have made
     the decision to quit and for their families.
     But I would submit it's also an important
     resource for you, as jurors, because it tells
     you what Dr. Cummings was telling his patients.
     And why is that important?  That's important
     because of what Dr. Cummings told you about
     himself.  He candidly admitted that he is not a
     neutral and impartial and unbiased witness.  To
     the contrary, he told you that he is a biased
     witness.  He told you that because of what he
     believes he's learned from his research, he has
     what he, himself, called a "significant bias
     against my client."  And he also testified that
     he has what he referred to as a "personal
     interest in the plaintiff winning the case."
          And we submit to you, ladies and
     gentlemen, when you look at that instruction on
     the believability of witnesses, you will see
     that bias or an interest in who wins the case
     is something that you can consider in
     evaluating the credibility, the believability
     of Dr. Cummings' testimony.
          Because whether or not Dr. Cummings thinks
     he has a good reason for being biased, he is
5781 still biased.  And that is something you should
     take into consideration.  But that brings us
     back to why the Smart Move pamphlet is an
     important resource, not only for smokers and
     their families, but for you, as jurors.
          And that's because the pamphlet tells you
     what Dr. Cummings is telling his patients when
     he's actually involved in helping them quit
     smoking.  Not what he's saying when he's trying
     to help a plaintiff win a lawsuit.
          So, returning to that pamphlet, we see why
     it wouldn't be surprising for Mrs. Surico not
     to have withdrawal symptoms, because he's got
     this whole page of getting over smoking, and
     those are the things that were referred to as
     withdrawal symptoms, irritable, tired and so
     forth.  But then, in a special box he writes,
     "remember."  And the first things he writes
     under "remember" is "You may not have any of
     these feelings."  And that's because some
     people have withdrawal symptoms and some people
     don't.  That's because different people respond
     differently.
          So we know that Mrs. Surico didn't have
     any withdrawal symptoms when she quit cold
5782 turkey in Beavercreek in 1978, after smoking a
     pack a day for 25 years.  She just stopped
     smoking.  And that eight- to ten-day time
     period is important, ladies and gentlemen,
     because all of the experts agree that the
     nicotine would have been out of Mrs. Surico's
     system within three or four days.
          And, once again, the evidence is clear
     that Mrs. Surico had the ability to quit.  The
     evidence is clear, from 1964 and 1968 that she
     had control of where she smoked, when she
     smoked, and how much she smoked.
          And the evidence shows you that it was
     Mrs. Surico's choices to smoke and her choices
     to continue to smoke that were the legal cause
     of her injury.
          And, once again, you can consider whether
     Mrs. Surico had sufficient external support.
     And what was the evidence on that point?  You
     heard Mr. Surico's testimony.  He told you that
     after Mrs. Surico resumed smoking, after eight
     to ten days, he told you that he did nothing to
     encourage Mrs. Surico to stick with it.
          What else do we know about her control
     over her smoking?  We know that in the 1979
5783 time frame, there was a time period where she
     cut down on her smoking during a three- or
     four-month period.  Mr. Surico didn't offer us
     many details about that, but we do know that
     there's no evidence that she had any withdrawal
     symptoms.
          And then, ladies and gentlemen, we get to
     1981.  Because you heard about the time period,
     shortly after Mr. Surico left the Air Force in
     1981.  And what you learned was that at that
     point, after smoking what the plaintiff claims
     was a pack a day, or more, for more than 25
     years, Mrs. Surico, again, stopped smoking.  On
     a dime.  She went from a pack a day to zero.
          And this time, according to Joanne
     Surico's sworn testimony, Mrs. Surico stopped
     smoking for six months.
          Now Mr. Surico's testimony wasn't entirely
     consistent with that.  He remembers the period
     was something like January to March.  But
     there's no question that for a two- to
     six-month period in 1981 Mrs. Surico completely
     stopped smoking.  She continued her -- she
     controlled her smoking and not the other way
     around.  She made the decision to stop smoking,
5784 and that decision was her decision.  It is a
     clear example that she was able to control her
     smoking behavior.  And that particular decision
     to control her smoking, that particular
     decision to stop smoking, for what Joanne
     Surico said was six months, is important for
     another reason.
          Because we know that within days of when
     Mrs. Surico stopped smoking, the nicotine was
     out of her system.  That's not disputed.  And
     we also know that if Mrs. Surico had any
     withdrawal symptoms at all, they would have
     been gone in a matter of weeks.  Also not
     disputed.
          We also know that Mrs. Surico's brain
     receptors would have returned to normal within
     some period of time, I'm going to get to the
     period in a minute, but first I want to point
     out a disagreement that I know you all noted.
          How do you know that the brain receptors,
     the buildup of the brain receptors, completely
     reverses after some period of time?  You know
     that from the two medical doctors who testified
     on this subject.
          First you heard from Dr. Burns, the
5785 plaintiff's witness, a medical doctor who
     testified that the buildup of the receptors is
     completely reversed.  And what he said was in
     two or three or six months.  He didn't really
     pin down a specific time period.  But the
     important point, ladies and gentlemen, is
     Dr. Burns swore to you that the buildup of the
     brain receptors is completely reversed within
     six months at the absolute outside, and
     possibly within two months.
          Dr. Rosman, also a medical doctor, agreed
     with Dr. Burns and testified that the
     receptors, the buildup of the receptors returns
     to normal, and he put it at even a shorter
     period of time.  The only witness who testified
     that the receptors never return to normal was
     Dr. Cummings.
          Dr. Cummings is not a medical doctor of
     any kind.  And, of course, in evaluating his
     testimony, you can, and we submit you should,
     take into consideration his self-confessed bias
     and interest in the case.
          In evaluating the credibility of his
     testimony, the bottom line is that the credible
     evidence shows that the buildup of nicotine
5786 receptors is completely reversed within a
     certain period of time from when a person stops
     smoking.
          So somewhere during that period of time
     that Joanne Surico says was six months, the
     receptors, the buildup of receptors, would have
     been completely reversed and would have gone
     back to normal.  So what does that mean?  That
     means when Mrs. Surico made the decision to
     resume smoking, in 1981, after Mr. Surico lost
     his job, there was no nicotine in her system,
     withdrawal symptoms were gone, and the buildup
     of her brain receptors had been completely
     reversed.  And what does that mean?
          That means that when Mrs. Surico decided
     to smoke, after Mr. Surico lost his job, she
     was making a fresh decision.  She was 41 years
     old, warnings had been on cigarette packages
     for 15 years.  Mr. Surico told you that
     certainly by then he was aware of the health
     risks of smoking.  And Mrs. Surico was in the
     same information environment that he was.
          So while we don't have any specific
     information about Mrs. Surico, we could say we
     just don't know, but if we were to indulge this
5787 idea that she knew what Mr. Surico knew,
     certainly he knew by that time that there were
     health risks to smoking.
          And you know that when she made that fresh
     decision to smoke, when Mr. Surico lost her
     job -- lost his job, that that was a decision
     that had nothing to do with addiction, it had
     nothing to do with being addicted to
     cigarettes, it was her own choice and her own
     decision.
          And how else do we know that Mrs. Surico
     was able to control her smoking?  We know that
     because her daughters didn't want Mrs. Surico
     to smoke in their houses and around their
     children.  And how did Mrs. Surico respond?
     Did she stop visiting her family?  Did she
     argue with her daughters?  No, she willingly
     complied with her daughters' requests.
          That's not an addict, ladies and
     gentlemen.  That's someone who decides
     something is more important to her than
     smoking, and does the thing that's more
     important and controls the smoking.
          How else do you know that she had the
     ability to quit with the right motivation?  How
5788 do you know that the plaintiff has not met his
     burden of proof to show that addiction, if she
     were addicted at all, was a but-for cause of
     her smoking?
          You know that from the evidence in the
     1992 Alaska trip that Mr. Surico took with her
     family -- Mrs. Surico took with her family.
     You learned that with the help of the patch,
     Mrs. Surico stopped smoking for two weeks.  Not
     a single cigarette during that entire time.
          Now the record is not entirely clear on
     whether she had withdrawal symptoms.  You heard
     about irritability, you heard about paranoia,
     but Dr. Rosman explained that paranoia isn't
     really a symptom of withdrawal.  In any event,
     all the experts agree that the idea of the
     patch is to avert the withdrawal symptoms.
          But in any event, the evidence could not
     be more clear that Mrs. Surico had the ability
     to quit smoking.  What she didn't have, what
     she didn't have was the motivation and the
     external support that Dr. Burns testified
     about.
          Because earlier this morning, you heard
     Mr. Surico's deposition testimony.  And he
5789 testified that during this discussion among
     him, Joanne and Madeline; Joanne and Madeline
     said, Hey, let her smoke.  And Mr. Surico said,
     I'm not stopping her from smoking.
          We are not blaming Joanne Surico, we are
     not blaming Madeline Holzem, we are not blaming
     Joe Surico, Mr. Surico, but you can and you
     should consider the role that that lack of
     encouragement, that that lack of external
     support, as Dr. Burns put it, the role that
     that those things played in her continuing to
     smoke.  But there's certainly no dispute that
     during that entire 1992 Alaska trip,
     Mrs. Surico did not smoke a single cigarette.
          And that brings us to another very
     significant point about Mrs. Surico's ability
     to control her smoking.
          Because the evidence showed that for over
     a year and a half, from the spring of 1992
     until Mrs. Surico passed in November of '93,
     her daughters never again saw her smoke.
          Now, Mr. Surico says that -- Mr. Surico
     says that Mrs. Surico did not quit for good on
     the 1929 Alaska trip.  He explains the fact
     that the daughters never saw Mrs. Surico smoke
5790 again by saying that for some reason, after
     smoking openly in front of her now very-grown
     daughters for almost 40 years, all of a sudden
     Mrs. Surico decided to hide her smoking from
     them.  To lie to them and to ask Mr. Surico to
     lie to them.
          We also know that according to the medical
     records, Mrs. Surico quit smoking for good in
     1992 and not 1993.  But, in any event, at the
     very least, we know that Mrs. Surico was able
     to control her smoking to refrain smoking in
     the presence of her daughters, including when
     everybody was on that family vacation in
     Hawaii.
          And Mr. Surico told us that she would
     sneak off sometimes, but we know that that was
     a family trip and that most of the time
     Mrs. Surico was saying to herself, there is
     something more important to me than smoking
     cigarettes.  And that is being with my family.
     So I am going to be with my family and not
     smoke, rather than forego being with my family.
          So, we know that when it was important for
     her to be around her family, she made the
     decision to be with her family and not smoke.
5791 If it was more important to her to be around
     people who might be offended by her smoking,
     like Joanne Surico's then husband, she didn't
     beg the people that might be offended, she
     simply didn't smoke.  That is not the behavior
     of an addict.  There can be no greater evidence
     of control than that testimony.
          And that brings us, ladies and gentlemen,
     to the clearest evidence of all, that the
     plaintiff has not met his burden of proof on
     the question of legal cause in that class
     membership question.  On the question of
     whether it was an addiction that was a legal
     cause, a but-for cause of Mrs. Surico's illness
     and death.
          And the clearest evidence of all that
     Mrs. Surico had the ability to quit.  And that
     all it took for her to quit successfully was
     the right motivation and the right external
     support.  Was the evidence of what Mr. Surico
     himself told you happened on that 1993 cruise
     to Alaska.  He and Mrs. Surico were dancing.
     Mrs. Surico got winded.  And when she did,
     Mr. Surico said to her, "You have to stop
     smoking or I won't dance with you anymore."
5792 And Mr. Surico told you, ladies and
     gentlemen, that was the first time that he had
     ever told Mrs. Surico that he wanted her to
     stop smoking.  He told you that that was the
     first time that he had ever even encouraged
     Mrs. Surico to stop smoking.
          The evidence showed you, ladies and
     gentlemen, that Mrs. Surico didn't say to
     Mr. Surico, "Joe, I can't do it, I can't quit
     smoking."  She didn't say, "I have an addiction
     that prevents me from quitting smoking."  She
     didn't say any of those things, ladies and
     gentlemen.  What she did was she quit smoking
     on the spot, cold turkey, and never had another
     cigarette again.
          And you know from that evidence that it
     was not an addiction that prevented Mrs. Surico
     from quitting before 1993, because addiction
     didn't prevent her from smoking when she
     finally had the right motivation.
          You will know that it wasn't a lack of
     information about the health risks of smoking,
     because she knew about those risks decades
     before 1993, beginning from when she heard
     Mr. Surico's doctor's advice and then when she
5793 heard about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report
     and then from the warnings on every pack of
     cigarettes made in the United States that she
     bought starting in 1966.
          You will know that she wasn't prevented
     from quitting before 1993 by any statement, any
     statement that she heard or didn't hear from
     Philip Morris.  No, ladies and gentlemen, the
     evidence showed you that Mrs. Surico had the
     ability to quit long before 1993, and certainly
     in time to avoid her injury.
          What prevented her from quitting was not
     addiction.  And it was not anything that
     Philip Morris said or didn't say.  All she
     needed to quit smoking successfully was what
     Dr. Burns said is enough for any smoker to
     quit.  All she needed was the right motivation
     and the external support to go on -- to go
     along with her own sufficient internal
     resources.
          And the first time that she got that
     support, the first time that she had that
     motivation, she quit.  She quit for good.  She
     quit cold turkey.
          And that, ladies and gentlemen, is how you
5794 will know that Mr. Surico has not met his
     burden of proof to establish that addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine was a but-for
     legal cause of Mrs. Surico's illness and death.
          And that is the evidence upon class
     membership, ladies and gentlemen.  And the
     evidence shows you that the answer to each of
     those three sub questions is no.
          And, as I told you and as the instructions
     will tell you, unless you all agree that the
     answer to each of those questions is yes, your
     work is done.
          And because we respectfully submit that
     the plaintiff has not met his burden on that
     first class membership question, we submit that
     you won't need to go any further on that
     verdict form.
          But there are other questions on the form,
     and because they are there and because
     plaintiff's counsel talked about them, I'm
     going to address them, too.
          And if we could have the verdict form back
     up, Marie.
          The next question requires the plaintiff
     to meet his burden of proof to show that
5795 cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris were
     the legal cause, or a legal cause, a but-for
     cause of Phyllis Surico's cancer and death.
          Because, actually, as plaintiff's counsel
     himself pointed out to you, it is not enough
     for the plaintiff to prove that Phyllis Surico
     was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine
     and an addiction was a legal cause of her
     cancer and death, we submit that they have not
     proved those things, but even if they had, that
     simply establishes class membership.
          Then the plaintiff must prove, by the
     greater weight of the evidence, that smoking
     cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris was a
     legal cause, a but-for cause, of Mrs. Surico's
     illness and death.
          And you will decide whether the plaintiff
     has met its burden of proof on that question.
     I would like to suggest to you some of the
     testimony you should consider.
          You should consider, of course, the
     testimony that Mrs. Surico did not have brand
     loyalty.  That she just bought whatever was the
     cheapest.
          We also submit you should consider the
5796 testimony of Mr. Surico and Joanne Surico and
     Ms. Holzem -- do you have that one, Marie?
          This is what they said about -- the
     testimony about Parliament being Mrs. Surico's
     primary brand.  And there is no dispute, ladies
     and gentlemen, I don't want to be heard to be
     disagreeing with the proposition that
     Parliament is manufactured by Philip Morris
     USA.  That -- we've agreed to that.  But the
     question is, has the plaintiff met his burden
     of proof to establish that the cigarettes
     smoked by Mrs. Surico, that Philip Morris USA
     cigarettes, were a but-for cause.
          And here was the testimony that you heard.
     It looks pretty much the same from each of the
     witnesses.  "I would say 85 to 90 percent of
     the time" and that was referring to smoking
     Parliament.  And then Ms. Joanne Surico, "She
     smoked mostly Parliament, so 80, 85 percent of
     the time at least."  Joseph Surico, "85 to
     90 percent of the time."
          And we would suggest to you, ladies and
     gentlemen, that in evaluating that testimony --
     and that's -- that's just what they said, those
     are their words -- but we suggest, in
5797 evaluating that testimony you should consider
     whether that testimony is supported or
     corroborated by other evidence.
          What other evidence do we have?  You will
     remember that plaintiff's counsel, in one of
     his cross-examinations, said that one of the
     places we could look, to decide whether
     testimony is supported and corroborated on the
     one hand, or contradicted and undermined on the
     other hand, one place to look are the
     photographs.  These are a lot of photographs.
     A lot of photographs produced during what was
     referred to as the discovery process, you heard
     testimony about that.  And you saw a lot of
     photographs in court.
          And you should consider that if
     Mrs. Holzem and Ms. Surico and Mr. Surico were
     right, you would expect that 85 to 90 percent
     of the cigarettes and cigarette packages shown
     in those photographs would be Parliament.  But
     what do we know from the testimony about those
     photographs?
          We know that Mr. Surico was not able to
     identify a single cigarette in any of those
     photographs as being a Parliament cigarette.
5798 He was not able to identify a single pack of
     cigarettes in any of those photographs as being
     a pack of Parliaments.
          Just drop a footnote to that.  He did
     identify a pack as possibly a Parliament, but
     we know it wasn't.  We know that that pack was
     a pack of True cigarettes.  So the only pack
     that he even purported to identify as
     Parliament, we know is not Parliament.
          So, in evaluating the question whether
     Mr. Surico has proved, by the greater weight of
     the evidence, that it was Philip Morris USA
     cigarettes that were a but-for cause of
     Mrs. Surico's illness and death, we would
     suggest that you consider that evidence, the
     evidence of the photographs, and the evidence
     you have about Mrs. Surico always buying the
     cheapest brand at the commissary, and we know
     that she had access to the commissary from the
     time Mr. Surico joined the Air Force in 1961
     until years after he retired in 1981.
          So would you take that down, Marie, please
     and get the verdict form back up?
          So, I'm beginning to sound like a broken
     record, I know, but we submit to you that you
5799 don't get past sub question one of question
     one, and you certainty don't get past question
     one.
          We also submit to you that you don't past
     question two, because the evidence I just
     recited isn't sufficient for the plaintiff to
     meet its burden of proof.
          But because the question is on the form
     and because you heard about it from plaintiff's
     counsel, I'm going to go on to this question.
     And this question is:  "Was the concealment or
     omission by Philip Morris USA of material
     information about the health effects or
     addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or
     both, a legal cause, a but-for cause, of
     Phyllis Surico's cancer and death?"
          Now, again, I may have misheard
     plaintiff's counsel, but if he suggested to you
     that those findings answer this question?
     That's wrong.  Because those findings don't
     answer the question whether concealment by
     Philip Morris was a legal cause of Phyllis
     Surico's illness and death.  And that is the
     question that you must answer.  And the key to
     that question, and the key to the related
5800 instruction is, the legal cause requirement.
          Because the findings don't tell you --
     and, remember, those findings have nothing to
     do with the case unless and until you get past
     question one.
          Those findings have nothing to do whether
     concealment was the legal cause of injury to
     Mrs. Surico.
          So even if you were to find that
     Mrs. Surico is a member of the class and apply
     those findings, we, of course, submit that you
     shouldn't, the findings don't answer that
     critical question.  You have to look to the
     evidence in this case.
          And you know, from Mr. Surico's own
     testimony, that in this case the answer to that
     question must absolutely be no.  Because there
     is not a shred of evidence -- and this is
     undisputed -- that Mrs. Surico's decision to
     start smoking, whenever that may have been, was
     the result of any concealment of information by
     Philip Morris.
          And, actually, there is, likewise, not a
     shred of evidence that any agreement to
     conceal -- any agreement to conceal information
5801 had anything to do with Mrs. Surico's decision
     to begin smoking and, in fact, it couldn't have
     because the agreement that you heard about
     began in 1953 and we know that Mrs. Surico, at
     least had her first cigarette before then.
          There is also not a shred of evidence that
     any of Mrs. Surico's decisions to continue
     smoking were the result of any concealment of
     information by Philip Morris.
          There is very clear evidence to the
     contrary, ladies and gentlemen, because you
     know from Mr. Surico that in 39 years not a
     single word ever passed Mrs. Surico's lips
     about a single cigarette company advertisement,
     let alone Philip Morris; not a single word
     passed her lips in 39 years about ever having
     heard any statement by any tobacco company
     about everything.  So if plaintiff's -- about
     anything.
          So if plaintiff's counsel gets up here and
     says, well, she must have heard these things
     because everybody else heard them.  She must
     have been influenced because everybody else was
     influenced.  Please keep your eye on the ball.
     Those questions were asked specifically of
5802 Mr. Surico, and he gave straightforward and
     informative answers.  And you know from his
     answers to those questions that nothing --
     there was no concealment and no omission that
     was a legal cause of Mrs. Surico's illness and
     death.
          And while I'm on this topic, ladies and
     gentlemen, you heard testimony, and you've
     heard argument, and I'm sure you will hear more
     argument about all these documents.
          As I said before, Mr. Scarola suggested
     that you refer to all these documents in your
     deliberations, and he listed documents for this
     question as well.  And I submit to you, ladies
     and gentlemen, you can look at every single
     page of every one of those documents, you won't
     find a single mention of Mrs. Surico.  You
     won't find a single mention that Mrs. Surico
     saw or heard or read any of the statements in
     those documents.
          And I will give you an example of that.
     So we keep hearing about this -- what's called
     the Frank Statement and the promise in the
     Frank Statement.  Is there any evidence at all
     that Mrs. Surico ever saw or heard the Frank
5803 Statement the day it came out, the one day it
     appeared as an advertisement in a newspapers?
     No.  Is there a shred of evidence from anyone
     who knew Mrs. Surico that will tell you that
     she ever saw or heard anything about that
     statement?  The answer is no.
          So when the question for you is, has the
     plaintiff proved by the greater weight of the
     evidence that concealment or omission or
     agreement to conceal or omit was a legal cause
     of Mrs. Surico's illness or death, you know
     that the answer to that has to be no.
          Now, I will repeat something that I said
     in opening, ladies and gentlemen, before I
     leave this topic, because while there is not a
     shred of evidence that those documents had any
     impact on Mrs. Surico, I don't want to be heard
     to say everything in those documents is just
     fine.  I don't want to be heard to say, well
     geez, all those things made perfect sense.
     There were some pretty stupid and inappropriate
     things said in those documents.  And if there
     were any evidence from anybody who knew
     Mrs. Surico that she had seen or heard or was
     in any way influenced by any of those
5804 statements, this might be a different case.
     But there is no such evidence, and that's why,
     if you even get this far, the answer to those
     two questions must be no.
          So, can you go to the next page of the
     verdict form, please, Marie?  Or scroll further
     down, however it works.  Okay.
          So that brings us to this question number
     five.  And counsel talked to you about question
     number five.  And, of course, you will
     understand that you don't get this far, we
     submit to you, because the plaintiff has failed
     to meet all of the burdens of proof on all of
     the questions that have to be answered yes in
     order to make it to this item.  But counsel
     talked about it, so I'm going to talk about it.
          We submit to you, ladies and gentlemen,
     that even if you get this far, even if you
     conclude that Mrs. Surico has an injury and
     that Philip Morris could be a legal cause, we
     submit to you that the percentages should be
     Philip Morris zero, Phyllis Surico a hundred
     percent.  And that's because, we submit to you,
     the plaintiff has failed in his burden of
     proof.
5805 I want to make something clear to you,
     ladies and gentlemen, we're talking about just
     this case.  I'm not trying to tell you that in
     every case, forever and ever, Philip Morris
     would be a zero.  I don't know about other
     cases, but I know about this case, and I know
     what the evidence is in this case.  And the
     evidence in this case is that the plaintiff has
     failed to meet her burden of proof to show that
     Philip Morris is at fault.  And that's why that
     one is a zero.
          So now, ladies and gentlemen, we get to
     the question of damages.  This is a difficult
     question.  Once again, we submit you don't even
     need to reach it.  But if you do, this is a
     difficult question.  And I don't mean just
     here, the concept of this question is
     difficult.  And rather than say whatever the
     two-point whatever million it is oh, geez,
     that's ridiculous, I'm not going to say
     anything like that.  I'm not going to suggest a
     number that you should find if you get this
     far, which we submit you shouldn't.
          What I would like to do is suggest a way
     for you to think about answering this question
5806 in a case like this.  And what I would like to
     suggest to you, and let me say, just so we're
     really clear, we are not suggesting that
     Mrs. Gail Surico is a replacement for
     Mrs. Phyllis Surico.  I actually think that
     Mrs. Gail Surico probably put it best, and
     Mr. Lewis actually echoed this.  You don't
     replace a lost loved one, you don't replace a
     lost parent, you don't replace a lost child,
     you don't replace a lost spouse.  And I do not
     want to be heard at all to be suggesting
     anything of the kind.
          But you are going to be called upon, if
     you get this far, to answer this question; and
     I would like to suggest a way that you might
     think about this.  And let me also tell you
     that when you are thinking about Mrs. Gail
     Surico and Mr. Surico's remarriage, that
     evidence was admitted so that you would have
     the whole story.  You're going to hear an
     instruction about what you're not supposed to
     use the evidence for, but I want to make sure
     you understand what you can use the evidence
     for.  You can use that evidence when you are
     thinking about the whole story, the truth, when
5807 it comes to the question of compensatory
     damages.  And here is the suggestion I would
     like to make.
          One way to think about this is on a
     spectrum.  And on one end of the spectrum, you
     might have someone who has suffered the tragic
     loss of a loved one, and that person is never
     able to get back on his or her feet.  That
     person is never able to move on with his other
     her life.  That person is alone.  That person
     doesn't remarry, that person doesn't have other
     family.  That person --
          MR. SCAROLA:  Excuse me, Your Honor.  May
     we approach?
          (Thereupon, out of the presence of the jury:)
          MR. SCAROLA:  Counsel is arguing a
     precisely improper consideration of this
     evidence.  He is suggesting that it can be
     considered by the jury in measuring
     Mr. Surico's pain and suffering.  That is
     totally improper and contrary to the court's
     instruction, it's contrary to the law.  I ask
     that he be directed to stop.
          MR. STERN:  I will put it clearly in the
5808 context of the plaintiff's burden of proof to
     prove damages, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  I'll let you
     address it in your rebuttal, sir.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Thank you.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar conference was
     concluded and within the presence of the jury:)
          MR. STERN:  And in deciding whether the
     plaintiff has met his burden of proof on the
     question of damages, I would suggest you think
     about this spectrum.
          And on the other end of the spectrum would
     be a person who has likewise suffered the
     tragic loss of a loved one, but fortunately, is
     able to get back on his or her feet.
          MR. SCAROLA:  Same objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. STERN:  Is able to pick up his or her
     life.  Is able to reengage with the world.  Who
     may be fortunate enough to find someone else to
     be with.  Who may be fortunate enough to have a
     life where they can at least reengage with the
     world and with their family and with the
     activities that they like to to.
5809 So I'm not going to give you a number.
     I'm going to just suggest to you that in
     deciding whether the plaintiff has met his
     burden of proof, that that is what you
     consider.
          Finally, ladies and gentlemen, there is
     this question about punitive damages.  And I
     want to spend just a few minutes talking about
     that, and then I will wrap up before too long.
          So on this question of punitive damages,
     you can do this part by now.  We think you
     don't get that far.
          On the question of punitive damages, I'll
     say this.  This is, for lawyers, it's sort of a
     weird position to be in because I have
     submitted to you that you won't get past the
     first sub-question of the first question, and
     here I am talking to you about what would
     happen if you got all the way to the bottom of
     the form.
          But -- and I know you know by now, we
     think you don't, but I do want to address it
     because once again it is something that's on
     the form, it's addressed in the instructions,
     it's been addressed by plaintiff's counsel.
5810 And when you consider this question of
     whether punitive damages are warranted, the
     first and most important thing I would ask you
     to bear in mind is the plaintiff's burden of
     proof is different and substantially higher on
     this question.
          So you will see under the circumstance --
     you will see that every other question is
     governed by the greater weight of the evidence
     standard, which you will find in the
     instructions I think on page eight.
          This one is different.  This one, the
     burden of proof is clear and convincing
     evidence.  And the question is whether you find
     by clear and convincing evidence that punitive
     damages are warranted.
          And you will notice, and Her Honor has
     instructed you, that this standard is a higher
     standard than greater weight of the evidence.
          So purely hypothetically, you understand,
     if you were to conclude that punitive damages
     were warranted by the greater weight of the
     evidence, if that were your conclusion, you
     would have to check no, because greater weight
     of the evidence is not enough.  So if you
5811 conclude they got greater weight of the
     evidence on punitives, that's not a yes, that's
     a no.  You have to conclude, in order to check
     yes, that punitive damages are warranted by
     clear and convincing evidence.
          I'm not going to say a lot about this
     because, again, it's our submission that you
     don't get this far.  But I am going to tell you
     that it's very important that you listen to Her
     Honor's instructions.
          I also want to make clear that we're
     talking about just this case.  I want you to
     bear in mind that this is not a class action.
     Other people have their own cases and other
     people can seek punitive damages in those other
     cases if that's appropriate.
          Here, for the reasons I suggested before,
     we submit the evidence is clear that the
     plaintiff has not met his burden of proof on
     the other questions, and we certainly submit
     that it's absolutely clear that the plaintiff
     has not met his burden by clear and convincing
     evidence on this question.  Because there is no
     evidence of any conduct that counsel was
     talking about by the companies that had any
5812 impact on Mrs. Surico.  If she didn't see it,
     didn't hear it, didn't read it, didn't have an
     effect on her, then that's not conduct that
     resulted in harm to her.
          And you will see in the first part of the
     instruction on this point that if it's not
     conduct that resulted in harm to her, and you
     don't otherwise find that it's reprehensible,
     which is a very high standard, then it can't be
     the subject of punitive damages.
          I would also like to make one other point.
     Punitive damages are for punishment.  So if you
     get this far, if you decide that Mrs. Surico --
     Mr. Surico is entitled to some compensation,
     you will have already decided to award him some
     money.  This punitive damages issue would be
     above and beyond that as punishment.  It would
     be above -- as punishment, it would be above
     and beyond the compensation.
          That, ladies and gentlemen, is all that I
     have to say about the evidence.  But I want to
     talk to you for just a minute more about a
     really important concept.  I've said the
     phrase, but I want to talk about what it means,
     and that's the burden of proof.
5813 As I told you before, and as Her Honor has
     instructed a number of times, including during
     counsel's arguments, the burden of proof is on
     the plaintiff.  You've got an instruction on
     that, you should follow that instruction, but
     I'm going to suggest to you a way to think
     about that in the context of how you go about
     doing your job as jurors.
          One way to think about that is if you want
     your questions answered, you look to the party
     that needs to prove the case.  And that means
     that you look over here, you don't look over
     there.
          So if you're back there and you're having
     a discussion and you say, hey, if Mrs. Surico's
     addiction prevented her from quitting, how is
     she able to quit in 1983 when the plaintiff
     says she was addicted?
          If that's your question, or if you have a
     question about how Dr. Burns could say that
     there was a tumor when the x-ray was clean
     without speculating, don't look over there,
     look over here.  That's what the burden of
     proof is about.
          And that, ladies and gentlemen, is all I
5814 have to say, except to thank you for being an
     extraordinarily, extraordinarily patient and
     attentive jury.  And I know that when you go
     back there, you are going to give the same
     attentive consideration to the evidence that
     you did when you were listening in the
     courtroom, you're going to give the same
     attentive consideration to Her Honor's
     instructions and to the argument of counsel
     that you have been giving in the courtroom.
          My closing remark is this:  I'm done now.
     Because the plaintiff has the burden of proof,
     the plaintiff gets to stand back up here and
     talk again.  I want you to do me a favor.
     Because I don't get to come back as you're
     listening to counsel, I want you to ask
     yourselves, if Stern could get back up here,
     what would he say?
          So if counsel says, well, we know there
     was a tumor because sometimes they get missed.
     You know what I would say.  You know I would
     say, that's speculation.
          If counsel gets up here and starts talking
     about all sorts of documents and there's no
     evidence that Mrs. Surico ever saw or heard any
5815 of those documents, I want you to ask
     yourselves, what would Stern say?  And you know
     what I would say.  You know I would say this
     case is about Mr. Surico, Mrs. Surico, and not
     about anybody else.
          With that, ladies and gentlemen, I will
     thank you again, bid you a good afternoon, and
     particularly thank you for the very patient
     attention you've paid to my remarks this
     afternoon.
