MR. PHILLIPS: May it please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes,sir.
MR. PHILLIPS: Counsel, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning.
THE JURY PANEL: Good morning.
MR. PHILLIPS: I think you know I'm John Phillips, and it has been my pleasure, actually our pleasure and privilege, I and my colleague and friend Lucy Mason, to try this case in front of you this past week and a half.
You've now been presented the evidence, and it's now my chance to talk with you about how the evidence fits within the instructions that you're going to get and the verdict form that you're going to be asked to consider.
And that's my task today. You have kept your promise as jurors to take your job seriously. You know, your questions, they were wonderful. We take our job seriously. We write up our exams.
We think we've got good questions.
You guys listened to the testimony. You go and sit in there for a few minutes, and then you write better questions than we have written.
I mean that's gratifying a lot of fronts.
It means that you're paying attention to the evidence. It means that you are taking your job seriously and responsibly, without passion, without emotion or sympathy, with the kind of seriousness that all of us, the Court, the
defense, and the plain tiff in this case could only hope for, and you have our thanks.
Now based on the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, I think you have a little bit of a dilemma. You have a cigarette company that, a decade ago, was found by another jury to have behaved badly, many years ago.
I told you when we first talked in voir dire that you would see some things that would make you unhappy, and I'm sure they did.
And you have a plaintiff, Ellen Tate, who is very sick whose decisions to smoke are not connected to anything Philip Morris said or did that you've heard about in this case.
You've heard the plaintiffs' lawyers in this case talk about the fact that this is a class action, that there are thousands of claimants, but this case is about Ellen Tate.
This case is about Ellen Tate's
decisions and her life and whether she matches up with the set piece you heard from the plaintiffs' lawyers about this defendant's conduct many decades ago. That's what your job is here.
And that is not blaming the plaintiff. That is the job of a juror and a jury to look at the evidence and see if it connects with the claims. That's the job in this courtroom.
That's the job you've had for the last
seven or eight days, and its what I want to talk about with you today in terms of whether or not that connection exists.
Not every smoker, ladies and gentlemen, who gets sick from smoking is entitled to compensation with respect to a product that has displayed congressionally-mandated warnings for the last 44 years. That's going to be your job to decide in this case.
Now I want to be clear on a couple of points. Lucy Mason told you in opening that Ms. Tate has emphysema and that her emphysema was caused by her long-term smoking. She also told you that Ms. Tate was addicted to her smoking at some point in her adult life.
You will not be asked those questions on
the verdict form. What will you be asked? Well, you'll be asked something quite different, and you saw those questions displayed by plaintiff's counsel, and we'll talk about them. You'll need to decide what was the legal cause of her injury, her emphysema.
Now Ms. Mason told you that we believe there are three questions that will help you organize your thinking about the evidence and ultimately the questions you'll need to answer on the verdict form.
These aren't the questions on the
verdict form, but we t Rink^th at they will help you, and we'll talk about those verdict form questions in due course. You saw them briefly at the end of Mr. Trop's presentation.
What did Ellen Tate -- excuse me, why did Ellen Tate -- or did Ms. Tate's addiction prevent her from quitting? Who was in control of Ms. Tate's decision not to quit until 1997? And did Philip Morris do anything to prevent her from quitting?
Those are the questions, and I'll ask you to think about those questions as we look at the evidence.
You're here first to decide whether Ellen Tate's addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of her emphysema. Now that's sort of a strange question.
Obviously smoking, taking smoke into your lungs over a long period of time is what causes a lung disease, not emphysema -- not addiction, excuse me.
But in order for legal cause to exist, it must be that the question comes down to whether Ms. Tate lost control of her smoking so she could not stop when she wanted to, was prevented from stopping by her addiction.
MR. TROP: Your Honor, misstatement of
the law.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PHILLIPS: In that situation, that would be a legal cause of her smoking.
On the other hand, you've heard some evidence and you'll need to consider whether or not Ms. Tate was in control of her smoking so that it was her choices and responsibility for her smoking which was the legal cause of her smoking and her subsequent illness. That's the first question.
We'll talk about the evidence. If you conclude that her addiction was not a legal cause of her emphysema, then your job will be done.
Mr. Trop thinks it's an easy question. We'll talk about whether it is. If you disagree with the defendant that her addiction was not a legal cause, then and only then would you go on to look at the other questions on the jury form.
And what will those next issues be?
Well, they'll also ask you a question about legal cause. Plaintiff must prove that something that Philip Morris did wrong, not just her addiction, but some wrongful conduct is a legal cause of Ms. Tate's injuries.
And we'll talk about the evidence with respect to those two important subject matters, questions that you will need to answer at the end of the day when you deliberate.
And I think the simplest way to talk about the evidence is chronologically, just like Ms. Mason did at the beginning of the case.
So let's do that. We know that Ellen Tate began smoking because of her peers in 1959, to be daring and cool.
We know that smoking was much more
prevalent in the late '50s and the early '60s than it is today, and by the time she graduates, we know that -- this is in 1964 when she graduates.
We know that she is now buying her own cigarettes. That was the evidence we heard.
Now Ellen Tate knew from the moment she picked up her first cigarette, which was a Kent cigarette, with her friend Andie, if you recall, she knew that she was doing something wrong and shouldn't have been doing it.
She told her herself that she was afraid to be caught by Andie's parents because she knew that they would disapprove and they would say that it was bad for her.
Now Mr. Trop, in his opening statement -- it was a long time ago; I went back and read it last night -- he told you that Ellen Tate had no idea that smoking was bad for her when she started.
You were in this courtroom when Ms. Tate, although she was forced to read her
deposition in order to acknowledge it, said: I knew that Andie's parents would have told us that it was bad for us.
Now, again, ladies and gentlemen, a
13-year-old does not have the maturity, does not have the judgment to make a decision to begin smoking. That statement was true in 1959, as it is today, and that is not why I'm giving you that evidence.
Why am I giving you that evidence? Why did you get that evidence? Well, you also heard Ellen Tate testify in this courtroom that she continued to believe that smoking was safe and not bad for her until 1988, 1988, when she was 43 years old.
And as you look at the evidence in this case and try to make sense of it in the context of the questions you're going to have to answer, that's important for you to know.
Now what do we know with respect to the evidence in her teen and young adult years? Well, we know her friend Mona, Mona Lichtenstein -- if you remember she testified by videotape, short testimony -- she remembered the Surgeon General's report of 1964 where the government definitively concluded that smoking caused lung cancer.
Ms. Tate's ex-husband, Mr. Fazio -- that was a deposition that was read to you by the
plaintiffs -- he testified that he remembered the
Surgeon General's report as well.
And Dr. Burns, another plaintiff's witness -- that was the pulmonologist from San Diego who testified by videotape -- he said that the Surgeon General's report was one of those single seminal events in history which really changed the way we behaved as a society. It didn't happen overnight, but it changed how we behaved as a society.
And of course he was right because counsel said there are 50 million smokers today, but of course the percentage of them in our population is much, much less than it was back in those days.
There are over, over 50 million former smokers in this country today. There are more people who have quit than who are currently smoking. It was a significant change in how we looked at this product and this practice.
Her friend Mona and her sister Marcia and her husband, Mr. Fazio, remember the warnings that went on the packs in 1966 and then the stronger warnings which you've seen in 1970.
Now the judge will give you an instruction on these warnings. You'll see it, and
he'll read it to you. This is the instruction:
The warning labels placed on the cigarette packs by Philip Morris USA complied with federal law, and it had no obligation to place any additional warnings on its cigarette packages.
These warnings gave smokers the information that they needed to make an informed decision.
You heard counsel talk about a report by the FTC in '67 saying: Well, we don't see much of an effect. That was three months after the warnings went on the pack.
You heard Dr. Burns. He told you it was a sea change in the way that we looked at this product, and just use your common sense with respect to what has happened in the last 50 years subsequently.
Ellen Tate was in her early 20s at this point. She's married in 1970, and she has her daughter Allyson, who you met. This is the testimony of Ellen's sister Marcia. Let's read it together. Marcia was read at the end of our case, if you recall. It was a deposition that was read, and this is what her older sister Marcia said.
Did you ever become aware of the
possibility that smoking would have a health consequence?
Yes.
When?
When the Surgeon General -- I don't exactly -- I don't remember exactly when it was, but I knew they put warnings -- the warnings on the cigarette packages, but I don't remember what year or when it was.
So understanding that you couldn't say with precision a specific date but the event you would tie it to was the warnings were placed on the pack of cigarettes?
Answer: Yes.
So she understood that this was a health risk the moment those warnings were on the packages.
Ellen Tate told you that she did not pay attention to the warnings, or to her sister for that matter, but we'll talk about that.
She doesn't try to quit at this moment in time. She's not even thinking about it. And you'll have to ask yourselves, is that because she's addicted or because she likes smoking and is just not thinking about quitting?
Her friend Mona and her sister Marcia quit smoking in the early '70s. You heard Mr. Trop talk about his metaphor for being in Target and that there were a lot of people walking down those aisles.
Well, in fact, the people in Ellen Tate's lives had left those aisles in the early '70s. They had smoked stopping. Ellen Tate was increasingly being isolated by her smoking activity as her friends and family stopped.
She's in her 20s and 30s now. Mr. Paige suggests that's probably the time period when she became addicted. We don't know when she became addicted, and certainly there's no evidence to suggest Mr. Trop is correct that she was a child who needed to have cigarettes.
Use your common sense on that question. Dr. Glover had no idea when she became addicted. How could he? She didn't testify that: I got up in the morning as a 16-year-old and had to have a cigarette.
But at some point, we know that she did become addicted, and it's up to you as to when in her adult life addiction occurred in her life.
Now Marcia Levitt, again, Ellen Tate's
sister, testified that she quit in 1971, and she became very antismoking as a result of that, and she testified that she was constantly on her sister's back to stop quitting and told her that it was dangerous and she should stop.
Here's her testimony again: Did you ever have a discussion with Ellen over the fact that there were no warnings on the packs of
cigarettes and what that might mean?
Yes.
When did you have those discussions?
After I quit, which was 1971, based on her testimony.
After you quit?
Yes.
And tell me the nature of the discussions that you had with her.
That it is bad for you and it's smelly, dirty, not lady-like, and just not the right thing to do. It is not cool.
Now did Ellen like smoking?
Yes.
Is that the next page?
When would be the first time that she told you that she liked it?
I don't remember. If you're looking for a year, I don't know.
I'm saying, would it go all the way back to the '60s or the '70s or the '80s?
After I quit, so that is when.
Well, with respect to smoking, were you shy about saying why you -- what you just told us a moment ago?
No.
And what about in response to the other comments you made about smoking, it's dirty,
smelly, not lady-like, not the thing to do, what did she say about any of those items?
Mind your own business. Don't tell me what to do.
That's her older sister talking about the conversations she was having with her in the early '70s after Marcia quit.
Now her friend -- this is a photograph, by the way, of Ellen Tate smoking a cigarette some time during that time period.
You'll have to decide for yourselves whether she appears to be enjoying what she's doing or whether she's hopelessly addicted.
Mr. Fazio that was living with her in
the '70s, this is her first husband, if you recall, he also testified as follows about when Ellen thought that Marcia was talking down to her by telling her to stop smoking. This is Mr. Fazio's testimony.
When you said to Ellen: Your sister is maybe just telling you that smoking isn't good for you, how did Ellen respond?
Her exact response, I don't know, but it was something in the order of: I know -- you don't have to tell me. It was like that, and then cease and desist.
Now what did you hear in the courtroom from Ellen Tate on this point? She said the
following to you:
Okay. Tell me about that. Why don't you tell the members of the jury what you recall back at that time about the controversy.
Well, they said, you know -- first of all, everybody smoked. There was so much controversy, and I believed the tobacco companies. They said it was safe. I went with that.
And then she was asked later by Ms. Mason: And if I understood your testimony correctly when Mr. Alvarez was asking you
questions, the first time you really thought smoking might be dangerous was 1988; is that right?
Right.
So Mr. Fazio is talking to his wife in the mid '70s. He's talking about -- he's trying to talk to her about the health risks.
She said: I know. Get off my back. Cease and desist.
And she told you she didn't know.
In the mid '70s, Ellen's cousin has either laryngeal cancer or neck or mouth cancer, and everyone in the family assumes it's from smoking. It's a decision point.
Ellen tells you, and she told you in this courtroom sitting on that chair, that she did not know that smoking was risky.
Her mother quits in 1982. Ellen does not try to quit. She tells Marcia again to: Mind your own business.
This is another photograph of Ellen Tate. You'll need to decide for yourselves, is this a woman who is controlled by addiction, or is this a woman who is making decisions for herself about using a product that she knows is risky?
We move through the 1980s, and we know that she saw a Dr. Shapiro. Now you recall that the medical records start for us in 1993, right, because they've all been thrown away by the other doctors, so we had to do some speculating.
But we do know that Dr. Shapiro told her that she should stop smoking because she was getting chronic bronchitis every year throughout the '80s.
And what Ellen Tate told you, ladies and gentlemen, is that she decided to ignore the advice of Dr. Shapiro -- she likes doctors -- and go with the tobacco companies.
1985, there are warning changes. You've seen these. They're even more detailed about the diseases and problems associated with smoking. Ellen Tate told you that she didn't pay attention to them.
We get to 1988. She has been a smoker for almost 30 years now, a little less than 30
years. Ms. Tate makes her first quit attempt after her friend Doris dies. That's what she told us.
She is 42, 43 at this point, and at this point, she's apparently no longer confused. She
quits for less than a day. She told us that.
And she admits that she knows from this day forward that her smoking is a serious health risk for her, yet, even with this knowledge, she quit for less than a day and then did not try again for another eight years.
In the hospital record where Dr. Westphal, who you saw, the gentleman with the cane, Dr. Westphal diagnosed Ellen Tate with severe COPD in 1996, but when he interviewed her at the hospital in January of 1996, he wrote this in the records.
If you can pull that up for us,
Mr. Fernandez. It's pretty slight.
Was told of emphysema 7-8 years ago. Advised to stop smoking.
So this is a report in the records in 1996 that she was told of emphysema seven or eight years ago, which would put it about 1988 when she quit for less than a day.
Ms. Tate testified she didn't remember this, and the records aren't available for that period of time, so you'll have to figure out what
she knew during that time period.
Now in the early 1990s -- you met
Dr. Gally. Do you remember Dr. Gally? He also testified by deposition. You might remember because the phone was ringing in the background a fair amount during his testimony. It was hard to hear.
But he's the physician that's been taking care of her for 17 years as the primary care physician. And he told you that he told her to quit five times and she did nothing in response.
And there's another important thing to talk about with respect to Dr. Gally's care, because you'll remember that she was hospitalized with bronchitis in 1993, and he went to see her, and he recommended the nicotine patch.
And you know that she never filled the prescription, and she never went back and talked with him five or six weeks later, as he asked her to. She didn't go back and see him for over a year.
Now why is that important? Well,
Mr. Trop, in his opening statement, he told you: You know, if Ellen Tate had had Dow Nicorette gum available to her, she would have used it. She chewed gum to try to stop, and if it had been
available to her, she would have used it, and she would have stopped earlier.
What happened to that claim in this
case?
Well, you saw those Dow documents. They were really dumb. They were stupid and dumb. But what did they have to do with Ellen Tate's case? Well, you heard Dr. Gally say: I had Nicorette prescriptions. I had all those kinds of things available to her throughout my care of her, and she showed no interest in it.
Mr. Alvarez put his client on the stand. Did you hear a single question about chewing gum, about wanting to have Nicorette and not having it available?
This whole claim was entirely made up, entirely made up, and you know why? It was made up because those documents are designed to make you angry at Philip Morris even though it has nothing, nothing to do with Ellen Tate and her life, nothing.
And that's the job you have here. You need to make the connections to make it relevant to your determinations. You need to resist being angry at old documents 30 years ago that have
nothing to do with Ellen Tate.
1997, Ellen Tate quits after taking a multiweek course at North Broward Hospital. By now she's 51 and she already has severe emphysema.
Why was she able to quit then and not in 1988 or '96 when she was hospitalized? And those, by the way, are the only -- that's the only evidence we have of any quit attempts in her life, 1988 for less than a day, 1996 when she was in the hospital, and it's unclear whether it was a day or two. We just don't know. And then when she quit, going to the course in 1997. That's it.
And what did she tell you when she sat on the stand? Well, she said her coworker signed her up for the class in 1997, and, shockingly -those were her words -- shockingly, she went to the course.
Now do you remember when she said that word: Shockingly, I went to the course? Words are important. What does that really tell you about whether she really had any motivation to quit before that when she surprised herself that she went to the course when her friend signed her up.
She was completely successful in
quitting with no assistance, and she's proud, and she should be, but she already was very sick.
So let's go back to the questions that
we framed for you at the outset of the case and which we think are important.
These first two questions go to the addiction/causation question: Did Ms. Tate's addiction prevent her from quitting? Who was in control of Ms. Tate's decision not to quit until 1997?
I'm going to keep putting this down because I don't want to block people's view of the slide.
Now both parties agree that she became addicted at some point in her adult life. If plaintiffs are suggesting to you that she was addicted a child or a teenager, there is no evidence of that.
You should resist that kind of appeal to your emotions, but some time in her adult life she undoubtedly became addicted. That's where the agreement is.
Dr. Glover is an interesting gentleman. He was the one person who testified about addiction from an expert position, although he's a
health educator.
He said some inconsistent things. He said nicotine took away Ellen Tate's choice, but then he agreed with me that he had a choice to quit in the '60s when he did quit.
He said addiction prevented Ellen from
quitting, but he agreed that she could have quit before 1997 and that her addiction did not prevent her from quitting.
Let's look at his testimony.
And yet you know that she overcame that severe dependence on nicotine in 1997, correct?
Yes.
She quit without using any nicotine replacement therapy, correct?
Correct.
She went to this class and got some support from other people, correct?
Correct.
Support that had been available to her for the last 25 or 30 years, correct?
Correct.
Knowing that, sir, we also know that Ellen Tate's addiction did not prevent her from quitting at any other point in her smoking life,
correct?
Yeah, I would probably say yes to that.
Okay. And we don't know why the stars didn't align for her when she saw those warnings, right?
Correct.
We don't know why for Ellen Tate the stars did not align in 1970 when she became pregnant and had her daughter Allyson, correct?
Yes -- correct, excuse me.
We don't know why the stars did not align for Ellen Tate in '73 when her sister quit and began nagging her to stop smoking herself? We just don't know why, do we, right?
Right.
We don't know why for Ellen Tate the stars did not align in the mid '70s when her cousin got disfiguring tongue cancer, et cetera.
He agreed: Correct, I don't know.
And Dr. Glover said some somewhat inflammatory things. He talked about shooting up nicotine and hijacking the pleasure centers of brain. He said he rubbed sticks together when he ran out of matches.
And after 30 minutes, 30 minutes on the
phone with Ellen Tate, who I had to introduce him to in this courtroom, he told you that she did everything possible to quit in 1988.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, Ellen Tate told you that is flatly untrue. This is what she said in response to one of your questions:
In 1988 when your friend Doris passed away from lung cancer, you said you quit for one day. Do you feel like that was a good attempt at quitting?
It was not a good attempt, but I should have tried harder.
Now Ms. Mason did tell you in the opening that we were going to call Dr. Kaplan, a psychiatrist. Plaintiffs mentioned that, but, frankly, after Dr. Glover's testimony and Ellen Tate's testimony and Dr. Gally's testimony, her physicians, we felt you really had the evidence you need on this question.
She became addicted at some point as an adult. She liked smoking, her sister told us, and she just did not want to quit until she did after she signed up for that course. At that point, she had a serious illness, and she was motivated.
And I asked Dr. Gally, her physician,
about the role of addiction in Ellen Tate's life, and this is what he said:
(Video clip played as follows:)
Sitting here today, you don't know whether it was addiction or stresses or how much she felt she needed to smoke to deal with other problems in life that were keeping her from becoming sufficiently motivated to quit from '93 until '97, correct?
That's correct.
In other words, because you believe motivation is the fundamentally most important factor in quitting, you can't really tell why it was she wasn't motivated sufficiently until she actually quit, correct?
Correct.
(Over video clip:)
MR. TROP: Objection.
(Video clip continued as follows:)
And you don't know whether addiction did or did not interfere with her motivation -THE COURT: Stop it, sir.
(Video clip paused.)
THE COURT: Folks, step in the jury room, please.
(Jury entered the jury room at 11:27
a.m.)
THE BAILIFF: Have a seat, please.
THE COURT: First of all, the three of you have got to stop talking while he's arguing. When you made your closing arguments, Ms. Mason and Mr. Phillips sat there as a lady and a gentleman and didn't say one word. I'm sure they were tempted to but did not say a word.
The three of you have been constantly talking amongst yourself during his closing argument. That is inappropriate. Please don't do it again.
Now what is your objection?
MR. TROP: Judge, we were shown a picture. We didn't know they were actually going to show the video. This is unfairly highlighting -- this replaying testimony again as
opposed to -THE COURT: That's exactly what was done during your closing.
MR. TROP: Well, that was evidence
actually.
THE COURT: This is evidence. This was a video played in evidence just like all the
videos that Mr. Paige referenced in his closing. Overruled.
Bring the jury out.
(Jury exited jury room and entered courtroom at 11:28 a.m.)
MR. PHILLIPS: Do you want me here, Your
Honor?
THE COURT: Yes.
Please continue.
MR. PHILLIPS: May I start that from the
beginning?
THE COURT: No.
MR. PHILLIPS: Can you just continue where you stopped then, Mr. Fernandez, please? (Video clip resumed.)
There were other factors that interfered with her motivation, correct?
I don't specifically know.
One way or the other, right?
Correct.
It would require you to speculate to say
otherwise, correct?
Yes.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PHILLIPS: Now, ladies and
gentlemen, if Ellen Tate's long-term physician,
Dr. Gally, has to speculate about why she didn't quit in 1988 and did not show much interest in quitting until 1997, aren't you left on the evidence based in the same physician?
Mr. Trop said in his opening that this is an easy question, but the physician who has been caring her for 17 years is telling you that he'd have to speculate about the role of addiction in terms of her decisions not to quit before 1997.
I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the evidence overwhelmingly supports that she was capable of quitting and did not want to quit until she decided to quit. She regrets that decision. It's understandable she's sick.
Here's the first question on the verdict form that you've been shown by counsel for plaintiffs, and it is the first question: Was Ellen Tate's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her COPD/emphysema?
Now you remember we talked about legal cause in voir dire, the car, the pedestrian car accident walking outside of the courthouse. Physical impact was the injury.
We know that the car hit me, but what's
the legal cause? We know that her smoking caused physical impact on her lungs and caused the disease in this case.
Your challenge is to decide, is there anything more that caused that than her decision to continue to smoke and want to smoke, and is addiction itself a legal cause of her illness, her lung disease illness?
Now Your Honor will give you a jury instruction that will help you on this point.
This is how you can determine legal cause: Addiction is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss, injury, or damage so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred.
But for the addiction, she would not have gotten emphysema. If you answer the question that, but for the addiction, she would have gotten emphysema because she liked smoking, then you need to answer this question no, that, in fact, her addiction is not a legal cause.
Now let me give you an example of what I
think "but for" means. But for your getting a jury summons, you wouldn't be here. That seems like a pretty good bet. But for your getting that, you would not have been here.
Now let me pose a different question to you. But for the daily stipend you get as a juror, you wouldn't be here. Well, probably not.
I doubt any of you are sitting here because of financial motivation.
So there are some things that are "but for" causes. You're here because you got a jury summons, and there are some things that are not. You aren't here because you're trying to make money as jurors even though you do get a daily stipend.
Now plaintiff will say and has said that there can be more than one cause, and that's true, but every cause must be a "but for" cause, and addiction needs to be a substantial contributing factor to causing her illness.
And if you conclude that her addiction is not a "but for" cause, then you should answer the question no, and your work will be done.
Now only if you answer the first question yes would you proceed, and I want to talk
about the rest of the jury form because doubtless you'll be discussing it and want to know the
defendant's use with respect to it.
That's where this third question comes in that I posed at the beginning of the case: Did Philip Morris do anything to prevent Ms. Tate from quitting?
Well, what we know is that plaintiff claims that she did not try to quit until 1988 because she did not know that smoking was dangerous until 1988.
This is her testimony:
There was so much controversy, and I believed the tobacco companies. They said it was safe. I went with that.
And then you saw the testimony earlier from -- elicited from Ms. Mason about the fact that she said that was up to 1988.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, there are critical moments in a case. One of them was when Ellen Tate told you that. I ask you to slow down the case and think about that. Ask yourself if that testimony sounds like something real to you.
Her friend Mona told us this:
(Video clip played as follows:)
When you knew Ellen during the first part of your life, from '62 to '67, Ellen never expressed to you any confusion about the health risks of smoking, did she?
No.
She didn't express to you any sense that there was a controversy about whether smoking was dangerous, correct?
That's correct.
She never told you that she had heard something from a tobacco company that made her doubt whether or not smoking was risky, correct?
That's correct.
Or whether smoking was addictive for that matter, correct?
That's correct.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PHILLIPS: And, ladies and gentlemen, none of her friends, Marcia, Mr. Fazio, anyone else who were her contemporaries and testified in this trial heard Ellen Tate say that she was confused or thought cigarettes were safe.
Dr. Gally told you, and he's been treating her for some time, that he believed she understood that cigarette smoking was dangerous.
And Dr. Proctor, the historian, he agreed that, by the 1970s, there was widespread appreciation of the health risks of smoking.
He said there was media saturation of those public service announcements, some of which you saw at the end of our case, widespread appreciation of the risks of smoking.
And Dr. Burns, again, the plaintiff's
expert, said this about smoker awareness, not nonsmoker awareness, smoker awareness in 1981: (Video clip played as follows:)
Now in 1981, you gave a speech to a Lung Association group about the percentage of smokers who were aware of the risks, correct?
Yes, and I'm well familiar with that
group.
All right. And you told that group in 1981 that 95 percent of smokers were thoroughly aware of the health risks and 90 percent thought that it might effect their own health, correct?
That's correct, and I believe I said that more smokers know that cigarette smoking causes disease or cancer than know the name of the President of the United States.
So that was '81. So more people knew
smoking caused cancer than even knew the name of Ronald Reagan?
That's correct.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PHILLIPS: Ellen tells you that she was going with the tobacco companies at this point in time.
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you that the evidence demonstrates that Ellen Tate knew that smoking was dangerous to her.
And she knew it when her sister Marcia
knew it. She knew it when her husband Mr. Fazio knew it. She knew it when her friend Mona knew it. She knew it when the warnings went on the packages, and she saw them every day. She knew it then.
And, remember, Ms. Tate told you on the stand that she is responsible for her decision not to quit, but that responsibility started in 1988 when she finally knew that smoking was dangerous.
If you conclude that the evidence shows that she knew that smoking was dangerous when the warnings went on the pack in 1966, then you should accept her testimony that she is responsible for smoking after she knew it was harmful.
So let's turn to the questions on the verdict form that relate to concealment, if we can.
You can see the numbers, so I'm taking these a little bit out of order. These are Questions 4 and 5, and they relate to whether Philip Morris concealed something that Ellen Tate reasonably relied upon to her detriment or whether Ellen Tate reasonably relied to her detriment on acts done in furtherance of an agreement between Philip Morris and other tobacco companies to omit information about health risks and that that reliance caused her injury.
It's a little legal. What's it saying?
It's asking you to answer the question whether or not Philip Morris, or Philip Morris acting with the tobacco companies, said things to Ellen Tate that made her believe that smoking was safe such that she decided that she would not quit.
That's the question, because we all know that her continuing smoking is ultimately what caused her illness in this case.
Now let's look -- well, Dr. Proctor is the historian who testified about all the things that Mr. Paige tried to resurrect in his closing
today that Philip Morris said or did or others said or did relating to cigarette smoking.
He showed you a bunch of news clips and articles, but Dr. Proctor was candid in saying he knows nothing about Ellen Tate.
And she told us she never saw any of the news clips or articles Dr. Proctor showed you with tobacco officials looking ridiculous.
I mean did you see the look on John Stossel's face back in 1980 and Ted Koppel's face? The only thing that was happening at that point was the loss of complete credibility by those tobacco officials even then.
Let's look at the subjects Dr. Proctor talked about, statements by tobacco executives in the press, on television shows before Congress. This is what Ellen Tate testified to you in trial
on those subjects:
Do you remember any particular article, newspaper article, or any particular television report?
No, not one in particular.
Okay. Do you remember the type of information that Dr. Proctor talked about and showed the members of the jury that's the kind of
information that was out there at the time?
I don't remember.
You don't remember a particular one?
No.
Outside of advertisements, you've heard a tobacco company say you should smoke?
No, their advertisements were to smoke.
But outside of advertisements, ma'am, you saw some clips in the courtroom from Dr. Proctor, correct, some news clips?
Yes.
And you had never seen those before,
correct?
No.
She was seeing those for the first time in the courtroom, ladies and gentlemen. She told you she decided to go with the tobacco companies, but she didn't see or view anything that she supposedly was going with.
She did say generally that she saw the
ads, but she couldn't identify any of the old ads that Dr. Proctor showed you.
If I can approach here, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. PHILLIPS: Thank you.
You saw these in closing. These occurred either before she was alive or before she was talking. These were in the '40s, early '50s.
This document here that's in evidence, you should look at it. You heard this 1953 survey by the Roper poll. Take a look at it.
It doesn't say anything about replacement smokers or needing to -- clearly it's a document that is viewing smokers as being people who are teenagers because that's what was happening at the time, and it's interviewing people who are smokers at the time who are that age.
But some of the stuff you heard, the rhetoric of defense counsel, please test a little bit. There are things that I'm not going to try to defend here, but test some of these things to see whether they even support the rhetoric of the defendant.
What she told us is that -- and most of these, by the way, are for brands -- these things you saw for brands that Dr. Proctor showed you are your brands that she never smoked that weren't
even made by Philip Morris.
The inhaling one, that occurred in the
'40s before she was alive, or when she was a baby. What did she tell us? What was the testimony?
What was the evidence connecting these allegations to Ellen Tate?
Well, she told us she watched I Love Lucy and she watched The Flintstones, Flintstones. She did not say that she saw them, by the way, when those shows were being sponsored by a tobacco company, and she never smoked the brands that were being advertised on those shows. Winston was not even made by Philip Morris.
You will get an instruction, ladies and gentlemen, on other tobacco company's advertisements, which I'll read to you now.
During trial, Ellen Tate introduced advertisements from companies other than Philip Morris USA. You may consider this evidence as it affects Ellen Tate's conduct. It is not relevant as to Philip Morris USA's conduct.
We know why Ellen Tate smoked the brands she smoked. They were brands of opportunity. She told us she smoked Parliaments because her friends in Florida had access to Parliaments in their families. She smoked Marlboro because Doris, her friend up in New York when she was a junior in
high school, had access to Marlboros because her father or her parents smoked them.
Those were the brands she smoked because they were the brands that were accessible to her. The advertisements that were shown to you did not play a role in the selection of the brands that she smoked.
No question, this is a time when smoking was more popular and more popularized, but that's different than connecting specific conduct to Ellen Tate's decisions.
And the only other thing you heard with respect to reliance, this important question of concealment and reliance such that it caused her to get a disease, is the discussion regarding Merit cigarettes.
And what you heard from Ellen Tate was that she saw the Merit cigarette ads on the television in the late 1980s.
And that was an interesting statement because you know Dr. Proctor correctly told you that television ads went off the air in 1971, and you also know from Mr. Jupe that the Merit brand of cigarettes was not even introduced into the market until 1976.
Not only did Ellen Tate never see a Merit advertisement on any television, there were never, never any Merit television advertisements ever.
We know that shortly after her -- before her first quit attempt in 1988, she told us she switched to Merits, and she said she switched because they were lower tar.
And then she said to you that she thought they were safer, but then Ms. Mason inquired of her with respect to her deposition testimony, and she was, again, forced to read and acknowledge her sworn testimony.
This was what it was: Do you remember being asked the question, ma'am, at your deposition: Is it fair to say that, regardless of the source of information, you believed that if you changed to Merit that it would be less harmful?
Answer -- you asked the question back:
If I believe it would be less harmful?
Do you believe that?
I don't think I really believed it. I mentally -- but mentally you want to believe it.
And then, ladies and gentlemen, Ellen
Tate told you this in response to one of your questions why she didn't quit smoking Merits after she realized that they were dangerous:
About how old were you when you found out that cigarettes were dangerous?
Not until my more mature adult years.
Why didn't you try to quit then?
Because the tobacco companies never told me how bad it was.
It will be up to you, ladies and gentlemen, to sort out what Ellen Tate knew and when.
One of the things she was clear about, she smoked the same number of cigarettes the same way, same puffing down to the filter when she smoked Marlboros and Merits.
This is her testimony:
So from your memory, you didn't start smoking any more; it was your same -- wrong emphasis.
So from your memory, you didn't start smoking any more; it was your same level of smoking you had -Just about.
And you didn't start taking deeper
puffs, did you?
I don't remember that.
And you didn't smoke a cigarette any further down, correct?
I always smoked them right down to the
filter.
And you smoked Merits just the same way,
correct?
Just the same.
And she didn't delay or put off quitting when she switched to Merits because she told you the first time she ever tried to quit was shortly after she switched to Merits in 1988 for one day.
What you have, ladies and gentlemen, is a history professor, a very smart history professor's speculation that maybe Ellen Tate unconsciously compensated by smoking more cigarettes or smoking them differently than she did to get the benefit of the cigarette design.
That's what you've heard with respect to this argument for detrimental reliance to her detriment -- or reliance to her detriment.
That's not evidence. That's a suggestion, a speculation by a history professor who honestly told you he's an advocate; he wants
every smoker who sues the tobacco industry to win, and he wants Ellen Tate to win even though he has no idea who she is.
You know who she is. You heard her testimony. It was real testimony, real evidence, not rhetoric or speculation.
I want to turn to the question relating to negligence on the jury verdict form, and, again, pay attention to the numbers because I'm
going a little out of order here, okay?
Number 2 will be: Please state whether the negligence of Philip Morris USA was a legal cause of Ellen Tate's loss, injury, or damage.
Every time you see that word "legal cause," that "but for" discussion that we had, that comes back into play in the same way, and that comes in here as well.
Now what did plaintiff tell you in this lawsuit with her evidence was the evidence of negligence? Well, you heard about the Dow Nicorette documents.
Well, they didn't have any effect on Ellen Tate. They were irrelevant and inflammatory and completely disconnected to her life.
They told you that smoking is dangerous.
Well, it's true. It has been for 44 years, and it's no more dangerous than it indicates on the warnings.
And Mr. Trop talked about marketing to kids. Again, feel free to look at that 1953 document to tell you whether it's targeting any particular person.
Certainly young people were people within the smoking group in the '50s and in a way that we would never find acceptable today, but there is no evidence that, with respect to Ellen Tate and her life and her choices, that she picked
Parliament because of any targeting.
She picked Parliament because it was available to her at a friend's house, or Marlboro; she picked Marlboro because Doris had it available to her. No targeting connecting this plaintiff -connecting to this plaintiff.
You also heard about the Surgeon General's report in 1964 and the report that Philip Morris made relating to the report of chemicals in tobacco smoke.
But you also heard Mr. Jupe on that point. He said: Philip Morris was honest. That information was conveyed to the Surgeon General.
The Surgeon General had it and reported it, and the only distinction was Philip Morris did not believe they were in concentrations or amounts that were dangerous. They didn't believe it was at the time.
We still don't know, for example, what the specific carcinogens that are causing it, but certainly a dose-response relationship is important to any analysis of chemicals in cigarette smoke.
Now I want to turn to the product defect argument you heard in this case. The next question is: Please state whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed in the market were a legal cause of Ellen's injury.
What was the defect you heard about? Well, first, I want to show you an instruction the jury will give -- the Court will give you with respect to the product itself.
The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity. Therefore, I instruct you that Philip Morris USA cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes.
Well, we know these are dangerous
products. The warnings have said it for 44 years. Dr. Proctor suggested that the defect is that the filters are a gimmick.
Mr. Jupe, who is a scientist, told you that's simply untrue. Dr. Proctor told you that filters make cigarettes more dangerous. He's an historian.
Mr. Jupe told you that there is no public health authority or governmental entity who has ever suggested that filters should be taken off the modern cigarette and go back to unfiltered cigarettes.
And there is no public health authority who has ever suggested that filters make cigarette smoking more dangerous.
Mr. Jupe was honest with you with respect to the data. It looks like there's only a slight benefit from it, much less than perhaps
Philip Morris would have hoped for, but he honestly believes that those filters work or he wouldn't be doing his job.
Plaintiffs' lawyers told you that:
Well, the defect is you should take the nicotine out of tobacco. You can do it.
Philip Morris did it, and they could not
commercialize a product even though they built an entire plant to commercialize the product.
You know, there's just no question that nicotine does play a role in the smoking experience. It's made in tobacco, and it plays a role in the consumer satisfaction in smoking.
And if you take it out, whether you call it taste or otherwise, it has an effect, and we know, we have admitted ultimately it has addictive qualities.
But Mr. Proctor wants Philip Morris to run a Starbucks that only sells decaf while everyone else is selling caffeinated products.
Finally, plaintiff says that the cigarettes should actually be cigars. Again,
Dr. Proctor is not a designer of cigarettes.
Changing cigarettes into cigars is like saying cars should be bicycles. You could say they're safer if they're bicycles, but they're a different product.
Cigarettes are inherently inhalable, and
they re dangerous because they re inhalable, but they are a different product.
And if the FDA chooses to tell Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies to take
more nicotine out of cigarettes, they'll do it.
If they tell the tobacco industry it should become something different, a different product, an uninhalable product, they'll have the authority to do that, but none of that has happened to date.
I want to talk about responsibility because that was featured largely by the plaintiff in their closing argument.
Counsel said that Ellen Tate accepts some responsibility. She told you that she takes responsibility from 1988 on, but she couldn't tell you when when you asked her that question.
She told you that once she knew the risks of smoking, then the responsibility was hers because she wasn't arguing that addiction prevented her from quitting.
But when did she really understand the risks of smoking? 1988? That's for you to decide.
You saw a chart that Mr. Paige showed you, which I will submit to you was just complete pseudo-arithmetic regarding share of responsibility.
Six years before she even smoked a
cigarette, that was a hundred percent on Philip Morris.
Stopped in 1982, and no one had responsibility after Ellen told you that she had responsibility after 1982.
It was all just what lawyers who aren't very good at arithmetic do, try to make up numbers to give dignity to irrational arguments.
That was not a rational approach to thinking about apportionment of responsibility.
We know that she smoked for eight years before the warnings went on, and she smoked for 30 after they did.
Now Mr. Paige also said Philip Morris accepts no responsibility. Well, Philip Morris does accept many responsibilities. It does not in this case accept responsibility for Ellen Tate's decisions, that's true.
But, as Mr. Jupe testified to you yesterday, Philip Morris has responsibility to make cigarettes with state-of-the-art filters in the hopes of making a less hazardous cigarette, and they take that responsibility seriously.
Mr. Jupe takes that responsibility seriously. They're responsible for placing the
warnings on the cigarettes that Ellen Tate saw for the last 30 years of her smoking, and they were on there every day.
And they take responsibility for complying with the State Attorney General's Master Settlement Agreement and the Federal Drug -THE COURT: Food.
MR. PHILLIPS: -- Food and Drug Administration laws, thank you, Your Honor, that now governs virtually everything that Philip Morris does, and they advocated for that law.
They comply with those things.
But, in this case, with respect to Ellen Tate's claims, we do not believe that Philip Morris is responsible for the decisions that she made to smoke and to continue to smoke.
And let me just say another thing about responsibility. You've heard a lot about other bigger lawsuits, federal lawsuits, federal government lawsuits.
You've heard about the State Attorney General and the Master Settlement Agreement.
Philip Morris is clearly accountable in a broader context than this lawsuit. You know that from what you've heard.
THE CLERK: Thirty minutes remaining. MR. PHILLIPS: Thank you, ma'am.
But those cases are not this case. You must ask whether this individual smoker, Ellen Tate, who is part of a class of thousands of other claimants, is entitled to an award of money damages.
That's your job here. And I want to turn to damages. Of course if you conclude that Ellen Tate -- excuse me, if you conclude that Philip Morris is not at fault, then you don't reach damages. If you conclude that addiction was not a legal cause of her emphysema, then you don't reach damages.
But, again, because the verdict form talks about all these issues, I want to talk with you about how we think about those issues as well.
And this is where I submit, ladies and gentlemen, you, as a jury, need to be careful.
Mr. Paige said you have a lot of power, but you know as well that power comes with responsibility.
Mr. Paige asked you in this courtroom to make Ellen Tate an extraordinarily wealthy woman. That's what he did.
And the judge will give you an
instruction that will help you on this. He will tell you that: There is no exact standard for measuring Ellen Tate's damage. The amount should be fair and just in light of the evidence that you've heard in this case.
You still must apply your reason, and when you consider damages, ladies and gentlemen, you need to consider a couple of things which I'd like you to talk about in the jury room when you deliberate.
You need to consider, what would Ellen Tate's health be like if she had not smoked? And that requires consideration of the diseases that she has in her lung that are not related to smoking.
This is where asthma comes into the case, and I am not -- I'm sorry that my questions didn't make that clear, because we haven't had a chance to talk about the verdict form, but it only relates to the question of damages.
Plaintiff spent a lot of time on this issue putting in evidence, and Dr. Andrews talked about it, but Dr. Andrews made clear to you, she has emphysema. She's very sick from emphysema, but she also has other disease processes in her
lung.
I don't, frankly, understand why the plaintiffs are running away from 12 years of medical records. This is the medical records (indicating). You'll have them in the jury room. They're tabbed for you.
In virtually every one of these tabs, there are physicians diagnosing her not for two
years but from 1997 to 2007 with asthma, as well as COPD.
You saw that big foldout thing you saw with all the COPD references. Well, of course there are COPD diagnoses. We don't dispute that. She has COPD.
We're simply trying to present to you the fact that these records show she has more than one disease. She has asthma diagnosed by 12 physicians, and she has COPD, and she has restrictive disease as documented in the medical records.
I'm not going to show all those records to you, but here, for example, is the record in 2007 from Dr. Starr, who you didn't see come into court.
And what Dr. Starr concluded in 2007 --
this is 11 years after she's diagnosed. He's saying: This is a 60-year-old white female with an established history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma.
He goes on to diagnose her with it in his impressions. There are diagnoses from Dr. Garrow, who is a pulmonologist, Dr. Smith. They're located in Tab 2D if you want to look in the records.
There are diagnoses from Dr. Goldman, who is a cardiologist, at Tab 4, Dr. Blum at Tab
9.	All of these are added to the other diagnoses that you saw.
She had -- and Dr. Westphal, who you saw, who was a very nice gentleman but who hasn't seen the patient for 12 years, he also agreed that there's an asthmatic component to her disease in her lung. This is what he said:
And you agree, do you not, that Ellen Tate during the time that you were taking care of her, has chronic obstructive pulmonary disease that has an asthmatic component to it?
Yes, and I've referred interchangeable, for lack of a better term than asthma component, a reactive airways component.
And Dr. Andrews, the pulmonologist from Tampa who came and testified to you in our case, simply said: There's no difference between an asthmatic component and asthma. It's asthma.
And what you have in the records, 60 references, not 30 or 50, but 60 references, many are diagnoses. Some of them are reports by Ellen Tate herself that she has asthma, right up until just before she files this lawsuit in 2007.
And you can look at her reports in Tabs
10,	11, 13B, 14 to her health-care providers that she has asthma and chronic asthma.
And when counsel says: I don't know why she's telling people that she has asthma, I'll
tell you why he said that, because what they told you at trial was she said that because she was trying to hide that she had emphysema.
Do you remember that? Well, then we show you the records of her questionnaire in which she reports both of the diseases. This is just one example in 2003.
And she's filling out a questionnaire for her health-care providers, and she's saying she has both of these diseases.
And then again one more, if you would,
Mr. Fernandez.
This is 2005, although very hard to read, June of 2005, and she's handwriting in: Emphysema, atrial fibrillation, asthma.
I mean clearly there she's not trying to hide she has emphysema. She's trying to report what disease functions are going on in her body.
And the importance and the significance of this is this: Dr. Andrews said that if she had not smoked, she would still have some restrictions and difficulty breathing because of these two other diseases, asthma and restrictive disease, that are not caused by smoking.
She does have emphysema. She's terribly sick from emphysema, but if you are thinking about damages and what she would be like today as a 63-year-old woman without having smoked, you need
to know that for purposes of evaluating damages.
Here's another thing I submit you should think about when you're thinking about applying reason to damages.
Mr. Paige gave you a huge number, a huge number. I'll submit to you that when you are thinking about being -- considering damages as just in light of the evidence, think about what
Ms. Tate told you.
She told you she loves her work, but she also told you, and I think it was apparent from her daughter's testimony as well, that it is harder for her to work. She has to get up earlier, and she's tired at the end of the day, and she's capable of doing less.
If you apply your reason when you are thinking about compensatory damages, think about what impact you would have in alleviating real pain and suffering for this plaintiff by making her choices about work over the next four or five years easier for her.
That is a reasonable way to think about compensatory damages rather than just picking a huge number in the sky.
Now I want to turn finally to punitive damages. Plaintiff has the right to ask for it. You don't have to award it.
And, in fact, what you will get are a
series of instructions from the judge that are essentially cautionary instructions telling you what you can't do in considering punitive damages.
And the reason for that is that punitive damages are extraordinary. They aren't
run-of-the-mill. They are something that is extraordinary to consider and award in a case.
Counsel agreed that plaintiff's burden here is clear and convincing evidence. You have to have a certain level of certainty that punitive damages need to be awarded in this case.
And you will be told by the judge, and this is critical, that punitive damages should only be awarded for the specific conduct that you can identify if you've gotten to the stage in the jury verdict form that Philip Morris, or working with other tobacco companies, did that caused Ellen Tate to reasonably rely on that statement and continue smoking instead of considering quitting.
This is the claim of fraud, that she was fooled and did not know that smoking was harmful to her until 1998.
If you answer that question differently than the plaintiff wants you to answer it, that she knew long before that and that she was not harmed because she wouldn't have gotten emphysema had she stopped when she knew about the health
risks, then you don't even reach punitive damages. Product defect, negligence, the
findings, they're all irrelevant to punitive damages, and the judge will instruct you on this.
It's only if you find that in this case Ellen Tate actually reasonably relied on something that the tobacco companies said, and she kept smoking because she believed something that they told her that was untrue, and you will need to be the people to analyze the evidence as to whether there's any truth to that assertion.
The judge will also instruct you that you can only punish Philip Morris for the harm that occurred to Ellen Tate if, in fact, you deem Philip Morris responsible for any of that harm.
In other words, you cannot punish Philip Morris, and you are instructed not to punish Philip Morris for the harm that plaintiff has been talking about throughout this case, hundreds of thousands of people every year dying because of their smoking.
That is not to be a consideration for you in terms of punishing Philip Morris. You cannot punish them for that, and this is the instruction on that -- actually it's the next one, but why don't you leave it right here.
This is also important. This, again,
reinforces that you need to evaluate the conduct in relation to the conduct -- excuse me, let me start over.
In considering whether the conduct causing damage to Ms. Tate warrants punitive damages and, if so, in what amount, you should evaluate that conduct in relation -- and that's the Philip Morris's conduct -- in relation to the conduct and actions of others, including Ms. Tate, and the fault that you attributed to Ms. Tate. In other words, you should not consider Philip Morris USA's conduct in the abstract.
Ladies and gentlemen -If I can approach, Your Honor.
-- this is Philip Morris's conduct in the abstract. This is all the stuff you saw, and it's not pretty, and they put Ellen Tate's name at the bottom of it, and they'll put another plaintiff's name at the bottom of it after this case. That's in the abstract.
What you needed to evaluate and have done in this case is to evaluate whether or not Philip Morris harmed this plaintiff and misled her into thinking that smoking was safe for 30 years until 1988.
Let s go to the harm to oth ers instruction I was about to talk about.
His Honor will also tell you that you may not award punitive damages on behalf of those other individuals.
You have heard evidence concerning harm suffered by persons who are not parties to this case. You may not award punitive damages on behalf of those individuals.
Any punitive damages you award must represent the punishment you deem appropriate for causing Ms. Tate's injuries, just as I discussed with you a moment ago.
Other individuals who have been harmed can bring their own suits and seek compensatory and punitive damages in their own right.
You've heard about the State Attorney General. You've heard about the federal government. You've heard about other claimants. That's a different form.
Ladies and gentlemen, you've also heard that today this industry is quite regulated.
There are no TV advertisements. There are almost no print advertisements, very limited distribution.
You can't reach for a cigarette pack in a store anymore. It has to be behind the counter, often locked up. It's thoroughly controlled by
the FDA and the Master Settlement Agreement, this industry is.
Punishment is not necessary to deter future misconduct because this industry and Philip Morris is now fully under the control of those governmental entities.
If any of these designs that were talked about and floated in this courtroom have any bearing, well, the federal government will tell Philip Morris that they should do that.
And so you should consider -- if I can see the next instruction, you should consider, when you consider punitive damages, whether Philip Morris USA's conduct has changed from the conduct on which you based your determination that punitive damages were warranted and to the extent to which circumstances have changed.
If you punish Philip Morris in this case, you'll be punishing not the people you saw in those old, grainy videotapes. They're long gone.
You will be punishing a company that
hires someone like Richard Jupe, who was straight with you, was totally straight with you, and plaintiff unfairly attacks in their closing, totally straight with you and takes his job seriously about trying to make less hazardous products and comply with federal and state laws
governing the tobacco companies. That s who you would be punishing.
And, finally, the verdict form will show you, and this is just a reminder, that you are considering punitive damages, if at all in this case, under the circumstances of this case.
One thing to remember is that punitive damages are an award that would go to Ellen Tate. You don't get to fund research on emphysema or education through a punitive damages award.
If you award compensatory damages, they will go to Ellen Tate and will be on top of any award for compensatory damages that you would have made for her losses.
THE CLERK: Fifteen minutes.
MR. PHILLIPS: Thank you, ma'am.
This will be additional money to her. I submit, ladies and gentlemen, nothing about the connection between Ellen Tate and Philip Morris in
detrimental reliance on things that were said or not said justifies any consideration of punitive damages in this case.
If you were to consider punitive damages, then you should consider it in the context of her claim, and it certainly should be no more than any compensatory award that you consider to be adequate.
But, in the end, it is you who have
discretion to decline to assess punitive damages. That's an instruction the Court will give you.
Ms. Mason and I thank you for the critical eye that you've given the evidence. We thank you for listening, for paying attention and taking your responsibility so earnestly.
It remains a responsibility that is unique to our citizenship, and you've done a serious and responsible job of it.
I ask your indulgence for one more issue. If, when you begin deliberating, any one of you begins talking about magazine articles or television shows that you've read that would add information from the evidence that you've seen, you need to stop each other when you do that.
It's natural, because we all have things
that we've heard. Cigarettes are things that we know about or have heard about, and we all bring that into the courtroom, but that's not evidence for purposes of evaluating this case, Ellen Tate's claims, and whether any compensation is due her.
So stop each other when you do that.
It's a natural tendency, but it's something the jurors need to be true to when they talk to each other and deliberate only on the evidence and the instructions that His Honor will give you.
Plaintiff gets the last word. She's ably represented. We will not be permitted to
respond, so please keep your critical eye.
What's the connection between the evidence you've heard and Ellen Tate? What's the connection between the tobacco companies and Philip Morris that's been rolled out for you very effectively and Ellen Tate and her life and her decisions? What's the connection?
How do their arguments connect to the decisions that she made in her life? Think about what I might have said in response since I won't be able to. Better yet, think about what Ms. Mason might have said in response.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. We
really do feel privileged to have tried this case before you.
