                    CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. SHIELDS:  Good afternoon.  This case is
     about addiction.  As Dr. David Burns, our first
     witness, told you, and as the 2010 Surgeon
     General's report confirms:  Nicotine addiction is
     the fundamental reason smokers persist in smoking
     and persisting in smoking is what causes diseases
     such as COPD.
          Now, Helen Taylor was just 14 years of age
     when she started to smoked with her friend Jane.
     She thought it was cool.  She thought it was
     glamorous.  She thought it made her look more
     adult.  It made her look more like the older girls
     that worked at the beauty shop where she worked
     part time on Saturdays.
          Back then, it was different.  It was normal to smoke.  To Helen and Jane, it seemed like everyone
     around them smoked; their friends, their parents,
     their teachers, even the priests.
          Ads for cigarettes were everywhere.  It was
     like wallpaper, on television, magazines,
     newspapers with celebrities and athletes, and even
     doctors endorsing one brand of cigarette over
     another.
          Helen, when she started, smoked a few
     cigarettes and then smoked more and more, and by
     the time she was a junior or so in high school, she
     was a regular daily smoker.
          By the time of her senior year when she got
     married at age 17, she was smoking about a pack a
     day.  And that increased over the years until she
     got as high as over two packs a day and sometimes
     even three packs a day.
          She was addicted.  And when she was diagnosed
     with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 1996
     and the doctors told her, her very life depended
     upon quitting smoking, she seriously tried to quit
     and struggled with numerous quit attempts for the
     next almost 18 years, using everything available to
     try to help her quit.  She finally succeeded in
     March of this year. John, Michael and I are proud to represent
     Helen Taylor in this claim against Reynolds Tobacco
     Company for her injuries.  We want to thank you for
     your attention throughout this.  I know it's been a
     long process.  There's been a lot of complicated
     evidence.  You've been very attentive.  You've
     listened closely.  We couldn't have asked for more.
     So we thank you again for your service.
          This closing argument is our last opportunity
     to explain to you what the evidence is, what our
     contentions are, and how it all fits together.
          As you know, this case grows out of a class
     action lawsuit started a long time called the Engle
     class action where a limited number of
     representatives brought a suit on behalf of all
     Florida smokers who have suffered of medical
     conditions and diseases caused by their addiction
     to cigarettes containing nicotine.
          Well, that trial occurred in 1999 and the jury
     returned a verdict finding, given the facts that
     gradually worked its way up to the Florida Supreme
     Court and these individual cases such as this case
     were then authorized to proceed.  And that's the
     reason why it is so many years later that we're
     finally in front of you in connection with Helen's claim.
          As I was organizing my thoughts last night, I
     thought what's the best way to explain our claim?
     What's the best way to review the evidence?  And it
     occurred to me that what made the most sense was to
     follow the verdict form that you would be given,
     what you would have to fill out when you go into
     deliberations, and work through that with you and
     talk about the evidence in regard to the various
     issues on the verdict form.
          There are four primary issues that are raised
     by the questions on the verdict form.  The first
     issue and the most important is whether
     Helen Taylor was a member of the Engle class, the
     class membership issue.
          To be a member of the class, we must prove
     that Helen Taylor was addicted to cigarettes, that
     smoking because of her addiction caused her disease, and that she was
     diagnosed and manifested the symptoms of disease before November 21,
     1996.
          If Helen was a member of the class, then she
     gets the benefits of the finding of that first
     trial.  You as a jury, as the court has instructed you, are bound to apply those findings.
          The second issue that you will need to address
     and that's set out on the verdict form deals with
     what is called specific causation.  The first part
     of that issue is whether Reynolds' cigarettes were
     a cause of Mrs. Taylor's disease.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Misstates the law.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. SHIELDS:  It doesn't have to be the
     element cause.  There can be more than one cause.
     The court will instruct you about concurrent cause.
     It is sufficient that Reynolds -- smoking Reynolds
     cigarettes was a substantial contributing cause, as
     the court will instruct you --
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Misstates the law.  We request a sidebar.
               (A sidebar conference was held outside
the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Instruction requires us to be
     but for cause, so saying it's a substantial cause
     is insufficient.  It has to be a but for cause.
          MR. SHIELDS:  That is why I said the court
     will instruct you.  Your Honor, are we going to play the game?
          THE COURT:  I sure hope not.  Let me just tell
     you, and he said as the court will instruct.  If
     you guys want to get down to the actual letter of
     the instructions, that is fine.
          And if you're going to jump up and object, I
     can't stop it.  I'm not going to like it, but I
     can't stop it.  But what I will do is I will stop
     you from talking about the law at all.  And I'll
     read the law to the jury and you guys won't refer
     to it.
          Can you talk about the facts, kind of glance
     by the law?  It's argument, I get it.  But I don't
     want to start off -- we're into this less than five
     minutes and you get up twice.  I can't stop it.  If
     you want to object every time he makes a statement,
     go ahead.  But I would prefer we kind of let each
     other make your argument.  I'll read them the law.
     I think juries are pretty smart.  They're going to
     take it back.  They're not going to soak this in
     right now and, oh, that man said this, they're
     getting concepts.  They're not going to remember
     these things verbatim.  So that's just my --
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Judge, I appreciate that and
     I'm fine with that.  Obviously, I don't want to be in a position where I haven't objected to him
     misstating, and I spend my whole argument and you
     must state the law and I'm in a position, well, you
     didn't object.  I've been in that situation a few
     times.  If that's going to be the lay of the land,
     that's the lay of the land.
          THE COURT:  Well, he gets two anyway, and
     whether he wants more than two or not, it depends
     how many you get.  Try to keep it as even as I can.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  I understand where the Court is
     going, that's my preference too, but I don't want
     to be in a position --
          THE COURT:  I get it, I get it.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  I thought we were just going to
     go instead of everything going we ground down.
          THE COURT:  I understand.  So -- well, I guess
     give him a little leeway.  If it gets a little
     egregious, jump up.  I expect he'll do the same.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Fair enough.
               (The sidebar conference ended and
proceedings took place in open court as follows:)
          MR. SHIELDS:  We were talking about the
     specific causation issue in overview.  There is a
     second part of the specific causation issue you
     will need to decide, and that is in connection with conspiracy and fraudulent concealment claims, and
     specifically whether Mrs. Taylor relied upon their
     fraudulent concealment of material information.
          The third major issue as set out in the
     verdict form and you're going to need to decide is
     called comparative fault.  Under Florida law, fault
     is not an all or nothing proposition.  That is,
     even if a plaintiff is at fault, a plaintiff may
     still be able to recover.
          You in those circumstances, however, would
     compare the fault of the plaintiff to the fault of
     the defendant.  That issue of comparative fault
     will be given further instruction by the court.
          But let me be clear from the very beginning,
     we acknowledge that Helen Taylor had some measure
     of fault in not quitting smoking sooner.  But it
     was in combination with the fault of R.J. Reynolds
     in various misconduct we'll talk about in more
     detail over decades.
          We acknowledge that.  R.J. Reynolds does not.
     Mr. Hohnbaum told you at the beginning of this case
     that Reynolds has zero responsibility.  A large
     part of this case is determining what
     responsibility they have and comparing it to what
     responsibility Helen Taylor has. The fourth area we will need to talk about is
     damages.  There are two types of damages;
     compensatory damages such as lost wages, medical
     expenses, so forth that we talked about and
     provided evidence on.  But there's also the
     question of whether to award punitive damages.
     Punitive damages is designed to deter and punish
     misconduct.
          So those are the four issues that you're going
     to have to deal with.  They are set out in various
     questions in the verdict form.  Let's talk about
     each in more detail.
          First, class membership.  The class membership
     issue will be addressed by the court and will be
     given -- you will be given an instruction as to
     what constitutes class membership.  We can bring up
     the instruction.
          The instruction basically gives three things
     that you're going to have to deal with.  One is the
     question of whether Helen Taylor was addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine; two is whether her
     continued smoking was because of her addiction to
     cigarettes; and three is whether the
     smoking-induced disease of disease was manifested on or before November 21, 1996.
          There is compelling evidence to the first,
     that Helen Taylor was addicted to cigarettes that
     contain nicotine.  Our first witness in regard to
     that was Dr. Burns.  Dr. Burns is a leading expert
     on addiction in this country.
          He is the author of the chapters on addiction
     in the two leading textbooks used by all medical
     schools in this country.  He is the author of every
     Surgeon General's report -- author and the reviewer
     of every Surgeon General's report since 1975.  He
     has written extensively about addiction.
          And what he told you was, first, addiction is
     a brain disease; second, cigarettes are addictive,
     and nicotine is the reason cigarettes are
     addictive.  Nicotine is the fundamental reason
     smokers continue to smoke.
          And he showed you how difficult it was for
     addicted smokers to quit.  This is one of the
     charts that he used.  What the chart showed is that
     about 80 percent of daily -- of smokers are daily
     smokers, about little less than 70 percent want to
     quit, and a little more than 50 percent try to quit
     each year, but only 6.2 percent are successful
     within six months. Meaning that of those 50 percent that try and
     quit, most of them are going to relapse within the
     first six months.  And then if you look at the
     longer run of saying one year, only 3 percent of
     smokers who try to quit remain quit for one year.
          And he explained the reason why that occurred
     is because of this trapping cycle of addicted
     cigarettes.  He gave you this example under
     Figure 18 of how an addicted smoker goes through
     this process of trying to quit, working up to quit,
     and all of the things that intercept them from
     being able to accomplish it.
          Filters, low tar, lights, the kinds of claims
     that the cigarette companies were making, and the
     likelihood that an addicted smoker would want to
     believe it.
          And he gave you another example of that in a
     figure which showed the competing pressures that
     occur on whether to quit or not to quit, and the
     effect of the campaign to convince smokers that
     they should continue to smoking by the cigarette
     companies versus the campaign of the public health
     community to try and get smokers to quit.
          And he explained how that process of denial,
     doubt, controversy pushes the addicted smoker to continue smoking.  All of that's confirmed by the
     2010 Surgeon General's report which sets out in
     detail the reason smokers don't succeed in quitting
     is nicotine addiction.
          You take nicotine out of cigarettes and people
     won't continue to smoke them.  You take the amount
     of nicotine necessary to sustain addiction out of
     cigarettes and smokers won't continue to smoke.
     There is a threshold level known by the tobacco
     companies and they make sure they have that level
     to keep smokers addicted so that they can keep
     selling their product.
          Dr. Burns specifically told you that
     cigarettes are engineered and designed to create
     and sustain addiction.  Now, there is absolutely no
     evidence to the contrary.  They didn't put on any
     witness to deny that they created and sustained
     addiction by manipulating and engineering their
     cigarettes to make sure they were addictive, to
     make sure they had the threshold level.
          Dr. Burns then analyzed whether Helen Taylor
     was addicted.  And he told you all the
     considerations that he looked at which are set out
     in the Surgeon General's report in 2010, whether
     she was a compulsive smoker, what quit attempts she made, how long she smoked, how much she smoked, all
     of those factors were considered by him, and the
     leading authority in the country on addiction said,
     in my opinion, Helen Taylor clearly was addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine.
          Now, the evidence of her smoking history
     supports that as well, starting with the fact that
     she started smoking at age 14, when she was young,
     as do most smokers, they start -- virtually
     90 percent of smokers start as teenagers.
          And her and a friend, Jane, became regular
     smokers, gradually increasing the amount they
     smoked.  She smoked around her mom.  She smoked at
     school.  She smoked in front of teachers.  She
     smoked in a designated smoking area at school, as
     did the other students.
          And when she got married at 17, she smoked
     even more and more.  You recall what Michael said:
     Smoking was their way of life.  She smoked all the
     time.  Their life was built around their smoking.
          Now, she made numerous attempts to quit, and
     they are documented in the medical records.  Go
     through the medical records, it's not just
     Dr. Kennison, but it's the other medical records as
     well document her request for assistance for smoking, her prescriptions for medications, the
     fact that she is trying to quit smoking.  All of
     that is in those extensive medical records.
          She did literally everything you can do to try
     and quit smoking.  She used nicotine patches,
     nicotine gum, nicotine lozenges.  She had hypnosis.
     She went to psychotherapist, Dr. Kennison, and had
     treatment and came in to see her to help stop
     smoking.  She attended two multi-week stop smoking
     schools.
          She had Wellbutrin prescribed for her.
     Ultimately, Chantix prescribed for her.  She used
     an electronic cigarette.  There was nothing left
     that she could do that she didn't attempt to do to
     quit smoking.  And she failed and failed and
     failed.
          And each time that she tried, she went through
     severe withdrawal symptoms.  She described those
     symptoms for you:  Irritability and anger,
     anxiousness, inability to concentrate,
     restlessness, inability to sleep.
          She summed it up by saying she just felt like
     she was dying.  She would break down and cry and
     say, "It's better to die than feel like this."
     That's severe addiction.  And it's borne out by all of the evidence.
          Yes, there were times that she told doctors
     that she didn't want to quit, and there were times
     she told doctors she enjoyed it.  That's part of
     the denial process and that she explained it was
     part of the process, she knew she would quit --
     should quit.
          She tried.  Having a further conversation with
     them wasn't going to help anymore.  And
     consequently, the easiest way to do with it is say,
     "No, I don't want to talk about it anymore."That's
     part of the denial process of the addicted smoker.
          You not only have Dr. Burns' testimony, you
     have Dr. Kennison's testimony about what she
     diagnosed her as being nicotine dependent.  You
     need to compare Dr. Kennison, Dr. Burns, and
     Dr. Frazier to the one expert that the defendants
     offered on this question on addiction, Dr. Ticknor.
     Dr. Ticknor testified that he didn't believe she
     was addicted.
          Michael, let's go forward to the Burns
     particular slide.
          And in thinking about Dr. Burns and
     Dr. Ticknor, think about the credentials of the two.  Here is Dr. David Burns, the leading expert
     on addiction in the country, graduate of
     Harvard Medical School, worked for the
     National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, major
     role in every Surgeon General's report since the
     '70s, done work for the National Cancer Institute
     and the World Health Organization, highly
     published, and is the author of the leading texts
     on addiction.
          And then there's Dr. Christopher Ticknor.
     Never written anything on addiction, never asked to
     be on any panel for the Surgeon General or any
     other professional organization, never done any
     studies, never done any analysis, never
     participated in any clinical studies for nicotine
     addiction, and he's not certified in addiction
     medicine.
          He's not certified in addiction medicine
     because he never went through an addiction medicine
     training program.  He had no specialty training in
     addiction medicine at all.
          He also claims to be affiliated with the
     University of Texas Health Science Center in
     San Antonio, but admits he's not listed as a
     faculty member, adjunct faculty member or any other role in connection with their website.
          More important, Dr. Ticknor in order to reach
     the opinions he wants to reach misstates what the
     requirements of DSM V are.  He says if there is a
     separate requirement for clinical significance.
     And you can read, as we did this morning, exactly
     what it says.  It doesn't say "and," and it doesn't
     say what he attempted to suggest was required.
          What he did was define addiction so that
     virtually no one would qualify.  And remember the
     end of my cross-examination of him, in which
     basically said in order to meet all of these
     requirements, you're going to have to be psychotic,
     schizophrenic, mentally retarded, severe mentally
     disabled so that you're unable to form the intent
     to quit before he would ever call you addicted or
     say that addiction had anything to do with your
     continued smoking.
          That is not what DSM V says.  That's not what
     the Surgeon General's report says.  That's not what
     the experts in the field say.
          Ask yourself one question:  Why is it that the
     only person that would come testify or that they
     brought to testify was not a specialist in
     addiction, not someone certified in addiction medicine, not a doctor in Florida, but go out to
     San Antonio, Texas, and get a general psychiatrist
     who doesn't have any credentials and have him come
     in and say that she wasn't addicted?
          The second part of addiction is whether she
     continued to smoke because of her addiction.  The
     evidence is overwhelming that Mrs. Taylor continued
     to smoke because of her addiction.  That is all
     that's required.
          We saw the charge you'll get on what class
     membership means and the language of because of is
     the reason one continued to smoke.  And if you find
     that Helen Taylor continued to smoke because she
     was addicted, then that element of class membership
     requirement is met.
          It doesn't have to be the only reason she
     continued to smoke.  She can enjoy smoking which is
     part of what the whole process of addiction is
     about.  She can have other reasons why she liked to
     smoke.  But if addiction is one of the reasons she
     continued to smoke, because of addiction, then we
     have met the requirement for class membership.
          And you will hear a lot about choice and
     whether she chose to smoke.  The issue is not
     whether she chose to smoke.  The issue is whether she was addicted and whether that played a role in
     her continuing to smoke.  Whether she chose to
     smoke may go to the question of comparative fault,
     but not whether she is a member of the class.
          The final requirement for class membership was
     that she was diagnosed with COPD by November 21,
     1996.  And you've heard a lot about this in the
     trial.  Let's review again the available medical
     records and what they show.
          The first important medical record is
     July 22nd, 1996.  Obviously before November 21,
     1996.  And it's the record in which Helen Taylor
     comes in to University Medical Center as an
     outpatient complaining of shortness of breath, and
     the impression of the physician is that she has
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
          You will have that record.  You can read it.
     That's the diagnosis.  It is what is signed off on,
     not only by the resident, but by the attending
     physician who was supervising her.
          It also indicates that they were doing a chest
     x-ray and we'll see the results of the chest x-ray
     on the next document.  But the important point is
     that the diagnosis and impression in July was
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. If there's any question about that, we go to
     the next one, October 16, 1996, obviously before
     November 21.  And, again, she is diagnosed
     specifically with chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease.
          She is given medication for disease.  She had a chest
     x-ray which showed a hyperinflated lung which is
     one of the findings supporting disease.  And her major complaint is that
     she had shortness of breath upon exertion which is
     one of the fundamental symptoms of disease.
          And one thing to note about both of these
     documents, neither of them indicates that she had
     any prior history of shortness of breath, that she
     had seen a doctor before for shortness of breath,
     that she had any prior diagnosis.
          And that's the way it works.  You go in and
     see a doctor, they take what is called a history.
     What are your complaints?  Have you been treated
     for them before?  Have you been diagnosed before
     them before?  There's nothing about any prior
     diagnosis.  There's nothing about asthma.  There's
     nothing about any prior shortness of breath. There's no history whatsoever.  And that's
     significant.  We'll talk about that in a moment.
          The next thing after this October 16 is in
     February she's hospitalized, and she's admitted for
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation.
          And the diagnosis when she leaves the hospital
     after she's been treated and hospitalized is that
     she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
     exacerbation.
          She then has, in March, pulmonary function
     test to define, as Dr. Burns says, the extent of
     her pulmonary obstruction.  We don't have copies of
     that report.  That report is gone.  What we do have
     is a medical report that sets out the results,
     December 9th, 1997.
          That document shows that she had moderate
     obstructive pulmonary disease that did not respond
     with bronchodilators, what is normally as the
     general way you distinguish asthma from disease.
          Now, you clearly then have a diagnosis of
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease before
     November 21, 1996, but the defense expert
     Dr. Schroeder says it wasn't COPD, it was asthma.
          And he says that despite the fact that there's no prior history of asthma, that the diagnosis
     doesn't say asthma, that the pulmonary function
     tests do not show any reversal from bronchodilators
     the way you determine asthma versus disease.
          And most importantly, he ignores all of the
     hospitalizations that have occurred thereafter.
     And we showed you those at the beginning of the
     case.  Let's bring up that list.
          This list is several pages long.  It's not
     every time she was diagnosed with COPD, it's just
     the major times.  If you worked your way through
     the medical records, time and time again she is
     diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease exacerbation, starting in July of 1996
     running through 2014.
          Over and over again, doctor after doctor.  At
     least three board-certified pulmonologists;
     Dr. Bagnoli, Dr. Cury, and Dr. Laos.
          Yet, we have a doctor come in from California
     who's made almost a million dollars testifying for
     them in other cases who says, "Oh, no, they're all
     wrong, it was asthma.  It was asthma she had as
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease."
          Why that whole thing about saying it's asthma instead of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?
     In order to avoid her qualifying to the class.  He
     admits she has chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease.  He admits it's caused by smoking.  But he
     wants to push it farther back in time.  And why
     push it father back in time?  So she wouldn't
     qualify for the class.  That's all that's about.
          And to do that, he has to ignore dozens of
     doctors who have treated her and diagnosed her as
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, including
     board-certified pulmonologists.  And he has to
     ignore the fact that the tests showed over and over
     again that it wasn't reversible which is what you
     would expect if it was asthma instead of disease.
          Let me show you one of those, and that's the
     report from Dr. Laos of June 10, 1994 -- 1999.
     This is a University of Florida professor of
     pulmonology who was brought in as a specialist in
     1999 when she was hospitalized to perform pulmonary
     function tests to confirm that she had disease.
          Read that document.  What it says is it shows
     that the test indicates she has disease.  He indicates that she has a history of it for the last four years.  Nowhere in
     there does he suggest any possibility of asthma.
     It's chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
          The experts all reach that conclusion.  One of
     them was Dr. Bagnoli.  Dr. Bagnoli is her treating
     physician.  He diagnosed her as suffering from
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
          And he went back and looked at all those
     records and told you under oath that she was
     diagnosed and had chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease before November of 1996.
          So the conditions for class membership clearly
     have been met.
          Let's go, then, to the second issue, the issue
     of causation.  There is no dispute here that
     smoking was the cause of Helen Taylor's disease.  Their only expert
     on that, Dr. Schroeder, admitted that she had
     chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and that it
     was caused by smoking.
          But Reynolds claims that it wasn't their
     brands that caused it.  And the evidence gets a
     little bit confusing here.  Helen was quite candid
     with you and said to you it's hard to remember
     going back with any decision, but before 1996, there was about an equal division between the
     Winston and Marlboro.
          The evidence we have is that from 1958 to
     1961, she smoked several brands; Pall Mall,
     Winston, her friend Jane said they smoked,
     Lucky Strike.  All of those are Reynolds brands.
     Either because Reynolds had manufactured them at
     the time or they bought the company that did, and
     the court will instruct you they're responsible for
     that company's brands as well.  Only one, L&M, did
     she smoke some during that time is not a Reynolds
     brand.
          And then following that from 1962 forward, her
     principal brand was Winston for a long period of
     time.  She says she thinks it was about an equal
     period of time with Marlboro before 1996.  She has
     testified at various times of estimates of maybe it
     was up to '72, maybe it was up to 1979.
          The fact is if you look at the '72 period and
     you look at the '79 period, it's a substantial
     amount in either event.  If you took the 1979
     period as to when she switched to Marlboro, then
     the majority of her use is Winston and the brands
     manufactured by Reynolds.  Twenty-one years versus
     16. If you take '72, it flips.  But in either
     event, it's pretty close, as Helen said, to being a
     similar amount of time between two brands.
          Dr. Burns is the only witness that addressed
     whether that was sufficient to be a cause, as the
     court will instruct you, of her disease.
          And what he testified to was that her smoking
     of Reynolds brands caused the injury to her lungs,
     which was then part of the additional injury caused
     by smoking Marlboro that resulted in disease.
          The question of causation is what is called
     concurring cause.  We believe that the court will
     instruct you on what is called substantial
     contributing factor, that is that there can be more
     than one cause, it could be both Marlboro and
     Winston and other brands, if in the normal course
     of events it leads to it and each is a substantial
     contributing factor without which the event would
     have occurred.  That is exactly what Dr. Burns told
     you.
          Remember his analogy of the tractor-trailer
     with two trailers behind it?  And he said it's
     going over the bridge and the bridge collapsed.  If you used Reynolds' argument, they would say, "We're
     the first trailer, Philip Morris with Marlboro is
     the second trailer.  And if you took away our
     trailer, she wouldn't have had it.  So we weren't
     the cause."
          And Philip Morris would say, "Well, if you
     took away our trailer, she wouldn't have had it,
     and we're not the cause."
          So, as Dr. Burns said under that analysis, the
     bridge didn't collapse.  Well, the bridge did
     collapse.  She did get disease.  The question is whether each
     was a substantial contributing factor, and if you
     took it away, whether she would have avoided the
     disease.
          That's exactly what Dr. Burns told you.  There
     is no testimony to the contrary.  The only other
     testimony came from Dr. Schroeder when he testified
     yesterday that had she quit in 1972, she may have
     avoided COPD, she may not have gotten it when she
     did.
          But the issue is not if she quit.  She didn't
     quit.  She continued to smoke.  She did get COPD.
     So the question is:  What caused it?  What
     contributed to causing it?  And the only one who answered that question was Dr. Burns.  He says that
     Reynolds brands contributed to causing it using
     this analysis.
          He also said there's a second reason that
     Reynolds brands caused it, and that is she got
     addicted to smoking cigarettes that were
     manufactured by Reynolds.  And if she hadn't been
     addicted, she would have never continued to smoke.
     She wouldn't have smoked any Marlboro to begin
     with.
          It's a real simple concept to understand.
     Almost all smoking starts as a teenager.  It is
     rare anybody starts to smoke the first time over
     21 years of age, and almost nonexistent that people
     start smoking for the first time when they're 25.
          Had she not smoked the Reynolds brands and
     become addicted, whether it's 1972, whether it's
     1979, whether it's a later period of time, she
     would never have picked up the Marlboros to begin
     with because she wouldn't have been addicted to the
     cigarettes to begin with.
          And that's exactly what Dr. Burns said.  It is
     both because she was addicted that the Marlboro --
     that the Reynolds brands were a cause, and because
     it worked in combination with the Marlboro brands, both were substantial contributing factors, both
     contributed to causing her disease and peripheral vascular disease.
          The remaining issue dealing with the question
     of causation is the question under the two other
     counts; conspiracy, fraudulent concealment of
     whether Helen Taylor relied upon the conduct of
     Reynolds and the other conspirators.
          For that, we're going to have to review the
     evidence relating to that.  And what we told you at
     the beginning of the case was that an overview of
     the misconduct was quite simple.
          One, they targeted kids; two, they engineered
     cigarettes to make sure that they created addiction
     and that they kept people addicted so that they
     would continue to smoke.
          And three, they entered into a conspiracy
     among -- with each other to keep addicted smokers
     smoking by denying the hazards of cigarettes, by
     claiming there was doubt about the scientific
     evidence, by reassuring smokers that if there was
     anything hazardous in cigarettes, they would find
     it and take it out when they knew what was in there
     and they knew they couldn't possibly take it out.
          The evidence that they targeted kids is overwhelming.  And you have not heard one piece of
     evidence, any testimony whatsoever from Reynolds
     denying it.
          The best evidence that they targeted kids is
     the simple fact of what they say in their internal
     documents.  Dr. Krugman was the principal person
     who talked about this issue.  And Dr. Krugman told
     you that he had reviewed their internal documents,
     and as a result of which, it was absolutely obvious
     that they were targeting kids.
          And among the documents that we showed you was
     first the fact that they had studied the 14- to
     17-year-old market.  Why do you study 14- to
     17-year-old smokers?  So that you can figure out
     how to keep -- get them to buy your cigarettes.
          You've got a whole series of documents
     starting in 1950s and running through the 1990s in
     which they're studying 14- to 17-year-olds and why
     they smoke.
          They also, we showed you specific documents
     from them where they indicated that what they were
     going to do was increase their franchise of the 14-
     to 17-year-old market.
          If you go to this particular document, perhaps
     the most important one.  It is the 1975 marketing plans presented to the board of directors of
     R.J. Reynolds at Hilton Head Island about 1974
     about their plans for 1975 and the years that
     follow.
          And their plan was to increase what they
     called their young adult franchise, but that young
     adult franchise went down to age 14.  The documents
     that show they targeted kids are just overwhelming.
     Their internal documents clearly confirm that they
     were targeting children.
          In addition to that, Dr. Krugman told you
     about all the money they spent on advertising in
     order to create images and pressure on children to
     smoke.
          He told you that they adopted a cigarette
     advertising code in order to suggest that they
     weren't targeting kids and that they routinely
     violated it with their ads.  And he showed you some
     examples of their ads.
          If you can bring up that composite, Michael.
          You'll have in evidence a composite of ads
     that we showed you.  And these ads are just
     absolutely clear that they're targeting children,
     both because of where they're located, because of
     how they look, and because of the content of the ad.
          Dr. Krugman went through them and analyzed
     them and had looked at them and said how, for
     example, do you look at this Camel Lights ad of
     Joe Camel playing pool with his hat on backwards
     with a cigarette in his hand and say that the
     purpose of that ad is not to try and influence kids
     to smoke?  That's clearly what they were doing, as
     their own internal documents indicate.
          Secondly, in addition to -- well, the fact
     that they targeted kids is not just something that
     Dr. Krugman believed.  We showed you that there
     were four consensus reports from agencies that had
     reviewed the issue and reached the same conclusion.
          The Federal Trade Commission in 1967 reported
     to Congress on their targeting kids and how
     successful it was so that virtually all Americans,
     including teenagers, were subject to their
     advertising.
          The 1981 Federal Trade Commission report again
     confirmed the effect on children of their extensive
     advertising.
          The 1994 Surgeon General's report reported
     specifically that their extensive targeting of
     children and their advertising had, in fact, resulted in children starting to smoke and
     continuing to smoke.
          And the 2008 National Cancer Institute report,
     Exhibit 431, also reached the conclusion that their
     advertising and targeting of children resulted in
     getting kids to smoke and in keeping them to smoke.
          The total weight of the evidence from multiple
     types of studies conducted by investigators from
     different disciplines using data from many
     countries demonstrates a causal relationship
     between tobacco advertising and promotional and
     increased tobacco use, particularly in connection
     with kids.
          The second area of misconduct that we showed
     you was how they designed and engineered their
     cigarettes to be addictive.  He showed you a
     document of what the highly-engineered cigarette
     was.
          And Dr. Burns explained cigarettes aren't just
     tobacco rolled in paper, they're highly-engineered
     products that include how you develop the paper,
     where the holes are placed in them, how flammable
     the paper is, what the filter is, what the tobacco
     itself is.
          And what he told you was that they engineer them to make them addictible first by making them
     inhalable.  It's only if you get the smoke down to
     your lungs deeply is it addictive because then it
     hits your brain seven seconds later.  If you can't
     inhale it, then you don't become addicted.
          The second thing it did to make sure that
     people were addicted was they manipulated the
     levels of nicotine to make sure it reached the
     level necessary for a threshold to create
     addiction.
          And Dr. Burns told you about blending various
     leaves and stem, using reconstituted tobacco where
     they added nicotine back into the sheath and
     blended together to get the minimum level of
     nicotine necessary for addiction.
          Finally, they added chemicals to make it more
     addictive.  Among them was ammonia.  Among them was
     acetaldehyde.  The purpose of which was to make the
     product have more of a nicotine kick, and as a
     result, to make it more addictive.
          So they targeted children.  They engineered
     their cigarettes to make sure they would become
     addicted and stay addicted.
          And then finally, they entered into a
     conspiracy which they engaged in for close to 50 years to deny that cigarettes were hazardous, to
     create doubt about whether they were hazardous, and
     to reassure smokers that they should continue
     smoking.
          Now, the conspiracy is significant.  I'll stop
     for a moment and explain the significance related
     to the conspiracy.  One of the Engle findings was
     that they entered into this conspiracy.
          The reason is that a conspiracy means that if
     Reynolds was a member of that conspiracy, they're
     liable for the conduct of the other members of the
     conspiracy done in furtherance of the conspiracy.
     They're liable for what Philip Morris may have
     done, what The Tobacco Institute may have done,
     what the TIRC would have done.
          So the question of whether or not Reynolds
     brands caused chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
     is actually irrelevant in the conspiracy count
     because they're liable under the conspiracy count
     even if her disease was caused by some brand other
     than a Reynolds brand.  That's the significance of
     the conspiracy count.
          And the finding was that they engaged in
     conspiracy.  And what's the evidence of that?
     Well, the evidence starts with the development of the scientific evidence that cigarettes are
     hazardous.
          He told you about that, that it started in the
     early 1950s with four epidemiological studies that
     set out for the first time that cigarettes caused
     lung cancer and caused an uproar in the tobacco
     industry about what they should do.
          That -- those studies were followed by a mouse
     skin painting study in 1953 that confirmed that
     cigarette tar could cause cancer and was consistent
     with these studies.
          It was in that same time period that Reynolds
     looked into it.  And their top scientist,
     Dr. Claude Teague, wrote a memorandum in which he
     reviewed the scientific evidence.  And what he
     concluded was that the studies tend to confirm the
     relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco
     smoking and cancer of the lung.
          It was a secret document.  It was not
     disclosed.  And most importantly, they said just
     the reverse publically from what their internal
     people were telling them.
          A few years later, they repeated the work and
     Dr. Rodgman also as part of their research
     department wrote a memo that indicated that cigarette smoke was a major causative factor in the
     presence of the high increasing incidence of cancer
     in the lungs in humans.
          It was secret.  They did not disclose it.
     Yet, their public relations people and their
     executives went out and denied that cigarette
     smoking was a causative factor.
          Next, there was a visit of foreign cigarette
     manufacturers to the U.S. manufacturers to see what
     they thought about whether cigarette smoking caused
     cancer.  And we have the memo of what they thought.
          They visited all of the tobacco companies and
     concluded that all of them with one exception,
     professor at Yale, thought that cigarette smoking
     caused lung cancer, confirming what they thought.
          And then finally, we showed you a 1962 memo
     from a Dr. Rodgman again in which he concluded that
     the amount of evidence accumulated to cigarette
     smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming.
          So we know what the evidence was and what they
     thought.  What did they do?  The evidence is with
     this growing body of evidence that cigarettes
     caused cancer, the presidents of all the tobacco
     companies, including the president of
     R.J. Reynolds, president of American Tobacco which later became part of R.J. Reynolds, the president
     of Brown & Williamson which later became apart of
     R.J. Reynolds, they got together at the Plaza Hotel
     just before Christmas in 1953 and they agreed upon
     a plan.
          And it was not to deal with the medical issue,
     not to deal with the fact that their customers may
     be dying of cancer from smoking, but how to deal
     with it as a public relations problem.
          And they hired the best known public relations
     company at the time out of New York City, Hill &
     Knowlton.  And we have the documents to show what
     they thought at the time because Hill & Knowlton
     wrote memos about their meetings with them.
          And their memos indicate, one, that they
     believed and understood it caused cancer; and two,
     that they knew it was addictive, that people could
     not quit.  They knew that, as these documents show,
     at least by 1953.
          We know from the Claude Teague memo that they
     knew earlier in February of 1953.  And what did
     they do?  They agreed upon a campaign in which they
     would use the vast resources of the tobacco
     companies to deny that cigarettes were a health
     hazard. In which they would claim that the scientific
     evidence was in doubt, that there was a
     controversy, and in which they would reassure
     smokers by saying, "We will investigate and
     determine whether cigarettes are harmful.  And if
     we find that it's harmful, we'll take it out.  So
     you might as well continue smoking in the interim
     because we're going to solve this problem before
     you have any difficulty."
          And you saw the evidence of them doing that.
     It started with what's call the Frank Statement.
     The Frank Statement was the first in the conspiracy
     campaign.  In that, they set out an ad for every
     newspaper in the country.  They reprinted it and
     sent it around to everybody they could.  And in
     that ad, they claim that there was no proof that
     cigarettes caused cancer.  Yet, their own internal
     documents suggest not only that there was proof but
     they believed it.
          And we accept the interest of people's health
     as a basic responsibility paramount to every other
     consideration of interest in our business.
          That's a line they repeated over and over in
     the ensuing years to reassure people, "We'll find
     out the answer here, don't be worried, just continue smoking."  When they knew internally what
     cigarettes were doing and how harmful they were.
          And in furtherance of this Frank Statement,
     they then issued press releases.  They went out and
     tried to change the stories in magazines and
     newspapers.  They met with television people.  They
     gave interviews.  They did whatever they could not
     just in 1953 and '54 and '55, but in the '60s, the
     '70s, the '80s, the '90s.
          They did not admit that cigarettes were
     harmful until 2000.  After the Engle trial was the
     first admission that cigarettes could be harmful.
     They did not admit that cigarettes were addictive
     until after the first Engle trial in 2000.
          We've given you some of the examples of this.
     They used a front organization called TIRC to
     engage in research designed to convince people that
     the scientific evidence wasn't sufficient when they
     knew it was.
          They created a lobbying organization called
     The Tobacco Institute just down the street from the
     White House that would issue press releases.
     Whenever the Surgeon General said anything saying
     the Surgeon General was wrong, sometimes using more
     blatant language.  And we saw some examples of that when Dr. Burns led you through some of the things
     that were being said.
          When the Surgeon General's report in 1964 was
     given and issued that publically said cigarettes
     caused lung cancer, they sent out their
     representatives, each of the television news
     programs to deny that the evidence was sufficient.
          And claimed, as Howard Cullman did on the
     CBS Evening News, that they would find anything
     that's harmful in cigarettes and take it out, and
     that it was continuing doubt about whether there
     was any problem.
          That continued in the years that followed.
     And we gave you example after example of it.  Let
     me show you a couple of examples to sort of remind
     you of it.
          First, let's go to the president of
     R.J. Reynolds on Nightline.
               (The following video clip was played as
follows:)
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  You said smoking does
     not cause cancer, yes or no?
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer.  It has not been causally
     established. UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Cigarette smoking, no
     causal relationship between cigarette smoking and
     emphysema?
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Despite all of the
     research to date, there has been no causal link
     established.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  No causal relationship
     between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  No.  As a matter of
     fact, there are studies that while we are accused
     of being associated with heart disease, there have
     been studies that are conducted over ten years that
     would say again that science is still puzzled over
     these forces.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Does it stain your
     teeth?
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  There are people who
     say it does.  I guess, depending on the human
     beings' own, let's say, physical makeup, it may
     well stain your teeth.
               (The video clip ended.)
          MR. SHIELDS:  All right.  That's one example.
     That's from the 1980s.  Earlier, The Tobacco
     Institute sent out the representative
     Howard Cullman to make similar statements on Face the Nation.
               (The following video clip was played as
follows:)
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  We are also very
     concerned about the charges leveled against our
     product, and we're very anxious to do whatever we
     can to clear the air in this matter.  We happen to
     be optimistic about the future, and we happen to
     feel that this is a great industry.
          And this industry can face the future with
     confidence because when, as, and if any ingredient
     in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious
     to human health, we are confident that we can
     eliminate that ingredient.
               (The video clip ended.)
          MR. SHIELDS:  That is the example of all three
     of the elements; deny that cigarettes are harmful,
     say that there's some doubt about the evidence, and
     reassure smokers to keep them smoking by saying if
     there's anything harmful, we can find it and take
     it out, so you might as well keep smoking.
          Dr. Burns showed you the consumption charts
     that indicated that the campaign worked.  They also
     denied that cigarettes were addictive.  And perhaps
     the best example we have of that was as late as 1994 when all of the presidents of the companies
     were asked to come before Congress, to raise their
     right hand, swore to tell the truth, the whole
     truth, and nothing but the truth, just like a
     witness here, and each of them, including the
     president of Reynolds, denied that cigarettes were
     addictive.
          Despite the fact that their own internal
     documents showed that going back to the '50s they
     knew and understood that cigarettes were addictive,
     that people would have an extraordinarily difficult
     time quiting, and that the way to keep them
     addicted was to make sure they had the right amount
     of nicotine.
          All of this is summed up in a document that
     indicates what they were selling.  We will bring up
     Plaintiff's Exhibit 305.  This is a document that
     summarizes what they have been doing over the year.
     Their strategy was to create doubt.
          Another one of their documents indicates that
     the product that they were selling was doubt, that
     they could not continue to assert that people had a
     free choice if cigarettes were addictive, and
     consequently, they had to deny that cigarettes were
     addictive.  That's what they did for decades. So the question becomes what impact did that
     have on Helen Taylor?  To understand what impact it
     had, we have to think about what was being
     concealed.
          Reynolds would like you to believe that what
     we are saying is that it was being concealed that
     cigarettes were harmful and look at all these other
     things out, newspapers and public service
     announcements that indicate that cigarettes were
     harmful.
          The point of fraudulent concealment, the point
     of the conspiracy count is not that people didn't
     know that it was being said that cigarettes were
     harmful, but that the cigarette companies knew it
     was harmful.  They knew it was addictive.
          They knew that filters didn't reduce the risk.
     They knew that low tar and light cigarettes were no
     more safe.  They knew that there was no scientific
     controversy.  They knew that the compounds in
     cigarettes that caused disease could not be taken
     out.  Yet, they publically said just the reverse
     and concealed the truth of what they knew.
          And so the question is:  What would have
     happened had they told the truth?  What would have
     happened had they revealed what they knew and fraudulently concealed?
          Helen Taylor told you, "Yes, I had heard that
     cigarettes were harmful.  I saw the label that said
     that they may be.  And I thought that meant that
     they may not be, that there was a controversy."
          She thought the controversy was between one
     man called the Surgeon General and the tobacco
     companies.  And she told you she believed the
     tobacco companies because she didn't think they
     would be allowed to sell cigarettes if they were
     harmful.
          Now, the evidence, the unequivocal evidence is
     that she relied on their campaign of denial and
     doubt.  She believed their campaign of denial and
     doubt.  She didn't think it applied to her.
          That wasn't unusual.  As Dr. Krugman showed
     you, the Federal Trade Commission looked at whether
     the labels were effective in 1967 and concluded
     that they have proven ineffective mainly because
     few people seem to pay any attention to it.
          They looked at the issue again in 1981 and did
     a whole series of surveys and polling information
     to see what people knew and understood and
     discovered that people had very little
     understanding of the true risks of cigarette smoking.
          She had almost no understanding.  She didn't
     think it personally applied to her.  She thought it
     was equivocal one man against the industry and that
     if it really was harmful, the government wouldn't
     allow it.  So she continued to smoke.
          Had the industry been open and honest and
     revealed what they actually knew and believed, it
     would not have been possible for the public to then
     say I believe the industry because the industry
     would have been telling the truth.  It could have
     made all the difference in the world.
          What we have now is a culture which is very
     antismoking, could have been the culture in the
     1950s at the time she started if they would have
     only been truthful about what they knew and
     believed.
          That, ladies and gentlemen, is the only
     evidence on reliance that proves their reliance.
          The third issue that we're going to deal with
     is called comparative fault.  As I told you,
     comparative fault is where you compare the fault of
     one versus the other.  And you'll have a verdict
     form that has a question in which you can assign
     percentages, and the court will instruct you what that applies to.  And you then fill that out.
          As I indicated, we certainly acknowledge that
     you could find and we acknowledge that Helen Taylor
     has some measure of fault for not quitting sooner,
     but so does Reynolds.
          They say zero responsibility.  This case is
     about whether they have some responsibility.  We
     accept it; they do not.  You need to look at their
     whole course of conduct and compare it to
     Helen Taylor's to decide what fault each has.
          She started smoking as a kid.  She quickly
     became addictive.  She smoked more and more.  She
     believed what they said, that it wasn't harmful.
     She believed that it didn't apply.  She believed
     that there was a continuing controversy.
          And then when she got disease and could no longer believe that,
     she tried for almost 18 years to quit smoking doing
     everything possible.  She did exactly what they
     wanted her to do.  That is, they targeted kids; she
     started smoking as a kid.  They designed their
     cigarettes to be addictive; she became addicted.
          They entered into a campaign and conspiracy to
     deny, doubt and reassure, and it worked on her.
     She believed their denials.  She thought there was doubt.  She was reassured because they wouldn't be
     allowed to sell them if it really was harmful.
          In comparison to her, look at their conduct
     over the years.  It is truly reprehensible.  And
     the result of which is that there have been massive
     damages and losses.
          So let me turn to the fourth issue, the
     damages in the case.  There are two types of
     damages.  One called compensatory damages.  The
     second is called punitive damages.
          We will show you the damages in regard to
     compensatory.  Compensatory damages include such
     things as past medical expenses, future medical
     expenses, lost wages, loss of earning capacity.
     The economics.
          We put all the evidence of her medical bills,
     they total $468,654.  We also put on the evidence
     of her lost income and loss of earning capacity.
     You recall Mr. Spruance testified.  Mr. Spruance
     gave you a range of the low end of the range and
     the high end of the range, and you see that in this
     chart.
          The low end of the range for past wage loss,
     future wage loss, future loss of services, medical
     expenses from hospitalizations is $776,000.  The high range is over $2.8 million.  You need to
     decide on the evidence where you think she falls in
     terms of that, given the testimony about what
     damages she's suffered.
          In addition to these economic damages which
     will be on the verdict form, you will also have a
     place on the verdict form to award damages for the
     intangibles, her pain and suffering, her mental
     anguish, her physical impairment.
          Those are damages under Florida law, and the
     court will instruct you on what damages are allowed
     under Florida law, and the verdict form will have a
     specific portion of the verdict form in which you
     can fill out those amounts.
          Now, I suggest that you think about it as
     follows:  Her damages include pain and suffering,
     mental anguish, physical impairment going back at
     least to 1996 to date.  Eighteen years.  A severe
     pain and suffering, mental anguish, impairment,
     hospitalization after hospitalization, ER visit
     after ER visit.
          You call Dr. Burns describing to you what it
     was like to have COPD with the straws getting
     smaller and smaller until you just felt like you
     were suffocating. And you will have a chart that shows what her
     expected life would otherwise be which is added to
     those 18 years so that if she lives anywhere as
     long as her expected life would be, you're going to
     around and in excess of 30 years of pain and
     suffering, physical impairment, mental anguish, all
     of those intangible losses.
          And you need to determine how much that's
     worth.  You can look at in terms of daily basis.
     You can look at it in terms of yearly basis.  You
     can look at it in terms of when it's severe and
     she's in the hospital and she's struggling to
     breathe, how much that should be worth.
          You can look at it in terms of all those ER
     visits in which she was struggling to breathe and
     goes in to seek help because she is panic-stricken.
     She's trying to breathe and can't.  How much all of
     that is worth.
          There's no magic formula.  It's up to you as
     jurors to determine what is a fair and reasonable
     amount.  I suggest to you that a fair and
     reasonable amount for that portion, the intangible
     portion, is no less than $5 million.  That's in
     addition to economic losses that are shown, that's
     in addition to the medical expenses that are shown. All of that should be completed on the verdict
     form.
          That's compensatory damages, but there's a
     second part of damages:  Punitive damages.  The
     court will instruct you on what punitive damages
     refers to.  Punitive damages and the instruction he
     will give you will deal with the purpose of
     deterring and punishing misconduct.
          If ever there was a case that justified
     punitive damages, it is this case.  You have seen
     the extensive evidence of their misconduct;
     targeting kids, designing and creating addiction,
     and conspiring to keep people smoking.
          With what result?  Dr. Burns told you the
     result is 440,000 Americans will die this year of a
     smoking-related disease.  The result is that since
     1964 when the first Surgeon General's report came
     out, 20 million Americans have died as a result of
     smoking cigarettes.  20 million people.  That is
     reprehensible.
          You're going to have to determine, based on
     the record you saw, as laid out by Dr. Burns, as
     laid out by Dr. Krugman, as to whether you ought to
     award punitive damages to punish them for the
     misconduct and to deter them and others from engaging in such misconduct.
          We think the evidence is overwhelming and that
     the final thing you should do on this verdict form
     is check the mark there's an entitlement to
     punitive damages and punitive damages ought to be
     awarded in this case.
          I'm going to sit down at this point.  The
     defense will have their concluding remarks, but I
     will be back to speak to you briefly after they
     have concluded their remarks as well.
          Thank you.


                   REBUTTAL ARGUMENT
          MR. SHIELDS:  Thank you, Your Honor.  I know
     it's been a long day.  You're anxious to get home.
     I'm anxious to get a little rest.  So I'm not going
     to take a lot more of your time, but I do feel
     compelled to respond to some of the things that
     were said.  And so let me just make a few major
     points.
          First, you are the judges of the evidence.
     And I've noticed you're avid.  And you've been very
     good about taking detailed notes so that you can
     refresh your recollection.  And you collectively
     then have to make a decision about what you think
     the evidence is.
          The lawyers don't determine what the evidence
     is.  If I tell you what the evidence is and it's
     contrary to what your notes are, of course you go
     on your notes and your collective memory.  I say
     this to you because quite candidly, most of what I
     heard Mr. Hohnbaum say in closing argument is
     either, one, not supported by the evidence,
     contrary to the evidence, or in great part
     cherrypicking little pieces of the evidence to make
     it appear different than what the totality of the evidence is.
          And so I'm going to ask you to look
     collectively at what you recall the evidence to be,
     not based on what you tell you, not based on what
     he says, but you really think the evidence was.
          So, for example, think about his summary of
     what Dr. Burns testified to.  It bore no
     relationship to what Dr. Burns actually said.  He
     cherrypicked a little point here and cherrypicked a
     little point there to act like Dr. Burns did not
     support in great detail everything in support of
     this case.
          Second point I want to make.  The law in the
     case comes from Judge Healey, not from me, not from
     Mr. Hohnbaum.  You will have written instructions,
     I must say in candor again, that several of the
     things he told you in his closing argument about
     what the law required is not what you will be
     instructed, and it is not what I believe the court
     will tell you the law is.
          For example, he was talking about but/for
     causation.  And he said to you, you have to find
     that Helen Taylor was powerless to quit smoking to
     find causation.  You won't find that on in any
     instruction from the Court.  You won't find that in the Court's instruction about what causation means.
          What the Court, I believe, will instruct you
     is the concurring cause instruction I showed you
     during direct; namely, that there can be more than
     one cause; secondly, that when two causes come
     together, the question is, is it a substantial
     contributing factor without which it wouldn't have
     occurred?  And that is precisely what Dr. Burns
     told you.
          Mr. Hohnbaum can get up here and say nobody
     said that, but that's what exactly what Dr. Burns
     told you.  Look at your notes.  That's the whole
     point of the analogy of the two trailers.  And he
     can say, Well, if she would have quit in 1972 she
     wouldn't have got COPD, but that's not the point.
          The point is she has COPD.  What contributed
     to causing it?  And if smoking their brands was a
     substantial contributing factor and the but for
     provision is met as well, as Dr. Burns said, that
     proves causation.  So you need to see what the
     instructions really say, not what our -- what the
     lawyers tell you they say or what they mean.
          Third point I would make:  Why did Reynolds
     need to go to California to get an expert to say
     she had asthma instead of COPD?  Think about that. He told you that riddled throughout the records was
     an indication she was diagnosed with asthma.
          Well, if any doctor here had diagnosed her
     with asthma, why didn't they subpoena the doctor to
     come in and testify to that?
          If any doctor here truly thought she had
     asthma, why didn't they employ that doctor to come
     in and testify?  Well, the answer ladies and
     gentlemen is, it's simply untrue that the records
     are riddled with diagnosis of asthma.
          Once again, cherrypicked a point here and a
     point there and then expands that to say it covers
     everything.
          Now, I know you're not going -- but do you
     have any doubt about it, go through the medical
     records.  What you'll see is every time she's
     hospitalized, the discharge summary is:  Chronic
     obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbation, not
     asthma.  Go through all the times she goes to the
     emergency room or sees the doctor.  Almost every
     one of those, the diagnosis is disease exacerbation.
          Look at the records, just don't take my word
     for it.  And certainly don't take his word that's
     throughout the records.  It isn't.  Look at it and see what the records actually show.
          Now, of course there some times when the term
     "asthma" appears.  And we saw, for example, he
     mentioned it in his closing argument.  On
     March 3rd, 1999, an intern said -- may be asthma or
     COPD, sounds more like asthma to me.
          The attending physician, that is the person in
     charge of training that intern, wrote a couple of
     pages later that it was disease, not asthma.
          More importantly, she was then sent as a
     result of that hospitalization to be evaluated by
     Dr. Laos, the head of pulmonology at the University
     of Florida.  And he wrote that June 10th letter
     after doing pulmonary function tests and
     unequivocally says chronic obstructive pulmonary
     disease, not asthma.
          The reality is they have to go out and get the
     guy they always call from California that paid
     almost a million dollars to come in and claim it's
     something other than what all of the local doctors
     and the local medical records said it was.
          Dr. Bagnoli went back through the records and
     said, Yes, I wrote asthma in the history, but I
     didn't have the records.  And now, I've gone back through the records and she didn't have asthma.
          Ladies and gentlemen, that ought to end the
     matter.  Let me also say, as he did, it's not a
     question of either/or asthma or COPD.  The issue
     for you is whether she had COPD before
     November 1996.  She also had asthma.  If she had
     asthma some other time, that doesn't change the
     fact that if she was diagnosed with COPD before
     November 21, 1996, and she had the symptoms of it,
     shortness of breath on exertion, hyperinflated
     lungs, the various things that Dr. Burns talked
     about, then she meets the class definition.
          Secondly, he ignored one important fact,
     pulmonary function tests were done a couple months
     later.  And Dr. Burns told you that the results of
     that test, even though done after November, clearly
     show that she had COPD before November -- you don't
     get that bad between November and March.  What was
     shown in March had to mean that she had COPD for
     sometime prior to November of 1996.  And both Dr.
     Bagnoli and Dr. Burns said that.
          Similarly, ask the question:  Why did they
     need to get Dr. Ticknor to testify?  You have
     throughout the records a diagnosis that she had
     nicotine addiction.  Not just Dr. Kennison, but Dr. Bagnoli, and look at the hospital records, time
     and time again they use the term "tobacco use
     disorder," they use the term "tobacco dependence,"
     and Dr. Burns told you Dr. Kennison told you, those
     terms are synonymous with a meaning of tobacco
     addiction.  She was diagnosed over and over again,
     from '96 forward as being addicted to nicotine.
          So how do you deal with that?  You bring in a
     doctor from San Antonio who's not a specialist, who
     has no particular training, and who takes an
     extreme view of what DSM requires.  And more
     importantly than that, who just flatly
     misrepresents what she told them.  We have a
     transcript.
          And that's why I put on Dr. Frazier so she
     could tell you, Here are the things that
     Dr. Ticknor told you he testified yesterday about
     what Helen Taylor told him, and it's not in the
     transcript.  It's not on the video.  She simply
     didn't tell it to him.  He said it in order to
     justify an opinion that is just flat wrong.
          Next let's talk a little bit about brand
     usage.  This whole brand usage issue has been so
     distorted in terms of what you have been told.
     First, it is not just Winston.  The question is whether brands manufactured by Reynolds or its
     predecessor companies for which its responsible
     American Tobacco contributed to causing her COPD.
          So just picking up 1962 Winston is not the
     issue.  The very interrogatory read to you
     indicates she smoked Pall Mall and Lucky Strike
     from 1958 to 1961.
          Those are brands manufactured by the American
     Tobacco Company, for which Reynolds is responsible
     because they bought that company.  They brought
     them into it.  It is now part of Reynolds.  So the
     question is, not just Winston and not just 1962 but
     the entire time period.
          And you have an interesting possibility here.
     It is true that there was an answer to an
     interrogatory that said '72 for Winston.  But it is
     also true, as Michael testified, that he recalls
     she smoked Winston up through the time she was
     married to Mr. Taylor, which would have been 1979.
          It is also true in her deposition Ms. Taylor
     said 1979.  So you have two possibilities.  You
     have a time period that runs from 1958 to 1972, and
     one that runs from 1958 to 1979.  If you take this,
     then the amount of time for Reynolds brands is 14
     years.  Whereas if you take this, the amount of time is 21 years.
          Next important point, the relevant time period
     is 1996 not 2008.  Because the question is:  Did
     those brands contribute to causing her COPD in
     1996?  So if you find as the records show that she
     had COPD in 1996, the time period you're interested
     in is up to 1996 not 2008.  So that if you used the
     1996 time period, then if you accepted the '72 time
     period, the difference would be 14 years for
     Reynolds brands, 23 years for other brands.
          But if you accepted the '79 period, which is
     what Michael remembers and what Ms. Taylor also
     testified in her deposition, it flips, and it's 21
     years for the Reynolds brands and 16 years for
     Philip Morris and Marlboro.
          And Helen Taylor got on the stand and said she
     couldn't be precise.  It seemed to her like she
     smoked them about an equal period of time talking
     about the time period before 1996 because that's
     the relevant time period.
          Dr. Burns answered the question based both on
     1972 and on 1979 and said in his opinion a
     substantial contributing factor without which it
     []wouldn't have occurred or the but for causation.
     There is no testimony to the contrary. Dr. Schroeder didn't address the issue.  They have
     no evidence to contradict what Dr. Burns said.
          It's interesting they spent almost no time
     talking about their own misconduct.  We said they
     targeted kids, they designed their cigarettes to
     create and sustain addiction.  They entered into a
     conspiracy to convince smokers to continue smoking
     by denying the hazards of cigarettes saying there
     was doubt about the science and reassuring people
     that they would take out whatever was harmful.
          No interest in going into any that of that,
     claims it's totally irrelevant.  What's the
     relevance of that?  The relevance is comparative
     fault.  You are to compare their fault to what
     Helen Taylor admits is her fault in not quitting
     sooner.  It's also relevant to punitive damages.
          The question of punitive damages is whether
     their conduct was reprehensible and thus whether
     you should deter and punish them for their conduct.
     That's why all of that evidence was put on.  And
     they just ignore it.  Did they offer any evidence
     to dispute?
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Your Honor, objection.  May we
     approach?
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.      (A sidebar conference was held outside
the hearing of the jury.)
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  I can't dispute the Engle
     findings.  He's spending this whole time blame us
     for not disputing the Engle findings.  So him
     making the point we haven't gone in and defended
     ourselves about those things.  We can't do that.
     And that's what he's -- I let it go a
     little smidge.  And then it got heavy.  He kept
     drilling on the point.  And he knows we cannot
     dispute the Engle findings.  And so criticizing us
     for not disputing the Engle findings is completely
     inappropriate.
          MR. SHIELDS:  One, they can dispute punitive
     damages and the basis for it.  Two, I filed a
     motion saying they could and you denied my motion.
          THE COURT:  Well, and the other thing is, in
     your close you started out by jumping up and down
     about what in Lord's name did we spend all this
     time about Engle, Engle, Engle findings, Engle
     findings --
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Because we can't dispute it.
     It's already happened. it's already over.  It
     doesn't decide the issues this case.
          THE COURT:  I know the impression you left with the jury they just wasted your time going
     through all this Engle business, which is not true
     because there's other reasons for it.  And so --
          MR. SHIELDS:  I was going to cite for the
     record Metropolitan Gold County v Cox says that
     even in the liability findings had been
     established, they are still admissible for the
     purpose of comparative fault.
          THE COURT:  He's just citing the case for his
     position.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  That's not Duval County.  I can
     say that.  He's not allowed to make the points that
     he's making about us not disputing the Engle
     findings.  And that's where the line is, and he's
     gone over that line.  He walked up to it and he
     jumped right over it.  And so whatever point he's
     made, I would say it's made.  It's time to move on.
          MR. SHIELDS:  Your Honor, I have a right to
     say they didn't dispute all the evidence we put in
     on punitive damages.  And they didn't.
          THE COURT:  I agree.  It's overruled.
               (The sidebar conference ended and
proceedings took place in open court as follows:)
          MR. SHIELDS:  You heard no evidence from them
     disputing the testimony of Dr. Burns, the testimony of Dr. Krugman that they targeted kids, that they
     designed their cigarettes to make them addictive,
     that they entered into a conspiracy to keep smokers
     smoking by creating doubt and denial and
     reassurance.
          Those are relevant of the punitive damages and
     the comparative fault.  The bottom line in this
     case is, as Mr. Hohnbaum continues to say, they
     claim zero responsibility.  Worked his way through
     the verdict form and put zero responsibility for
     everything.
          We admit some responsibility.  We admit she
     has some measure of fault.  This case is whether
     they have any responsibility, whether it's an
     absolutely zero, because that's what they made.
     And they refuse that -- all these years to concede
     they have never done anything wrong.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Objection, Your Honor.  Motion
     on that one.
          THE COURT:  Have a seat.  Finish up,
     Mr. Shields.
          MR. SHIELDS:  It comes down to the simple
     proposition, you're going to have to determine as
     you work your way through this verdict form, one,
     was she a member of the Engle class?  The evidence is unequivocal that she was; two, you're going to
     have to determine causation.  And the evidence is
     undisputed from Dr. Burns on that; three, you're
     going to have to determine comparative fault.  I'll
     submit there's evidence on what they did -- what
     they did over the years in comparison to her, means
     that you need to assign substantial fault to them.
          And finally, you're going to have to determine
     damages, both compensatory and whether to award
     punitive damages.  The issue at this point is not
     an amount of punitive damages.  The issue at this
     point is whether there is entitlement to punitive
     damages for their misconduct.
          I'm not going to go over the figures again
     with you, you've heard them.  You heard them from
     Mr. Spruance.  You've seen them from the documents
     and from the medical records.  I trust that you can
     go through that information and make a decision on
     those issues.  I thank you again for your time, for
     your attention.  We really do appreciate it.  We
     know how difficult it is in a case of this
     complexity and this length for a jury sit through
     with the constant problems we're dealing with.  So
     we truly appreciate it.  Thank you.
          THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Shields. All right, ladies and gentlemen, that will do
     it for today.  Again, though, we're not yet
     completely finished so please do not discuss the
     case among yourselves, don't let anybody discuss
     the case with you.  Obviously, don't do any
     research, don't talk to family members, friends,
     things of that nature.  Don't form any fixed
     opinions just yet.
          We have one more thing to do, and that's for
     me to read to you the jury instructions that apply
     in this case.  And then you'll be able to go to the
     jury room to begin your deliberations.  And that's
     when the discussions will begin among yourselves.
          So again, thank you, as both lawyers have said
     for your attention not just for today but
     throughout the last week and a half, two and a
     half, whatever it's been, long time, and have a
     safe ride home.  See you in the morning.  We'll
     start at 9:30.  I'll see you all then.  Thank you
     again.
