                    CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Why have we spent so much time in this case
     essentially trying to reprove the Engle findings
     when the case that you are asked to decide is
     Helen Taylor's case?  You wouldn't know it by how
     much time you spent listening to Helen Taylor.
          On direct examination, Mr. Shields asked
     Ms. Taylor questions for 45 minutes, 45 minutes.
     Dr. Krugman and Dr. Burns testified, Dr. Krugman
     for 245 minutes, Dr. Burns for 395 minutes, ten
     hours of testimony from Dr. Burns and Dr. Krugman.
     Generic witnesses testifying about generic facts.
          It's testimony in a box, right.  Dr. Burns
     $3.5 million, going from one courthouse to another
     courthouse to another courthouse saying the exact
     same thing.  Dr. Krugman going from one courthouse
     to another courthouse to another courthouse saying
     the exact same thing.
          Dr. Krugman, when I asked him about another case, the person from Kentucky, "I testified the
     same as the person started in 1922 and grew up in
     Kentucky."  It doesn't matter to Dr. Krugman, he
     comes in and he says the same thing in every single
     case.
          The facts that are going to help you decide
     this case are the facts that relate to Helen
     Taylor, not to anybody else.  Not to any other
     person but to Helen Taylor.
          Now, the Engle findings that we talked about
     from the very beginning of this case during voir
     dire, they do not help you answer the issues that
     you have to decide in this case.  They don't.  They
     don't establish that she's a member of the class,
     obviously, right.  That's the first issue to
     decide, is she a member of the class.
          They don't establish whether Ms. Taylor's COPD
     or PVD was caused by smoking R.J. Reynolds
     cigarettes.  They don't establish that Ms. Taylor
     was addicted, right.  They don't establish that.
     And they don't establish that any sort of addiction
     was a legal cause of her COPD or PVD.
          And they do not, of course, establish that
     anything R.J. Reynolds said or did prevented
     Ms. Taylor from knowing that smoking was dangerous. You don't even get to consider the Engle findings
     until you determine that Ms. Taylor is a member of
     the Engle class.
          The facts that matter in this case are not
     complicated.  They're not difficult.  They're
     simple.  All the stuff that you heard from
     Dr. Burns and all the stuff that you heard from
     Dr. Krugman that don't have anything to do with
     Ms. Taylor.
          What we know is that Ms. Taylor did not start
     smoking with R.J. Reynolds cigarettes.  She started
     smoking with L&M cigarettes.  We know that while
     Ms. Taylor smoked R.J. Reynolds cigarettes from
     1962 to 1972, we're going to have some discussion
     about that, millions, millions of smokers quit as a
     result of the public health community's repeated
     warnings.
          We know, Dr. Frazier testified from the stand
     today that Ms. Taylor never tried to quit smoking
     until 1996.  And we're going to talk about what
     that effort looked like.  24 years, 24 years after
     she stopped smoking R.J. Reynolds cigarettes.
          The ten years that Ms. Taylor smoked
     R.J. Reynolds cigarettes did not cause her COPD or
     her PVD.  And Ms. Taylor is not a member of the Engle class for, among other reasons, she did not
     have COPD before November 21, 1996.
          The case in some respects is captured right
     here.  What we know from her smoking from 1958 to
     1961, she started with L&M.  The testimony is she
     smoked Lucky Strikes for about six months and then
     she never purchased Pall Malls but occasionally she
     smoked them.
          Then we know from 1962 to 1971, '72, she
     smoked Winston cigarettes.  And the rest of the
     time, decades, decade after decade, she never
     smoked Winston cigarettes.
          Now, let me just address something right at
     the outset because Mr. Shields spent some time
     talking about that the cigarette is highly
     engineered.
          What we know is that nicotine occurs naturally
     in tobacco.  What we know is that there is less
     nicotine in cigarette tobacco than in natural
     tobacco.  This is Dr. Burns' testimony.  It comes
     out.  They reduce the amount of nicotine.
          And roll-your-own cigarettes are as addictive
     and dangerous as the cigarettes Helen Taylor
     smoked.  Folks, there is no way to make a safe
     cigarette.  There is no way to do it. And if we go back, of course, keep this in
     mind because this is a thread throughout the entire
     case, we didn't manufacturer the cigarettes that
     Ms. Taylor smoked past 1972.  She smoked
     Philip Morris cigarettes starting in 1972 for
     decades up until this year.
          So, look, what's the first question you're
     going to have to decide in this case?  The first
     question on the verdict form.  I'm going to go
     through this verdict form with you today.  The
     first question, not surprisingly, is state whether
     Helen Taylor is a member of the Engle class.
          All of the verdict form questions that you
     have to answer in this case relate to Helen Taylor.
     It's her case.  It's her burden to prove her
     claims.
          So we showed this slide to you in opening, and
     I think Mr. Shields used it with Dr. Burns.  It's
     not in dispute that these are the hurdles the
     plaintiff has to clear to establish that she's a
     member of the class.
          The first one:  Plaintiff must prove she had
     COPD before November 21, 1996.  If you don't cross
     that hurdle, right, if they haven't proved that to
     you, then she's not a member of the class. Then you -- plaintiff also has to prove
     medical causation, that her COPD was caused by
     smoking.  They then have to prove that Ms. Taylor
     was addicted to nicotine.  And if you cross that
     hurdle, you have an additional hurdle, and that is
     whether addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause
     of her COPD.
          So what I want to do is I want to walk through
     those hurdles and what the evidence is relating to
     those hurdles.
          So let's talk about manifestation first.
     There's no dispute that this is what the plaintiff
     has to prove:  She had COPD before November 21,
     1996.
          And there are three facts to keep in mind as
     you decide the manifestation question:  One,
     Ms. Taylor has asthma, she has asthma.  The
     symptoms of asthma and COPD are the same.  And no
     testing proves Ms. Taylor had COPD in 1996.
          It is the plaintiff's burden to prove to you
     that she had COPD in 1996.  This is it, this is
     their proof.  Two pages of her medical records.
     Two, that they are using to establish that they had
     COPD in 1996.
          There was no testimony from the doctors about these two reports.  There's no -- there's nothing
     else for you to rely on than these two documents.
          Now, look, it said key facts.  Ms. Taylor had
     asthma.  Dozens of doctors over time believed
     Ms. Taylor had asthma.  I set up here, Mr. Kalil
     set up here on this ELMO and he threw one in front
     of another about COPD, and I threw in one and
     another about asthma.  That does not aid the
     inquiry.  It's not a let's see who can get the
     biggest stat of asthma versus COPD.  That's not the
     exercise here, okay.
          But what we do know is the one doctor who
     provided continuous care to Ms. Taylor, continuous
     meaning year after year after year starting in
     2011, was Dr. Bagnoli.
          Dr. Bagnoli in his medical records repeatedly,
     repeatedly assessed her and diagnosed her with
     asthma.  And those are four records right there and
     you'll have to look at, he diagnosed her with
     asthma.
          Three years of office visits.  Dr. Bagnoli did
     pulmonary function tests.  He did the tests.  He
     did three tests.  And after looking at those tests,
     what did he say was her condition?  He said she had
     asthma. He did numerous chest x-rays during that time.
     What condition -- we're not contesting she had
     COPD, right.  The point here is she has asthma,
     right.  Dr. Bagnoli said so.  He said so after
     three years of office visits.  He said so after
     numerous pulmonary function tests.  He said so
     after numerous chest x-rays.  And, of course, he
     had one CT scan.  Repeatedly.
          And I asked, "You wouldn't write down one
     thing and actually mean something else, would you?"
     And his answer was, "Never.  I would never do
     that."
          When he wrote down that she had asthma after
     treating her for many, many years, when he wrote it
     down, that's what he thought.  He wouldn't write
     down one thing and mean something else.  Of course
     he wouldn't.
          Now, you've got to ask yourself when you see a
     party running from overwhelming weight of the
     evidence, why?  Why are they spending so much time
     trying to prove to you that she never had asthma?
          Folks, everybody from that stand said you can
     have asthma and you can have COPD.  You can have
     both of those conditions at the same time.  So why
     is there a changing story here?  And there is a changing story, right.
          Because Ms. Taylor self-reported throughout
     her medical history, "I had asthma."  I asked her
     on the stand, "To your knowledge, do you have
     asthma?"
          "No, I don't."
          Dr. Bagnoli says she's been telling people she
     has asthma.  Dr. Burns acknowledges that asthma was
     filled out by Ms. Taylor, not by her physician.  So
     she says on the stand, "I don't have asthma," she
     tells doctors throughout her life she has asthma.
          And here's the problem for them:  If she had
     asthma in 1996, they know that there is nothing in
     these two records, absolutely nothing that could
     distinguish between asthma and COPD, nothing.
          The symptoms of asthma and COPD are the same.
     Both cause obstruction, both cause coughing, both
     cause wheezing, both cause shortness of breath.
          And let's pause on the next one, because
     Mr. Shields made a point about mentioning
     hyperinflation of the lungs because that's a
     finding on one of these reports, hyperinflation of
     the lungs.
          Well, folks, every witness from the stand was
     asked that question, said hyperinflation occurs with both asthma and COPD.  Having hyperinflation
     doesn't aid the inquiry because the symptom is the
     same whether you have COPD or whether you have
     asthma.  They're treated with nebulizers and
     steroids.  They can lead to exacerbations.
     Plaintiff simply hasn't proved that she had COPD in
     1996.
          What do we know about these two records?  We
     know there was no pulmonary function test in 1996,
     right.  There wasn't.  There was no CT scan in
     1996.  There was no chest x-ray that confirmed
     COPD.  The chest x-ray -- the chest x-ray only
     mentioned hyperinflation of the lungs which could
     be either condition.
          And there's no reference in here to coughing
     or sputum production which would be consistent with
     chronic bronchitis.  Remember the definition of
     chronic bronchitis, you have to have coughing or
     sputum production for three consecutive months over
     a two-year period of time.  Is there anything in
     here about that?  Absolutely not.
          What we do see in those records is certain
     references.  In July, right, the reference was rule
     out COPD.  Now, we can all agree that rule out does
     not mean that's what she had, right.  Otherwise, why are you ruling it out?
          And Dr. Bagnoli confirmed, you haven't
     confirmed the diagnosis, you're trying to rule it
     out.  It means what it says.
          In October, what does the record say?  It says
     let's evaluate for emphysema.  Now, I get that in
     the diagnosis box it says COPD, right.  There's no
     question that's what it says.  How could the doctor
     have made that diagnosis on the limited information
     that was available to him in 1996 because none of
     the things that was reported to the doctor and none
     of the findings that he made differentiate between
     COPD and asthma.
          And we know that even after 1996 that there
     was still a question in the doctor's minds about
     whether or not she had COPD.  She had pulmonary
     function tests.  There's a record in July 22, '97.
     The results are still pending.
          We spent a lot of time on the March 3rd, '99,
     record.  Sounds more like asthma but could be both.
     And then 6-10-99, "We'll schedule her for a full
     set of pulmonary function tests to determine
     whether or not she has chronic bronchitis or
     emphysema."
          COPD is chronic bronchitis and/or emphysema. No testing, of course, proves she had COPD in 1996.
     The pulmonary function tests only establish whether
     or not there is an obstruction, that's what the
     test does.  The test does not show what the cause
     of the obstruction is.
          And the first time she had any record that
     showed emphysema was in 2008 when she had the CT
     scan.  It said minimal -- I can't even remember
     what the term was at that point.  That's emphysema.
     2008, first time it shows up on any record.  And
     those results showed that the emphysema was
     minimal.
          Now, look, Mr. Shields spent a fair amount of
     time putting stock in the fact that there are
     records that establish -- there are references to
     records in '97 and later that make reference to no
     bronchodilator response, right?  Remember those
     records that said no bronchodilator response?
          Dr. Schroeder when he was on the stand was
     asked questions by Mr. Shields, and it is
     undoubtedly the state of medical knowledge in the
     gold report that Mr. Shields put up and said isn't
     this the state of the art?  Isn't this the
     established view of the medical community?
          And what does it say?  It essentially says response to bronchodilator is not helpful in
     distinguishing between the two diseases.
          So while the doctors back then were noting no
     bronchodilator response because back then the
     knowledge was that must mean something, it's a way
     to distinguish between the two.  So they noted it
     back then, but we know now, this establishes now no
     bronchodilator response is not helpful in
     determining whether or not somebody has asthma or
     COPD.
          Ms. Taylor, the first hurdle that you have is
     did she prove that she -- her COPD manifested
     itself before January 1 -- November 21, 1996.  The
     answer to that question is no.
          Second, plaintiff must prove smoking was a
     legal cause of her COPD.  It's her burden to prove
     that smoking was the cause of her COPD.  I'm not
     going to spend any time on that hurdle.  I'm going
     to go to the next one.
          Plaintiff failed to prove addiction.  And we
     spent a lot of time.  In fact, the plaintiff put on
     three, three separate witnesses to try to prove to
     you that she was addicted.  They put on Dr. Burns
     who talked about it.  Of course, Dr. Burns talked
     about a lot of things.  He talked about addiction. And then we had -- we had Dr. Kennison, Ph.D.,
     not a medical doctor, Dr. Kennison.  And then
     today, yet again, we heard from another person to
     tell you that Ms. Taylor was addicted.
          We also heard from Dr. Ticknor.  Dr. Ticknor
     testified that Ms. Taylor's smoking did not cause
     her clinically significant impairment or distress.
     And it's clear from the record that it did not
     cause her clinically significant impairment or
     distress.
          She was able to control her smoking.  There
     were times when she would go hours without smoking
     on the job.  There were times where she was smoking
     four or five cigarettes a day.  She could, in fact,
     control her smoking.
          And it did not interfere with her work or
     family obligations.  Taking a smoke break during
     the day does not interfere with your work
     obligations.
          And there's been no suggestion that it's
     interfered with her social obligations.  We had one
     argument with the son that we talked about, and
     that's it.
          And Ms. Taylor did smoke to relieve anxiety.
     That was part of the reason that she did it. Dr. Ticknor is the only medical doctor who met
     Ms. Taylor and treats nicotine addiction every day.
          Think about it.  Dr. Burns testified from the
     stand, did he ask Ms. Taylor any questions?  Did he
     even talk to Ms. Taylor?  Dr. Frazier, did she ask
     Ms. Taylor any questions?  No.
          What we heard from about somebody who actually
     seen and discussed with Ms. Taylor her smoking was
     Dr. Kennison, right.  And what we know about
     Dr. Kennison is she's a specialist because she took
     a four-day training course.  She has seen only ten
     patients solely for smoking cessation in her
     practice.  Ten.
          She did not review any other medical records
     or depositions.  And this is critical:  She knew
     that Ms. Taylor had filed a lawsuit against the
     tobacco companies the entire time she treated her.
     And she did not diagnose Ms. Taylor under the DSM V
     which we spent so much time talking about until
     after her deposition.
          What happened in this case is instead of
     Ms. Taylor telling you in the 45 minutes of
     questioning that you got on direct examination
     whether she was addicted, what we saw was
     Dr. Kennison come into this courtroom and put note after note after note after note all done a year or
     so before this lawsuit came to trial, six years
     after it had been filed, and testified about what
     those notes say.
          That's the evidence from the person who saw
     her on a day-to-day basis during that time period.
     The only person that they have that actually spoke
     to Ms. Taylor was Dr. Kennison who only saw her in
     the last 15 months.
          Ms. Taylor was not addicted.  If you get over
     that hurdle, which you should not, you also have to
     address -- catch up in my notes here.  You have to
     address whether or not the addiction -- because
     it's not over if she's addicted, that doesn't end
     the inquiry.  Addiction has to be a legal cause of
     her disease.
          Look, folks, you're going to get the jury
     instructions, okay.  So when Mr. Shields or I tell
     you what the law is, this is your check, right.
     You're going to get them when you go back to the
     jury room.  The judge is going to instruct you on
     them and you're going to get them.
          And one phrase that you did not hear from
     Mr. Shields in any of his discussion about the jury
     instructions is the phrase "but for."  But for. You're going to see that phrase throughout the jury
     instructions.
          But for means it wouldn't have happened but
     for something.  So here plaintiff must prove
     addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause.  But for
     the addiction, she would not have gotten COPD.
          The issue for you to decide is did she have
     the choice to continue smoking rather than to quit,
     did she have that choice or was she powerless due
     to her addiction?  It's one or the other.
          If she had the choice, then the addiction was
     not a but for, was not a legal cause of her COPD.
     And if she was powerless due to her addiction, the
     hurdled is cleared.
          And this is the instruction and you'll get it
     back there so you don't have to write it down.  But
     it says the magic words "but for."  We're going to
     see that again.
          Now, look, this is also just interesting, and
     it is a moment to pause as you think about the
     evidence that you heard in this case and why that
     evidence does or does not really impact Ms. Taylor.
          But according to Dr. Burns, Ms. Taylor did not
     become addicted until 1968.  1968.  She was
     24 years old in 1968.  Even under Dr. Burns' own theory that she was addicted, Ms. Taylor made a
     free choice to smoke the first decade she started
     smoking cigarettes.
          And her free choice before 1968 did not cause
     her to smoke for another 46 years.  Her smoking
     from 1958 to 1968 was not a but for cause of her
     COPD.
          Let's talk about nicotine addiction.  Nicotine
     addiction does not permanently change brain
     receptors.  It does not interfere with the smoker's
     ability to understand the dangers of smoking.  It
     doesn't interfere with that.  And it doesn't
     interfere with the smoker's ability to make an
     informed choice to quit or continue smoking.
          Nicotine, folks, everybody that's smoked
     cigarettes has gotten nicotine.  It doesn't prevent
     smokers from quitting permanently.  Of course it
     doesn't.  Millions and millions of addicted smokers
     quit while Ms. Taylor continued to smoke, and
     didn't even try to quit up until 1996.
          Why is Ms. Taylor different from the
     60 million smokers who quit?  Ask yourself that
     question.  Were her cigarettes more addictive?  No,
     they weren't.
          Is her brain affected differently from other smokers who quit?  No.  Was her exposure to
     advertising different?  No.  Was her exposure to
     any tobacco company statements different?  No.  Did
     she smoke more or longer than others who quit?  No,
     of course not.
          And did Ms. Taylor somehow -- is she different
     from her family and friends -- and I went over some
     of the family and friends that she had over the
     course of her life who smoked and made the decision
     to quit.  Was she any different than those people?
     The answer is no.
          Ms. Taylor chose to continue smoking because
     she enjoyed it and wanted to continue to smoke
     until she made a decision in 2014 to stop smoking
     and made a concerted effort and she quit.
          There's really no dispute that Ms. Taylor
     smoked because she enjoyed it.  It calmed her down.
     She like smoking and socializing.  They put up
     their own pictures showing her having fun with
     friends smoking.  She said she loved her coffee and
     cigarettes and she said smoking and beer would go
     together, and she would go to bars and smoke and --
     and drink beer.
          For 38 years she never said she wanted to
     quit, she never asked anyone to help her quit, she never sought medical assistance to quit.  Never
     tried to cut down on her smoking at all.  She made
     a choice not to quit.  Thirty-eight years on the
     calendar.
          And she admits that she bears some measure of
     fault in not quitting smoking sooner.  That, in
     large measure, answers the question.  She's
     acknowledging that, "I could have quit sooner."
     She was not powerless to quit.  She admits she
     could have done it.
          When I asked her that question, though, on the
     stand, I said, "Ma'am, you're accepting
     responsibility for not quitting sooner; isn't that
     correct?"
          And her answer was, "I leave that up to my
     attorneys, but I tried as hard as I could try."
     Some measure of fault in not quitting sooner
     acknowledges that, in fact, she could have quit
     sooner.
          And let's talk a little bit because I know
     you've heard testimony about quit attempts and quit
     efforts, and I would ask you here's a woman who
     worked at Brinks for 11 years driving an armored
     vehicle.  She wasn't driving that vehicle by
     herself, right. She would go, she would drive and there would
     be other people in the vehicle, right, that were
     helping her out, go into the bank, bring the money
     out, right.  So she was working with people at
     Brinks.  She had a partner in her private
     investigation business.
          Who did we hear from?  Who did we hear from
     about her efforts to quit smoking?  We heard from
     her, shortly, 45 minutes of testimony, a short
     period of time her talking about it.
          We heard from Dr. Kennison who was just a
     scribner.  She was saying what Ms. Taylor told her
     a year before this lawsuit came to trial.  And we
     heard from her son that she tried to quit.  Where
     are the objective witnesses?  Where are the people
     that she worked with that said, "Yeah, I saw her
     struggle, I saw her work through that, I saw that
     she wanted to quit, I understood what she was going
     through."  Nothing in this case from anybody along
     those lines.
          And what we do know is that in 1996 when she
     goes to the doctor and she's told she has
     respiratory problems.  She says the doctors told
     her it was COPD and it's on records, and it was
     caused by smoking.  What did she do? She says, "I tried to quit."  Was there any
     record that establishes that she tried to quit?
     Did she bring in a witness that said she tried to
     quit?  Is there any doctors note?  Is there
     anything that would establish that that's what she
     did in 1996?  There's nothing.
          Instead, what we know from her own testimony
     is that she was a private investigator and that was
     her peak smoking, was 1996 after when she's working
     on stakeouts and doesn't have much to do.
          That is not the sign of somebody who is
     dedicated and committed to stopping smoking
     cigarettes.  And we know that she repeatedly
     refused to quit smoking.  Repeatedly.
          And I'm not saying that she didn't try the
     nicotine patch and she didn't try Wellbutrin and
     she didn't try those things.  But what we know is
     when she put forth a consistent effort that's
     documented in the records, that she quit.
          You have to ask yourself why did Ms. Taylor
     see Dr. Kennison in 2013?  Dr. Bagnoli referred
     her.  Well, Dr. Bagnoli started seeing her in 2011.
     Dr. Bagnoli testified for Ms. Taylor's attorneys in
     2010.
          When Ms. Taylor first saw Dr. Kennison, her lawsuit had been pending for five years.  Five
     years.  And what you saw was Dr. Kennison's
     opinions on what -- it was really no more than just
     reading what Ms. Taylor had said.  And what
     Ms. Taylor had said was said about a year before
     this lawsuit after the lawsuit had been pending for
     five years.
          Can anyone really prove to you that Ms. Taylor
     could not have quit smoking at any time?  She's
     intelligent.  She's hard working.  She's capable.
     Think of what she has done in her life, the
     different things that she has had to accomplish,
     the different paths that she has taken.
          She's gone -- she worked at the dog track for
     a while.  Then she starts her own private
     investigation business and then she goes to work
     for Brinks, learns how to use a firearm.  She's
     independent.  She's persistent.  She tough.  She's
     driven.  She is not a victim.
          The fact of the matter is that Ms. Taylor quit
     when she was motivated.  She took Chantix in 2006.
     What I didn't hear Mr. Shields say -- and I
     don't -- he gets the last word, right.
          So what he could say and might say in the time
     that he has left is, well, Chantix was the deal. Chantix, that was the difference, right.  That
     was -- that was how she was able to quit, was
     Chantix.
          Well, she took it in 2006 and continued to
     smoke.  She did take it in 2014, okay, and she took
     it for months and -- and this is important -- she
     set a quit date in advance.  She threw away her
     cigarettes.  She avoided going to the places that
     would trigger her smoking.  Motivation and
     persistence, not the Chantix, are the reasons
     Ms. Taylor quit.
          Dr. Burns, millions and millions of smokers
     have quit.  Every person who took the stand to talk
     about addiction testified that every single smoker
     can quit.
          30 million smokers have quit between '64 and
     '79.  90 percent of them do it cold turkey with no
     assistance.  60 million people have quit smoking.
     The highest rate of quitting in the United States
     history was when Ms. Taylor was smoking
     R.J. Reynolds cigarettes, the highest rate of
     quitting in U.S. history.
          Plaintiff failed to prove that addiction
     caused her COPD because she could have quit.  How
     do we know it?  Because she did quit.  How do we know it?  Because they've admitted that she could
     have quit sooner.  We know she could quit.  She was
     not powerless.  She made a choice.
          All right.  So here's the verdict form that
     you're going to get it.  And Question 1, state
     whether Helen Taylor is a member of the Engle
     class.  She doesn't meet any of the hurdles.  The
     answer to that question is no.
          If you answer that question no, you don't have
     to go any further on the verdict form.  Your job is
     done.
          And if it were that easy, I would just sit
     down right now and that's all we would talk about.
     But I have an obligation to go through the entire
     verdict form and to address all of the issues that
     you may be asked to decide when you get back to the
     jury box -- jury room.
          Just catch up with myself here.
          Michael, can you switch back?  Thank you.
          All right.  Question Number 2, state whether
     cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company or its predecessor tobacco companies was a
     legal cause of Helen Taylor's COPD or PVD.  That's
     the question.
          All you really need to know is on this slide. She smoked Winston cigarettes from 1962 to 1972.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Judge, there's a box on mine.
     I don't want to address jury whether there's a box
     on theirs, whether they're obstructed in that
     view -- there it goes.  Thank you.
          THE COURT:  I didn't see a box on mine.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  I didn't -- after our previous
     discussion.
          All right.  So look, Ms. Taylor smoked Winston
     cigarette from 1962 -- Your Honor, I think with --
     I think she's in a little bit of distress, Your
     Honor.
          THE COURT:  You need a break?
          A JUROR:  I'm okay.
          THE COURT:  Are you sure?
          A JUROR:  No.
          THE COURT:  You need to water?  We've got
     tissues.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  So Ms. Taylor smoked Winston
     cigarettes in 1962 to 1972.  How do we know that?
     How do we know?  Well, Dr. Krugman said it, said I
     read her deposition.  Started smoking around 1962
     and she stopped smoking around 1972.  He -- he
     based that on the deposition that he had read that
     Ms. Taylor testified that she smoked Winston for ten years in the deposition.
          I asked her questions about the
     interrogatories.  And remember, those are the
     documents that a party gets where they have
     questions.  And it's long ago that Ms. Taylor got
     those.  She didn't have to do it under pressure.
     She had plenty of time.  She could consult with her
     lawyer, she could consult with anybody she wanted
     to about how long she smoked various brands of
     cigarettes.
          In 2008 what she wrote down and swore under
     oath was that I primarily smoked Winston cigarettes
     from 1962 to 1972.  And when I asked her that,
     right, and when you did write it down you swore
     that that information was accurate, and the dodging
     and weaving begins.  To the best of my knowledge,
     but my knowledge is forgotten really.  She changed
     her story during trial now that the case is only
     against R.J. Reynolds.
          So look, what did she go to?
          MR. SHIELDS:  Objection.  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          (A sidebar conference was held outside the
hearing of the jury.)
          MR. SHIELDS:  Counsel, is this one of my two. I thought the discussion we had about mistrial in
     connection with him raising this with the jury.
     That would have been sufficient warning being an
     improper subject to the jury a possibility of
     another party in closing.  Apparently not.
          THE COURT:  I thought so too.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  I'm permitted to point out that
     we are the only defendant in the case.  So I can
     certainly say we're the only defendant.  Where is
     Philip Morris?  Where is Liggett?  I'm permitted to
     say that.  I thought that's what I did, Your Honor.
     I just said we're the only defendant.
          THE COURT:  I don't think that's what you
     said.
          MR. SHIELDS:  Now, that we are the only
     defendant.
          THE COURT:  Yeah.  Now, that the case is only
     against R.J. Reynolds.
          MR. SHIELDS:  We would renew our conditional
     motion for mistrial asking the Court to hold it
     under advisement to see if there's any prejudice at
     the end of the case.
          THE COURT:  I'll take it under advisement.
     And let's not go there.
               (The sidebar conference ended and
212-279-9424
Veritext Reporting Company
www.veritext.com
212-490-3430
Electronically signed by Heidi Hunter (201-418-531-0872)
13adc9ba-e982-42ed-921d-38155c50e6c5
proceedings took place in open court as follows:)
          MR. KALIL:  Is everybody okay over there?  I'm
     blocked.  Usually I try and watch to see if
     everyone is all right.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  All right.  So in 2008 she says
     '62 to '72.  Right.  Then on the stand she says it
     would be cut exactly in half down the middle.  I
     made sure -- I wanted to make sure what that
     testimony really was, so I asked her:  So you're
     testifying that you smoked the Marlboro cigarettes
     the same amount of time that you smoked the Winston
     cigarettes?  And she said real close, now folks --
     my drawing is terrible.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Hohnbaum, that needs to come
     down.
          MR. HOHNBAUM:  Okay.  Sorry.
          Fifty-six years of smoking.  Where does she go
     from?  Ten, ten years essentially, '62 to '72 with
     a little bit -- I agree there's a little bit before
     that.  It's not clear how much, but there's clearly
     some before that, but this is -- this is it.  What
     did it go to?  Half.  More than double, almost
     triple the amount of time that she said she smoked
     Winston cigarettes in 2008 to what her testimony
     was before you in this case. So why?  Why the change from 10 years to 28
     years?  It's because plaintiff has the burden to
     prove that smoking Winston cigarettes caused her
     COPD and PVD.  And nobody is going to tell you that
     the 10 years she smoked Winston cigarettes,
     stopping 40 years ago caused her COPD or PVD.
          Here's the legal cause instruction, the legal
     instruction you'll get from the Court.  There's
     those magic words again, "but for" that Mr. Shields
     did not use in his discussion about the legal
     standard, but for.
          And he wants to tell you about this example of
     the bridge.  We heard that in opening and with
     Dr. Burns, and we're hearing it again now that if
     you have two tractor-trailers and one isn't
     sufficient and you need the other, that's legal
     cause in his mind.
          But what we have here instead of two trailers,
     we have a trailer and a motorcycle.  And no matter
     what, the trailer in this case, the smoking of
     Marlboro cigarettes, was sufficient, of course it
     was, in and of itself to cause her COPD and her
     PVD.
          It takes 20 to 30 pack-years to develop COPD.
     Ms. Taylor's Winston smoking was not sufficient by itself to cause her COPD.  And the converse of that
     is also true, Ms. Taylor's Marlboro smoking was
     sufficient by itself to cause her COPD.  That's why
     the change from 10 to 28.  10 is not enough.
     Otherwise, why not just stick with what you wrote
     in 2008?  It's 1962 to 1972.  It's what she said in
     her deposition, it's what she said in 2008, and
     it's changed here on the stand.
          And what we know is that if you don't have
     COPD when you quit smoking, you won't get it in the
     future.  Every single expert testified to that.
     And of course, there's no evidence that Ms. Taylor
     had COPD when she stopped smoking Winston
     cigarettes in 1972.  Smoking Winston cigarettes was
     not a but for cause of plaintiff's COPD.
          And this chart that Dr. Burns used I thought
     was instructive on this point.  So what we know on
     the left side, that's the FEV¹, I know you guys
     have heard more about pulmonary functions tests
     than you care to, but you'll recall that 70 percent
     or above is in the normal range.  And when she was
     28 years old, this is when she stopped smoking
     Winston cigarettes, her lung function was well
     above normal and essentially consistent with
     someone who had never smoked. Smoking R.J. Reynolds cigarettes did not cause
     her COPD and it did not cause her PVD.  Dr. Burns'
     own testimony.  Had she quit smoking in 1972 by
     2007 her risk of getting PVD, which is when she got
     the peripheral vascular disease, would be the same
     as nonsmokers.
          It didn't cause -- it wasn't the but for cause
     of her COPD, and it wasn't the but for cause of her
     PVD.  So if you get to this point on the verdict
     form, and of course we do not think you should, I'm
     sorry, Michael.  Thank you, Michael.
          Question Number 2:  That cigarettes
     manufactured by R.J. Reynolds were a legal cause of
     Helen Taylor's COPD no; PVD, no.
          So what's the next questions on the -- what
     are the next questions the verdict form you'll look
     at?  State whether R.J. Reynolds' concealment or
     omission of a material fact about the health
     effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes
     or both was a legal cause of Helen Taylor's
     injuries.
          And Question Number 4 is:  State whether R.J.
     Reynolds' agreement to conceal or omit a material
     fact regarding the health effects of cigarette
     smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of Helen Taylor's
     injuries.
          Here's a way to look at it.  Ms. Taylor has
     the burden to prove that the concealment or
     agreement to conceal -- because now we're in the
     Engle finding territory, right -- was a but for
     cause of her smoking-related disease.  But for the
     concealment would she have gotten the disease.
          This is the instruction.  You'll have it.
     Reliance -- requires reliance on statements to her
     detriment saying that but for her reliance, the
     injuries would not have occurred.
          You cannot rely on something if you have
     sufficient knowledge about the dangers of smoking
     and the addicted nature of smoking.  And what we
     know -- and this is the question:  Did she develop
     COPD or PVD because she relied on a statement by
     R.J. Reynolds about the dangers of smoking?  Did
     she rely on it?
          And what we know from Dr. Burns himself is
     that for hundreds of years people have been writing
     about the dangers of smoking.  People have been
     aware for hundreds of years that it was addictive.
     School books have taught about the dangers of
     smoking.  The term "coffin nail" dates back to before 1900 actually.  We showed you the textbooks,
     they're in evidence.
          Kids were taught about smoking.  We spent time
     on the Reader's Digest.  Article after article
     after article about the dangers of smoking and
     addictiveness of smoking.
          Popular press, LIFE magazine.  The experiment
     we heard so much about that was in the news in
     1953.  The term "coffin nails" comes back in the
     1950s.  LIFE magazine was one of those magazines
     that Ms. Taylor remembers seeing growing up.
          What do folks in the public health community
     say about what was known about the dangers of
     smoking?  Our position is that we have informed the
     public through excellent coverage of the press,
     radio, and TV, the Surgeon General of the United
     States.  Mr. Shields wants to spend a lot of time
     stacking up the Surgeon General's reports.  This is
     what the Surgeon General said in 1957.
          Dr. Heller, the director of the National
     Cancer Institute, newspapers, radio, TV, and other
     media have done an excellent job covering the
     problem.  This is an exceedingly valuable way of
     informing the public.
          We know that in 1964 the biggest public health story of the century was the Surgeon General's
     report that came out in 1964 which concluded that
     cigarette smoking causally related to lung cancer.
     We know that in papers that Ms. Taylor -- in
     communities where Ms. Taylor lived that they
     covered the Surgeon General's report, they covered
     the dangers of cigarette smoking.
          The Florida Times Union, when she moved to
     Jacksonville -- and this is just a sampling,
     there's more in evidence if you would like to see
     them, stacks of newspaper articles covering
     cigarette smoking.  We know that for every pack of
     cigarettes that Ms. Taylor smoked from 1966 on,
     there was a warning on the pack.
          We showed you during the case the See It Now
     piece in 1955, the Surgeon General's report on the
     CBS News, the discussion about CBS with Harry
     Reasoner.  We showed you a public service
     announcement that were typical of that day,
     warnings were everywhere.
          Dr. Daniel Horn, 1968:  You could stand on a
     rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top
     of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone
     anything they did not already know.  1968.  That's
     the year that Dr. Burns says Ms. Taylor became addicted.
          1970, the warning changes.  Every pack of
     cigarettes contained this warning.  We have to go
     no further than the testimony of Dr. Burns on this
     point, no further.  Mr. Shields put up on the
     screen all his qualifications, all of his
     qualifications.  What did Dr. Burns say in 1975?
     Not now, not now when he's going from courthouse to
     courthouse testifying.  Not now.  But back then in
     1975 what did he say:  More Americans know that
     cigarette smoking is dangerous than know the name
     of the president of the United States.
          That's what Dr. Burns said in 1975.  What did
     he say in 1981?  He said 95 percent of people are
     thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking,
     95 percent.
          And then he went and made a distinction
     between those who are thoroughly aware and those
     who realized that their own health could be
     affected.  90 percent of them realized that their
     own health could be affected.
          You remember what the questions were of Dr.
     Burns, well, there's a context of that.  There was
     a context of that.  And I would have expected
     Mr. Shields to sort of ask questions about what that context was, and he didn't, because those are
     Dr. Burns' statements about what he believed --
     based on his time in the public health community,
     what he believed at that time about how widespread
     the dangers and hazards of smoking were to the
     American public.
          And look, the public information campaign
     worked because what happened?  Millions of heavily
     addicted smokers quit.  1950s, 1957.  That's the
     statement we looked at before, 1964 the Surgeon
     General's Report, 17.6 million people.
          Of course the warning label goes on, that's
     the Daniel Horn quote from 1968, warning label --
     new warning label goes on in 1970.  And of course
     in 1972 there's -- every advertising that's out
     there has to have the warning on it.
          Ms. Taylor did not make any smoking decisions
     based on cigarette advertising.  We saw
     advertisements that were up there for brands of
     cigarettes she never smoked for time periods well
     past the time she was smoking R.J. Reynolds brands.
          Advertising didn't cause her to smoke, to
     choose a particular brand.  Advertisements were not
     the issue.  She -- she started smoking.  And I
     think Mr. Shields mentioned this in his opening. She started smoking with her friend Jane when she
     got her first job.  She saw people in the beauty
     parlor, and she thought they looked glamorous.
     That's why she started smoking.
          The first brand she tried was L&M, not made by
     Reynolds.  And then she smoked other brands during
     that period of time.  It sounded to me like what
     she could get her hands on in those first four
     years, that's what she smoked.  And as Dr. Burns
     testified, she switched because of taste, not
     because of advertising.  Ms. Taylor was not asked
     questions about why she switched brands.
          She was asked questions about why she started
     and she testified the beauty salon, seeing the
     people in the beauty salon.  And she switched from
     Winston to Marlboro because of taste.
          Why did Ms. Sadler testify in this case?  She
     did sing the jingle for us.  She did sing the
     jingle for us, and she described the brands her
     father smoked and she described her own smoking
     history.  In the past 53 years, Ms. Sadler has
     spent more time talking to Ms. Taylor's attorneys
     than she has to Ms. Taylor.  And did we hear from
     any other friend or coworker about why she smoked,
     why she made decisions to do certain things?  We did not.
          What we heard instead was Dr. Krugman.  Why
     was Dr. Krugman afraid.
          To talk to Ms. Taylor?  He could have.  He's
     the expert.  He wrote a textbook.  He teaches.  Do
     you think that Dr. Krugman could have gotten to the
     bottom of the issue of whether advertisements
     matter to her?  Did she continue to smoke?  Did she
     believe something was untrue?  Did it prevent her
     from understanding the risks?
          He could have put together a nice package of
     questions and sat down with Ms. Taylor and asked
     Ms. Taylor those questions and gotten the answer.
     He didn't do that.  And you have to ask yourself
     why he didn't do it?  Instead, he goes from
     courthouse to courthouse saying the exact same
     thing.
          Ms. Taylor's claims that somehow -- and
     they're thin anyway.  Her the testimony on this is
     paper thin that she had any reliance on anything
     the tobacco company said, right?  You got Dr. Burns
     testifying it, never talked to Ms. Taylor; you've
     got Dr. Krugman testifying it, never talked to
     Ms. Taylor.
          What we know is that in 2008 -- this is what we read this morning -- six years before trial,
     Ms. Taylor testified or admitted under oath that's
     when she signed the interrogatory responses, that
     she routinely read the Florida Times Union
     newspaper for at least the past 30 years.
          And then what happens?  Dr. Burns gets up on
     the stand.  Dr. Krugman gets up on the stand.  And
     then what happens?  Knowing what it would look like
     if she was routinely reading the newspaper and
     keeping up with events.  After seeing all of that
     information, what did she testify?
          Once you moved and got married, would you have
     occasionally read the newspaper?
          Occasionally read the newspaper.  I doubt it.
     Your testimony is:  You did not subscribe to the
     Florida Times Union in the 1970s?  I remember
     subscribing to it because either somebody was
     stealing it or it was wet, rained on.
          When the Surgeon General's report came out in
     1964, do you recall it being in the newspaper?
          No, I wouldn't have read it.
          And you saw various newspapers that were put
     up during the course of this trial, do you recall
     seeing any of those stories in the newspaper?
          No, not at all. I routinely read the Florida Times Union in
     2008.
          I wouldn't have read that, from the stand.
          What do we know about what Ms. Taylor told her
     son?  Do you remember your mom telling you when you
     were growing up to not to smoke?
          Yes, sir.
          Did she tell you don't ever pick them up
     because they're hard to quit?
          Yes, sir.
          Did she tell you that pretty much your whole
     life?
          Yes, sir.
          Ask Ms. Taylor:  Is that what you were telling
     your son when he was growing up?
          The fact is that what she told her son was not
     to smoke and that it can be addictive, and she told
     him not to smoke because she knew it was harmful.
     She didn't want her son to pick up smoking.
          And then she acknowledged -- we got a little
     sliver there, right.  And so you told your son
     should quit smoking prior to 1996?
          At that point she was saying it was like
     common knowledge it had come into being, that's the
     way she described it. The fact of the matter is Ms. Taylor testified
     she did not hear all the things you saw put up on
     the screen, facts, facts, the Frank Statement,
     Tobacco Institute.  All of those statements that
     you see there, why?  She didn't read them.  She
     never saw them.  Did she rely on those statements?
     Of course she didn't rely on those statements.  She
     never saw them.
          And, once again, you have to ask yourself:
     Why did Dr. Krugman not ask her questions about
     this as well?  The campaign of doubt, the campaign
     of denial.  People were misled.  People didn't
     understand.  They were confused.  Well, the only
     person that matters in this case about that is
     Ms. Taylor.  She's the other person that matters.
          So why didn't Dr. Krugman ask her:  Did you
     disbelieve the warnings?  Were you confused?  Do
     you not think he could have put forth a series of
     questions that would have put this issue to rest?
     He didn't do that.
          Ms. Taylor was not waiting on additional
     information from R.J. Reynolds to quit smoking.
     The material information is -- this is in the
     instructions -- that is of such importance that a
     reasonable person would have considered it significant in his or her decision making process.
          Ms. Taylor knew cigarettes were harmful.  She
     knew they could cause disease.  And knowing that
     information for 38 years, she never even tried to
     quit smoking.  Remember, Ms. Taylor has the burden
     of proof in this case on every single one of these
     issues.  And what does Ms. Taylor say?  She says
     she doubts she would have quit smoking based on
     additional information from R.J. Reynolds.  Doubts.
          That's not more likely than not.  That's
     doubt.  Just like Dr. Bagnoli, doubt means exactly
     what it says from her own statement on the witness
     stand.  Ms. Taylor did not develop COPD or PVD
     because she relied on a statement by R.J. Reynolds
     about the dangers of smoking.
          She knew the dangers of smoking.  The fact
     that she didn't know that Reynolds knew doesn't
     change the fact that she knew that it was harmful
     and she could have made a decision to quit when she
     knew that and she didn't.  She didn't rely on it.
     For 38 years she knew, for 38 years and she didn't
     try to quit.  She knew it was harmful and -- and
     she didn't try to quit.
          Michael, can you help me out again?  Thank you
     Michael. So Question 3:  State whether R.J. Reynolds'
     concealment or omission of material fact about the
     health effects or addictive nature of smoking or
     both was a legal cause of Ms. Taylor's injuries?
     The answer to that is no.
          And state whether R.J. Reynolds' agreement to
     conceal or omit a material fact regarding the
     health effects of cigarette smoking or the
     addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal
     cause of Helen Taylor's injuries.
          The answer to that is no.
          Facts, facts as it relates to Ms. Taylor.
          All right, so what's next?
          Question 5, so this is the comparative fault
     point.  Again, we do not believe you should get to
     this point.  But it's my obligation to go through
     the whole verdict form.  State the percentage of
     fault, if any, that was a legal cause of Helen
     Taylor's injuries that you charge to R.J. Reynolds
     and that you charge to Helen Taylor.
          Now, this is an important point.  The
     assignment of fault relates only to actions that
     were a legal cause of Ms. Taylor's COPD or PVD.
     You have to find -- there are facts here -- there
     are lots of documents that you've seen, there are lots of testimony that you've seen, right.  But
     unless it's a legal cause of her COPD or PVD, you
     can't consider it for purposes of fault.
          The action of Reynolds has to be the cause.
     And we cannot -- Reynolds cannot be assigned fault
     for actions that were not the legal cause.  So
     documents you see up there from 1974 or 1990 about
     youth marketing, she was an adult at that point in
     time.
          You can't assign fault based on things that
     have nothing to do with Ms. Taylor and weren't the
     legal cause of her COPD or PVD.
          Look, four addiction experts.  Only Ms. Taylor
     could make the choice to quit.  Only Ms. Taylor.
     Dr. Burns, before 1968:  Free and encumbered
     decision to smoke before 1968.  Says she became
     addicted again at this time period between the end
     of her first marriage and dating her second
     husband.  That's the 1968 time period, give or
     take.
          And when Ms. Taylor started dating her second
     husband, she been smoking Winstons for six years.
     Okay.  What do we know about 1968 when Dr. Burns
     said she became addicted?  Well, by that point in
     time the Surgeon General had already issued his landmark report in 1964 that got as we talked about
     enormous coverage.
          The cigarette warnings were already on the
     pack for one or two years by that point in time,
     right, 1966.  She started telling her son not to
     smoke.  Don't smoke.  And millions of other smokers
     were quitting.  She made the choice to smoke
     Winston cigarettes.
          One way to look at it is just comparing, what
     is the conduct of the two?  If you look at
     Ms. Taylor she made a free choice to smoke Winston
     cigarettes.  She told her son to smoke her entire
     life [sic], his entire life and her entire life
     when he was growing up, but did not try to quit
     before 1996.
          She did not quit after she saw the 1966
     warning.  She made no effort to quit in 1970 when
     the new warning went on the cigarette pack.  She
     made no effort to quit when she was smoking Winston
     cigarettes at all.  By 1985 she had stopped --
     remember the testimony, I just stopped reading -- I
     was so used to them I stopped reading.  She stopped
     reading the pack warnings.
          Before 1996, undisputed.  She made no attempt
     to quit.  Before 1996 she didn't even reduce the amount of cigarettes that she was smoking with the
     knowledge that she had that it can be harmful.  She
     didn't even reduce the amount that she smoked.
          When doctors told her she had a respiratory
     condition caused by smoking, what did she do?  That
     was her peak amount of smoking her entire life.
     And the amount of time -- the peak amount of time
     that she was smoking -- this after 1996.  And of
     course since 1972 she was smoking Marlboro
     cigarettes made by Philip Morris, not R.J.
     Reynolds.
          Ms. Taylor refused to quit a number of times.
     You have the records.  You'll have them back in the
     jury room if you want.  She refused to quit time
     and time again.  She sought professional help,
     when?  About a year before the trial.  And she's
     testified herself she knew she wouldn't quit until
     she got strong.  She wouldn't quit until she wanted
     to do it for herself.
          And every quit attempt that you've heard about
     was made while smoking somebody else's cigarettes,
     not R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes.  And we know that
     Ms. Taylor can quit smoking.  And we know by her
     admission that she could quit smoking sooner, and
     we know that of course because, in fact, she quit smoking in 2014.
          And when she quit, she hadn't smoked an R.J.
     Reynolds' cigarette -- when she quit she hadn't
     smoked R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes in 42 years.  Her
     choices are the only legal cause of her COPD and
     PVD.  I had to do it myself.  I had to get strong,
     I knew I had to get serious.
          When Ms. Taylor got serious -- I know there's
     testimony that she had to the nicotine patch and
     she had these other things.  Do you have any doubt
     in your mind that when this lady put her mind to
     it, when she finally put her mind to it, she did
     it, and they've acknowledged that she could have
     done it sooner?  Of course she could.
          She had 42 years of choices after she stopped
     smoking Winston cigarettes.  During the time, she
     was smoking, majority of the time she was smoking
     Winston cigarettes, according to their own experts,
     she wasn't addicted.  Nothing we could have done
     before 1972 would have prevented Ms. Taylor's COPD
     or PVD.
          Only Ms. Taylor had the ability to prevent her
     COPD and PVD.  And she is 100 percent responsible
     for the choices that she's made.  Nothing Reynolds
     did -- because it's about Reynolds at this point, nothing that Reynolds did between 1962 and 1972
     caused her COPD or PVD.
          And just so it's clear, if you answer
     Questions 3 and 4 yes, this comparative fault
     concept does not come into the case.  You would be
     finding, if you answer those questions yes, that
     Reynolds is 100 percent responsible for her COPD,
     even though she didn't smoke Reynolds cigarettes
     for 42 years.
          We're 100 percent responsible for her starting
     to smoke, even though she smoked L&M cigarettes
     first made by Liggett.  You would be finding that
     we're 100 percent responsible for her decision to
     smoke Philip Morris cigarettes, Marlboros for the
     last 42 years, that we're 100 percent responsible
     for her never trying to quit smoking when she
     smoked Winston cigarettes, and we're 100 percent
     responsible, even though Dr. Burns testified that
     Ms. Taylor was not addicted for the majority of the
     time she smoked Winston cigarettes.  The
     comparative fault calculation that you're doing
     does not apply if you answer yes to Questions 3 and
     4.
          So on this question if you get in your
     deliberations, state the percentage of fault, if any, that was the legal cause of Helen
     Taylor's injuries that you charge to -- I'm sorry,
     you're ahead of me, thank you.  You're get -- thank
     you -- R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, 0 percent,
     100 percent.  So let's talk if you get to this
     point -- let me catch up in my outline here.
          Next, damages.  You'll be instructed any
     damages must be fair and just in light of the
     evidence.  Let's talk a little bit about some of
     the issues relating to the damages claim.  First of
     all, the $5 million thrown out to you for pain and
     suffering.  $5 million, what is that connected to?
     What -- what basis did the $5 million have?  No
     basis.  It's just a number, $5 million, that's the
     pain and suffering.
          But let's take a look at what happened from
     1996 when they claim she had COPD until the
     present.  Okay.  So we know that when she was
     driving the Brinks truck -- she fully employed from
     '96 to 2001 working full-time.  No impairment to
     her function.  She did have exacerbations that we
     attribute to asthma, but she was working during
     those time periods.
          Then she goes and gets a job at Brinks.  She's
     got to get a commercial driver's license.  What's required in that?  You can't have a respiratory
     dysfunction likely to interfere with your job.  I
     asked her:  You knew you couldn't have a
     respiratory condition that would affect your
     driving?  She said, Right.  I was considered safe
     to drive.  They're asking for damages going back to
     1996, and then into 2000, 2004.  What did she say
     about her job at Brinks?
          Do you have to lift and carry things?  Yes,
     sometimes I would load 200 boxes.  She did that the
     entire time she had a job at Brinks.  And that
     ended driving the truck in 2011.  So her COPD and
     PVD did not prevent her from doing what anybody
     would describe as physically strenuous work.
          And what did she say to Dr. Kennison in 2013?
     In 2013, she's telling Dr. Kennison contrary to
     what she said on the stand that I'm working one day
     a week, just Saturdays, is that she's working
     overtime three, 12-hour days.  This is in 2013.
          She lost no income because of the injuries she
     claims here.  She was fully employed throughout
     this entire time period.  And we've set forth from
     private investigation internship.  She got a master
     investigator's license, started the cleverly named
     Art of Facts Detective Agency.  She went on stakeouts.  She was going on stakeouts as much as a
     year ago.  They want you in part of their
     calculation of damages to consider future medical
     expenses.
          Now, Ms. Taylor has not been hospitalized in
     just about two years.  And Dr. Bagnoli himself said
     it would be a guess to try to determine how often
     she would be hospitalized in the future.  You
     cannot base your decision on guesses, on
     speculation.  And that's exactly what you would be
     doing finding that somehow she was going to be
     hospitalized a certain number of times in the
     future.
          And of course part of the calculus here is --
     again, it's their burden.  Ms. Taylor has asthma.
     Right now she has emphysema, minimal emphysema
     according to the CT scan in 2008.  And it's their
     burden to establish what of her damages are a
     result of COPD versus asthma.  And the fact of the
     matter is they can't.
          In fact, they asked Dr. Schroeder, Can you say
     which one is what?  Which hospitalization?  What
     problem is associated with the asthma versus the
     COPD?  And the issue is, you cannot distinguish
     which one is causing the problems.  And it's their burden to prove to you their damages.  And they
     haven't proven that.
          So there are a number of categories of damages
     on the form that they break out.  And you'll have
     to go through each one if you get to this point on
     the verdict form.  You'll have to look at that,
     evaluate the evidence.  You'll have access to
     whatever documents that are in evidence that will
     help assist you in that regard.
          And I'll just go to question 11:  What are the
     total damages that Helen Taylor has proved in this
     case?  And the answer to that is zero.
          Thank you, Michael.
          Let's talk about the next issue, if could you
     get to this point on the verdict form.  Punitive
     damages can only be awarded for the concealment
     that caused Ms. Taylor's COPD or PVD.
          So when you heard evidence about what was
     concealed or what wasn't known, you have to tie
     that to Ms. Taylor in determining whether or not
     punitive damages are awarded.  And you may not
     punish R.J. Reynolds for any harm suffered by
     anyone other than Ms. Taylor.  And let me make this
     point clear, that punitive damages are in addition
     to damages that fully compensate. If you get to this point, you will have
     already determined that Ms. Taylor has been fully
     compensated for her injuries.  This would be in
     addition to that.  And the punitive damages can
     only be awarded to her.  It's about the money going
     to Ms. Taylor.
          The instruction is important here.  It's clear
     and convincing evidence, which is different than
     the burden of proof on any other issue that you
     have in the case.  Clear and convincing evidence is
     evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
     confusion and of such weight it produces a firm
     belief or a conviction about the matter in issue.
          And I want to focus on the phrase "lacking in
     confusion" because if you get back into the jury
     room and you're deliberating over this point, if
     there's any hesitation about this, then it's not
     lacking in confusion.
          The Engle findings do not establish that
     Ms. Taylor is entitled to punitive damages.  That's
     what we talked about at the beginning.  It doesn't
     establish certain things in this case, and it
     doesn't establish that she's entitled to punitive
     damages.
          Dr. Burns testified in response to Mr. Keehfus' question about number of things
     Reynolds has done to develop a safer cigarette.
          Reynolds has tried to reduce harmful
     ingredients in cigarette smoke, Dr. Burns
     acknowledged that.  Dr. Burns acknowledged that
     Reynolds was on the cutting edge of developing a
     body of tobacco chemistry science.  Dr. Burns
     acknowledges that Reynolds scientists and their
     publications have been cited in many of the Surgeon
     General's reports.  And we know that cigarettes
     that burn tobacco, it cannot be made safe.
          The Council for Tobacco Research has awarded
     more than $300 million in grants to fund
     independent scientific research projects.
     Thousands published scientific articles and medical
     reports, more than 600 articles funded by tobacco
     research are cited in the Surgeon General's report.
     The CTR funded scientists of great integrity, from
     Dr. Burn's mouth.  And CTR funded research at
     virtually every major university in the country.
          Before publication of the 1964 Surgeon
     General's Report, TIRC and CTR funded published
     research concluding that smoking is addictive
     before the publication of the 1964 Surgeon
     General's report.  And it funded a collection of more than 6,000 articles, 6,000 articles that was
     cited as a basic source reference for the 1964
     Surgeon General's Report.
          Reynolds should not be punished in this case.
          Michael, please.  Thank you.
          Under the circumstances of this case, state
     whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive
     damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds.  The
     answer to that question is no.
          Now, this is my last opportunity to talk to
     you unless you answer that question yes.  In which
     case we'll come back for another phase of this --
     of this trial.  And Mr. Shields, as is his right,
     can split up his closing, and he can talk first and
     he can talk last.  And obviously I don't get a
     chance to respond, and so I'm confident he'll bring
     up things for that reason.  So that I don't get a
     chance to respond.
          Now I would ask you to continue as you have
     done throughout this case to listen carefully to --
     what the evidence has been and decide the case not
     on what Mr. Shields says the evidence is or what he
     says the instruction is, or what I say the evidence
     is or what the instruction is, but on your view of
     the evidence that you've heard in this case. And at the end of the day what matters in your
     determination of the issues in this case are the
     simple facts that I raised with you in the opening,
     these are the facts that matter in making your
     determination.
          Michael, can you switch that on.  Thank you.
          So Liggett made -- Liggett made L&M cigarettes
     that Ms. Taylor smoked during the first four years
     of her smoking history.  Liggett is not here.
     Philip Morris made the Marlboro cigarettes
     Ms. Taylor smoked for the past 42 years and isn't
     here.  What we know is that Helen Taylor smoked
     Winston cigarettes from 1962 to 1972.  And we know
     all of these facts.  And those facts lead to the
     conclusion that Ms. Taylor has not proved her
     claims and is not entitled to any damages in this
     case.
          Thank you very much for your patience and your
     service.
