OPENING STATEMENT
MR. GEISE: May it please the Court,
Mr. Ratzan, Mr. Zebersky, Mrs. Vasko, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
We're at the end of the case. We're at the end of this phase of the trial. You've heard from the witnesses. You've seen the evidence. You've seen the records, the military records, the insurance records, and the medical records, and you've heard a lot of things that have absolutely nothing to do with the two questions on the verdict form. And you've heard a lot of things that have
everything to do with those two questions on the verdict form. I want to take some time to go through what doesn't matter and what does matter.
And while I do that, I want to also tell you that it has been Jason's and my great pleasure to try this case in front of the seven of you. It's been our pleasure. And whenever I try a case, years later I'll look back, usually I remember the result. But the one thing I always remember, are the faces of the jurors. I'll remember where you sat ten years from now. I'll remember what you look like; how you paid attention.
And the reason you can remember that, is because you've played such an important role in what's gone on in this courtroom. You've been as big a part of this as I have, as Mr. Ratzan, and of all the witnesses. And for that, I will not forget you.
And I also won't forget the work you have put in and you're going to put in. You've been here for about two weeks. You've been on time. You've paid attention. And this is something that takes you out of your normal life, and we
appreciate that and we thank you for doing your civic duty.
And that duty has one more step, and that's filling out this verdict form. You're going to do that today.
Now, after listening to the Plaintiff's closing argument, I want to go back to a few things I said in my opening statement about what this case is not about.
This case is not about whether smoking causes disease, and it's not about whether smoking is addictive. We admitted those things.
And despite those things, smoking is still legal, cigarettes are legal. They're legal to make, they're legal to sell. Contrary to what you might think from Dr. Cummings, they're legal to advertise and, most importantly, they are legal to smoke.
Now, I want to look at the two questions you're going to have. If we can bring up number one. You saw these from Mr. Ratzan. I'm not going to read through them again. It's just these two questions. These are the only two questions that matter in this case.
There's not a question on this verdict form whether Reynolds or other people at tobacco companies said dumb things in the past. It's not there. There's not a question on this verdict form about cigarette advertising or press releases or the Dick Van Dyke show.
That's not on there. Somebody asked a question about prostate cancer question the other day. There's not a question on here about prostate cancer. And similarly, you heard things about lung cancer throughout the trial. There is not a question on here about lung cancer.
These are the only two questions that you have to answer.
Mr. Ratzan talked a little bit about the burden of proof and Judge Tuter will instruct you about the law on that. I agree with Mr. Ratzan. They have the burden on the first question. I have the burden on the second question.
And the greater the weight of the evidence isn't met through speculation or guess or hypotheticals or little wordings one way or the other. It's meant through proof. Proof in the records, proof from the testimony of witnesses
who took the stand and told you what they thought. Proof from fact witnesses who testified, and proof from experts who are qualified in their fields who testified.
Now, I contend the Plaintiff does not meet the burden of proof on the first question. And I contend that we do meet that burden on the second question.
I'm going to talk about both of those.
Mr. Vasko passed away in 2006. And in his absence in this trial, it was left to other people to paint a picture of Mr. Vasko. Now, in this trial, the Plaintiffs tried to paint that picture through two people: Mrs. Vasko and Dr. Cummings. And not surprisingly, the picture that they painted for you fit with their theory of the case.
And the picture they painted for you,
Mr. Vasko knew nothing about the risks of smoking, nothing. Mr. Vasko was hopelessly addicted and couldn't quit smoking, but for a day maybe.
And the picture they tried to paint for you, he didn't know anything about his COPD, and all those underlying symptoms, until after
May 5, 1990.
Now, the problem with this picture they tried to paint, is that although Mr. Vasko was not here in this courtroom to take the witness stand and testify, he speaks to us and he gives us his testimony through the proof in the records you saw.
And the testimony that he gives us, and that others gave us, destroys the picture they tried to paint in this case.
You heard from Dr. Cummings over the course of three days, and his appearance in this trial is part of his war against tobacco.
Dr. Cummings candidly told you, he's testified in over 50 of these cases. He's a traveling road show that goes from courthouse to courthouse to courthouse. And as part of that traveling road show, he tries to get other experts to come with him, and he recruits them to participate in his war.
Now, to advance his agenda in this case,
Dr. Cummings' testimony was an invitation to you to ignore the two questions you have to answer; to ignore the duty you swore to uphold as a juror. His appearance and his agenda is
an invitation to you to ignore the facts of this case and look, instead, on the extraneous, the irrelevant, and the inflammatory.
Dr. Cummings' testimony was a lot like those negative political ads that we've seen over the last couple of months, that I'm sure we're all so tired of. Messages that are designed to play on your emotions, rather than appeal to your intellect, all to try to steal your vote.
Dr. Cummings talked a lot about Philip Morris ads, Philip Morris executives. Look at the table. Philip Morris is not a defendant in this case.
Dr. Cummings showed you advertisements for Camel, Old Gold, Kent, for Winston, and a variety of other cigarettes. What is the proof in this case? The proof is that Mr. Vasko never smoked those brands.
In fact, Dr. Cummings showed you ads from before the time Mr. Vasko was born.
Dr. Cummings combed his archives looking for the most inflammatory public statements he could find, and he played them for you. But there isn't a bit of evidence, there isn't a
bit of proof, in this case, that Mr. Vasko ever saw or heard any of those inflammatory statements.
Remember Dr. Cummings showed you the clip of the Winston ad on the Flintstones. Well, first, there is no evidence that Mr. Vasko ever watched the Flintstones, and it's proof in this case that he never smoked Winstons.
And on cross examination, Dr. Cummings admitted to me that, well, Reynolds never advertised on the Flintstones or any of those Saturday morning kids' shows. And, well, gee, in fact, the only times that they advertised on the Flintstones was when it was a show for adults at night.
But why did Dr. Cummings show you Fred and Barney? He wanted to rile you up. He wanted to get you mad. He wanted to recruit you for his war. He's trying to win your vote with no regard to whether it had to do with the facts in this case.
Now, if you deduct the extraneous, the irrelevant, and the inflammatory, you get rid of the Philip Morris ads, the Philip Morris executives, the ads for brands he never saw,
the ads from before he was born, the stuff from CTR and TI, that rhetoric that there's no evidence that Mr. Vasko ever saw, if you get rid of that stuff, what is left from Dr. Cummings' testimony?
All that is left is his opinion that John Vasko was addicted. That's an opinion that Reynolds shares in this case. It's not something that I told Dr. Cummings for the first time when I was crossing him. Ladies and gentlemen, I told you that in opening statement. I came out and I told you that fact.
Now, it's interesting that even though I told you, and Dr. Cummings knew lots of stuff, that's something apparently that didn't get to him. That's something that Mr. Ratzan apparently didn't tell him.
Do you remember this exchange? I asked Dr. Cummings, after he went through three days, to tell you that Mr. Vasko was addicted. You know that, in this case, we don't dispute that Mr. Vasko had nicotine addiction. And did Cummings, for knowing lots of things that are irrelevant and extraneous and inflammatory, he
didn't know this fact. He said, I didn't know that.
I think General Cummings was at the wrong battlefield when he came into this courtroom.
In redirect with Dr. Cummings, Mr. Ratzan told him, I want you to focus on this case. Well, if Dr. Cummings focused on this case, he would have realized that everything he was showing you had nothing to do with this case.
And how do we know that? We know that from proof, from this witness chair from Mrs. Vasko. And I'm not going to sit here and try to tell you what I remember people saying. I'm just going to show you what was said. And let's look at what Mrs. Vasko said about this case.
First line: "Now, you're not aware of your husband seeing any cigarette advertising; are you?
"No, I'm not aware of him.
"And you never discussed tobacco advertising with your husband; did you?
"No."
Let's look at the next line.
"And he never told you that he relied on
anything that a tobacco company ever said or did when he made the decision to smoke cigarettes?"
The answer: "No".
Next slide.
"You never heard of the Frank Statement prior to this lawsuit; had you"?
"I never heard of the Frank Statement".
"And you never talked to your husband about the Frank Statement prior to this lawsuit"?
Answer: "No."
Next line.
"You don't remember ever talking to your husband about the Tobacco Industry Research Committee"?
"No".
"Or the Counsel for Tobacco Research"?
"No".
"Or the Tobacco Institute"?
"No".
Finally there's this one:
"And in fact, you don't have any knowledge whatsoever why your husband smoked; is that correct"?
"No, that's correct".
So, folks, I don't care how big Mr. Ratzan wants to blow the Frank Statement or the open debate. He can make it wall size. He can make it the size of this courthouse. He can hang it outside. It doesn't matter because Mr. Vasko never saw it.
That's the proof in this case.
Now, you heard Dr. Cummings has testified in cases like this many, many times. And the slide show is well rehearsed and well traveled.
And it may have some relevance in some of those other cases that he testifies in, but not in this case, not with this smoker, not in the case of John Vasko.
So you want to talk about focusing on this case? Focus on John Vasko's case. Because John Vasko and his choices are what this case is all about.
Now, I told you in opening statement that the Plaintiffs have a theory of addiction. And that theory of addiction is like I95. And once you start smoking and become a daily smoker, you'll find yourself helplessly seat-belted in the car, not in the driver's side, but in the_
passenger side. Old man nicotine's got the wheel and you're strapped in next to him. And that car is destined to go all the way from Miami to Maine. Nicotine's is behind the wheel. Whatever choice you had is gone. You have one, and only one destination, and that's Maine. No stops along the way. Nicotine has lined up orange barrels along every exit ramp for those thousands of miles; you can't get off.
No matter what you learn along the way, no matter what people tell you, no matter what you learn in school, no matter what you read in the newspaper, no matter what, you're helpless, you can't change your behavior, you can't stop smoking, and disease is your only destiny.
in that view, you get straight from addiction to injury. But you learned in this case, and you know now, that it's not that simple. This road for a smoker has lots of exits. We're going to talk about a number of the exits. And you learned in this case that smokers, even addicted smokers, can stop smoking, 60 million smokers have quit. It's up to the smoker.
An addiction didn't prevent Mr. Vasko from getting off this road. He's no different than the 60 million who exited, except that he didn't want to get off that road.
Now, as you deliberate, it's important to remember that there is a person between the addiction and the disease, and this is something I showed you in opening. Let's look at it again.
And that person between addiction and the disease is John Vasko. Squarely between it. And Mr. Vasko is the only person, the only person who could have made a decision that would have changed the outcome of this case.
Let me dwell on that point for just a second. When you cut through all the finger pointing and the alibis, there's only one person who could have altered this chain of events, only one: It wasn't Mrs. Vasko. It wasn't Mr. Vasko's friend, who told him to quit smoking. It wasn't the elusive Dr. Dhanani.
It wasn't Fred Flintstone.
The only person is John Vasko. And it's this man, in the middle, that they want to take out of this case, that they don't want you to
focus on, that they don't want you to look at. They want you to skip over it, because they want you to skip over the fact that the cause of his smoking was his choice. Because as Dr. Abramson told you, and I'll talk more about Dr. Abramson in a minute, John Vasko's choices are the cause of his disease, not addiction.
You saw the Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers. Dr. Cummings pointed out to you things that he says are false about that. But he also pointed out many things in the Frank Statement that are true. And another point on the Frank Statement, he also told you that this was not an uncommon advertising theme in the 1950s.
Remember that I showed you frank statements for baldness, frank statements about fur prices, and even frank statements about constipation. It was a common advertising theme at the time.
The one thing about the Frank Statement that they showed you is it had nothing to do with Mr. Vasko's decision to smoke, or his decision to keep smoking. He never saw it, no matter how big, when they blow it up, he still
never saw it.
But while the Frank Statement that Dr. Cummings showed you had nothing to do with John Vasko and his smoking, Mr. Vasko made a couple of frank statements of his own about his own cigarette smoking.
The first was in 1981. Let's take a look at it. You saw this. You saw this throughout trial. The 1981 life insurance application.
Mr. Vasko signed it. And when he signed it, he said it was true and correct that he had not smoked for 12 months. And he told the company, you go ahead and you rely on my frank statement.
It wasn't the only frank statement that Mr. Vasko gave us.
He had a second one, three years later,
1984. Let's take a look at this one. Very similar to the first frank statement about his cigarette smoking. Again, he hasn't smoked in
12	months, and he's certified that the answers and statements are full, complete, and true, to the best of his knowledge, and he did it to induce action by the insurance company.
On each of these forms, John Vasko_
essentially testified in this case that he was able to control his smoking and quit for a year at a time on two occasions. Mrs. Vasko testified that these frank statements are anything but, they're not true. She said he never quit for a year at a time, not in 1981, not in 1984.
But in trying to paint this picture of John Vasko that Mrs. Vasko and Dr. Cummings did, they can't have it both ways. These insurance records go one way or the other. One, either these signed statements are evidence that he did stop smoking for 12 months; that he did have the ability to quit, that he was not helplessly addicted, unable to quit. Either they proved that that's not the case and he did quit or, on the other hand, when they try to tell you that he wasn't aware of the risks of smoking, these records tell you otherwise.
You heard testimony when he signed up for the nonsmoker's plan is because he understood that nonsmokers are healthier, nonsmokers live longer, and that the smokers have a bigger risk of disease and, on a life insurance
application, death.
So they can't have it both ways. These two frank statements for Mr. Vasko tell you one of two things: Either he quit and could quit, or either in 1981 and 1984, he knew about the risks of smoking.
Mr. Ratzan talked a lot about choice. And he predicted that I was going to mention choice. And that's right, I am going to mention choice.
But you didn't just hear about choice from me. This isn't something that me and Mr. Keehfus concocted while we were over at our office to work. Choice comes from the Surgeon General, the nation's highest health officer.
He calls smoking a personal choice health behavior. And Dr. Cummings agrees with it, because he's worked on Surgeon General's report. He's been part of those that have called it a personal choice health behavior.
We heard about three different times the Surgeon General said that, first in 1977.
Surgeon General says cigarette smoking can be called a personal choice health behavior.
That wasn't a stray comment. It wasn't a
misprint. It wasn't something one of the peer reviewers missed and, oops, it leaked to the public.
They said it again in 1982. Look at this one. However, a personal choice behavior, such as smoking, is impossible to randomize, i.e., to dictate smoking behavior. You can't dictate it, because people make the personal choice.
And again, in 1986, the Surgeon General recognized that cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
So the Surgeon General says, yes, it's addictive, but the individual smoker must decide, must choose whether to continue it.
You have that choice.
The Surgeon General repeatedly said that smoking, as addictive as it can be, is a personal choice health behavior. Nowhere in these statements from the Surgeon General does he use the term constrained choice.
Constrained choice is a term that Dr. Cummings concocts to come into trial to try and get around the fact, the proof from the Surgeon
General's reports.
Why does he do it? He does it because he tries to get you to excuse John Vasko for the choices that he made. But the Surgeon General thinks smoking is a personal choice. And the Surgeon General puts John Vasko, the smoker, between addiction and injury, because that smoker, according to the Surgeon General, can exercise that choice to either not start or to stop, or if he wants, to make the choice to continue. And the Surgeon General is telling us that John Vasko, and only John Vasko, has that choice.
Now, can smokers quit? Yes. Does Cummings knows that smokers can get off this highway any time they want. He knows that addicted smokers can quit. He believes they can quit. And in one of the shortest answers he gave to my question, this is what he said.
I asked him, true or false question, even addicted smokers can quit smoking.
He said, true.
And in fact, Dr. Cummings has that Smart Move pamphlet that he gives to people who come to his clinics to get them to stop smoking._
What does he tell them? Let's look at it. Do you have what it takes to stop smoking? It's really pretty simple, three questions. First, do you want to stop? Second, are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine?
And third, are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? It all comes down to motivation. If you want to and you're willing to put up with some temporary discomfort, you, too, can do it.
Were there external motivations that could have prompted John Vasko to give it a try to stop smoking? Were there exit ramps along I95 that he was aware of but chose not to take?
You bet there were.
Mrs. Vasko and Dr. Cummings want you to think that Mr. Vasko knew nothing about the risks of smoking. But he did. And everything he knew, every time he knew it, was a potential exit and he could have chosen to take, but he chose not to.
I think as it came out, I live in San Diego now. And so I've been away from my family for a couple weeks while we've been here. And sometimes when I'm away from my two
boys, especially, I can get a little punchy. I was on the phone with my sixth grader on Sunday before Halloween, and he was asking me how trial was going, and I was asking him how school was going for him. And, to be honest, he was more interested in school than this trial, but that's all right. And he said in their social studies class -- his class is working on maps and using maps as a way to communicate your point. So then he came up with a terrific idea. He's like, dad, why don't you use a map in your case, it helps communicate a point.
So with the help of the sixth grade class at Solana Santa Fe School in San Diego,
California, I have a map. This is a map of I95. It goes from Miami to Maine.
I want to talk about this. I want to talk about the exits along this highway. You heard from Dr. Martin yesterday about the time Mr. Vasko was in school in Ohio, elementary school, middle school, and high school, the risks of smoking and addiction were taught in the classrooms in the 1940s and the 1950s. And we know that these were recommended and
required teaching. You saw the pupil test that you needed to take that asked you those questions.
At that time, Mr. Vasko have chose whether he wanted to get on this highway or not. If he had heeded those instructions in school, he may have avoided I95 altogether. But for whatever reason, he chose to smoke.
So he starts out on the highway here. As you grew up, he read the Cleveland Plain Dealer and the Cleveland Press. He was a paper boy for the Press. And we saw yesterday article after article, after article. I'm sure it got boring for you all. But we saw all the articles from the Cleveland Plain Dealer and the Cleveland Press about the risks of smoking. These are more exit ramps along the way, more exit ramps that John Vasko have chosen to take, but he chose not to. Instead, he chose to stay on the road.
Now, Dr. Cummings showed you an impressive collection of materials that Mr. Vasko never saw. Dr. Cummings wants you to think that people in the '50s and the '60s couldn't possibly have known about the risks of smoking
because, after all, the Frank Statement issued one time, and Philip Morris sponsored I Love Lucy. So people didn't know about all these articles and everything.
But Mr. Ratzan has talked about wearing 2010 goggles. And Dr. Cummings comes into this courtroom wearing 2010 goggles, but they're being worn on an anti-tobacco advocate. So, he tells you people didn't know about the risk back in the '50s and '60s. But there are eyewitness accounts from public health community experts in the '50s and in the '60s who look at those glasses and they tell you, huh-uh, this is the way it was back then. And you saw that.
Dr. Hammond of Hammond and Horn, "In my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not is their own business."
You want an exit? Go ahead, it's your own business.
And Surgeon General Leroy Burney, "Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press,
radio and TV."
Each of these warnings, each of these statements, each of these articles, is another warning, another exit that he could have chosen to have taken, but he chose not to.
Let's go to the next line. Remember this record, the 1960 military record that John Vasko signed? This is right before he and Mrs. Vasko got married. And in it, he was experiencing shortness of breath and a chronic cough. What did the Army doctor tell him in 1960, that his cough was caused by smoking. Decades before he was diagnosed with emphysema. Decades before his first pulmonary function test, he was told that smoking caused his respiratory problems. And he acknowledged receiving that information by signing the record.
Now, since this is Florida, and it's election time, I'm going to steal a quote from Al Gore: This, folks, is an inconvenient truth for the Plaintiffs. This is a fact, in the medical record, that in 1960 he knew he had a condition with his respiratory system that was caused by smoking. Now, it's going to get
worse over time. But in 1960, he's put on notice by the military doctor about the relationship between smoking and your health. 1960.
And this doctor's visit taught Mr. Vasko a lesson for life. Using this map, this is driver's education for the smoker. In 1960, you're smoking, you got a cough, and they're related. Get off the road. Stop. But Mr. Vasko kept smoking. He knew from that moment forward what smoking can do, but he chose from that moment forward to smoke.
Now, let's move on up I95 a little bit more. There's more that he knew. There's more that he chose not to act on. And this is testimony from his wife, in this case, where I asked her:
"Question: When did you first notice that your husband had that hacky cough?"
"It was after we were married".
"So sometime after 1960"?
"Sometime, yeah, during that year, uh-huh".
"And was that something that he had throughout the rest of your life together"?_
"Yes. It got worse as he got older".
"And from the time he had it in the 1960s, did you think it was like a smoker's cough"?
"Like I said, I wasn't sure what a smoker's cough was, but, yeah, I thought it was like a smoker's cough".
Maybe she didn't know what a smoker's cough was, but Mr. Vasko did because his doctor in the military in 1960 told him.
Now, four years after he sees the military doctor, we're in 1964, Surgeon General's report. You saw the flood of coverage yesterday: Newspaper, magazines, television. Here's just a look at one of them in The Plain Dealer.
Mrs. Vasko remembers the 1964 Surgeon General's report. She's in the passenger seat, John Vasko is driving. She's in the passenger seat. She sees that exit, but he doesn't take it. He doesn't even try to stop smoking in 1964. This was another exit ramp he could have chosen to have taken, but he chose not to.
Move on up the highway. We go to 1966. Warning labels appear on cigarettes. And warning labels will be on every pack of
cigarettes from 1966 until the end of Mr. Vasko's life, and they're still there today. For the last 40 years, every time Mr. Vasko reached for a cigarette, it was an exit ramp that he could have taken. Each reach, literally thousands of times that he could have chosen to make that cigarette his last, but he didn't.
And there's more information we have for Mrs. Vasko as we move up into the Northeast. I asked her:
"Did you talk to him about it was not good for his health"?
"She said yes".
"And that was prior to 1981"?
"Yes".
"So years prior to Dr. Dhanani making a diagnosis of emphysema, you yourself had asked your husband to stop smoking because it was bad for his health"?
"Yes".
Each time she told him was a request from her that was another exit he could have chosen to have taken, but he chose not to.
By the same token, all along this highway,
we know that he continued to have this hacky cough. And we heard that Mr. Vasko was an intelligent man. He was a smart man. And he knows -- he knows, in the back of his mind, every time he has a cough, and as that cough worsens from the 1960s on, he knows that his condition is related to smoking, because his doctor told him that in 1960.
As a result of his choices, we get all the way from Miami and there we are, moose and chowder and we're in Maine. Choices.
Mr. Vasko had plenty of choices. They weren't constrained choices. They were personal health choices, according to the Surgeon General.
I'm going to leave the sixth grade portion of my closing and keep moving.
Attempts to quit. We heard about a few attempts to quit that Mr. Vasko made. We heard that sometime after he saw Dr. Dhanani he tried the nicotine patch one time. He kept smoking while he tried the patch. We heard he tried nicotine gum later, one time, and he kept smoking when he chewed the nicotine gum. We heard sometime around 2000, he tried Wellbutrin, and he kept smoking while he tried
the Wellbutrin.
If you're going to try to quit, the patch or gum or drugs, if you're going to try to quit, it should be accompanied by an actual quit attempt. As Dr. Abramson told you, when John Vasko was making these attempts to quit, but made the decision, the choice to keep smoking while he was trying them, he was sabotaging those efforts to quit. That was his decision.
Now, I think it's interesting -- we talked about the life insurance applications. I think it's interesting the timing of the one in 1984, because -- I don't know, it's one of these "ginormous" boards. Can we have an open debate about smoking? Do you remember what year that is? 1984.
Now, we know Mr. Vasko never saw that. We know he never read it. We know nobody ever talked to him about it. But we also know that there was no debate for Mr. Vasko in 1984. He applied for insurance and that was a recognition that he knew, he knew what smoking could do to you. He knew that it could shorten your life. And that's why nonsmokers get
cheaper premiums. And that's why, according to Mrs. Vasko, he said he was a nonsmoker, to get the cheaper premium.
This open debate by Reynolds has nothing to do with the closed debate in Mr. Vasko's mind in 1984. And there's more evidence, besides the life insurance applications, that Mr. Vasko was able to quit smoking.
Do you remember we saw these medical records from 2000, from March to May of 2000, that record that he stopped smoking for two to three months? But, just like the life insurance applications, Mrs. Vasko tells you, that record is not true either. Any time a record documents that he stops smoking for a period of time it's not true? Why? Because it doesn't fit with the painting they want to paint for you.
But it's important. He quit smoking for two months. Two things. One, it shows he had the ability to quit if he wanted to and, second, you learned from Dr. Abramson, and even from Dr. Cummings, that nicotine is out of your body within a few days, and that the withdrawal symptoms last for a few weeks. So by the time
you stopped for two to three months, you're beyond that temporary discomfort. You're beyond that and you can quit.
So if he could quit in 2000, he could have quit any time along that highway and stayed quit.
THE COURT: Twenty-five minutes.
MR. GEISE: Thank you, Your Honor.
Mr. Ratzan talked about Dr. Abramson and he's been paid. Well, you know what, he took time away from the patients that he treats for illnesses and that he sees. He took time away and he charges for the time to get prepared and to come here and to offer his opinions to you.
And if you do the work, folks, you should get paid. I mean, let's face it. If you're going to put in the time, you should get paid for your effort. And Dr. Abramson was.
But I want to talk about a difference between Dr. Abramson and Dr. Cummings.
Dr. Abramson is a real live medical doctor. He went to medical school and everything.
Dr. Cummings didn't.
Dr. Abramson can prescribe drugs, drugs like Wellbutrin and Chantix and Zyban._
Dr. Cummings can't.
Dr. Abramson can make an actual diagnosis of addiction and dependence on a person.
Dr. Cummings can't.
Dr. Abramson works with people on heroine, alcohol, methamphetamine, cocaine and nicotine addictions, so he knows how they compare.
Dr. Cummings, remember he said he can't make a diagnosis, he only assesses smokers.
And Dr. Abramson is board-certified in multiple areas of psychiatry, including addiction psychiatry. Dr. Cummings told you he's not board-certified in anything.
Dr. Abramson told us about that 2000 medical record, is that when Mr. Vasko returned to smoking after two to three months, it wasn't in response to nicotine. It's because he wanted to. He exited the highway, was off for two to three months, and made the decision, the choice to get back on.
And even outside of the times that Mr. Vasko completely quit, we know that he had control over smoking. We heard about not smoking when he was in church, about not smoking at work when he couldn't, about not
smoking at his house after a certain period of time. The record is clear: John Vasko controlled his smoking; his smoking did not control him.
And you saw other evidence of his ability to control addictive behaviors. You saw all these records of alcohol use, and I'm not going to take you through all of that.
But we know he quit drinking in 2000, and we know he quit for good in July of 2003. And we know that when he stopped, he experienced symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Remember, the record that showed he was feeling tired and he gained weight? Those are temporary discomforts. Those are the things you need to get beyond to stop a substance problem.
Mr. Vasko did it with alcohol. And if he can do it with alcohol, he can do it with smoking. Remember Dr. Abramson said it's the same skill set that you use for alcohol, as nicotine, as heroin, as cocaine. Same skill set. He had the skills to do it.
The difference is he wanted to stop drinking, and he didn't want to stop smoking.
Now, Mr. Ratzan raised an issue about_
credibility and believability of the witnesses.
I just want to point out one record that I think makes that point. In 2004, Mr. and Mrs. Vasko both went to see Dr. Seangio at the Gulf Family Practice in West Virginia. Let's look at the record. The health history is taken. You've seen this. It talks about smoking, alcohol, caffeine. And this document, like the life insurance applications, like the 1960 medical record, is signed by John Vasko.
Mrs. Vasko says, not true, don't take my husband's signature for it, take my word for it.
But what she told you is that smoking cigarettes one-and-a-half packs per day, that's right. That's right, right down to the cigarette. And she told you that the caffeine, the coffee and tea, six cups a day, that's right, right down to the cup.
And she told you that the quit date on alcohol of July 2003, that's right, right down to the date.
But the one pint of vodka per day for 30 days, that's just wrong.
Folks, ask yourselves, why does somebody
get everything right on a form but one thing?
If you're going to tell somebody a specific date that you stopped drinking, is that a sign of a problem? Take my word for it? Trust me? Not in this case, not with this record.
And when the witnesses' testimony flatly contradicts something you see in a record, especially something that's been given the stamp of approval with John Vasko's signature, you need to question that.
Now, why did Mr. Vasko smoke? It's because he enjoyed it. You heard the testimony, you saw the testimony, Dr. Cummings talked about it, people told you, he enjoyed smoking. And everyone has regrets about things they do, and maybe he had a regret that he smoked. Maybe Mrs. Vasko regrets that he smoked.
But regretting something and wishing you had done something different doesn't mean you didn't use your free will to do it. And we shouldn't second guess it. Because it doesn't matter whether we think his choices were good choices or bad choices. They were his choices. And as the Surgeon General said, they were his
personal choice health behaviors.
And Mr. Vasko should not be excused from making those choices, nor should Mrs. Vasko be paid money for her husband's choices.
A person who has control over what choice he makes, should be responsible for that choice. And a person who can decide to smoke or not, should be responsible for that choice.
And a person who is a smoker, makes a decision on a daily basis whether to be a smoker or not. We saw this from Dr. Abramson's testimony.
Dr. Abramson responded to a question, I think, if we can pull that up, please.
"And I think that, in terms of a behavior like smoking, people act one cigarette at a time. And I don't think they're experiencing that, each time they take a cigarette, they don't have a choice to take that cigarette. In fact, I think the contrary is true, that there is a self determination. We are not robots.
We are able to make a decision. And so they make that decision one cigarette at a time."
And the only person in this case who could make that decision, who was in a position to control that decision, was John Vasko.
Let me turn briefly to this second question on the verdict form. Mr. Ratzan tried to take my words from me in opening statement. I stood in this spot, or one of these spots, and said: Demand proof. You know what? I did. And I don't need anyone in this courtroom to demand proof from me and my client. I demand it of myself. And you have proof on this issue, and you have proof beyond the greater weight of the evidence.
Let's talk about that. Apparently the proof that we have in this case is enough to convince Mr. Ratzan. Because look at this question he asked Dr. Kreitzer the other day:
"First of all, for Mr. Vasko, going through life, getting to the 1990 time frame, you recognize that we agree that he had COPD probably even before 1990, right, you understand that?"
Dr. Kreitzer said; "Yes".
THE COURT: Hang on one second. You need to stop.
MRS. FELDER: Yes.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to let you take your morning break. One
of the jurors needs to take recess. So please remember my admonitions not to discuss what you've heard in the courtroom. Step back in the jury room for just a few moments. Let everybody stretch and use the restroom. We'll be right back with you.
(Outside the presence of the jury).
THE COURT: Sorry for interrupting, but she was signaling me and there was nothing I could do. Give you plenty of time to reorient yourself when we get back.
(Thereupon, a recess was taken, after which the following proceedings were held:)
THE COURT: Mr. Geise, you still have 22 minutes remaining. If you need additional time because of the disruption, just turn to me and say, Judge, I just need a few more minutes. And the same will apply to you, Mr. Ratzan.
You have 21 minutes left. And if you need additional minutes, let me know.
MR. RATZAN: I have 21?
THE COURT: Twenty-one.
Everybody back? Steve, check on them and see if they're ready.
THE BAILIFF: They're ready.
THE COURT: Bring them in.
(In the presence of the jury).
THE COURT: Everybody back. Mr. Geise is still on his closing. And after Mr. Geise finishes, we'll hear rebuttal and I'll charge you.
Mr. Geise, you're welcome to proceed.
MR. GEISE: Welcome back, everyone. Glad I didn't lose anybody. You don't need to apologize. That's fine.
We were taking a look at this second question on the verdict form. And I'm going to lay out what the evidence and what the proof is with respect to this question, but first I want to take a look at what the Plaintiff's position is on this.
Mrs. Vasko remembers that there was a trip to see Dr. Dhanani sometime in 1990 when her husband was diagnosed with emphysema. An important point to make right off the bat is it says COPD. And you've heard in this case that COPD is not just one thing. It includes a number of things. It includes emphysema. It includes chronic bronchitis. It includes asthma. There are lots of things that go with
the umbrella of COPD.
And Mrs. Vasko remembers that her husband was diagnosed with emphysema by Dr. Dhanani. She remembers it was after May 5, 1990, because it was around the time of purchasing the summer home in West Virginia.
Now, to start, let me remind you what evidence we don't have in this case. We don't have a medical record from 1990 where a doctor made the diagnosis. We don't have a record from Dr. Dhanani or anyone else. You didn't hear the testimony of any doctor who said, I diagnosed John Vasko with COPD or emphysema in
1990.	You didn't see a pulmonary function test from 1990. You didn't see a pathology report from 1990.
And if we had that proof, if those records were there, from both parties, I think they would show us what we say is the case, what we say is demonstrated by the other proof. We don't have those records.
What do we have? We have a handful of medical records, and we have a lot of testimony, testimony from Mrs. Vasko.
Now, are there medical records from the
2000s that talk about a diagnosis or COPD in 1990 or 1991? There are. But those records don't say that was the first time he was diagnosed. It doesn't say it was the only time he was diagnosed. They just say 1990 or 1991.
Remember when Dr. Cummings told you about medical records? He told you sometimes those dates are off a little bit. They can vary.
And I went through with him the smoking history that's recorded in the medical records that are evidence, and you can look through, but according to the medical records we have, he either started smoking in 1951 or 1951 or 1960 or 1964. So those records can vary.
Now, when I asked Dr. Cummings about that, he said, well, that's true, but it's better to look at a medical record from the time when somebody was being treated for a very serious disease like lung cancer. And he wanted you to look at 2006 records. And that's what he looked at to say that Mr. Vasko started when he was 12.
Look at the records, in 2006, one month, and it's in March, Mr. Vasko said he smoked for 50 years. But the next month, I think it was_
the record you saw with Dr. Han yesterday, he told him he smoked for 52 years.
So in 2006, when he's supposed to be really up front with his doctors, according to Dr. Cummings, there is a variance of two years, there is some wiggle. So keep that in mind when you look at the medical records.
Now, the records that mention 1990 and
1991,	they don't tell us a thing about the diagnosis. They don't tell us how those doctors made it; what those doctors looked like. We don't know.
Speaking of the records, I have to address this. I don't know where it is. We have a bunch of boards up here. Dr. Han. And it was nice of Dr. Han to come in yesterday and clear up whether it was an eight or a nine; whether it was his handwriting or not.
Now, the one thing is -- I'm not trying to pull any tricks here. I got the same evidence that the Plaintiffs have. I see a record and I ask Dr. Cummings, is that 1980 or not?
Dr. Cummings said he didn't know. Dr. Han came in yesterday and he told you, hey, I can see how somebody would say that's 1980. And he
could see it.
Mr. Keehfus asked him looking at the big blowup, what's it look like? And he's like, yeah, I could see where he'd say that. But my original, I can see that it's 1990.
So I'm not trying to play a game with
1980.	I'm just looking at the evidence that's in this case.
But there's couple of other things Dr. Han told you yesterday. Even though he wrote down 1990, doesn't know how the diagnosis was made; doesn't know who the doctor is. He never treated Mr. Vasko for COPD or chronic bronchitis or asthma or emphysema. Most importantly, he said, he could not tell you to a reasonable degree of medical probability, that that diagnosis was after or before May 5, 1990.
So what proof do we have that Mr. Vasko knew or should have known before May 5, 1990?
Now, we don't have a lot of medical records, but we do have some uncontroverted medical evidence in this case about what he knew. Let's start with the 1960 military record. And everything about Mr. Vasko's_
medical history has to go back to this.
If you want to know the story, you got to read the first chapter. This is the first chapter in his medical history. From that point forward, with the 1960 record, Mr. Vasko knew or should have known that any coughing that was either that bad or got worse throughout his life, was caused from his smoking. At that time, Mrs. Vasko said that's when he had this hacky cough, and it got progressively worse.
That's how COPD works. It gets progressively worse. And he knew that in 1960, and as it went forward.
We called Dr. Kreitzer. Dr. Kreitzer is a pulmonologist. In fact, he's the only pulmonologist you heard from in this case.
Let's take a look at the difference between Dr. Kreitzer and Dr. Cummings.
Dr. Kreitzer is a medical doctor.
Dr. Cummings is not. Dr. Kreitzer can diagnose patients with lung disease. Dr. Cummings cannot. Dr. Kreitzer can treat patients with lung disease. Dr. Cummings cannot.
Dr. Kreitzer is Board-certified. Dr. Cummings
is not. Dr. Kreitzer is a Fellow of the American College of Physicians, not Dr. Cummings.
But for this case, Dr. Kreitzer can perform back extrapolations looking at pulmonary function tests, looking at evidence, looking at proof. It's not just Dr. Kreitzer guessing what it is. It's been done over the years by international and national groups of pathologists looking at lung disease to tell you what you can do with a pulmonary function test.
And Dr. Cummings understands this is a shortcoming of his. Look what he said:
"And the specialty of doctor who makes the diagnosis of COPD and emphysema is a pulmonologist, correct"?
"That's true".
"And you defer to a pulmonologist for the diagnosis of emphysema and COPD"?
"Yes, I do".
That's what Dr. Cummings said.
Can we see the next one, please?
I'm not going to walk you through this.
Dr. Kreitzer explained how it's medical_
evidence about how you can look at a pulmonary function test and back extrapolate to predict what those values are at a certain point in time. It's medical evidence.
And he said that you go back, remember,
1994, we heard Dr. Coplowitz made the diagnosis of COPD? And Dr. Kreitzer said, I agree, I agree. I look at the back extrapolation and I agree he had COPD in 1994. But he had it in 1990, he had it in 1989, and according to the back extrapolations that is uncontroverted medical evidence in this case, COPD goes back to the 1970s.
Also heard, I think it was in Dr. Kreitzer's testimony, about a pathologist who didn't testify in the case, Dr. Ronald Schwarting, the Plaintiff's expert pathologist.
And according to the testimony that was on the stand, Dr. Schwarting looked at the lung pathology in 2000 and said that it was so significant that it was evidence that there was emphysema and COPD from back before 1990. So that's another piece.
So for medical evidence, we have pathology, we have the back extrapolation from
the 2006 PFT. We have the 1960 medical record.
Now, maybe that's why Mr. Ratzan agreed that Mr. Vasko had COPD before 1990 in that question to Dr. Kreitzer.
But in addition to the medical evidence, you heard substantial proof from the witnesses that demonstrated that Mr. Vasko knew or should have known that he had COPD related to smoking prior to May 5, 1990. And the volume of this proof and the volume of this evidence certainly equals the greater weight of the evidence.
Now, remember, to know or should have known something, you don't need the actual medical diagnosis. If that's the case, the question would say, when was Mr. Vasko diagnosed with this. It's not that. It's when did he know or should he have known. If you want to demand proof, I'll give you proof.
But let's not look at my words. Let's look at the words of the testimony in this case. We know beginning in 1960, the same time as that military record, Mr. Vasko had the hacky cough. We know that. Let's look at other testimony from Mrs. Vasko.
"Now, throughout your time with Mr. Vasko,
you never bought him cigarettes; did you"?
"No".
"That was because you didn't like smoking and you didn't like him smoking"?
"Yes".
"And by not buying him cigarettes, that was your way of telling him you didn't approve of it"?
"Right".
"And he was aware that that was your position about cigarettes; wasn't it"?
"Yes".
"And that was the case even when you first starting dating"?
"Yes".
When they first started dating back in the 1950s, that's what he knew.
Let's look at the next line.
"So years prior to Dr. Dhanani" -- and that's 1990 -- "years prior to Dr. Dhanani making a diagnosis of emphysema, you, yourself had asked your husband to stop smoking because it was bad for his health"?
"Yes".
"And you had asked him to stop smoking
because it was bad for his health, prior to
1981,	when he filled out the life insurance application"?
"I had once in a while asked him, not that often".
This is before 1981. This is before 1990.
This is before May 5, 1990. John Vasko should have known and he did know.
We talked about whether it's reasonable or responsible for people. This is responsible.
This is responsible when a husband and wife talk and somebody says what you're doing is bad for your health. That's responsible. And it's responsible enough that he knew it and he should have known.
You heard about Pat Natalizio. He noticed that Mr. Vasko had a deep cough, and he told him to either switch to filters or quit entirely.
I also asked Dr. Cummings, about the testimony he relied on to form his opinions, and Dr. Cummings told him this -- I asked him.
"Mr. Vasko told Mr. Natalizio in the 1980s that he wanted to quit because his coughing was hurting his chest; is that correct?"_
Dr. Cummings said, "That's right."
Before May 5, 1990, John Vasko should have known and he knew that smoking was hurting his chest.
There's more testimony from Mrs. Vasko.
And I hate to read these to you, but I don't want to mischaracterize what was told to you in that witness chair, so it's better to just go right to the source.
"And he had this kind of cough for quite a while before he went to see Dr. Dhanani, quite a while"?
"Yes. It was probably the year before he started to get worse".
"And this was -- this wasn't the smoker's cough from the 1960s. This was a worse cough; wasn't it"?
"It was a more progressive cough."
Progressive, just like COPD.
"And when your husband would get this colds with the cough, I think you told Mr.
Ratzan it was the kind that would last for six to eight weeks"?
Answer, "yes".
"And you mentioned you remember your
husband having this type of cough and cold in around 1988"?
Answer, "yes".
1988, folks, before May 5, 1990, John Vasko should have known and he did know.
One point on these coughs for six to eight weeks. These aren't the simple, oh, I got a little bit of a cold that's going to last a few days and clears up. Dr. Kreitzer told you these are the coughs of COPD. These are the colds of COPD. Six to eight weeks is not your run-of-the-mill little infection cold and it goes away. These are signs. These are signs, symptoms of COPD, that John Vasko should have known and he did know before May 5, 1990.
And it's these same coughs and colds that he had in the '80s, that he had in 1990 when Dr. Dhanani diagnosed him with emphysema, that he had in 1994 when Dr. Coplowitz said he had COPD. It's the same thing. He knew and he should have known.
And the other thing about Dr. Dhanani that Mrs. Vasko told us -- let's look at the next one.
"Do you recall when your husband started
having these colds that wouldn't go away"?
She said in 1988, 89.
Look at this question:
"Now, the visit to Dr. Dhanani was not the first time your husband saw a doctor for one of these cold that wouldn't go away, was it?"
"No".
Mr. Ratzan wants to talk about it's reasonable, it's responsible for people to go to the doctor when they have these conditions. I agree. And Mr. Vasko did that before the visit to Dr. Dhanani. Why? Because he should have known and he did know.
Now, Mr. Ratzan said, you know, you can't know before you went to the doctor. You can't kick someone out of court when they go to a doctor for it. That's what he said. You can't kick someone out of court when they go to a doctor for it.
You can kick someone out of court if they go to a doctor for it before May 5, 1990.
That's the law in this case and that's the question for you.
THE COURT: Five minutes.
MR. GEISE: Thank you.
Now, one more slide here.
"When your husband went to see Dr. Dhanani and Dr. Dhanani told him he had emphysema, he also told you and your husband that it is what lung disease that was caused by smoking, correct?"
"Yes."
"And you don't remember if this is the first time you heard from Dr. Dhanani about your husband having something wrong with his lungs that might be related to smoking; is that correct?"
"Answer."
The first time was before May 5, 1990.
John Vasko should have known and he did know. And Dr. Kreitzer told you that his patient, patients he's treated for these conditions for over 30 years, patients know before they have that official diagnosis, patients know.
It's like if you hurt your back in a car accident and you're injured, you're hurt, your back is killing you, you can't walk, you can't sleep, you can't eat. It aches and aches and aches. You know you've hurt your back, but you might not know that you cracked a vertebra or
slipped a disk, but you know your back hurts.
And John Vasko knew he had COPD. He knew he had the conditions. He knew his chest hurt from coughing. He knew he had coughs and colds that would not go away, and he knew this before May 5, 1990, because any reasonable person would have.
Now, real quickly, COPD. "C", chronic, chronic, a hacky cough beginning in the '60s that gets progressively worse, coughs and colds in the 1980's that don't go away.
Obstructive, the condition that causes you to cough, to have a productive cough with phlegm and sputum, a cough that causes your chest to hurt.
"P", pulmonary, lung, yes, that's where this was.
"D", disease, there is no question about that.
But the "O" can also stand for something else in this case, other than obstructive, and what it can stand for is what you can describe Mr. Vasko's symptoms in the 1980s, and that's obvious. Dr. Cummings agrees.
I asked him this.
"And coughing and breathing problems are obvious serious health problems associated with smoking"?
Dr. Cummings said, "sure."
Just like Dr. Cummings, Mr. Vasko can't make the medical diagnosis of COPD, but he certainly knows when it's obvious when he has health problems associated with COPD caused by smoking.
Mr. Ratzan talked about common sense.
When you come into the courthouse and you go back in that jury room to deliberate, you take your common sense with you.
And based on the testimony from Mrs. Vasko and the records that we do have, your common sense tells you that John Vasko both knew and should have known that he had COPD and that it was caused by smoking before May 5, 1990.
Now, I did urge you at the beginning of the case to demand proof and that goes for both sides. On the first question, I submit that the plaintiff has not proved that addiction caused Mr. Vasko to smoke or ever prevented him from stopping. He smoked because he wanted to. He smoked because he chose to.
And it's his choice, like the Surgeon General says, not addiction is what caused him to smoke and caused him to develop COPD. You saw that proof on the highway.
Your answer on question 1 should be "no".
And on the second question, the question that I have the burden of proof on, the burden of proof is met through testimony and records. You've seen that testimony.
And beyond the greater weight of the evidence, John Vasko knew or should have known that he had a smoking-related illness before May 5, 1990. Any reasonable person in his shoes would have known it and he did. And your answer on that question should be "yes".
We talked in voir dire -- it was a very important question. We talked in voir dire about your ability to hear the evidence and, if it was warranted, to come back with a verdict form a tobacco company, to come back for a verdict for R.J. Reynolds.
Ladies and gentlemen, in this case, in this case, that verdict is warranted.
I thank you again for your time and your attention and your service and doing your civic
duty. I appreciate it. Thank you.
