          MR. McCARTER:  Thank you.
          So Judge gave us the option.  I
    thought I'd start a little bit, and then we
    go to lunch at noon.  That way I don't have
    to talk to people on empty stomachs.
    Instead, I will get full stomachs.
          I think Mr. Kaiser's closing argument
    was the first time this courtroom has
    actually felt warm or hot in here.  I'm not
    going to try to turn up the heat with
    emotions because you know emotion's not
    supposed to be part of the decision you're making.
          We all may feel sympathy towards
    Mr. Vila, but sympathy is not part of it at
    this time either.
          Let me start off by, I want to thank
    you again for your time being here.  The
    last time I stood up here was about two
    weeks ago.  We had gone through jury
    selection together.  And now we have gone
    through the entire case together.
          Everybody has been on time every day,
    paying attention closely, and respecting us
    and the witnesses as well.  I appreciate
    that.
          Now, what I want to do is I want to
    start off with what -- I would submit to you
    are the five most important facts in this
    case.  The five most important facts of the
    evidence showed.
          First, is that Mr. Vila smoked because
    that's what he wanted to do.
          Now, Mr. Vila all along has denied he
    enjoyed smoking.  But you've seen pictures
    of him enjoying smoking.  You've heard from
    his family members who said he enjoyed smoking.  You've heard from other witnesses
    who talked to Mr. Vila.  They said he
    enjoyed the taste of a cigarette.
          He enjoyed the way it made him feel.
    He thought it helped his concentration.  It
    helped him with anxiety.  It helped his
    mood.
          Did Mr. Vila enjoy smoking or not?  I
    submit to you that actions speak louder than
    words.  If you don't enjoy smoking, what do
    you do?  You stop.
          Well, they say he was too addicted to
    stop.  Well then, you at least try to stop,
    right?  If you're doing something you don't
    enjoy, you at least try to stop.
          What we know from the evidence in this
    case is that Mr. Vila never tried to quit
    smoking, never tried to stop smoking, never
    tried to cut back on his smoking until 1994
    when his doctor told him he had cancer.
          So Mr. Vila smoked for 25 years.  He
    says he didn't enjoy it, but he never tried
    to stop.
          He enjoyed it.  That's why he didn't
    try to stop.  Because that's what he wanted to do.
          Third, when Mr. Vila was motivated to
    quit smoking he was able to quit with ease
    and for good.  Mr. Kaiser asked Mr. Vila
    when he was on the stand, "When was it that
    you first became motivated to quit smoking?"
          He said, "It was in 1996 when I quit."
          Now, Mr. Vila says that he stopped
    smoking for 50 days when he was being -- in
    his radiation treatments.
          And you heard from Dr. Seely that
    after 50 days of not smoking all the
    nicotine is gone from his system and all --
    or virtually all of the withdrawal effects
    from quitting are gone.
          Now, you know in the medical records
    they suggest Mr. Vila quit for good in 1994.
    Mr. Vila says he went back to smoking, but
    he went back to smoking at a time when he
    didn't have any withdrawal effects and there
    was no nicotine in the system.
          He made a voluntary decision to go
    back to smoking after his radiation because
    he enjoyed it.  If he did go back to
    smoking. And then he decided in early 1996,
    finally, "I do want to quit."  When he
    decided he wanted to quit, for the first
    time he was motivated to quit, what
    happened?  He quit.  He was somebody who
    could quit smoking -- did quit smoking and
    it was relatively easy for him.
          Fourth, you know from opening
    statements and the jury instructions the
    heart of this case is:  Did Philip Morris do
    anything or say anything that had any impact
    on Mr. Vila?
          They showed you with Dr. Proctor on
    that video, statements that Philip Morris
    made over the years regarding the health
    risks of smoking and addiction.
          But then you heard on
    cross-examination, I asked Dr. Proctor,
    "Did -- were any of those statements made --
    they were all made in the United States?
          " Yes.
          "Were any of them made in Cuba or
    published in Cuba when Mr. Vila was there?
          "No.
          "How about Spain when Mr. Vila was there?
          "No.
          "How about the Dominican Republic
    while Mr. Vila was there?
          "No."
          Nothing Philip Morris said about the
    health risks of smoking had any impact on
    Mr. Vila, and nothing Philip Morris did had
    any impact on Mr. Vila.
          Finally, Mr. Vila is responsible for
    the choices he made in his life.  I want to
    be clear I am not intending to criticize
    Mr. Vila in any way for the choices he made.
          We all make different choices in our
    lives.  But with the right to choose how to
    live your life comes what?  Comes the
    personal responsibility of the consequences
    of those decisions.
          Mr. Vila made choices.  He made
    choices to smoke.  He made a choice to smoke
    for 25 years without ever trying to quit.
    He made the choice to quit.  And I'm going
    to talk about this more later.  But he made
    the choice not to go back to his doctor
    after the radiation treatments. This is a huge issue in the case and I
    think you'll see, the evidence is pretty
    clear, that points he did not go back to his
    doctor.
          Everything that happened after that
    was on him for not going back to his doctor.
    Everything that happened before that was on
    him for making the choice to smoke and not
    trying to quit.
          Now, I want -- now I want to turn to
    where I started in my opening.  I want to
    show some of the timelines here that I used
    because I want to show you what the evidence
    did show.  It's exactly what we talked about
    showing.
          I want to start here with the U.S.
    Remember, things that were going on in the
    U.S., that's on the bottom here.
          You heard all this testimony about
    what Philip Morris was saying about the
    risks of smoking from Dr. Proctor.
          But then on cross-examination you
    heard that people were referring to
    cigarettes as "coffin nails" and being
    addictive back in the early 1900s, more than a hundred years ago.  It wasn't a secret.
          There were articles in the U.S.
    published over the decades on the dangers of
    smoking.
          By 1954, 90 percent of Americans had
    heard that smoking may be a cause of lung
    cancer.
          We move on to the 1960s.  You have the
    1964 Surgeon General's report.  You have the
    warning on the pack in 1966, which changes
    in 1970.  No ads on television and radio
    after that.
          Between the -- 15 years between 1964
    and 1979, 30 million smokers quit.  I want
    to show you the warnings because this is
    very important to all of the claims.
          Starting in 1966 -- so 49 years ago.
    For 49 years there have been warnings on
    every package of Philip Morris cigarettes
    sold in the U.S., starting in 1966.
          "Caution:  Cigarette smoking may be
    hazardous to your health."
          Their expert, Dr. Proctor, was not
    aware of a single instance where Philip
    Morris failed to include this on its package when it was supposed to do so.
          1970, the language of the warning
    changes.  This is on there for the next 15
    years.  Remember, this is the warning that's
    on the pack when Mr. Vila comes here on
    vacation in 1978.  And he said he recalled
    seeing the warning.
          Now, he didn't say that at trial.  He
    said he didn't recall seeing it.  I had to
    use his deposition to show you what he said,
    that he did recall seeing this warning.
          "Warning:  The Surgeon General has
    determined that cigarette smoking is
    dangerous to your health."
          Now, if we continue on, here in the
    U.S. you have -- we have additional warnings
    going on the package in 1985.  That's where
    we have the four rotating warnings.
          This is the story of what was
    happening in the United States on these
    timelines, but it had nothing to do with
    Mr. Vila.  Because Mr. Vila didn't come here
    except for a vacation in 1978 where he saw
    that warning.  He didn't come here until
    1989. I asked Mr. Vila, "When you were
    living abroad in Cuba, Dominican Republic or
    Spain, did you have any access to U.S.
    media?  Did you see statements by the
    American tobacco companies?"
          And he said no.
          So these are -- up until 1989,
    Mr. Vila and Philip Morris are two ships
    passing in the night.  What happens in 1989?
    What does Mr. Vila hear from Philip Morris?
    What are the messages Philip Morris gives
    him about the dangers of smoking when he
    comes here and hears something from Philip
    Morris for the very first time?
          Philip Morris tells him four things
    right on the side of his pack.  One of these
    four things was on every package of
    cigarettes he bought here in the U.S.
          "Cigarette smoking contains carbon
    monoxide."  "Quitting smoking now greatly
    reduces serious risk to your health."
    "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease,
    emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy."
    And then one on low birth rate, which wasn't
    relevant to him. Now, remember what Mr. Vila said.  "I
    didn't hear anything about the dangers of
    smoking until I came here in 1989."
          They want you to believe that if only
    he had known earlier that smoking could be
    bad for his health he would not have smoked.
    He would not have started or he would have
    quit.
          What did Mr. Vila do in 1989 when he
    saw this warning and he says it was new
    information?  Did he try to quit?  Did he
    try to cut down?  Did he stop smoking?
          No.  He did what he was doing before
    because it wasn't new information to him.
    It didn't matter to him.  He was willing to
    take the risk.
          Remember he told his friends when they
    talked to him about his smoking, "If I get
    sick from smoking, bury me in a Marlboro
    truck."  He knew what he was doing, and he
    was willing to take the risk.
          Now, let me go back to the timeline
    because plaintiff put in all this evidence
    of what was being said in the United States
    during a 35-year time period when Mr. Vila wasn't here.
          We had to put in evidence for you of
    what was happening in the places where
    Mr. Vila actually lived.  This is before he
    was in Cuba.
          In Cuba, in the early 1900s, you heard
    when I crossed Dr. Proctor, there was
    literature describing tobacco as harmful to
    your health.  There was an antismoking
    movement in Cuba in the early 1900s, just
    like there was here.
          In the 1950s there are articles on the
    dangers of smoking in Cuba where Mr. Vila
    lived, same as there was in the U.S.
          "Selecciones" is just a preprint of
    the "Reader's Digest" here in the U.S., in
    Spanish.  And Mr. Vila said he was exposed
    to that.
          We have Mr. Vila's uncle dying of lung
    cancer in the 1950s.  He was a cigarette
    smoker.  That's how we started our cross of
    Mr. Vila.  And you remember, he denied
    knowing that his uncle died of lung cancer.
    We had to show him his deposition.  He
    denied his uncle was a smoker.  We had to show him his deposition.
          Mr. Vila's cousin, Carmen Vila,
    testified in her deposition that she never
    smoked because as a little kid growing up in
    Cuba she saw antismoking advertisements in
    the newspaper or television.
          She had the same proclivity as
    Mr. Vila for saying something different at
    trial than at her deposition.  You saw what
    she said in her deposition.
          You have articles on smoking and
    health in places where Mr. Vila is living,
    and there in magazines he was reading.  And
    you have harmful effects of smoking on
    Mr. Vila's relatives.
          Let's move up in time here.
          Mr. Vila moves to Spain in 1969.  This
    is where he says he started smoking Marlboro
    cigarettes.  I want to talk about that a
    little later.
          But you know from Dr. Proctor's
    testimony that Marlboros were the least
    popular cigarette in Spain at the time and
    were way more expensive than any other
    brand. Mr. Vila moves to the Dominican
    Republic.  And throughout this entire time
    he does not try to quit smoking, not one
    single time.  I'm going to talk about this
    more later.
          Mr. Kaiser suggested there is some
    evidence that Philip Morris was making the
    cigarettes in the Dominican Republic.  He
    criticized us for not calling somebody from
    Philip Morris to tell you they weren't
    making the cigarettes in the Dominican
    Republic.
          Why on earth would I need to do that
    when his own expert, Dr. Proctor, testified
    on cross-examination that Philip Morris did
    not make the cigarettes in the Dominican
    Republic.  That E. Leon Jimenes company did.
    That was his own expert.  Why would I need
    to call somebody to repeat what his own
    expert said?
          There are warnings of dangers of
    smoking on television in the Dominican
    Republic, according to Carmen Vila,
    Mr. Vila's cousin, who was living in the DR
    with him -- next to him at the same time he was there.
          Finally, if we move forward, when we
    get to later points in time, of course, we
    have Mr. Vila moving to Miami where his
    uncle tells him about his heart attack.
    "You can't smoke around me."  That's
    actually his godfather.  "I had a heart
    attack from smoking."  Mr. Vila understands.
          You have the quit attempts Mr. Vila
    describes.  You have his throat surgery.
    He's cured of cancer and traveling around
    the Caribbean and Europe.  And I'm going to
    talk about that later because that's
    relevant to this claim that Mr. Vila is so
    severely depressed that he can't function in
    life.
          He's so disabled he can't work.  I'm
    going to talk about that in a little bit.
          So what the story of Philip Morris and
    Mr. Vila show is that there just is no
    connection between the two.  There is no
    intersection.
          He moves here in 1989.  The only thing
    Mr. Vila sees are the warnings.  That's
    going to be relevant to a lot of the questions on the verdict form.  That's what
    I'm going to start to talk about right now.
          Let me show you this before I do
    because I showed you the warnings.
          And there seems -- there has been some
    suggestion throughout the trial that Philip
    Morris should have been putting warnings on
    its cigarettes in Spain when Mr. Vila was
    living there, or in the Dominican Republic.
          Now, keep in mind -- remember that
    cigarettes in Spain were sold by the Spanish
    government.  They had a 300-year monopoly on
    the sales of tobacco.  And they controlled
    all aspects of the sales of tobacco.
          There is no evidence that Philip
    Morris was required to put warnings on the
    packs in Spain or that the Spanish
    government monopoly would have allowed it to
    happen.
          Dr. Proctor, their witness, testified
    that the government controlled all aspects
    of cigarette sales in Spain.
          But here is the important part:  This
    is important because Mr. Vila starts smoking
    in 1969, right?  This applies to the entirety of his smoking.
          It says, "The warning labels placed on
    cigarette packs and advertisements by Philip
    Morris USA complied with federal law, and
    Philip Morris USA had no obligation to place
    any additional warnings on its cigarette
    pack and advertisements after July 1, 1969,
    in the United States."
          But look at the next part of this.
    "Jose Vila does not claim that Philip Morris
    USA, Inc. should have given additional or
    different warnings on its cigarette packs
    and advertisements after July 1, 1969."
          So this business about Philip
    Morris -- supposed to put warnings on their
    packs in Spain is not part of this lawsuit.
    There is no claim about that.
          In the Dominican Republic Philip
    Morris wasn't even making those cigarettes.
    They licensed the trademark.
          Judge, this may be a good time to
    break.
          THE COURT:  Then we'll break.
          MR. McCARTER:  I'll talk about the
    verdict form when we get back.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. McCARTER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
So I want to jump right in to the verdict
form right now, because these are the questions
that you're going to be asked to answer at the
end of the case.  This is the first one on here
that Mr. Kaiser showed you, and there's really
a few issues that are wrapped up into this one
question.  This is where the HPV issue comes
in, and I will go through the evidence on that.
If you believe that they have not proven that
smoking was the cause of his cancer, and that
HPV caused it, you check "no" to this question.
Addiction is also part of this question.
If you believe that they have not proven that
he was addicted, you check "no" to this
question as well. 2811
And there's also a third element to this,
which I will talk about, and that is that the
addiction has to be a legal cause of Mr. Vila's
cancer, and what that means is that without the
addiction he would not have gotten cancer.  And
what you'll see is if he would have smoked
anyway because he wanted to smoke, then his
choice to smoke is the legal cause of his
cancer, not any addiction.
There are three reasons why the answer to
this question should be "no" on the verdict
form, and if you check it "no," you're done.
The first is that they did not meet their
burden of proving that Mr. Vila's cancer was
caused by cigarette smoking; the second is that
they did not meet their burden of proving that
Mr. Vila was addicted to nicotine; and the
third is that the legal cause, even if Mr. Vila
was addicted, the legal cause of his cancer was
the choices that he made in life to smoke, if
you believe his cancer was caused by smoking
and not HPV.
I want to go through one by one, and I
want to go through the HPV issue step by step
as we try to do with the witnesses in the case. 2812
In retrospect, I wish I had put these as
questions, because you are the ones that are
going to answer them, not me.  So the first
question I pose is whether HPV can infect the
larynx?  What is the evidence on whether HPV
can infect the larynx.  Because if it can't
infect the larynx, then it can't cause cancer
there, right?  So the first thing you have to
figure out is, can it infect the larynx?  And
on this issue all the evidence is yes, from all
the witnesses on both sides.  Everybody agrees
that HPV, the virus, can infect the larynx.  It
happens if HPV gets in the mouth, through oral
sex or open-mouth kissing, HPV can travel in
the saliva, get into the base of the tongue,
and also can go down past the epiglottis into
the larynx and into the vocal cords.  Every
person who testified on that issue in this case
agreed on that.  And the reason is -- and
there's some common sense to this, one is the
epiglottis is the only potential physical
barrier to HPV getting in the larynx and the
vocal cords, but the epiglottis is open almost
all the time.  When you're breathing it's open,
so it's not a physical barrier.  And as Dr. 2813
Felix testified, saliva runs down into the
larynx all the time.  And you know from your
own common sense, and we talked to Dr. Goodwin
about this, that viruses -- HPV is a virus --
viruses get into the larynx and the vocal cords
all the time.  That's why if you have a cold,
you can get a sore throat.  The virus has made
its way into the larynx.  That's why if you
have laryngitis, laryngitis is an infection or
irritation of the larynx.  So viruses all the
time travel in the mouth in the saliva into the
larynx.  Everyone's agreed on that.  That's the
first step.
The second point, and I'm going to phrase
it as a question rather than the answer to the
question, is can HPV, when it infects the
larynx, can it cause cancer there?  And there's
really two lines of evidence on that in this
case.  The first is:  What kind of tissue is in
the larynx and the vocal cords?  It's squamous
epithelial tissue.  And you heard from
everybody that the kind of tissue HPV causes
cancer in is squamous epithelial tissue.  Dr.
Felix explained how that happens, it's because
the HPV virus gets into the tissue.  And our 2814
tissue has these cancer prevention genes in it.
One of them was the p53 gene.  And Dr. Felix
explains how the virus gets into the tissue and
HPV turns off the cancer protection gene.  So
it turns off the cancer protection gene, which
allows HPV to cause cancer in the larynx.  So
it's the same tissue that's in the cervix and
in the mouth and elsewhere, and cancer can be
caused by HPV there and also in the larynx.
That's one line of evidence.
There is a second line of evidence, and
that's the research that's been done.  Here's
the evidence in terms of, well, it's the same
tissue that HPV causes cancer in, in the
larynx, does it actually do it?  This is the
evidence in the case.  On the yes side, yes,
HPV causes cancer in the larynx.  You have Dr.
Felix.  Dr. Felix has studied this issue.
They've even admitted he's a world renowned
expert in HPV research, and he told you that
based on his research and his studies HPV does,
in fact, cause cancer in the larynx.
When Dr. Goodwin was here and Dr. Gomez,
you heard about what researchers from the
National Cancer Institute, the International 2815
Agency for Research On Cancer and the Henry
Ford Hospital Research Center, that they also
have concluded that HPV causes cancer in the
larynx.  In fact, they report that 25 percent
of laryngeal cancers are associated with HPV.
That's independent published research not by a
paid expert in this case that says, yes, HPV
can cause cancer in the larynx and it's fairly
common.
And Dr. Gomez told us, those institutions,
National Cancer Institute, is the premier
research institute on cancer in the United
States.  And the IARC there is the same
function for The World Health Organization
Internationally.
Dr. Gomez yesterday admitted, yes, HPV can
cause cancer in the larynx.  She admitted that
and she had studied HPV.  The only one on the
"no" side is Dr. Goodwin.  He came in initially
saying, no, it could never happen or it can
only happen with those warts in the throat.
But you remember on cross-examination he saw
those articles I showed him, from these
esteemed research organizations, and he
admitted he wasn't really up to speed on the 2816
issue.
Dr. Goodwin, who is the only person in the
"no" column, has never published any research
on HPV or HPV-caused cancer.  So I'd submit to
you the evidence, from people who know what
they're talking about, including one of their
own experts, lines up in the "yes" column here:
"HPV can and does cause cancer in the larynx
and the vocal cords."
The next -- I'm going to do it as a
question again.  What about Mr. Vila and his
cancer?  Does he fit the profile?  I'm not
going to talk about the slides yet, the
pathology, but does Mr. Vila fit the profile,
does his cancer fit the profile of an
HPV-caused cancer?
You remember I asked Dr. Goodwin about
that, we even made a flip chart here -- turn
this around -- and Dr. Goodwin told us that
when HPV causes cancer there are a few
distinguishing features about it.
We talked about who is at higher risk.
People of European descent are at higher risk
than African-Americans for HPV-caused cancer.
Men are at higher risk than women.  The 2817
HPV-caused cancer tends to appear at a younger
age, in the 30s and 40s.  There's a higher
survival rate with HPV-caused cancer.  It is
less invasive than smoking-caused cancer, and
multiple sex partners creates a high risk of
getting HPV and a higher risk of HPV-caused
cancer.
This was -- Mr. Williams was the other
case Dr. Goodwin testified, and we don't need
to look at that.  But you remember Dr. Goodwin
admitted that in terms of every one of these
risk factors Mr. Vila fit.  Mr. Vila is of
European, not African-American descent.  He's a
man.  He got his cancer when he was 39 years
old.  You've heard from multiple experts
smoking-caused cancer doesn't tend to occur
until you're much older in the 50s and 60s.  He
survived his cancer.  His cancer was less
invasive and did not go into the lymph nodes.
You heard Mr. Vila's testimony about a
history of 30 to 40 sexual partners before his
cancer, which created a very high risk of
contracting HPV.  
And one of the last questions I asked
Dr. Goodwin was:  On all of these risk factors, 2818
all of these profiles that you've identified as
being related to HPV-caused cancer, Mr. Vila
fits every single one of them.  All of them
point to HPV for Mr. Vila; and Dr. Goodwin said
"yes."
Now, he's not the only one who agreed with
that, because we talked to Dr. Gomez about the
same issue yesterday.  Remember Dr. Gomez, like
Dr. Goodwin, like Dr. Felix said:  HPV cancers
are more prevalent in younger populations.
"Younger" meaning people in their 30s or 40s.
How old was Mr. Vila?  39.  Fits right in.
Men and women in their 30s and 40s are
typically not the population you would think
about for head and neck cancer caused by
cigarette smoking.  She agreed with that.  That
doesn't tend to happen until people are in
their 50s or 60s.
Mr. Vila's age of 39 fits in with HPV,
does not fit in with smoking.  What about the
presentation of the cancer?  This is where we
get into the poorly differentiated and the
well-differentiated thing and the keratin
thing.
This was during direct examination:  "When 2819
you see laryngeal cancer, and it's the result
of smoking, is there a particular appearance
you consistently see?"
"Yes."  She said the smoking cancers tend
to be well-differentiated cancers and
keratinizing.  And then she said, with respect
to HPV, they tend to be non-keratinizing and
poorly differentiated.
Why is that so important?  It's so
important because the 1994 pathology described
Mr. Vila's cancer as poorly to moderately
differentiated, which fits HPV not smoking, and
that there was no mention of it being
keratinizing, which fits HPV and not smoking.
So, again, from their own expert, Mr. Vila
fits the profile of HPV-caused cancer.  Now the
tumor in 1996 looked different.  And at first
Dr. Gomez was saying, well, maybe it's a
second, a brand-new cancer that happened to pop
up in the same spot.  
But you remember when she heard about
Mr. Vila not going back to the doctor for
treatment.  She admitted she could not say
whether it was a new cancer or a recurrence.
The only evidence in this case is that the 1996 2820
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
tumor was a recurrence, was a -- the same tumor
in 1994 grew back, but it had the same cause.
Why did it look different?  The only
explanation you got was from Dr. Felix, who
testified that the radiation caused the cancer
to change the way it looked.
MR. KAISER:  Objection.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
(Thereupon, the following proceedings were held at
side bar:)
MR. McCARTER:  I know what the objection
is, but as Your Honor observed at the time
there was one question and answer on this issue
that was not objected to and it was not in
evidence.  It was the second question and
subsequent ones that Mr. Kaiser objected to.
But the first one is in evidence.
THE COURT:  But you are not to go that
route.
MR. KAISER:  Well, I don't remember him
ever saying radiation is the explanation for
the change in the cancer.
MR. McCARTER:  He did and it wasn't
objected to.
THE COURT:  It was one question that he
  2821
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
answered.
MR. McCARTER:  That's all I'm going to
say.
THE COURT:  Overrule the objection.
(Thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the
 6
following proceedings were held in open court:)
 7
 8
 9
MR. McCARTER:  So far the profile of the
cancer and the profile of Mr. Vila's risk all
point to HPV, not smoking.
Let's talk about the pathology, because
that was a big deal the last couple of days we
were here.  Does the pathology establish that
Mr. Vila's cancer was caused by HPV and not
smoking?  And that's where Dr. Felix's
testimony comes in and Dr. Goodwin's.
Dr. Felix talked to you about koilocytes
in the pathology.  Remember the koilocyte has
the raisinoid nucleus, multiple nucleus --
multiple nuclei and that distinctive halo
around the nuclei.  And he said to you, these
are koilocytes.  Here's an example, there's
three nuclei there, they're raisinoid, they're
shriveled, then they're surrounded by the white
halo.  The white halo happens because the virus
blocks the cell from producing the material
  2822
that makes the cytoplasm.  So it's just empty.
Dr. Felix showed you multiple pictures of
koilocytes, here's another one and another one.
The point of Dr. Gomez's testimony was to
rebut Dr. Felix.  Dr. Felix said, based on his
vision and seeing koilocytes, he is 100 percent
certain that this cancer was caused by HPV.
Dr. Goodwin was supposed to come in and
rebut it.  And at first Dr. Goodwin said, well
I don't see it  -- not Dr. Goodwin -- Dr. Gomez
said, I don't see any koilocytes in there.  But
on cross-examination she did say, if you see
koilocytes in the epithelial tissue, that
means, by definition, it has been infected by
HPV.  So she now agrees with Dr. Felix, if
there's koilocytes, there's HPV.
She said she didn't see koilocytes, but on
cross-examination she admitted -- she
admitted -- that she can't tell whether or not
they're koilocytes, and because she can't say
whether or not they're koilocytes, she can't
say whether or not HPV caused the cancer.
I've put the title on here about Dr. Gomez
admitting that plaintiff has not met his burden
of proof because plaintiff has the burden of 2823
proof on this issue.  They have the burden of
proving that smoking caused the cancer, not
HPV.  And their own expert says she can't tell.
If their own expert, who is supposed to seal
the case for them, can't tell, that means they
have not met their burden of proof.
You have Dr. Felix saying he's 100 percent
certain, she's saying she can't tell.  They
have not met their burden of proving that it
was smoking and not HPV as the cause.  And
Dr. Gomez admitted that as much in her
testimony yesterday.
And the fact is, looking at the
description of the 1994 pathology, she cannot
rule out HPV as a cause of the cancer.  They
have to prove it to you and they have not done
it.
Now, one more thing about Dr. Gomez is,
you heard at the end of her cross-examination,
she has seen approximately 3,000 cases of
laryngeal cancer in her career.  She admits
that at least 2 percent of those are caused by
HPV.  And we figured out that's about -- that
should be about 60.  And she admits that she
did not -- that she missed the diagnosis in all 2824
60 of those cases that came across her desk,
because she says she's never seen a case.  And
if you believe Dr. Felix that it's 10 percent
of cancers, of laryngeal cancers are caused by
HPV, that means she is 0 for 300, zero for 300
in diagnosing HPV-caused cancer.
And you heard from Dr. Felix that when he
has diagnosed HPV-caused cancer based on
koilocytes, he has never been proven wrong, not
by testing, not by anything.
But I think you can use your own common
sense on this one.  And I have a board of it.
Remember I showed this -- I put it on the
screen with Dr. Gomez yesterday.
She said:  These are either koilocytes or
glycogen-filled cells, which would not be
koilocytes.  And I put them on the screen right
next to each other, and I said, "Dr. Gomez, do
you think these look the same?"
And she said, "Yes."
But you can tell they don't look the same.
They are very different.  They are different
colors.  Here you have the multiple nuclei,
which describes koilocyte, you have different
structures, you have the halo here, and you 2825
have them all over the place here.  This is
what Dr. Felix said was a koilocyte, this is
what Dr. Felix said was glycogen.
And Dr. Gomez agreed this is glycogen.  If
it you think these pictures look different,
then it means HPV caused the cancer.  But
either way, because Dr. Gomez couldn't tell the
difference between the two and they have the
burden of proof, they have not met their burden
of proof.
Now, that's it on the HPV issue.  Let me
move on to the question of addiction.
The second reason the answer to question
number one is "no" is because plaintiff did not
meet their burden of proving that Mr. Vila was
addicted to nicotine.  Now when we had jury
selection you were asked a lot of questions
about whether you thought relatives were
addicted to nicotine, whether all smokers were
addicted, and you know you have to set your own
personal views aside and decide the case based
on the evidence.  The only evidence in this
case is that addiction has to be diagnosed
using the DSM-5 psychiatric manual.  That's
what both of the experts did in this case and 2826
so that's what I want to talk about.
I submit to you, even just looking at the
facts of this case, you know Mr. Vila was not
addicted because he never tried to quit smoking
or failed to quit smoking before he got cancer.
When he was motivated to do so, which he said
first happened in 1996, he quit, and it was
easy for him.  None of his doctors ever
diagnosed him as addicted or nicotine-dependent
or with tobacco use disorder, none of his
doctors in all of those medical records.
None of Mr. Vila's medical records say he
was addicted.  His cousin, Carmen Vila, who
came here to testify for him said he's not
addicted, he wasn't addicted.
Dr. Ticknor came in yesterday and talked
about clinically significant impairment.
There's no evidence that Mr. Vila was unable to
function or had any impairment due to nicotine
addiction.  And in terms of the DSM criteria,
at most Mr. Vila had only 3 of 11 during any
12-month period.
And Dr. Ticknor told you Mr. Vila does not
fit the diagnostic criteria for addiction and
that he could have quit smoking at any time. 2827
Now, that's my expert.  I want to talk about
their expert, because their expert is the only
evidence they have offered on that.
Their expert is Dr. Seely.  Dr. Seely told
us:  "Anyone can quit smoking.  50 million
Americans have quit."  Remember Dr. Seely in
his practice diagnosed 50 to 60 percent of his
patients as addicted.  What does he do when he
comes into court to testify?  He says they're
all addicted.  Anybody who is suing the tobacco
companies is addicted.  He's never published on
nicotine or addiction, he doesn't treat
patients for smoking cessation.  Remember he
did his interview of Mr. Vila and it was
interrupted by the lawyers.  He was asking
Mr. Vila a question, and the lawyers told him
to leave the room.  So his interview was not a
pure interview where he got honest information
from Mr. Vila; it was interrupted by Mr. Vila's
lawyers.
And even Dr. Seely says a diagnosis of
addiction requires at least four criteria
during a 12-month period; not two, not what you
heard this morning, but four.  He said two to
three is the beginnings of addiction, but it 2828
takes four to be diagnosed as addicted in a
12-month period.  So I am going to go through
this fairly quickly because you saw it
yesterday.
"Tobacco is often taken in larger amounts
over a longer period than was intended."
Mr. Vila never said what his intention was or
that he did not intend to smoke as much as he
did.  So there's no evidence that he used the
tobacco more than he intended to.
"Persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts
to cut down."  He never tried until 1994; and
when he tried to quit, he did quit.  When he
tried to cut down, he cut down.  There were no
persistent, unsuccessful efforts.
He didn't spend a great deal of time in
activities necessary to obtain or use tobacco.
He would multi-task while smoking.
Both Dr. Seely and Ticknor gave him the
craving, the craving one.
"Recurrent tobacco use resulting in a
failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school or home."  The only evidence they
put on was he was reprimanded once, but they
showed you his pay records where he was getting 2829
raises every year, and he was never fired from
his job.  Now, if you fail to fulfill major
responsibilities at work, that doesn't happen.
"Continued use despite having recurrent
social or interpersonal problems."  Even
Dr. Seely admitted that one wasn't satisfied.
"Important social, occupational or
recreational activities are given up."
Dr. Seely said that Mr. Vila stopped going to
church because of his smoking.  You may have in
your notes when Mr. Vila testified, he said he
never stopped going to church because of his
smoking.
Dr. Seely said Mr. Vila stopped going to
the movies because of his smoking.  You heard
Mr. Vila testified in his deposition, he
stopped going to movies because they got too
expensive.  And he's not smoking today and he's
not going to the movies because they're too
expensive.
"Recurrent tobacco use when it's
physically hazardous."  Dr. Seely says it's
enough to smoke in bed.  But there's no
evidence that it was ever dangerous for
Mr. Vila to smoke in bed, because he was doing 2830
it in the morning or when he was wide awake at
night.
"Tobacco use is continued despite
knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical problem."  This is the one where it
depends on when he quit.  If he quit in 1994,
it is a no.  If he quit in '96, it is a yes.  I
will leave it a yes for now, and I will explain
something about that in a minute.
So both gave him tolerance and withdrawal,
both Dr. Seely and Dr. Ticknor.  So there's
four up there.
Dr. Seely would say that's enough for
addiction if they're within a 12-month period.
But they're not within a 12-month period;
because when Mr. Vila supposedly was using
tobacco after 1994, that was during 1994 to
1996, that's a different period of time when he
was building his tolerance or having withdrawal
symptoms.  So the most he has in any 12-month
period is three.  Under their own expert's
rule, which our expert disagrees with, but take
their rule, he needs four in a 12-month period,
he has three.  He does not meet the criteria
for nicotine addiction under the DSM-5. 2831
What's the evidence as to whether Mr. Vila
was addicted to nicotine?  The only person who
says yes is Dr. Seely, who, when he's being
hired to testify, always says yes.  That's
their only evidence.  Mr. Kaiser has been
talking about these factors are subjective.
Maybe they are subjective.  Maybe you should
just throw them out because they're subjective,
but if you throw them out, you have to throw
out Dr. Seely's analysis, too.  And they have
no evidence.  They can't have it both ways.  If
these things are unreliable because they're
subjective, they have no evidence, no diagnosis
of addiction; and if they are not subjective,
if you should credit them, then they say, under
even their own expert's rule, Mr. Vila did not
meet the criteria.
So you only have Dr. Seely saying he's
addicted on the "no" column, you have Dr.
Ticknor, our expert, you have his cousin, who
knew him very well, Carmen Vila said he was not
addicted, and you have no diagnoses of
addiction in the medical records or by his
doctors.  4,000 pages on his medical records
and not a peep about addiction, nicotine 2832
dependence or tobacco use disorder.  Nothing.
And I submit to you, the weight of the
evidence here is on the "no" column and not the
"yes" column.
The third reason why the answer to
Question 1 is no is because even if Mr. Vila
was addicted, even if smoking caused his
cancer, it wasn't the addiction that caused the
cancer, it was his choice and decision to
smoke.
And let me pause right here, because I
meant to say this earlier.  To answer this
question "yes," all of you have to agree that I
am wrong on all three of these points, to
answer it yes, because he has to prove that
smoking caused the disease, that he was
addicted and that addiction caused the disease.
Everybody has to -- all of you have to agree
unanimously that I am wrong on all three
points.
To answer the question "no," you actually
don't have to agree on the reasons.  Half of
you can think:  They didn't prove smoking
caused the disease.  Half of you can think:
They didn't prove he was addicted.  And that's 2833
enough, as long as all of you have a reason, it
doesn't have to be the same reason, why they
didn't meet their burden of proof, you answer
the question "no."
To answer it "yes," I have to be wrong, we
have to be wrong on all of these points, and
you-all have to agree on that.  
The question -- the last point here is
that the legal cause of Mr. Vila's cancer was
not any addiction, it was the choices he made
in life.  The fact is, addicted or not,
Mr. Vila could have quit smoking at any point
in his life.  Any time he had wanted to quit,
was motivated to quit, he could have quit.  If
his cancer was caused by smoking, which we
disagree with, but if it was, the cause of that
was not any addiction, it was his choice to
smoke and the decisions he made in his life.
So for those reasons the answer to
Question 1 should be "no."
Question 2 asks whether smoking cigarettes
made by Philip Morris was a cause of his
laryngeal cancer.  You know that Mr. Vila
smoked cigarettes in Spain, the Dominican
Republic and the United States.  And let's talk 2834
about that, because it relates directly to this
question.
Remember when Mr. Vila testified about his
smoking in Spain, he said he smoked Marlboro
cigarettes in Spain.  And then on
cross-examination he said, "Oh, yeah, I also
smoked Camel cigarettes."  And when Dr. Seely
was here, Dr. Seely said, "Well, Mr. Vila told
me he also smoked L & M cigarettes."
Camel and L & M cigarettes are not made by
Philip Morris, only Marlboro.  Then Mr. Vila
said he started smoking Marlboro in Spain when
he was a teenager, he had no job.  What you
learned when we cross-examined Dr. Proctor is
Marlboro cigarettes were five times more
expensive in Spain than other cigarettes,
because they were imported and the sale was by
the Spanish monopoly; they were giving lower
prices for their own cigarettes, the Spanish
cigarettes.
So Mr. Vila is claiming as a teenager
without any money to be smoking the most
expensive cigarette or one of the most
expensive cigarettes in Spain.
You also learned from Dr. Proctor that 2835
Marlboro was the least popular cigarette in
Spain at the time, with a market share of below
1 percent.  I think Dr. Proctor said the market
share of Marlboro in Spain at the time was like
Misty brand cigarettes today, which probably
many people have not heard of, but if you heard
of it, it's not a popular brand among
teenagers, because as Dr. Proctor said,
teenagers tend to smoke brands that are
popular, not unpopular, and they don't smoke
the expensive brands.  
So even their own expert, Dr. Proctor,
said Marlboro was a highly unlikely brand for a
teenager to be smoking in Spain when Mr. Vila
was there.
Mr. Kaiser talked about corroborating
evidence.  There is no one who corroborates
that Mr. Vila was smoking Marlboro cigarettes
in Spain, because his cousin, Carmen, wasn't
living in Spain at the time, she didn't catch
up with him until the Dominican Republic.  So
it's all Mr. Vila's word.  
And I would suggest to you, you have a lot
of reason to doubt his testimony, because you
have heard a lot of inconsistencies in what 2836
he's told you and what he said to other people.
About how he got his first cigarette.  In his
deposition he said, from friends at school.
Here in court he said, from family at home.
About how much he smoked.  About his quitting
history, whether it was 1994 or 1996.  He
claimed to you as the nicotine patch over the
counter at a time when the nicotine patch was
not available over the counter.  We have the
smokeless tobacco issue.  When we asked him in
his deposition about his travel after his
surgery, he said he hardly traveled at all.
You know that's not true.
On his disability application, he was
dishonest and said he had no income from his
family and no income generally.  You've heard
about other sources of depression that have
nothing to do with his cancer.  He changed his
testimony, or tried to change it, about whether
Philip Morris withheld information from him.
And he said in his deposition that his uncle
died from lung cancer and his uncle was a
smoker.  And he said at trial, "Oh, I don't
know if he died from lung cancer, I don't even
know if he smoked." 2837
He denied his mother told him not to
smoke, and he denied that he had seen the
warnings on the pack when he was here on
vacation in 1978, and then you saw he
remembered seeing the warnings from his
deposition.
So there are plenty of reasons, not just
what Dr. Proctor says about how unpopular
Marlboros were or how expensive, but all these
reasons to doubt his testimony.
Now, even if you don't discard that
testimony, it's not much smoking in Spain, and
it's not really going to change the answer to
the question, but I suggest you have a lot of
reasons to be skeptical of it.  
Let's talk about the Dominican Republic.
Those cigarettes -- remember, this question
asked whether cigarettes made by Philip Morris
were a cause of his cancer.  Cigarettes in the
Dominican Republic, Marlboro cigarettes then
were not made by Philip Morris.  Check your
notes if you want, but when I started
cross-examining Dr. Proctor at the beginning of
cross-examination.  This is one of the issues I
covered with him.  He testified:  "Those 2838
cigarettes were not made by Philip Morris, they
were made by the E. Leon Jimenes Company in the
Dominican Republic by a licensing agreement
where Philip Morris allowed them to use
'Marlboro.'"
Now there are documents in evidence that
they put in evidence that you haven't seen that
do say Philip Morris owned a stake in the
company, but this question doesn't ask whether
cigarettes made by a company that Philip Morris
had a stake in caused his cancer.  The question
is:  Did cigarettes manufactured by Philip
Morris cause his cancer?
Philip Morris did not manufacture those
cigarettes, their own expert admitted it.  The
reason why that's important is because that is
the single largest chunk of Mr. Vila's smoking.
That's 15 years out of 25 years of his smoking
were in the Dominican Republic.  So the
majority of his smoking was of cigarettes not
manufactured by Philip Morris.
So when you look at the evidence, and if
you have any doubt in your mind about this,
because they were suggesting earlier that
somehow Philip Morris made those cigarettes. 2839
If you took notes during the Proctor
cross-examination, look at toward the beginning
of the cross, and you will see it, it's in
there, I mentioned it in my opening, so I think
you guys were paying attention to it at the
time, because I told you in my opening, Philip
Morris did not make those cigarettes, and
that's what the evidence is.  So we can cross
that off.
So what do we have here of Philip
Morris-made cigarettes that Mr. Vila smoked?
Well, he had the symptoms of his cancer in July
of 1993, he came here to the states in
December 1989.  Three and a half years of
Philip Morris-made cigarettes before he got his
cancer.  That's it.  That's it, three and a
half years.  Where is the evidence that three
and a half years of smoking is enough to cause
laryngeal cancer?  Where is the evidence?  They
have the burden of proof.  Who testified to
that?  Nobody.  All -- the only person who
addressed it was Dr. Goodwin, and he said that
Mr. Vila smoked enough cigarettes in his entire
life to cause the laryngeal cancer.  That's not
the issue here.  Because the Dominican 2840
cigarettes don't count, and if he wasn't
smoking Marlboros in Spain, that doesn't count
either.  And even if it was, it wasn't that
much.
Nobody testified -- they have the burden
of proof -- they offered no evidence, no
evidence, nobody came here and said, He smoked
enough Philip Morris-made cigarettes to cause
lung cancer -- or laryngeal cancer.  They have
the burden of proof.  They offered zero
evidence.  I asked Dr. Goodwin about it.
Because I didn't want it just to be there's no
evidence, I wanted something affirmative.
Dr. Goodwin admitted that in his practice,
and he has been doing it a long time, he has
never seen a single case of laryngeal cancer
caused by three and a half years of smoking.
That's what this issue is.
So the answer to this question is "no,"
not only because they offered no evidence, but
because their own expert said that's not enough
smoking to cause laryngeal cancer.  The fact is
cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris were
not -- are not a legal cause of his cancer.
Even if you find that smoking was a cause of 2841
his cancer.  Because it was such a minority of
his smoking history.
These next questions are similar, so I put
them together, and these asked whether Mr. Vila
has proven that he relied to his detriment on a
statement made by Philip Morris, and then it's
a little broader below.  And I want to focus on
that word "statement," because he has to prove
that he relied on the statement.
What's the evidence on that?  Well, let me
first show you the jury instructions, because
they say the same thing.  Reasonable reliance
on a statement.  Again, I have highlighted or
underlined "statement" where it appears because
that's important, it's part of the requirement.
What reliance means is that Mr. Vila heard a
statement by Philip Morris and did something
that he otherwise would not have done.  That he
heard a statement and the statement caused him
to do something he would not have otherwise
done, which in this case means that he wouldn't
have smoked.  That he heard a statement that
caused him to smoke and he otherwise would not
have smoked.  
That's what is at the heart of this issue. 2842
But the evidence is that Mr. Vila, other than
the four warnings that I showed you earlier, he
never heard any statements from Philip Morris.
All the statements they showed you that Philip
Morris made in that Dr. Proctor video were made
here in the US.  
And I asked Dr. Proctor, "Have you seen
any evidence that any of those statements made
their way to Cuba, or Spain or the Dominican
Republic?" and he said, "No."  Every time I
asked the question, he said "no."
I asked the flip side of it to Mr. Vila.
"When you were living abroad, did you hear any
statements by the American tobacco companies,
including Philip Morris?"
He said, "No."
I said, "Well, were you even exposed to
American media when you were in Spain and Cuba
and the Dominican Republic?"
He said, "No.  Yeah, I had TV, but I only
got local channels."  Remember that?  "I only
got local channels, I didn't have cable, I had
absolutely no exposure to any statement by any
tobacco company."
If he hasn't heard a statement by a 2843
tobacco company, he can't have relied on a
statement by a tobacco company.
So what does plaintiff talk about?  Well,
they talk about these ads, these Marlboro ads
in Spain.  What are the ads, right?  Not
pictures, not statements.  They have to prove
statements.  Pictures.  Pictures of cowboys,
cows, horses and mountains.  No statements.  No
statements.
In any event, the Judge has instructed you
that Philip Morris has a right to advertise its
products, and you may not find liability based
on the mere fact that Philip Morris advertised
its products.
You're being instructed by the Judge that
the fact that Philip Morris advertised
Marlboro, whether it's here in the US or Spain,
is not a basis for finding or imposing
liability or responsibility on Philip Morris.
So what about the ads? -- and I got ahead
of myself.  
If you are in a car accident and a cop
comes up to you and says, "I need a witness
statement from you."  A witness statement is
something you say in words or write in words. 2844
You don't draw pictures.  Pictures are not
statements.  Pictures of cows and cowboys, and
horses and mountains, those are not statements,
but those are the only things Mr. Vila says he
saw.  He did not see any statements.  Without
seeing statements, he could not have relied on
statements.  There is absolutely no evidence of
any statement by Philip Morris or another
tobacco company that Mr. Vila heard, much less
influenced him.  And the advertising is not
statements.
We asked Mr. Vila this in his deposition;
this is where he tried to change his testimony
at trial:  "Do you believe that any tobacco
company withheld information from you that
would have affected your smoking decisions?"
His answer was:  "No, sir."
This gets at the reliance point of it.  If
he did hear a statement, he still has to prove
that because he heard the statement, he did
something that he would not have done, or that
the statement concealed information to him that
would have made a difference.  And he testified
straight up:  "They never withheld any
information that would have made any difference 2845
to me."  Actions, again, speak louder than
words.
So ask yourself this:  When Mr. Vila says
he got the information that they are saying
would have made a difference and caused him not
to smoke, what happened in the real world?  You
don't need to speculate about what he would
have done if he had heard some statements that
he never heard, just ask what he did in the
real world when he did get the information.
Because if this information made some
difference to him, he would have at least tried
to quit smoking, right?
But you saw this.  You heard this.
Whenever it was he learned about his uncle's
lung cancer, that happened in the 1950s,
whenever it was he learned about it, he did not
try to quit smoking.  So that information,
obviously, wasn't important to him and wasn't
going to cause him to do anything he didn't
want to do.
His mother told him not to smoke so much.
He doesn't say when it was; the only time he's
living with his mother is in Spain.  But,
again, he doesn't try to quit smoking when his 2846
mother says, "Don't smoke so much, you might
get sick."  His friends talked to him about his
smoking.  What does he do?  Does he say, "Oh my
gosh, smoking is bad for me?  I'm not going to
do it anymore, I'm going to try to quit"?  No,
he keeps on smoking, he doesn't try to quit.
He saw the warnings on the pack, on his trip
here in 1978, he didn't try to quit smoking.
He saw the warnings in 1989 when he moved
to the US.  He didn't try to quit smoking.  He
was told about his godfather's heart attack
when he came to the US.  He didn't try to quit
smoking.  
That is all conclusive proof that the
information they say was withheld from Mr. Vila
would not have made one lick of difference to
him, because when he acknowledges he got the
information, he didn't do anything different.
It didn't matter to him then either, and it
wouldn't have mattered to him at any time.
Mr. Vila's attitude is best summed up by
what he said is a joke, which is:  "If I get
sick from smoking, just bury me in a Marlboro
truck."
That's what he would tell his friends and 2847
family when they would tell him not to smoke so
much.  That indicates he knew smoking caused
disease that could kill him, and that he was
willing to take the risk, because he wanted to
smoke.  And that he wasn't feeling like he was
a victim or an addict or somebody who was doing
something he didn't want to do.  Somebody who
feels like that doesn't joke about being in a
Marlboro truck.  You joke about being buried in
a Marlboro truck if you're comfortable with
what you're doing, you know the risks and
you're willing to make the tradeoff.  And
that's who Mr. Vila was.  
So on both of these questions, Number 3
and 4, I submit to you these are the easiest
questions to decide in the case because there
is absolutely no evidence that any statement by
a tobacco company ever reached Mr. Vila, much
less that it caused him to do something that he
otherwise would not have done.  These are both
nos here.
Now I want to turn to the percentage of
fault.  And you have seen these already, but
let me talk about some of the issues here.  Our
position is that Mr. Vila is 100 percent 2848
responsible for the choices and decisions he
made in life and also 100 percent responsible
for the consequences of those decisions.
The fact is, is that Philip Morris did not
influence or control in any way Mr. Vila's
smoking; Mr. Vila was in charge of that.  He
made the decision to start smoking, and he
smoked all those years without trying to quit.
That was his decision and his choice.
One of the biggest issues here, factual
issues for you, I submit, on this
responsibility question and also on the next
question relating to damages, is the fact that
after Mr. Vila had those radiation treatments,
he never went back to his doctor to see whether
they got all the cancer.  He never followed up
on that.  And I'm going to go through all the
evidence on that in a minute.
The overall point is Mr. Vila is
responsible not only for his smoking, but he's
also responsible for not going back to the
doctor when the doctor said to come back.
Now, you have heard a lot on this.  This
is the medical record when Mr. Vila's done with
his radiation.  This is the record from 2849
June 22nd, 1994.  Mr. Kaiser called this a
follow-up visit.  It wasn't a follow-up visit.
This was the end of the radiation.  We know
it's not a follow-up visit because at the
bottom, it says:  "The patient has tolerated
the treatment and we have given him a return
appointment for one month."  It's hard to read
from there.  So his cancer doctor says come
back in a month.  That's going to be a
follow-up.
And he also says:  "Go see Dr. De Cardenas
before returning here."  Dr. De Cardenas is
Mr. Vila's ENT, the ear, nose and throat
doctor.  So his cancer doctor tells him right
at the end of the radiation, "Come back in a
month and also see your ENT."
Now, we know, not only from the medical
records but Mr. Vila's testimony, that he did
not follow up.  This was on one of those
supposed half truth boards, I guess they were
claiming, I was telling you, a half truth about
this, that Mr. Vila never followed up.  And on
their board, the way they -- the part I
supposedly left out is I didn't talk about the
two blood tests he had later in the year. 2850
There's no evidence that those blood tests had
anything to do with his cancer.  In fact, the
follow-up, what you've heard from the doctors
is, the follow-up would have involved putting a
scope down his neck, not blood tests, put a
scope down his neck to look if the lesion was
gone.  They put up the blood test because they
are the only medical records they could find
after this period of time, and they're claiming
that's the follow-up.  There's no evidence
that's the follow-up.
In fact, I asked their expert,
Dr. Goodwin, I said:  "You've looked at the
medical records and you did not see any medical
records suggesting he went back to his doctor."
And Dr. Goodwin agreed with that.
So whatever these blood tests are,
Dr. Goodwin didn't think it was a follow-up
either.
So let's look at the key record here that
you've seen any number of times.  We've typed
it up there so you don't have to read the
handwriting.
And it says:  "44-year-old found to have
vocal cord squamous cell cancer, 1993." 2851
Now, I want to pause there because Mr.
Kaiser, ever since I put this document up, he
has gone to great lengths to suggest there's
something incorrect about it, right?  He points
to 1993 and tries to browbeat Mr. Vila yelling
at him into saying, "No, my cancer was in 1994,
not 1993."
This is Mr. Vila relating this to the
doctor when he was applying for disability.
Mr. Vila says 1993 because that is when his
cancer first arose.  That's when he had the
hoarseness, 1993.
Then it says surgery in 1994.  That's when
he had the biopsy.  And Mr. Vila says, yes,
that's what he considered to be the surgery,
1994.
Then it says:  "Noncompliant with
follow-up care."
Then in 1996, he developed a recurrence
and had a laryngectomy.
Now, this morning Mr. Kaiser suggested to
you that this was a doctor evaluating him for
disability, and those doctors don't want
anybody to get disability, so he's going to
write anything down. 2852
The question is:  Did the doctor just make
this up, or is this what Mr. Vila told his
doctor?  Did he tell that doctor:  "I did not
go back after my radiation; I did not follow up
and then the cancer came back worse and I had
to have all the surgery on my throat"?
You don't have to guess about that because
I actually asked Mr. Vila that question.  And I
don't know why there's a suggestion somehow
that this medical record is wrong and Mr. Vila
went to follow up when Mr. Vila admits that
he's the one who told his doctor, this doctor
in 1994, that he had not complied with the
doctor's order to follow up.
This is what I asked in cross-examination:
"Did you tell him" -- referring to that doctor
who wrote the report we were just looking at --
"Did you tell him that you had not complied
with the doctor's orders to follow up after
your radiation in 1994?"
Answer:  "Yes, sir."
This idea that Mr. Vila somehow followed
up and the doctor got it wrong.  Mr. Vila
said -- he admitted he did not go back to his
doctor in 1994.  Whose responsibility was it 2853
for Mr. Vila to go back to his doctor when his
doctor said, "We've given you radiation, we're
not sure if we have the cancer, come back to
make sure we got it all or else something worse
can happen"?
Was it his doctor's fault that he didn't
go back?  No.
Was it Philip Morris' fault that Mr. Vila
didn't go back to his doctor?  No.
We all have a responsibility to look after
our own health.  Mr. Vila didn't go back.
At first Mr. Vila said:  "Well, I didn't
have the money."  Then you heard, "Well, he
wasn't fired from his job, he quit his job."
And he got this inheritance from his father,
and he could have asked his family for money.
And I pointed out all of this Dominican
Republic travel to him and said:  "Couldn't you
have just not gone on one or two of those trips
and used the money to go back to the doctor?"
And then he said something different, it was no
longer I didn't have the money, he admitted
what the truth is, and this is what he said:
"I didn't want to go back to the doctor."
We all get to make those choices in our 2854
life.  If you don't want to go back to the
doctor because you're worried what the doctor
is going to say, that's your prerogative.  But
if you don't go back to the doctor, when the
doctor says, "I don't know if I've gotten all
the cancer, we need to follow-up," if you don't
go back to the doctor then, it's your
responsibility.  And the consequences of not
going back to the doctor are your
responsibility.
What would have happened if he had gone
back to the doctor?  If he had gone back to the
doctor, there's no way to know for sure what
would have happened, because he didn't do it.
But you remember Dr. Goodwin testified
that in 1994 when he had the radiation, the
alternative treatment would have been to
remove, through surgery, just remove that
lesion.  And if they had done that, Mr. Vila
would have been a little hoarse, because he
would have been missing part of a vocal cord,
he still would have had the left one, he would
have still been able to breathe through his
nose and throat and taste everything, and he
wouldn't have the stoma. 2855
The evidence in this case from the medical
doctors is after the radiation, the tumor was
smaller.  So if it's smaller and they had
detected it, they could have done that same
surgery if Mr. Vila had followed up.  If he had
gone back to the doctor, like the doctor said,
and the doctor had seen the tumor there, they
could have removed it surgically, and Mr. Vila
would not have any of the problems he has
today.
Those problems come not from Philip
Morris, not from his doctors, but from Mr. Vila
not going back to his doctor; and that is
Mr. Vila's responsibility.
And I asked Mr. Vila -- this was at the
end of the afternoon when I was cross-examining
him -- one of the first days we were getting
into live witnesses.  And I asked him:  "Do you
accept any responsibility either for not going
back at all, or if you went back once, for not
going back after that?  Do you accept any
responsibility for that?"
He admitted:  "Yes, sir."
He has all the responsibility for that.
That is 100 percent his responsibility.  And I 2856
also asked him about his feelings of depression
and sadness.  And, essentially, I asked him:
Isn't this why you are really depressed,
because you realize, you realize that if you
had gone back -- if you had just followed your
doctor's orders, you think none of this,
meaning the throat surgery, the removal of the
vocal cords, not being able to breathe through
his mouth and nose, none of that would have
happened if only you had gone back, is that why
you feel the way you feel?  
I think this was the last question and
answer that day and it was:  "I calculate,
yes."
So Mr. Vila -- they're denying he has
substantial responsibility in this case --
Mr. Vila, himself, admits that he feels
responsible for what has happened to him.  And
the fact is, he is responsible for it.  He
should have gone back to the doctor.  He didn't
go back.  He didn't want to go.  I'm not
faulting him for that, that was his prerogative
and his choice, and he has had to live with the
consequences of it, but he is responsible for
it.  And he's the only one who is responsible 2857
for it.
And because Mr. Vila is responsible for
his smoking, not quitting sooner, smoking as
much as he did for how long he did, and also
because he just didn't want to go back to the
doctor, everything that they're claiming
damages for is his responsibility, 100 percent
responsibility on Mr. Vila if you get that far
on the verdict form.
Now, I want to talk about damages.  And I
think the number they picked, maybe one of the
middle numbers they want you to award Mr. Vila,
$20 million, $20 million for making the choice
to smoke, not ever trying to quit, not going
back to the doctor, you get $20 million for
that?  $20 million if the average family of
four in Florida makes an annual salary of
$50,000, you'd have to work 400 years to get
$20 million.  400 years.  That's what they're
asking for.  That's an absurd amount of money,
particularly in light of the facts of this
case, when Mr. Vila is the cause of all of his
injuries.
And they've talked in this case about
Mr. Vila's depression.  And I submit to you 2858
that most of Mr. Vila's mental health issues
have nothing to do with his cancer.  This is a
long list, but this is the list I went through
with Dr. Seely.  The list of reasons why
Mr. Vila has gotten counseling.  They're all in
Defense Exhibit RRR -- I know it's hard to see,
but if you wanted to look, you'd see he's
gotten counseling -- these are all things that
have nothing to do with his cancer.
He's had counseling for a falling out with
his sister, he had counseling because he
believes his sister cheated him out of his
inheritance, his mother's inheritance, his
mother's death, he got counseling for that.
And I think if you look at Mr. Vila's demeanor,
you can see that the single most thing that has
gotten him choked up during trial is a
discussion of his relationship with his sister
and his mother's death.  And I submit to you
those are the major causes of his sadness and
his depression.  He's felt isolated from his
family.  The list goes on and on and on.
But one of the counseling sessions was
when Hurricane Wilma came through and his power
went out, and he got counseling for that.  You 2859
may be asking yourself, why is Mr. Vila getting
all of this counseling?  One of those reasons
is because he's on disability for depression.
And you heard testimony that you have to be
examined by doctors and mental health
professionals to get disability for depression.
If Mr. Vila doesn't go to counseling and
doesn't see psychiatrists, he doesn't get the
money for depression.  And so Mr. Vila, to get
the money for depression, has to go to these
counselors.  And if the thing that's on his
mind is the power went out after Hurricane
Wilma, then that's what he is going to talk
about.  But you can scour those mental health
records that are in evidence, and what you will
see is he has a lot of reasons he's getting
this mental health treatment, and they have
nothing to do with his cancer.
Really, I think, the most compelling
testimony on this comes from his cousin, right?
They brought his cousin in to be the
before-and-after witness on his mental health
situation.  She's talked and spent a lot of
time with Mr. Vila, she's his closest relative
here in the US, his confidant, they spend hours 2860
talking, they've had many late nights together.
And what did she say when she testified?  She's
in the best position, right?  
"In all the times that you've spent with
Mr. Vila, you haven't actually observed him
being depressed, have you?"
"Depressed?  No, I have not.  I have seen
him very sad."
"In fact, Mr. Vila has never told you that
he was depressed, has he?"
"No, ma'am."
So this claim about Mr. Vila and his
depression, I don't doubt there is evidence
that he's getting counseling, that he's sad
over many things; but I would suggest to you
that the claim of his depression has been
greatly exaggerated, and that's why we've gone
to great lengths to talk about his travel.  I
don't fault Mr. Vila in any way for traveling.
If it makes him feel better or he enjoys
vacations, he enjoys going to other countries,
good for him.
But why travel is so important is because
their Dr. Seely came in, and Dr. Seely said he
has severe depression.  And notice during their 2861
direct examination, they did not ask Dr. Seely,
"Well, what does that actually mean in terms of
his life to have severe depression?"  They
didn't ask that, but I asked him that.  And
Dr. Seely said:  "Well, Mr. Vila's severe
depression means he has difficulty going
outdoors, he has difficulty being seen by
others, being in a community setting,
socializing with friends and strangers, and he
really isn't able to go out and about or
function."
What did Dr. Seely never see?  What had he
never seen before he offered that testimony?
Mr. Vila's passport.  They didn't give it to
him.  So this man comes in here and says, this
guy, Mr. Vila can't get out of the house, he
can't function, he can't go outside, he can't
be in a community setting; all these times
traveling around the Caribbean and Spain, he's
done exactly that.  He's done exactly that.
Dr. Seely's image, what he was describing
Mr. Vila as is not Mr. Vila.  We know this is
Mr. Vila's real life because you only get these
stamps when you leave the country and come back
in.  So what has Mr. Vila's real life been 2862
like?  It's not the life Dr. Seely described.
It's a life of flying back and forth to the
Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, and Spain in
the back, more trips to the Dominican Republic,
back to Costa Rica, to Cancun, to the Bahamas,
a bunch of times to the Bahamas, back to the DR
and to the Cayman Islands, to Spain, to the
Dominican Republic, to the Bahamas again,
Dominican Republic, Dominican Republic, Spain,
and so on.
That's not the picture of somebody who
can't function in life, who is severely
depressed.
Now you heard earlier that:  "Well,
Mr. Vila travels to the Dominican Republic so
often because it is therapeutic for him, he
gets to be with his family."  What about the
Bahamas?  We haven't heard about any family
members living in the Bahamas.  Is he going
there to be with family or is he going to the
beach?  
What about Cancun?  We haven't heard about
any relatives living in Cancun that give him
therapy when he's there.  Is he going to see
family members or is it vacation?  I'd asked 2863
the same question about the Cayman Islands.
So the idea that he's traveling
therapeutically, because of his depression,
just doesn't fly.  This man is able to go out
and about and do things, he's been able to be
here for three weeks, 9 to 6 p.m --
Your Honor?
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. McCARTER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
Just a couple more points on the travel,
and I hope I haven't spent too much time on it.
But I showed you these boards during my opening
statement.  I will just put them right here.
Remember I said in my opening statement,
you can use his passports as physical evidence
like you're a detective to see, well, did the
depression really stop him from doing the
things that he wanted to do in life.  And what
you will see when you do that is there are two
interruptions in his travel.  He's gone on 49
different trips since his throat surgery, 49
different international trips to five or six or
seven different countries.  What you will see
is there's a break in his travel right here,
July 8, 1997.  That's the first one.  There's
another one around 2003.
So the question is:  Did his depression,
did that stop him from traveling just as he was 2865
traveling before?  The answer to that question
is no.
You may remember I asked Mr. Vila about
his disability, when he applied for disability.
And the reason he stopped traveling between
July 8th, 1997, and March 14th, 1999, the
reason he stopped traveling during that period
of time is he was applying for disability
benefits.  He submitted his application in
August of 1997, so as soon as he got back from
Costa Rica he applied for disability, he had to
get examined by doctors, interviewed with
people at the Social Security office, filled
out a bunch of paperwork, and they denied him
disability initially because they said, "You
can work.  You might not have your full voice,
but you can talk so you can work at a job that
doesn't require you to talk."
Then he reapplied after the denial and he
added depression to his application.  And then
he got analyzed and had to spend another year
or so applying for disability.  This time he
got evaluated by mental health professionals,
saw other doctors, interviewed with people,
filled out paperwork.  He eventually was given 2866
disability for depression.  And as soon as he
was cleared for disability and started getting
the payments, what did he do?  He started
traveling internationally again.
So the break you see, the first break in
the travel you see has nothing to do with him
being too depressed to travel and has
everything to do with having to fill out
paperwork and see doctors and meet with people
to try to get disability.
As soon as he was cleared for disability,
he went right back to the same lifestyle from
before, and went traveling around the
Caribbean, the Bahamas, Dominican Republic,
Cayman Islands and so on.  
The second break in his travel happens
around 2003, and then he doesn't travel as much
after that.  And you remember that that's when
his mother dies, in 2003, and he didn't inherit
the money that he thought he was going to
inherit.  And his mother had been funding his
lifestyle and his travel before 2003, when she
passed away.  And he didn't get any of the
inheritance; he didn't have any money to travel
anymore.  Not -- he wasn't too depressed to 2867
travel, it was just he didn't have the source
of money he had before.
So even with the condition that he's in,
with the throat surgery and the stoma and not
being able to breathe through his mouth and
nose, not being able to taste, which I submit
to you is 100 percent his responsibility
because he didn't go back to the doctor, even
with that condition, he has still been able to
live much of the same lifestyle that he did
before.
And that goes directly to this issue of
damages, because what they're claiming damages
for, really, was the surgery in '96, which was
a consequence of his failing to go back to the
doctor; and this, what they called the severe
depression that Dr. Seely says makes this guy
not be able to go outside the house or
function, even though he's been here every day
for three weeks.
So on this question of damages, if you get
that far on the verdict form, if you don't
answer the earlier questions no, like I've
talked about, if you don't assign him 100
percent at fault, that's the answer on the 2868
question for damages.  This is not a case in
which any money should be awarded to Mr. Vila
at all.
The last question on this case asks
whether you find by clear and convincing
evidence that punitive damages are warranted
against Philip Morris.
Mr. Kaiser talked about this.  What they
want you to do is come back next week for more
testimony by witnesses so they can get more
money.  That's what they're asking for here,
more money, not this time for compensation but
to punish Philip Morris.  And there is
absolutely no reason, no reason at all, why you
should do that.  
This has a higher standard of proof:
Clear and convincing evidence.  So they have
the burden of proof on everything.  On the
other issues it's the greater weight of the
evidence.  Here it's clear and convincing
evidence.
What they have to prove, by clear and
convincing evidence, they have to prove that
there should be punishment, and the evidence of
that has to be precise, explicit, lacking in 2869
confusion, and of such weight that produces a
firm belief or conviction without hesitation
about the matter at issue.
I submit to you they have not offered any
evidence that would warrant punitive damages or
any compensation or any liability in this case,
much less clear and convincing evidence of it.  
And this is in evidence here, you know
from the evidence that the dangers of smoking
have been widely publicized for decades; that
Philip Morris has included warnings on every
pack of cigarettes it has sold in the United
States for 49 years.  And every pack of
cigarettes Mr. Vila smoked had a warning on it.
The world is different today in 2015 than it
was in 1950s and 1960s and 1970s, which is
where the bulk of the evidence that Dr. Proctor
talked about occurred.  There's no longer --
there hasn't been television advertising for
cigarettes in 44 years.  There hasn't -- Philip
Morris stopped -- they voluntarily stopped
advertising in magazines.  There are no
celebrities in ads or athletes in ads, there's
no sponsorship in sports.  It is a different
world today than the world that Dr. Proctor 2870
talked about decades ago, and there is simply
no justification in this case for awarding
Mr. Vila more money -- this would be more money
on top of the $20 million they want you to
award.  There is no justification for awarding
him any money, much less more money for
punitive damages.
You get this far in the verdict form, the
answer ought to be no.
Now, I want to talk about one last thing,
and I've mentioned this, but this is the
instruction on burden of proof.  And why this
is so important, it's so important because they
have the burden of proof.  They have to prove
to you all of the things that what they need to
prove to get money.  They have to prove to you
that his smoking -- that his cancer was caused
by smoking, not HPV.  They have to prove to you
that he was addicted to cigarettes.  They have
to prove to you that his addiction, not his
voluntary choice to smoke, was the legal cause
of his cancer.  They have to prove to you that
that three and a half years of smoking Philip
Morris-made cigarettes was enough to cause
laryngeal cancer.  They have to prove that 2871
Mr. Vila heard a statement by Philip Morris or
another tobacco company and relied upon it. 
That is their burden of proof.  We have to
prove nothing.  We have to prove nothing.  They
have to prove their case and they have not done
it.  It is their burden and they have not met
it.  They did not prove that his cancer was
caused by smoking.
Dr. Gomez told you that yesterday, she
can't tell.  She was brought in for the
expressed purpose of rebutting Dr. Felix to
prove to you that smoking was the cause and not
HPV, and she said she can't tell.  Dr. Felix
told you he was 100 percent certain it was
caused by HPV.
They have not proved that Mr. Vila was
addicted to nicotine.  Even under Dr. Seely's
test where you need four and only four factors
during a 12-month period, they don't even meet
that, because they only have three during a
12-month period.  And you heard from Dr.
Ticknor that Dr. Seely's test isn't the real
test anyway, and there's been no evidence, no
proof that Mr. Vila was addicted.
They didn't prove he smoked enough Philip 2872
Morris-made cigarettes, the three and a half
years here in the US, to cause laryngeal
cancer.  They didn't prove that he heard or
relied on a statement by Philip Morris or
another tobacco company.  The evidence is
clear, he heard no statements, he's admitted as
much.
And, finally, really what this case is
about, is about responsibility, and Mr. Vila is
100 percent responsible for the choices and
decisions he made.  He made the choice to start
smoking, to smoke for as long as he did, to not
quit sooner, to not quit until he was already
diagnosed with cancer.  And he made that
important choice which has led to everything
that has followed in his life.  That important
choice not to go back to the doctor when the
doctor said come back within a month.  He made
that choice not to look out for his health, his
cancer came back, he had to have throat
surgery, which didn't have to happen if only he
had come back like his doctor said.
So when you -- I'm about done talking.
Mr. Kaiser gets to go next for a few minutes
for rebuttal.  He has the last word because he 2873
has the burden of proof.  I won't have an
opportunity to get up and respond to whatever
it is he says.  I don't know what it's going to
be and I won't have a chance to respond, but I
hope you've seen during this trial that when
you've heard things from one side and you've
heard things from the plaintiff's side, there
has always been a response, and that has taken
the response for you to see the whole story.  I
don't get the opportunity to do that this time,
but I would ask you to consider what the
response might --
MR. KAISER:  Objection.
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. McCARTER:  To consider what the
responses might be to his -- what you hear from
him.
be."
MR. KAISER:  Objection as to "what might
THE COURT:  Overruled.
MR. McCARTER:  I appreciate your time.  I
am about done talking.  You're the ones who get
to talk last, through your verdict form.  And
when you go in that room to deliberate, I'd ask
you to look at the evidence and your final word 2874
to be a verdict for my client, Philip Morris.
So on behalf of myself and Ms. Soto over
there and Juan who has been helping us out the
whole time, I really appreciate your attention.
We have kept you here much longer than we
probably should have, but you've been a great
jury.  Thank you very much.
