          MR. KAISER:  May it please the Court,
    Counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury,
    good morning.
          THE JURY:  Good morning.
          MR. KAISER:  What I'm going to do in
    my summation is to summarize the evidence
    that you have heard, the testimony that you
    have heard, and I'm going to address each of
    the questions on the verdict form.
          Before I get to that I want to address
    another issue, and that is the need to
    please consider all of the evidence and all
    of the testimony.  And I ask you that for
    one reason.  Because during this trial,
    there were certain half truths that came to light.
          What do I mean by that?  Let me show
    you by way of examples.  These are really
    nonissues.
          When Jose Vila was testifying, you
    heard testimony and you heard questions that
    were asked:  When did Jose quit.  There was
    an issue.  Was it 1994?  Was it 1996?  You
    know what, it really doesn't matter.
          Because even if Jose Vila was smoking
    today, he could still be addicted to the
    nicotine in the cigarettes according to the
    criteria for tobacco-use disorder.
          But be that as it may, the defense
    pressed hard.  They even showed Jose a
    record from the hospital where it said he
    quit smoking in 1994.  Then they showed you
    a deposition where it says "stopped smoking
    in 1994."
          But what they didn't show you were the
    several medical records that said he stopped
    smoking in 1996.  What they didn't show you
    was the supplemental interrogatory response
    that they received where it said he stopped
    smoking in 1996. What Jose Vila testified to adamantly
    was that he stopped smoking in 1996.  How
    does he know?  He might not be that clear
    about dates, but he's clear about the fact
    that it was several months before his
    surgery that resulted in his larynx being
    taken out.
          Now, don't you think he might know how
    soon before surgery where he had his larynx
    taken out that he quit smoking?  That's what
    I mean by half truths.  You didn't get it
    all.
          We had to show you these documents
    that showed he quit in 1996.  We also showed
    you documents, medical records, that showed
    that there are mistakes that are made in
    medical records.
          You know darn well that Jose Vila did
    not say to a doctor on one visit that he was
    58 and 56.  Medical records make mistakes.
          Another nonissue, whether Jose Vila
    used smokeless tobacco.  That's a complete
    nonissue in this case.  Yet, the defense
    when they questioned Jose Vila asked him,
    "Did you ever use smokeless tobacco?"  And Jose Vila had no idea even what it was.
          They showed in the medical records,
    "It says here you used smokeless tobacco,
    and you quit using it in December of 1984."
    What they didn't show was a record that we
    had to show, and it said he never used
    smokeless tobacco.
          That's another half truth.  So you
    have to consider the entirety of the
    testimony and the entirety of the evidence.
    Another example.
          Another nonissue.  Why is it a
    nonissue?  Did Jose drink two to three beers
    daily?  There was one medical record where
    they showed Mr. Vila where a doctor said he
    drank two to three beers daily and he smoked
    a half a pack of cigarettes a day.
          Even the defense's own doctor said
    alcohol wasn't a risk factor.  It just
    doesn't play into it.  No one really
    mentioned it.
          What happened was, we showed you
    additional medical records that told you the
    truth.  He uses alcohol socially.  He drinks
    alcohol occasionally.  And alcohol he rarely consumes.  That's another example of half
    truths that you saw in this case.  That's
    why you have to consider the entirety, the
    entire picture.
          Jose's testimony, no, that was totally
    wrong.  Did Jose follow up with medical
    care?  A compliance issue.  The half truth
    here is a Social Security doctor's
    examination of Jose Vila.
          Number 1, do you really think this
    doctor that examined Jose Vila wanted to
    make sure he got disability payments?  Of
    course not.  Their job is to make sure you
    are denied disability payments.  This is a
    Social Security doctor examining Jose Vila
    on behalf of the Social Security
    Administration.
          We don't know what questions this
    doctor asked Jose Vila.  We don't know
    whether Jose Vila answered or understood the
    questions.  All we know is that there is a
    sentence that says, noncompliance with
    follow-up treatment and the date of surgery
    or date of his diagnosis is wrong in the
    medical records. I don't mean to demean.  I don't mean
    to disparage.  But do you remember this,
    because we're not sure if Jose understood
    what "compliance" even meant.
          Why do I say that?  You will recall it
    took me 15 minutes for my own client to
    answer my question as to when he was
    diagnosed with his cancer.  Do you remember
    that?
          When he said it was late '93, I think
    it was '93.  I showed him the medical
    record.  I said, "Jose, the answer is in the
    second paragraph.  It says March of '94."
          "Now, let me ask you:  Do you remember
    when you were diagnosed?"  He looked and
    said, "I think it was '93."
          Now, we know he suffers from
    depression.  We don't know how that causes
    him to think.  But you heard him up there
    struggling to answer that question after 15
    minutes when I finally showed him a
    pathology report.  I said, "Do you remember
    a biopsy?"  He said yes.  He looked, and he
    said March of 1994.
          So you see how long it took for the question to register and for him to answer
    the question.  So that's why it is important
    to consider.
          They put this document up there to
    suggest to you he was noncompliant.  On the
    stand I think they even had him say, "Yeah,
    I never went to my doctor."  Then he said to
    me, "I went twice."
          Do we even know what Jose understands
    about compliance?  We have no idea if he
    knows what that means.
          Yet, what did we show you?  We told
    you about the medical record.  You saw the
    medical record, that is not listed here,
    from Dr. Pomper the radiologist, the
    oncologist, who did the radiation.
          He examined him upon completion of the
    radiation treatment.  That's one follow up.
    And there was no concern at that time.
          Jose Vila told you he went to his
    doctor two subsequent times.  And we showed
    you medical records by way of blood test
    results on September 6 of '94 and
    September 20 of '94 and there was never any
    evidence that there was new cancer. We also -- in response to the
    defendant's contention that Jose Vila just
    ignored his follow-up treatment and just
    went on a worldwide jaunt to travel around
    the world what did we show you?
          In the passport for that year of 1994
    after his radiation therapy there was not
    one instance of travel.  That's the half
    truth.
          Remember, again, when I showed him the
    passport, his own passport, and I showed him
    the page and I said, "Is there any evidence
    of you traveling after April of 1994?"
          He said, "Yes, right here.  Yes."
          It was the date before April.  He
    didn't understand.  I showed him again and
    if you look he says, "No, there is nothing
    after April of 1994."  That's the example of
    the half truths.  You have to consider all
    of the testimony.
          Something else you have to consider:
    You think this man got on the stand just to
    lie to you?  If you think that on the first
    question of the verdict, just say no.  Just
    say no.  I'm not going to waste your time. You don't need to waste ours.
          What did Jose Vila testify about?  He
    offered testimony about his smoking history.
    His smoking history was confirmed
    independent of his testimony.  When that
    happens what does that mean?  If there is
    independent verification of what he's told
    you, it means he told you the truth.
          How do we establish that?  There are
    medical records that establish how much he
    smoked and when he smoked.  In addition to
    his testimony.
          There are other witnesses.  His cousin
    who is related to him came up and said, "I'm
    not sure how much he smoked, but it was sure
    a lot."
          Jose Vila said, "I used to smoke in
    bed.  I would wake up and smoke.  I did it
    all night."
          The cousin said, "When I was living
    with him, I would sometimes get up during
    the night and I would see Jose up.  We would
    talk and he would smoke."
          That's what I mean by independent
    verification. So when the man is talking about his
    smoking history and you can verify it with
    other testimony, it means one thing:  That
    man was telling you the truth.
          Jose Vila testified about his issues
    with depression.  If it's independently
    verified with other evidence, it means one
    thing:  It means that Jose Vila told you the
    truth.
          We have an inch or 2-inch stack or
    larger of medical records, behavioral
    records from psychiatric treatment that
    diagnosed Jose Vila with severe depression.
    Independent of Jose Vila telling you how he
    felt and how he was depressed and sad means
    one thing:  He told you the truth.
          We had Dr. Seely come up on the stand
    and he himself diagnosed the man with severe
    depression disorder, independent testimony.
    What does it mean?  He told you the truth.
          Now, they had Dr. Ticknor on that
    stand.  He didn't say one word to dispute
    whether or not the man was depressed, just
    like he said he was, which means one thing:
    Maybe the man wasn't lying to you, because you can verify with independent records and
    independent evidence.
          That's what I mean to consider
    everything and not just the half truths.
          Question Number 1:  Was Jose Vila
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine
    and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause
    of his laryngeal cancer?
          Let's take the issue of addiction
    first.  We had Dr. Seely testify.  Dr. Seely
    said, "The definition of addiction is a
    compulsive use of a psychoactive substance
    that caused reinforcing behaviors leading to
    a loss of control over use of the
    psychoactive substance."
          That's what he said.  That definition
    was undisputed when Dr. Ticknor testified,
    did not touch it.
          Dr. Seely said that addicted people,
    they actually have permanent changes in
    their brains as a result of that behavior.
    Dr. Ticknor testified on behalf of the
    defense and did not dispute that.
          Dr. Seely testified that there is an
    absolute loss of control such that you lose free will when you are addicted.
          Dr. Ticknor testified and did not
    dispute that.
          Dr. Seely testified that there are
    certain reinforcing behaviors when someone
    is smoking.
          Dr. Ticknor testified and did not
    dispute that contention.
          Dr. Seely testified that there are
    certain smoking cues that activate the
    reward centers of the brain, and it's those
    cues that cause people to smoke.  It's those
    cues that cause people that may have quit
    for years to all of a sudden pick up a
    cigarette, don't know why, and smoke it.
          Dr. Ticknor testified and did not
    dispute that.
          Dr. Seely took you through the
    criteria, and he told you and justified why
    Jose Vila met many of the criteria.  Of the
    11, he might have met 9 or 10 of them.
          Now, remember, all you have to do to
    meet the criteria to be suffering from
    tobacco-use disorder is to meet two, 2 of
    the 11, that's enough to be classified as suffering from tobacco-use disorder.
          Dr. Ticknor, the defendant's own
    witness, when he went through those criteria
    and denied, of course, that there was any
    type of subjectiveness involved came up with
    four, three, perhaps four criteria that Jose
    Vila meets, which means what?  He satisfies
    the criteria for tobacco-use disorder.
    That's all we have to prove.
          Wait.  Dr. Ticknor says in order to be
    considered addicted, it has to be a severe
    presentation where 10 percent of the people
    might fall into that category.
          But what I read yesterday, what the
    book that the psychiatrists use about
    addiction, where Dr. Ticknor chooses to use
    addiction to mean only those extreme
    presentations.
          It says in the book that: "Note that
    the word 'addiction' does not apply as a
    diagnostic term in this classification;
    although, it is in common usage in many
    countries to describe severe problems
    related to compulsive and habitual use of
    substances. "The more neutral term 'substance-use
    disorder' is used to describe the wide range
    of the disorder from a mild form to a severe
    state of chronically relapsing compulsive
    drug taking.
          "Some clinicians will choose to use
    the word 'addiction' to describe more
    extreme presentations.  But the word is
    omitted from the official DSM-V
    substance-use disorder diagnostic
    terminology because of its uncertain
    definition and its potentially negative
    connotation."
          So it says some people might choose to
    use the word "addiction."  Dr. Ticknor falls
    into that category of being some of those
    people.  But most will not.  And most will
    use "addiction" even if you meet two
    criteria instead of all of them.  It just so
    happens that Dr. Seely is one of those who
    says, As long as you meet the criteria for
    tobacco-use disorder, that's addiction.
          We have satisfied that component
    there.  Jose Vila has been shown to
    demonstrate tobacco-use disorder addiction. That's Number 1.
          Number 2:  Laryngeal cancer.  No one
    disputes the fact that Jose Vila suffered
    from laryngeal cancer.  The dispute is
    whether or not it was caused by smoking or
    whether it was caused by HPV.
          Dr. Goodwin, our first expert we put
    on, the head and neck surgeon, you remember
    him.  What did he say?  HPV for laryngeal
    cancer is not even an appreciable risk
    factor.  It is that rare for laryngeal
    cancer; not oral pharyngeal cancer, but
    laryngeal cancer.
          Dr. Goodwin told you that the only
    times in his 40-year-or-so career that he
    has seen a laryngeal cancer caused by HPV is
    in the case of this laryngeal papillomatosis
    that he talked about that causes warts on
    the larynx.  That's it.
          Dr. Goodwin said the only time we see
    HPV-related cancer, which is in the oral
    pharynx primarily, the tonsils and the base
    of the tongue, is with nonsmokers.
          Then you heard from Dr. Carmen Gomez.
    I'm not going to bring out all the charts with the slides of the pathology.  You know
    why?  Because it's unnecessary.  Because
    when all is said and done this whole idea
    about koilocytes is not even relevant to the
    issue of laryngeal cancer.  It might be
    relevant to cervical cancer, Dr. Felix's
    specialty.
          Why isn't it relevant to laryngeal
    cancer?  You recall what Dr. Gomez said.
    First of all, you don't see koilocytes in
    the cancer of the laryngeal cancer tissue.
    You just don't see it.  Sometimes you
    mistake it.  It might look like koilocytes.
          But what she says is as long as the
    cancer is keratinizing and
    well-differentiated, it's never going to
    test positive for this p16 she mentioned.
          Remember, she even brought in an
    example.  She said, this is the type of
    tissue that we see with laryngeal cancer
    every day.  It is a well-differentiated
    sample, she said.  She showed you the amount
    of keratinizing, the amount of keratin being
    produced.
          She even tested it for p16, and it was negative.  And that's why she said it
    doesn't matter if you think you see a
    koilocyte.  If it is a koilocyte, as long as
    it is keratinizing and well-differentiated,
    it is not HPV driven.
          What else did she say?  Even if you
    find in a tumor the existence of an HPV
    infection, it doesn't necessarily mean in
    the larynx that the HPV infection caused the
    cancer.
          The defense even showed her a study.
    Do you remember?  She hadn't read the study.
    They asked her, "Doesn't it say there is an
    association of 25 percent?"  Then again when
    they try to ask her, "Don't they say it
    causes 25 percent?"
          She goes, "No, no, no."  She objected.
    Do you remember that?  She said, "I object,
    Your Honor.  Can I say that?"  She said,
    "No, association; not cause."
          Then I read to her a couple of
    passages.  One of which was, "Small sample
    size and publication bias complicate the
    assessment of the prevalence of HPV in head
    and neck sites beyond the oral pharynx." So you have a selection bias right in
    this study which makes it unreliable for
    other sites other than the oral pharynx
    where you see this type of cancer.
          What else?  "As detection of HPV DNA
    in tumor biopsies alone is not sufficient
    evidence of causation, molecular biology
    studies have helped identify a subset of
    these cancers that may be a consequence of
    HPV infection.  Such a subset is mainly
    found in the oral pharynx, particularly the
    tonsils."  That's what the study shows that
    the defense relied on when they showed
    Dr. Gomez.
          Finally, "However, viral detection in
    biopsy material alone is not evidence of
    causation.  HPV types that have been well
    described as lacking the ability to induce
    neoplastic transformation may be coinfecting
    the tumor, yet not be causally related to
    tumorigenesis."
          And when I read that to her yesterday,
    she said, "Thank you."  Because that is what
    she was saying the entire time of her
    testimony. It doesn't even matter if the
    koilocytes exist.  It doesn't matter if
    there happens to be an HPV infection in a
    tumor cell.  The fact remains when it's
    well-differentiated and keratinizing, the
    infection isn't causing the cancer; it's the
    smoking.
          That was in the laryngeal cancer.  It
    has nothing to do with cervical cancer.  She
    even said, "Cervical cancer is different.
    You see koilocytes in a cervical cancer;
    99.9 percent of the time you can rest
    assured that that disease is caused by HPV.
    It's different in laryngeal cancer."
          Dr. Felix may be a world renowned
    pathologist, but his specialty is not head
    and neck cancer.  His specialty is cervical
    and gynecological cancer.
          Dr. Felix admitted his area and
    concentration is gynecological pathology and
    cytology.  That he has a consulting service.
    That in his consulting service other doctors
    have tough cases and they send them to
    Dr. Felix.  95 percent of these cases are
    what?  Gynecological pathology. Dr. Felix said, "If you look me up on
    my Web site at University of Southern
    California, it's not going to say anything
    about head and neck cancer."
          Dr. Felix admitted when he was first
    called by a defense attorney to help with a
    head and neck cancer case in 2009, his
    response was, "I'm really not an expert in
    head and neck cancers."
          So in answer to the question, we have
    demonstrated to you this was a
    smoking-related cancer.
          Remember what else, the presentation
    of this cancer.
          This cancer that is caused by HPV will
    arise in the oral pharynx.  That's what the
    testimony was.  Even Dr. Felix admitted, "It
    is primarily found at the base of the tongue
    and the tonsils."  In Jose Vila's case, it
    was found in the larynx, which is not the
    base of the tongue or the tonsils.
          You heard testimony from Dr. Gomez.
    Most of the time when these HPV cancers are
    found, they present with a lump in the neck,
    and the aspiration of the tumor reveals cancer.  What's the first place they do
    (sic)?  They look in the oropharynx.
          HPV-related cancers are more often in
    the lymph nodes.  And that's where they're
    found.  There is more often lymph node
    involvement.
          Jose Vila in his 1994 cancer and his
    1996 cancer, no lymph nodes were involved.
    Inconsistent with HPV-related cancer.
          There is a better outcome with HPV
    cancer.  Jose Vila did not have that better
    outcome because he was treated with
    radiation in 1994 and he had a recurrent
    cancer in 1996 that necessitated the removal
    of his larynx, which I submit to you is not
    a really good outcome.
          Dr. Gomez said with HPV cancer you
    don't get the recurrence.  It doesn't come
    back.  With smoking-related cancers you see
    it.
          And finally, I've been through this,
    the HPV-related cancers are non-keratinizing
    and they are not well-differentiated.  And
    Jose Vila's cancer was well-differentiated
    and extensively keratinizing.  Inconsistent with the existence of HPV causing the
    infection.
          And Dr. Gomez said:  Age?  Yeah.  He
    was pretty young to get cancer in the
    larynx, but we see more and more of cancer
    in the larynx with young people.
          So in answer to Number 1:  "Was Jose
    Vila addicted to cigarettes containing
    nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a
    legal cause of his laryngeal cancer?"
          Why is the answer yes?  Because the
    fact is, if he was addicted -- if Jose Vila
    was addicted, it was his addiction that was
    causing him to smoke more cigarettes.
    Because if he wasn't addicted he could put
    them down at any time he wanted.
          It was the loss of control that
    compelled Jose to smoke.  With Jose smoking
    more cigarettes than he normally would, he
    was getting more toxins and carcinogens
    because of the addiction.  As a result of
    these toxins and carcinogens, he developed
    his laryngeal cancer.
          If he wasn't addicted to those
    cigarettes, he wouldn't have smoked as many cigarettes and wouldn't have gotten sick.
    And that's why the addiction caused the
    disease.
          So in answer to Number 1, it is a
    resounding yes.  That Jose Vila -- addiction
    to cigarettes containing nicotine was such
    an addiction -- was a legal cause of his
    laryngeal cancer, that is a yes.
          We have demonstrated that Jose Vila is
    a class member.  So step two, what you get
    now is to rely on the Engle findings for the
    next question.  And the Engle findings, as
    the judge said, establish that cigarettes
    containing nicotine are addictive.
    Cigarettes cause laryngeal cancer.
          Philip Morris USA, Inc. was negligent.
    Philip Morris placed cigarettes on the
    market that were defective and unreasonably
    dangerous.  Philip Morris USA, Inc.
    concealed or omitted material information
    not otherwise known or available knowing
    that the material was false or misleading or
    failed to disclose a material fact
    concerning the health effects or addictive
    nature of smoking cigarettes or both. That Philip Morris USA agreed to
    conceal or omit information regarding the
    health effects of cigarettes or their
    addictive nature with the intention that
    smokers and the public would rely on this
    information to their detriment.
          Now, the question Number 2 then:  "Was
    smoking cigarettes manufactured by Philip
    Morris USA, Inc. a legal cause of Jose
    Vila's laryngeal cancer?"
          Jose Vila smoked no other cigarettes
    than Marlboro, which were manufactured by
    Philip Morris, so the answer is yes because
    we know now that cigarettes were the cause
    of Jose Vila's laryngeal cancer.
          His addiction was the legal cause.
    And it follows that the fact that he was
    smoking Philip Morris cigarettes, that is
    the legal cause of his laryngeal cancer.
          So answer to Number 2 is yes.
          Now, there's some suggestion that the
    cigarettes Jose Vila was smoking in the
    Dominican Republic weren't really Philip
    Morris cigarettes.  There was that subject
    matter that was raised. There are countless documents in
    evidence, and I will read in some of those
    exhibit numbers, but there's one in
    particular.  And I'll put this on the screen
    for you.
          And this is a document you'll see from
    1971.  And you'll see Hugh Cullman, George
    Weissman.  If you remember Dr. Proctor's
    testimony, he mentioned Cullman and Weissman
    as being executives of Philip Morris USA,
    Inc., the defendants here.  And routinely
    you saw those names on documents that
    Dr. Proctor testified about.
          Well, what are they talking about
    here?  They're talking about the board of
    directors for E. Leon Jimenes in the
    Dominican Republic, and they're proposing to
    make E. Leon Jimenes a member of the board.
          Why is that relevant?  It's relevant
    because it's the defense's contention that
    Philip Morris just gave -- kept their
    trademarks and allowed this company, the
    Jimenes company, to manufacture and sell
    their cigarettes in the Dominican Republic.
    Not the case. This document shows you that that
    company was owned by Philip Morris USA, Inc.
    Philip Morris is saying that from their
    executives of Philip Morris USA, Inc.  And
    it's Philip Morris deciding to put on the
    board of directors Leon Jimenes.
          So they own the company in the
    Dominican Republic.  The bottom line is, the
    cigarettes that were manufactured and sold
    in the Dominican Republic were manufactured
    in the United States.  They're Philip Morris
    cigarettes.  And they're the same Marlboro
    cigarettes that are manufactured here in the
    United States and smoked here in the United
    States.
          If for a minute, if for a minute
    Philip Morris USA, Inc. had evidence that
    there really weren't cigarettes that they
    were making being sold in the Dominican
    Republic, they would have brought a
    representative from their company to say,
    No, those Philip Morris Marlboro cigarettes
    weren't ours.  And they didn't do it.  So
    that's a nonissue.
          And there's other exhibits that you can look at that will demonstrate the same
    thing.  These were Marlboro cigarettes
    manufactured in the United States and sold
    in the Dominican Republic, and Jose Vila
    smoked them.
          Plaintiff's Exhibit 338.  Plaintiff's
    Exhibit 307.  Plaintiff's Exhibit 231.
    Plaintiff's Exhibit 304.  Plaintiff's
    Exhibit 344.  Plaintiff's Exhibit 355.
    Plaintiff's Exhibit 356.  Plaintiff's
    Exhibit 349.  Plaintiff's Exhibit 353.
          If you take a look at these exhibits,
    you will see that the cigarettes that were
    manufactured and sold in the Dominican
    Republic were manufactured here in the
    United States and sold in the Dominican
    Republic under the same cigarettes as Jose
    Vila smoked here in the United States when
    he came here.
          "Question Number 3:  Did Jose Vila
    reasonably rely to his detriment on any
    statement made by Philip Morris which
    concealed or omitted material facts not
    otherwise known or available to him
    concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, was
    such reliance a legal cause of his laryngeal
    cancer?"
          You already have heard the finding,
    and that is that Philip Morris concealed
    material information about the health risk
    and addictive nature of smoking.  That's a
    finding for you to consider when you're
    dealing with reliance.
          Now, let's talk about reliance and
    what does that mean.  Did Jose Vila rely on
    these statements?
          Well, certainly if they withheld
    information, he couldn't rely on information
    that was withheld.  But what information did
    he rely on?
          Remember, Dr. Proctor testified about
    this, information bombardment that the
    tobacco companies were sending out to the
    public to reassure them that you can keep on
    smoking until we get to the bottom of this.
    And that was a sham.  That was a fraud.
    That lasted for 50 years.
          And it might be the case that Jose
    didn't see any of those documents. But do you know what he did see?  He
    saw advertisements.  And advertisements
    contain statements of the tobacco companies.
          And what were these advertisements
    saying to Jose Vila?  Those advertisements
    he saw, one of which was for Marlboro
    cigarettes when he was living in Spain, were
    telling him:  You will be a part of the
    crowd.  You'll be like a cowboy.  You'll be
    riding that horse.
          They glamorized smoking.  They
    normalized smoking.  They made it look like
    it was pleasurable and safe and active
    instead of telling him the truth because
    they knew at that time that that stuff is
    going to kill you.  You're going to get
    addicted to it.
          And they didn't tell him that.  And he
    told you when he testified, I liked those
    commercials.  I related to that cowboy.  And
    he saw other commercials.  He saw Winston
    ads.  He saw the L&M ads he told you about.
    That goes to the conspiracy because there
    were other American manufacturers
    advertising their product in Spain when he was a child.
          So the question is:  Did he rely on
    the information in the ads?  And the answer
    is:  Of course he did.  Because he told you,
    I saw those ads.  I remember those ads.  I
    wanted to be like the Marlboro man.
          What did he do?  He started smoking
    Marlboro cigarettes.
          After that first one was offered to
    him he continued to smoke Marlboros.  So the
    question is:  Well, what would have happened
    if the truth had been told to Jose?  What
    would have happened if when the tobacco
    companies knew their products were bad, that
    they could kill you, that they could cause
    cancer, they told the truth?
          So that when they were advertising
    Jose Vila would have known, these can kill
    me.  So that when they were plugging their
    cigarettes in all their venues in Spain, on
    billboards, all their advertisements, would
    have had that warning:  These might be
    addictive.  They will be addictive.  They
    will kill you.
          The question then is:  Do you think he would have started smoking?  We know the
    answer.  He would not have.
          And how do we know that answer?
    Because Jose Vila was asked specifically on
    the stand if he recalls his deposition
    testimony.  It was a straightforward
    question:
          "If you knew as a 15 year-old when you
    first started smoking that first cigarette,
    if Philip Morris had told you this could
    cause cancer, would you have smoked?"
          And his answer was:  "No."
          That's what reliance means.  If he had
    known of the statements that they didn't
    tell him about, would it have changed his
    behavior and his decision?  And he said, It
    would have because I wouldn't have smoked.
    That's what you have going for you.
          So Number 3, the answer is yes.  He
    did rely on those statements.  He absolutely
    relied on those statements and those ads he
    saw when he was a kid.  That's reliance.
          Number 4 is the same answer because it
    goes to the conspiracy and that he also
    relied on these statements from the other tobacco companies.  He was bombarded with
    these advertisements.  And he remembered
    seeing these.
          So Number 4:  "Did Jose Vila
    reasonably rely to his detriment on any
    statement made in furtherance of an
    agreement to conceal or omit material facts
    regarding the health effects or addictive
    nature of cigarettes, and if so, was such
    reliance a legal cause of his laryngeal
    cancer?"
          And the answer, again, is based on the
    evidence.  Yes.
          You're now asked to apportion fault.
    The question becomes, then, who's more at
    fault here.  And I submit to you, based on
    the evidence, it is Philip Morris that bears
    the brunt of the fault here and not Jose
    Vila.
          And why do I say that?  And I'm going
    to show you by way of a demonstrative.
          There was a certain question that you
    need to ask and you need to listen to
    Mr. McCarter's response to those questions
    to determine fault. And so the first question you need
    answered is:  Why does defendant Philip
    Morris act as if it doesn't exist?  Whey do
    they act like they don't even exist?  Why is
    it all on Jose Vila?  Why is it always on
    Jose Vila, well, he didn't try to quit?
    Jose Vila, you didn't try doing that.  Jose
    Vila this.
          Because if they admit that they do
    exist, they have to admit fault because they
    took a big -- they played a big role in
    this.  They played a big role in Jose Vila's
    decision to start smoking.  And they will
    not address the issue.  They will not answer
    that question:  Why are they avoiding
    talking about themselves?  Listen for that
    answer.
          Secondly:  When the defendant Philip
    Morris knew by the '50s that cigarette smoke
    contained carcinogens and could cause
    cancer, why did they choose not to tell the
    public?
          And Jose Vila was a member of the
    public.  He was living in Spain.  They were
    advertising their cigarettes in Spain.  Why couldn't they say at the time they were
    advertising their cigarettes that this is
    what we know about our product?  They had
    that choice.  And they didn't make it.  And
    for that we don't take responsibility.
          That's on them because they had the
    opportunity long before Jose Vila started
    smoking his first cigarette to tell him:
    These might kill, they might make you
    addicted.  And they didn't do it.  And for
    that reason they're at fault unless they can
    answer that question for you.
          Number three:  When Philip Morris knew
    by the '50s that nicotine was an addictive
    drug, why did they choose to not tell the
    public?  Same question.
          Long before Jose Vila started smoking,
    why didn't they just inform?  He was part of
    the public.  Maybe by the time he had that
    first cigarette, he would have known.  The
    onus is on Philip Morris, not Jose Vila.
          See how they answer that question.
          Why did the defendant Philip Morris
    respond to the strong evidence linking
    cigarettes to cancer with a campaign designed to create doubt about the health
    risks and addictive nature of cigarettes for
    the next 50 years?
          And you heard Dr. Proctor when he
    testified that's exactly what they did.  And
    they created this sham organization.  This
    organization that acted like a front that
    was going to do all of this legitimate
    research to get to the bottom of the
    problem.  And they didn't do any such thing.
          They did a whole bunch of research.
    They had renowned scientists.  And they
    researched everything but smoking and health
    for 50 years.  And they didn't answer the
    question because they wanted to lull smokers
    to continue to smoke and not to quit.
          And so why didn't they truthfully
    respond to this evidence at the time that
    they knew it?  They had the choice, and they
    didn't.  And it caused people like Jose Vila
    to smoke because he wasn't informed.
          And for that it's their fault, not
    Jose's.  Let them answer that question for
    you.  And if they satisfy you, then it is
    Jose Vila's fault. See if they do it.
          When the defendant first knew that it
    could take enough nicotine -- they could
    take enough nicotine out of their cigarettes
    so as not to sustain addiction, why did they
    fail to take action?  Why didn't they do
    it -- well back into the '50s when they knew
    it -- not take every bit of nicotine out,
    but take enough out so that you could smoke,
    smoke, smoke and you wouldn't get addicted
    to their cigarettes.
          And that's possible to do.  And they
    knew it was possible to do.  And they had a
    choice, and they didn't do it.
          Why?  Because they wanted to addict
    people.  They wanted people to smoke their
    cigarettes early, often, and for a long
    time.  And that's why they didn't do it.
          And just think if they had done it.
    If they had done it, things would have
    changed.  But they didn't.  And the fault is
    not on Jose for that, it's on them.
          See how they explain that to you.  See
    how they answer that question for you.
          Number six:  Why did the defendant target youth with its advertising campaign?
          Why do you think so?  Do you think
    maybe because young people are more
    impressionable and don't have the judgment
    that adults have?  Do you think maybe that
    could be it?
          And see what they tell you about that.
    See how they answer that question:  Why they
    targeted kids like Jose Vila with their
    advertisements, with the man on a horse and
    the Winston tastes good.  See what they tell
    you about that.  That's not Jose's fault
    that he was being targeted.
          Why did the defendant add ammonia to
    its cigarettes, including Marlboro?
    Remember what Dr. Proctor said?  They
    started adding Marlboro (sic) to change the
    PH.  And what was the effect?  It gave
    smokers that kick from the nicotine.  It
    gave them a kick.  Dr. Proctor even wrote on
    that, the "secret and soul of Marlboro."
          And it was not that Marlboro was
    selling because of its ads so much as it was
    for the fact there was ammonia in it, and it
    was giving smokers that kick. And why did they do that?  Because
    they wanted smokers to continue smoking
    their Marlboros for a long, long time.  And
    for that it's their fault and not Jose's.
          And so when you look at Jose's fault
    in this case, what is it?  Jose Vila did
    everything they wanted him to do.  What do I
    mean by that?
          He smoked their cigarettes and started
    young.  That's what they wanted.  They
    targeted to youth just like Jose.  He smoked
    Marlboro cigarettes and smoked them for a
    long time, just like they wanted him to do.
          He smoked a lot of cigarettes for a
    long time, just like they wanted him to do.
    And the fact that he did everything they
    wanted him to do -- what are they telling
    you now?  Jose, you're an idiot.  You
    trusted us.  You should have known well back
    then we were lying to you.  That's what
    they're saying now.
          How could he be blamed for that when
    he did everything they wanted him to do?
          So what's his fault in this?  What's
    his fault?  Maybe he didn't try hard enough to quit when his doctor in the '90s said:
    You got to quit smoking.  Maybe that's his
    fault or maybe not.  And why is that?
          Because even the tobacco industry and
    the tobacco companies knew, September 9 of
    1980, that we can't defend continued smoking
    as free choice if the person was addicted.
          Sort of like Dr. Seely says, that your
    brain is rewired and changed and you've lost
    control.  And now they want to put fault on
    Jose because he just didn't quit early
    enough.
          So where is the fault on Jose Vila?
    Well, the defense is going to tell you he
    just didn't comply.  He didn't comply with
    his doctor's orders.  And if he didn't (sic)
    comply with his doctor's orders, he wouldn't
    have gotten the recurrence of cancer.
          No.  That's not true.  That cancer
    came back anyway.  It didn't matter if he
    complied or not.  The cancer was coming
    back.  And it did.  And no one came in and
    said, Only if he had complied early, the
    tumor would have been smaller.  You didn't
    hear that. All you heard was that he had a
    recurrence of his tumor and it resulted in
    his larynx having to be taken out.
          So there's no issue of compliance here
    because you haven't heard evidence by --
    anybody called that says Jose didn't comply,
    and had he complied he wouldn't have gotten
    the cancer.  Who's going to say that?  That
    cancer was coming back.
          But how about this:  How about if Jose
    hadn't started?  That's the main issue here.
    The issue here is how come he didn't quit.
    The issue is how come they did all that
    stuff to make him start in the first place.
          Because you know what?  If he hadn't
    started in the first place, we wouldn't be
    here today standing before you because of
    his disease.
          So we have to look at when he started
    and why he started.  And I've already shown
    you that the reason being is because of what
    the defense did.  And now they don't want to
    address that.  All they want to address is,
    why didn't Jose quit?  Why did Jose trust
    us?  Why didn't Jose believe when he was 15 years old that we were lying to him?
          So I submit to you, please consider
    when he started, not when he quit because
    that's the starting point you need to
    consider.  And they won't address that.
    They will not address that.
          So when you come to comparative fault
    in this case, you have to assign fault.  And
    it's up to you how much to assign fault.
    And I submit to you that the brunt of the
    fault lies with Philip Morris and not with
    Jose Vila.
          And it's up to you.  Lay 5 percent on
    him, lay 10 percent.  But the brunt goes to
    Philip Morris based on the evidence in this
    case.
          So the answer to number five is
    whatever you feel.  But based on the
    evidence, it is a resounding larger
    percentage on Philip Morris than it is on
    Jose Vila.
          Number six is damages.  And you heard
    Jose Vila testify about his damages.
    Remember, we talk about compensatory damages
    to compensate Jose Vila for his disfigurement, to compensate Jose Vila for
    his pain, for his mental anguish, for what
    he's gone through.
          And what did he tell you?  Well, in
    1994 when he had his surgery, when he had
    his first treatment with radiation, he told
    you how painful it was to eat and how there
    was this terrible burning in his throat.
    And he went through that for a period of
    time as a result of his radiation
    treatments.
          And he told you what happened when he
    had this recurrence of cancer where he was
    short of breath, where he's having pain,
    where he could not swallow, where he could
    hardly eat.
          And when he's diagnosed with his
    cancer, he had the laryngectomy that
    resulted in his losing his larynx.  And what
    did he tell you about that, the effect that
    it's had on him?
          He told you, among other things, that
    he used to enjoy going to the beach and
    swimming.  And that was something he did as
    a kid.  And as a result of that surgery he could no longer do that.  And he even tried
    once to go to the beach.
          And what did he tell you?  It was an
    embarrassment because he has a hole in his
    throat.
          Let me stop there for a minute.  This
    man's got a hole in his throat.  And he's
    embarrassed because people are going to look
    at him.
          Now, if a person gets a stain on their
    tie or on their shirt, a speck, that person
    is so concerned that they have a stain on
    their shirt, they don't want to be seen
    because people are going to notice the stain
    when, in fact -- when you got a little dot
    on your shirt, no one's going to notice.
          But yet the person who's got that spot
    on their shirt or on their tie is so
    concerned that someone's going to notice
    this spot.  This is awful.
          Well, Jose had a hole in his throat.
    And you know people are going to notice
    that.  Can you imagine what he's thinking,
    though?  What that's doing to him with this
    hole in his throat? And he couldn't be around people for
    that reason.  And he wasn't around people
    for that reason.  And that's why he conceals
    that hole with these turtle necks.  Because
    he's embarrassed.  And he shouldn't be
    because he didn't do it to himself; they did
    it to him.
          And so he would go to the beach.  And
    he couldn't do that anymore.  Because he
    said he went one time and the sun was bad
    for him because it caused him pain.  And the
    water splashed.  Remember, he was sitting
    with his back to the water and the wave came
    and some of it went into the stoma and he
    felt like he was going to die because it's
    like you're drowning.  So he stopped doing
    that.
          And what else?  Jose liked to be with
    friends.  He liked to socialize with
    friends.  All of a sudden his friends didn't
    want to be with him.  He would call them and
    they would want to get together and they
    would tell them, sure we'll get together and
    they wouldn't call him.
          And he knew why because he said, when he would go out, he was scared because he
    thought he had an odor coming from this
    stoma that would sometimes get congested
    with phlegm.
          And he said he would make a sound when
    he ate because that's the way he had to do
    it.  And he said people were offended.  And
    people would look at him.  And he would get
    embarrassed and was self-conscious about it,
    and that caused him a lot of concern and a
    lot of pain.  And especially when his
    friends deserted him.  You know, you know
    who your real friends are when you're going
    through a tough time.  And he learned no on
    wanted to be with him.
          And so what did he do?  His family
    would pay for him and he traveled.  And he
    traveled to Santo Domingo because he said
    they were the only people that accepted him.
    And that's what he did.
          Now, the defense wants you to think he
    just went on a worldwide travel to go on a
    vacation.  Now, you didn't hear anything of
    the sort.  You heard that he went to the
    Dominican Republic.  And anywhere he went, it was to visit family because his family
    was his support.  And that's why he was
    traveling outside the United States.  To
    visit his family.
          And when I asked him:  Well, if you
    were traveling that much to go visit your
    family, why didn't you just move to Santa
    Domingo?  And what did he say?  I'm an
    American.  That's what he said.  He was
    happy when he became a citizen.  And that's
    why he didn't move there.
          And what else?  What else do we know
    has caused Jose Vila suffering as a result
    of his laryngectomy?  What else do we know?
          This man has lost the ability to
    breathe through his nose.  This man has lost
    the ability to breathe through his mouth.
    This man only has the ability to breathe
    through a hole in his throat, and that is
    not fun.
          This man can no longer smell.  This
    man can no longer taste.  This man cannot be
    out of a room when he's cooking something
    because he doesn't know if it's burning.
    This man doesn't know if what he's eating is rotten because he can't taste it.
          This man can't keep food in his house
    because he doesn't know when it goes bad.
    This man wouldn't know if he's in another
    bedroom that there's a fire in the kitchen
    because he can't smell.  That's some of the
    limitations he suffers with because he
    doesn't have the ability to taste and smell
    anymore.
          This man doesn't sneeze through his
    nose.  He gets a feeling in his nose but it
    comes out through the hole in his stoma.
    This man told you there are times when he is
    sleeping in bed that he gets this congestion
    and the phlegm actually goes to the ceiling.
    And that's disgusting.  But that's what he
    has to live with.
          And that's his pain and suffering.
    This is a man who lost the ability to speak
    after he had this surgery.  And he took it
    upon himself to learn how to do it.  And how
    did he learn how to speak?  He would pray at
    nighttime.  And he would say words when he
    would try and belch.  And he would say
    prayers and try and speak.  And eventually he did learn on his own to speak.
          And he said the first time he talked
    was when a friend was driving and said he
    didn't know whether to turn left or right
    and Jose said, turn left.  And the friend
    said, Oh my God.
          Why did he say that?  Because this was
    a jovial guy.  This was a guy who liked to
    talk, who liked to socialize, who was the
    life of the party.  And he had learned to
    talk again on his own.
          But he suffered a lot of pain.  He
    continues to suffer a lot of pain.  And he
    continues to be embarrassed that he lives
    this way.
          And finally, you've seen that this man
    has been diagnosed with severe depression
    issues.  You got to see him on the stand,
    how he was able to register questions being
    asked and to answer questions.
          And there's a pile of records that
    talk about his depression.  And the defense
    would suggest, Well, he's had all these
    other stressors in his life that have really
    caused the depression.  It's not the cancer. No.  It's these other things, like the
    loss of his mother.  Of course that's a
    stressor.  You're going to grieve.  Other
    issues involving the relationship with his
    sister.  That again, another example of half
    truths.
          What do I mean by that?  This is what
    I mean:  They're going to tell you that
    after his cancer diagnosis he had these
    various stressors in the medical record:
    His relationships with his partners, his
    mother's death, his falling out with his
    sister over the inheritance from his
    mother's death, the fact that he was
    assaulted.
          And there's others.  And yet if you
    look at the first record when he walked into
    this behavioral science place to see a
    psychiatrist, what was he there for?
    Because of his cancer that he had suffered
    through, because of his stoma and this hole.
    And that's what Dr. Seely said was the cause
    of his major depressive disorder.
          And no one has disputed that.
          And you know what else the defense didn't bring up that I did?  And that was
    the fact that Jose Vila went through a lot
    of stressors before he ever developed
    cancer.
          And what types of stressors did he go
    through before he developed cancer?  He
    moved three times to different countries
    while he was still in school as a kid.
    That's enough to be traumatic for a child.
          His father and brother could not join
    the family when they moved to Spain.  That's
    enough to be traumatic for a kid.
          His father had two strokes.  That's
    enough to be traumatic to a kid.
          His father had prostate cancer.
    That's enough to be traumatic to a kid.
          His own brother died.  That's enough
    to be traumatic for a kid.
          He had to leave old friends when he
    would move and make new friends after
    moving.  That's enough to be traumatic for a
    kid.
          He had to leave his old schools and go
    to new schools after being uprooted in order
    to move.  That's enough to be traumatic for a kid.
          And yet, not one shred of evidence
    that, despite these stressors, he was ever
    diagnosed with any depression issues.
          And what does that mean?  If he wasn't
    depressed before his cancer with all of
    these stressors and he was diagnosed after
    his cancer when he had the ability to go to
    a doctor, it means one thing:  The
    depression is a result of his cancer and his
    suffering even up till today.
          And so that's another example, ladies
    and gentlemen, of a half truth.
          Well, so how do you quantify an amount
    of damages?  I can't write on a piece of
    paper line by line because we're dealing
    with pain and suffering.  We're dealing with
    those issues.  You have to quantify that.
          I could suggest something and I will
    suggest something.  You might suggest
    something otherwise.  You might think my
    suggestion is good.  You might not.
          But I'm going to tell it to you
    anyway, because it's only a suggestion.
    What we do in our everyday lives is based on one thing:  Time.  Units of time.  That's
    why we all wear watches.  We're all driven
    by time.
          We make sure to get our seven or eight
    hours of sleep.  We make sure to do our
    eight hours on the job.  People go to school
    and courses are divvied up into hours, a
    three-hour class, a four-hour class.  A
    15-minute quarter in a football game.  A
    20-minute period in a hockey game.
    Everything we do is guided by time.
          People go to work every day.  They get
    paid by the hour, some more than others.
    Athletes get paid zillions of dollars to
    perform their job.
          They like their job.  They entertain
    the public.  They get done with their job,
    they rest up for the next game which could
    be the next day depending upon the sport.
    Or the next week.  They do it because they
    want to.  They do it because they are good
    at it.
          Teachers, they help kids.  They are
    trained.  They go to school to be able to
    learn how to do their job.  They do their job.  They go and teach these kids, and they
    give their time.  They come home after work.
    That's what they do.
          They get paid.  They may get paid $20,
    $30 an hour, but they do their job and like
    doing their job.  And then they get time off
    for the summer before they go back to school
    again.
          Expert witnesses do their job.  They
    come into the courtroom, they testify.  They
    do what they have to do.  They go out and
    they wait for the next job.  That's what
    they do.
          Lawyers do their job.  Lawyers get
    paid.  Lots of them get paid handsomely.
    They get trained.  They like their job.
    They do their job, they want to do their
    jobs well.
          What does it all mean?  It means that
    Philip Morris gave Jose Vila a job.  Philip
    Morris gave Jose Vila a job, and his job was
    to suffer as a result of losing his larynx.
    That was the job they gave him.
          Now, this was not a job that he was
    trained for.  This was not a job he asked for.  This was not a job he applied for.
    This was not a job he or anyone in the
    universe would want.  This was not a job
    that has any retirement.
          This is a full-time, 24-hour a day job
    that never goes away until you die.  That's
    the type of job that Philip Morris gave Jose
    Vila.
          The question then becomes:  How much
    is that worth?  What is an hourly rate for a
    job such as that, that no one on the face of
    the earth would want?
          So I have a suggestion.  I have a
    range.  A low range, a medium range and a
    high range.
          MR. McCARTER:  I'm going to object,
    Your Honor.  That's an improper basis for
    calculating damages.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. KAISER:  You can consider it any
    way you want, but this is how it's divided.
    This is a man who has suffered for 20 years.
    And if you take the low range and assign the
    rate of $75 an hour for his suffering for
    24 hours a day for the number of days that encompass 20 years, you arrive at that
    figure:  $13,140,000.
          If you take the medium range at $100
    an hour, 24 hours times the same number of
    days for 20 years, you arrive at
    $17,520,000.
          If you go to the high range, $125 an
    hour for his suffering, for his
    disfigurement, for his anguish, at 24 hours
    for the same numbers of days, you arrive at
    $21,900 (sic).
          So there's a low range, there's a mid
    range, there's a high range.  You might
    accept that suggestion; you might want to
    calculate it as ever you want to do it.
          Now, there are future damages.  He's
    healthy now; he doesn't have cancer.  But
    he'll suffer every day because he still has
    this hole.  That's up to you to decide,
    whether you want to calculate it the same
    way.  However you want to do it.  I stopped
    with today, 20 years.
          The next question that you're asked:
    Is under the circumstances of this case
    state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages
    are warranted against Philip Morris.
          Compensatory damages deal with what
    this man, Jose Vila, has gone through.
          Punitive damages deal with the conduct
    that Philip Morris only, in the conduct of
    what they did in order to deter others, and
    to punish them.  Philip Morris.
          So the eye is on Philip Morris when
    you consider punitive damages and whether
    we're entitled to punitive damages.  And by
    way of a board there are some examples of
    why we are entitled to punish Philip Morris
    for their actions.
          And this is repetitive in a way.  But
    Number 1:  They knew by the early '50s that
    cigarettes caused cancer, and they failed to
    tell the public.  They failed to tell the
    public.
          Now, why is that?  That's not acting
    by accident.  That's intentional.  They made
    the choice.  Do you remember, Dr. Proctor
    testified.
          When they decided to form this
    agreement, this conspiracy at the Plaza Hotel in December 14 of 1953, it wasn't
    because of safety and health concerns.  It
    wasn't for that at all.  It was because the
    bottom dollar, their sale prices, their
    stock prices were falling.  That's why they
    decided to do that.
          So they knew by the early '50s that
    cigarettes caused cancer.  And they had a
    choice:  Do we come clean with the public
    and are we honest with them, or do we
    conceal that?
          We know what they did.  They concealed
    it.
          They knew by the early '50s that
    nicotine was addictive.  They failed to tell
    the public.  That's not by accident.  That
    was intended.  We know it was intended
    because you heard Dr. Proctor's testimony.
          They knew despite knowledge of the
    health risks and addictive nature of
    cigarettes, they continued to advertise and
    glorify and normalize cigarettes.
          So in all these cigarette ads that
    they showed billions of people -- we know
    they reached billions, because remember the FTC report from 1967 that Dr. Proctor was
    asked questions about.  And he read to you
    some of those figures.  That billions of
    people saw their ads, including Jose Vila.
          So despite their knowledge of the
    health risks they continued to glorify, to
    normalize, to show people in movies smoking
    cigarettes.  And this is what they did by
    their advertisements on billboards, on TV,
    in newspapers, in magazines, on public
    transportation, skywriting.
          Anywhere you could imagine they
    continued to advertise without one time
    saying, "These will kill you.  These are
    going to addict you."
          Remember, we showed you a document in
    response to the 1964 Surgeon General's
    report.  And a representative, an executive
    from Philip Morris, what do they want to do?
    They wanted a psychological crutch and
    reassurance to keep people smoking.
          They wanted to come up with a crutch
    that people wouldn't stop.  That was not by
    accident.  That was intentional.
          When this conspiracy was formed it was formed because of concerns over losing money
    from the decrease in cigarette sales.  I
    have already told you that.
          They targeted youth.  See, this is all
    examples of reprehensible conduct for which
    they should be punished.  They targeted
    young people.  They targeted kids.  They
    wanted kids to start out young.
          Remember, Dr. Seely said, "Young kids,
    their brains are not yet fully developed.
    Young kids, they are more susceptible to
    getting addicted.  Young kids, they are more
    susceptible to having trouble stopping
    smoking."
          That's what these defendants were
    doing.  Philip Morris was targeting these
    kids.  For that they should be punished.
          These kids that don't have the
    judgment skills to be able to decide one way
    or the other rationally what to do.  And
    they were targeting them.  They wanted them
    to smoke.
          And he bit hook, line, and sinker into
    what they wanted him to do.  For that they
    should be punished. 50 years of lying to the public about
    the health risks of smoking.  50 years, not
    a day.  50 years they went on this campaign
    to make sure that people kept smoking their
    cigarettes.  And all the time that they were
    denying this Jose Vila still saw their
    statements by way of their advertising.  He
    still saw that.
          You heard the astronomical number of
    deaths caused by cancer and other diseases
    because of smoking.  The tobacco companies,
    Philip Morris, knew people were dying.  They
    continued to keep that from the public.
          They knew people were dying.  They
    continued to try and create doubt so that
    people would not quit and continue smoking
    their cigarettes.  That's intentional.  That
    is reprehensible.  For that they should be
    published.
          As Dr. Proctor said, this was one of
    those world's most deadly conspiracies.  For
    that, ladies and gentlemen, to deter future
    conduct and to punish, Philip Morris should
    be punished and you should find, Yes, you
    are entitled to punitive damages. I'm going to sit down now.  But I just
    ask that you consider the testimony in this
    case you've heard, the evidence in this case
    you've heard, and compensate Jose Vila for
    his loss.  Punish Philip Morris for their
    intentional acts and reprehensible conduct.
          Thank you.


MR. KAISER:  What I want to do is to
respond but in reverse order to what
Mr. McCarter talked to you about.  And the
first thing is talk about absurdity.  The fact
that Mr. Vila somehow has a hundred percent
responsibility, that's the absurdity.  And why
is that?  Because, as Dr. Proctor said, they,
Philip Morris, the most deadly conspiracy --
and they were a part of it -- in the world,
that those folks, Philip Morris, lied to the
public for 50 years; and for that, they don't
take any responsibility.  It's all on Mr. Vila.
That's what is absurd about that argument.
The burden of proof.  There's no magical
concept of this burden of proof.  The burden of
proof that we have in this case is:  Are we
more likely right than wrong?  Simple.  By the 2875
greater weight of the evidence, those scales of
justice, just a little bit past 50 percent,
that's all it is.  It is not beyond reasonable
doubt, all doubt, shadow of a doubt; it is a
greater weight of the evidence.  A low standard
of proof.
Now, I just want to talk about some other
things that Mr. McCarter raised.  This idea
that Carmen Vila said that her cousin was not
depressed.  Carmen Vila will tell you, she's
not an expert.  She said she wasn't an expert.
We have had expert witness testimony tell you
that Mr. Vila suffered from depression, he was
diagnosed with depression, not just by Dr.
Seely, but if you look at those mental health
records, you will see several instances when he
was diagnosed with major depressive disorder.
That's a non-issue.
The fact that Dr. Seely testified that the
type of depression Mr. Vila has.  He talked in
terms of he's not comfortable in social
situations, he's not comfortable with
strangers.  He didn't say he was inside living
under a bed.
And he was specifically asked:  "How would 2876
he react?  How would he be able to go to an
airport?  Would he be able to go to an airport
and get his ticket and go on an airplane?"  He
would be able to do all of those things.  And
remember when I talked to Dr. Seely about, how
about his expectation of going to visit his
family?  And he said that was therapeutic for
him.  That was something that would have helped
him.  So that, ladies and gentlemen, is a
non-issue.
This idea that Mr. Vila didn't comply, he
did not follow up with his treatment.  Well, I
submit to you that if instead of lying to the
public for 50 years, when Philip Morris first
knew that their product could kill, they should
have told people, like Jose Vila, at the time
when he was a kid, and maybe he wouldn't have
started, and then we wouldn't be up here
talking about compliance or not complying.
So when they want you to put 100 percent
of responsibility on Jose Vila because he
couldn't comply, you need to go back and say,
wait a minute, you didn't tell him when you
first knew the stuff was bad, and maybe he
wouldn't have smoked; and like Jose said on the 2877
stand, if he knew, he wouldn't have smoked.
That's what he said.
They had this quote, Mr. McCarter put this
quote on the screen about the fact that
Mr. Vila's compliance or his failure to comply
was the whole basis of his depression, and that
long question, what was the response by
Mr. Vila?  "I calculate, yes."
What does that mean?  Did he understand
the question?  Does he know what comply or not
comply means?
And, finally, if you look at all of these
psychiatric records -- and I pointed this out
during the trial.  If you look at all of those
records, you will not see one entry in the
hundreds of times that Mr. Vila went for
psychiatric treatment where he said:  "I really
feel depressed because I didn't comply with my
follow-up care."  That's nowhere to be found.
That is a red herring.  That is a non-issue.
And, again, what would have happened if
Mr. Vila didn't comply?  Does that mean the
cancer just wouldn't have come back?  The
cancer was coming back whether he complied or
not.  That's just the fact of cancer.  It came 2878
back.  And not because Mr. Vila didn't comply,
it's not the cancer saying, "Well, Mr. Vila
didn't comply, I'm going to come back."  That's
ridiculous.  He got cancer.
Now, let me ask you this:  Do you think
for a minute when the radiation oncologist had
treated him with radiation therapy for 33
treatments over 50 days, that he would just
decide at some arbitrary point, okay, we're
going to end this treatment, you can go home
now and you're fine?  Or maybe, just maybe,
they would have been able to quit the treatment
on the 33rd day because they checked him out
and said, you know what, there's no more tumor,
you're fine.
Why on earth would a physician, an
oncologist, tell him:  Go on your merry way,
we've just decided there's no more treatment
left?  If there was any hint of a tumor in his
larynx, they would have zapped him with more
radiation, don't you think?
So on that medical record that you see
from Dr. Pomper, after his radiation ended,
that's an examination, and there's nothing in
that report that says, you know what, there's a 2879
question here, maybe you need a biopsy.  
And what Mr. McCarter stayed away from
this time, that he broached during the trial,
was the fact that there was none of this travel
around the world in 1994 after his radiation
treatment ended.  He's retreated from that
point.  Why?  Because perhaps maybe the man was
in compliance.  And those blood tests, I'm not
suggesting that they withdrew blood to see if
he had cancer.  What I'm saying is, that's two
more examples of the man going to a doctor in
September of 1994, instead of traveling.
I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, if
you're going to think about this compliance
issue and put fault on Jose Vila for somehow
not complying, think in terms of why he was in
that situation with cancer to begin with.  It's
because of Philip Morris' conduct in the '50s
when they first knew that their cigarettes they
wanted to sell to kids could kill them.
This idea of reliance that somehow
Mr. Vila had to actually see a particular
statement and rely on it is ridiculous, because
this is a concealment case, not a
misrepresentation case.  Mr. Vila couldn't see 2880
a statement that he didn't know about and rely
on it; and that's why in the instructions that
Mr. McCarter didn't read to you, the Judge told
you:  Jose Vila need not present direct
evidence that Jose Vila relied on a statement
put out by the tobacco companies omitting
scientific findings on the harmful effects of
smoking in order to find that Jose Vila relied
on any statement that concealed or omitted
material facts.  You may infer Jose Vila's
reliance from the evidence.
That's an inference.  Now, somehow there's
evidence in this record that Mr. Vila didn't
hear statements in the advertisements?
Remember with Dr. Proctor's testimony, we
played commercials, and one of them was the
Marlboro man commercial, and there are words in
those Marlboro man commercials, and there are
statements in those Marlboro man commercials,
and Jose Vila testified that he heard those
commercials, and that's what he relied on.
So, indeed, yes, advertising is a
statement.  Advertising you heard is a powerful
statement.  Advertising in this case,
especially from Philip Morris, reached 2881
billions, with a "B," of people.
And regardless of whether Mr. Vila heard
or relied on any other statements in their
documents or in their public statements that
they aired to the public, that's of no moment,
because what he relied on was their most
important statement, and that was their
advertising to sell their products.
Now, you heard this reference that when
Mr. Vila was smoking in Spain, cigarettes were
the most expensive cigarettes on the market in
Spain.  Well, Mr. Vila told you, he was getting
money, allowance from his family that allowed
him to smoke those cigarettes.  And then when
he got a job at the bank, he was able to spend
that money on the cigarettes.  You heard,
"Alas, but Marlboro cigarettes were just not
popular at all; how on earth would he have seen
advertisements for those cigarettes?"  Well, in
order for cigarettes to get popular, don't you
think you have to advertise for them first?
Maybe that's why he saw so many advertisements,
because they weren't yet popular, but they
eventually became popular, they became
worldwide popular. 2882
When Mr. McCarter was touching on this
idea of addiction, he said:  Clinically
significant impairment.  And he said that Dr.
Ticknor, although he found four criteria,
didn't find clinically significant impairment.
And you will remember, when I read from
the book, from the DSM-5, you saw that
clinically significant impairment is built
right into the criteria.  Remember that
language:  "A problematic pattern of tobacco
use leading to clinically significant
impairment or distress as manifested by at
least two of the following."  And then there's
the criteria.  The substantial, the -- "The
significant impairment is built into that
criteria," so if you meet the criteria, you
have met the clinically significant impairment.
And I showed him other disorders.
Caffeine-related disorder, for example, where
clinically significant impairment was not --
THE CLERK:  You have five more minutes.
MR. KAISER:  How much?
THE CLERK:  Five minutes.
MR. KAISER:  -- was not built in the
clinically significant impairment was a totally 2883
separate component.  So that, also, is a
non-issue.
On the idea of the laryngeal cancer.  All
of these slides, all of this idea of koilocytes
is nothing but a red herring.  It is an issue
they want you to chase.  Because I harken back
again to Dr. Gomez.  She said:  "You don't
really care about koilocytes with this
laryngeal cancer.  When you see the cancer and
it's keratinizing and it's well-differentiated,
they don't care if there's a koilocyte or not,
because it is not being driven by an
infection."  That's what she said; that's what
the study said that I've read twice now.  That
is a non-issue.
And you know what else?  Their good Dr.
Felix, he came in here and brought a sample of
a tumor that he said, "Here you go, this has
koilocytes," and it was from the cervix.  From
the cervix.  Why didn't he bring in a tumor
from the larynx?  If this man has done head and
neck cancers before, as a pathologist, why
didn't he bring in a laryngeal cancer to show
us?  Because he deals in gynecological
pathology.  That, ladies and gentlemen, also is 2884
a non-issue in this case.
And remember the good Dr. Felix when I
asked him.  Oh, I spoke on behalf of Merck for
five or six times until I showed him that
document.  Over the years he was speaking 25,
35 times beholden to the pharmaceutical
companies.  And what was he doing?  He was
dispensing that vaccine to his patients,
getting paid hundreds of thousands of dollars,
and he's beholden to them.
And also, with respect to this koilocytes,
as he even said himself, you rarely see them,
you rarely see them, but when you do, it's
definitive.  Well, he's seen them twice in
these Engle cases where he's testified.  He's
two for two.  He saw them in that Hexner case
we talked about, and he says he saw them here.
Again, the koilocytes mean nothing.  We've
talked enough, you've been burdened enough.  I
thank you for your time, ladies and gentlemen,
and I just ask you to consider all of the
evidence and all of the testimony in this case
and compensate Jose Vila.
Thank you very much.
