MR. GUSTAFSON: If it please the Court.
Afternoon.
You've heard all this evidence. You've probably heard enough from lawyers, and so I'm going to get right to this. I know y'all want to get right to deliberations. I'm going to be brief.
By your verdict you've decided that punitive damages may need to be imposed against R.J. Reynolds, and that's what this proceeding was about today.
And you've already rendered a compensatory damages verdict for Mr. Ward's loss, and that was to measure his loss.
Today what we're asking you to do is to punish R.J. Reynolds for what they did because all morning long for two hours with Dr. Figlar, their corporate representative on the stand, they said not a word about the past, not a word, not a thing, except they tried to distance themselves from three of the scientists who wrote the papers that you
saw during evidence.
And the truth came out on the cross-examination, that those people enjoyed long careers with R.J. Reynolds and retired; probably had a nice big party when they left.
They tried to distance themselves, but the truth was R.J. Reynolds never distanced themselves from the scientists. They retired from R.J. Reynolds. They moved up in the company, and they retired. And you didn't hear a thing.
And you heard you heard Dr. Figlar just now. They don't accept responsibility for what they did. They didn't talk about the past when Mr. Weaver put him on. We asked him about the past. They don't agree that their conduct was what you saw. They don't take responsibility.
There has to be a reckoning. There has to be a reckoning. That's what this --That's what we're asking you to do today.
What are you punishing for? The jury instruction you're going to get says, if you decide to award punitive damages, the award should be no greater than the amount you find
necessary to punish R.J. Reynolds for the harm caused by the death of Mattie Ward and to deter R.J. Reynolds and others similarly situated from engaging in that kind of misconduct in the future.
That's what this is for. This isn't about other people who got hurt. This is about Don Ward and Mattie Ward, and this is about punishing R.J. Reynolds for what they did to her and Don Ward.
You heard nothing from them today about that. They said Mattie Ward's name one time. They spent two and a half weeks saying how's this got anything to do with Mattie Ward.
And we proved to you how it did have something to do with Mattie Ward. It had everything to do with Mattie Ward.
And when they got to the part of the case where it really is about Mattie Ward, they said her name one time. And they refuse to take responsibility.
This is a case of punishment for what they did. So when you consider the amount of punishment to impose on R.J. Reynolds for the reprehensibility, the wrongfulness of their
conduct, you have to impose an amount that's meaningful.
What does that mean? What's a meaningful amount? Think about what they did. Think about everything that we showed you here and everything they didn't, whether they're even willing to take responsibility for what they did, whether they're even willing to be held accountable.
They talked for two and a half weeks about personal responsibility. That's the new R.J. Reynolds, personal responsibility.
Just talk about personal responsibility, take none of your own. Take none of your own. That's R.J. Reynolds. Even now. Just now he wouldn't accept responsibility for what the company did.
They were never before punished for anything having to do with Don Ward and Mattie Ward. And you are the only jury who's ever going to decide this. No other jury's ever going to decide this question ever again. This is Don Ward's one case for his one wife, and you are the one jury who's going to decide this issue for all of us.
What are you supposed to consider? You're supposed to consider, in deciding the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment against R.J. Reynolds and as a deterrent to others, and you're supposed to consider the nature, extent and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances, and then you're supposed to consider the financial resources of the defendant.
Well, you heard that R.J. Reynolds, despite telling you they make -- they profit 40 cents a pack per pack of cigarettes, that their net profit in the last reported year was $1,021,000,000.
And if you divide that up by 365 days in a year, because you know that smokers are smoking on Saturday and Sundays, too... If you divide that up by 365 days in a year, it is $2.8 million every single day.
Now R.J. Reynolds as a corporation --You've got the instruction before. They enjoy corporate status as a person. They are considered a person in the eyes of the law, just like any one of us coming in this
courtroom.
And like all the rest of us people, R.J. Reynolds, along with those rights they have as a corporation, come responsibilities. All of us have rights, and all of us have responsibilities. They go hand in hand with those rights, and that has to be respected.
So as a person, as a person, R.J.
Reynolds is the same person today that they were back in the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s.
They don't get to come in here and say, oh, that's a different R.J. Reynolds. They are the same person that did all of those things for all of those years who still won't accept responsibility. Even now. Even now.
You are the only ones. You are the only ones who can answer this question. So, if you think about it like this, how do we punish?
In criminal cases, if this were a criminal case and there was a person who was on trial -- not a corporation but a person on trial. In a criminal case, the jury, if they find the defendant guilty and they determine
that, depending on the crime, there are different kinds of punishments. You can take away liberty. You can take away rights. You can imprison people. But this isn't a criminal trial. It's a civil case.
And R.J. Reynolds might be a person, but you can't put -- If this was a criminal case, you couldn't put R.J. Reynolds in prison.
They don't go to jail, like the rest of us do. This is a civil case.
So what they did, what R.J. Reynolds did, they did for money. That is abundantly clear. So money is how you punish them. That's what they cared about. That's how you punish them.
Anybody who has raised children knows exactly how punishment works. You give your children rights. They mess up. They have responsibilities. You enforce that. That's how people learn. That's how -- That's how people learn. R.J. Reynolds cared about money, and it's what they care about now, is money.
They brought you Dr. Figlar. And he told you that they put documents on a Web
site. The truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth. Yeah, we put those documents on a Web site.
You found out the truth. They put documents on the Web site as a result of lawsuits from various state governments. That's when they put that stuff up there.
He told you that the FDA has authority to regulate all those things ever since 2009. This case is about Mattie Ward.
Ask yourselves -- Ask yourselves what the FDA's authority in 2009 has to do with Mattie Ward who died in 2005, and then you find out the truth.
The FDA has the authority, the authority to regulate things; but when they exercise that authority, R.J. Reynolds exercises its rights as a person to bring a lawsuit against the FDA to keep the FDA from doing the very thing that they just got done telling you the FDA has the authority to do.
Ask yourselves -- Ask yourselves if that's consistent with taking responsibility, if that's -- if that's consistent with having learned your lessen and changing the way
you're going to be. No different. No different.
Would you tolerate that? Would you tolerate saying, oh, I've changed my ways?
If it was a person who was on trial here who had done the things that R.J. Reynolds had done, if all of those people died, and they made all that money, and they congratulated themselves in written documents like we showed you in this trial, and then they show up and say, well, I'm different now. Let me keep the money. But I'm different now, and I don't want to be held accountable for what I did. Nobody would tolerate that.
Don't pay attention just to what they say. I told you on the very first day of this trial, it's not just what they say.
It's what they actually do.
You remember this research planning memo by Dr. Teague in 1973 about --
MR. BARINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
It's not relevant to this phase.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: - about all these brands of cigarettes for the youth market.
THE COURT: Your ten-minute cue, Mr. Gustafson.
MR. GUSTAFSON: I'm sorry?
THE COURT: Your ten-minute cue.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Thank you.
And that they shouldn't influence non-smokers to start smoking. Rather, they should simply recognize that many or most of the 21 and under group will inevitably become smokers, and offer them an opportunity to use our brands. And we need new brands designed to be particularly attractive to the young smoker.
And then you go to how they're going to go about doing that. The name chosen should have a double meaning, one desirable connotation in straight language and another in the jargon of youth.
And then they talk about all of the things that it should have. It should require new technology and appear to be - to control irritancy and related mouth-feel factors to produce a bland smoke; and number two, the creation of some useful demonstrable novelty in the filter or mouthpiece package
or other aspect of the product system.
We just put a pack of cigarettes into evidence today you can buy at any store in Escambia County. It's called Camel Crush.
It's got the name that it's talking about here. It's a double entendre for youth.
Kids crushing on people.
Camel Crush. It's got a special filter on it. You can look on the box. I encourage you to take one of those cigarettes out of that box back in the jury room. Click the filter. Smell it. It gives you a lightly mentholated flavor, just like Dr. Teague said in this memo 30 years ago.
They ain't no different. They are no different. You saw the candy cigarettes.
What did Dr. Figlar tell you? Toffee is not candy. Ask yourselves... Ask yourselves if they can be believed.
What we're going to ask you to do...
You're going to have one question on the verdict form, one question: How much.
They make $2.8 million a day. That's 160-something thousand dollars an hour. They've made $300,000 since we've been here
this morning. They made $50 million in profit since we've been in this trial.
I'm going to ask you to impose punitive damages on R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for four and a half million dollars. That's a day and a half of profit. That's a day and a half of profit. Ain't going to bankrupt anybody. You're going to send them a message.
He told you this morning that the board of directors from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company will be made aware of the jury verdict in this case. It will be reported.
If you put a zero on this fine today, if you don't impose a real, meaningful reckoning for what they did, they're going to be mighty pleased.
Four and a half million dollars is reasonable, and it bears a relationship to the amount of damages you already awarded in this case. That's the standard. That's the standard. And that's what we're asking you to award.
Thank you.



MR. GUSTAFSON: If it please the Court.
Only in a room full of lawyers could the language of the jury instruction cause so much controversy.
Mr. Baringer only talked to you about, we don't need to be deterred, we don't need to be deterred. We're different today.
The jury instruction that you're going to get, two of the elements for punishing, awarding punitive damages, imposing punitive damages on R.J. Reynolds, has to do with punishing them for past conduct, whether the wrongful conduct was motivated solely by unreasonable financial again.
There is no evidence otherwise in this case. That's all they cared about was financial again.
And the second one is whether the unreasonably dangerous nature of the product, together with the high likelihood of injury resulting from the conduct, was actually known by the managing agents, directors, officers, or other persons responsible for making the policy decisions at R.J. Reynolds. Well, you know now that they knew that. You learned that in this trial.
R.J. Reynolds doesn't want to talk about punishing them for the things that they did. They don't want to be punished for killing
million, that that would be the amount of money that would make him whole for the loss of his wife.
And again, we don't need to get into whether money is appropriate, but that's the only mechanism we have.
You found Reynolds to be 30 percent responsible, so essentially, when you put a number on it, which, for what -- You know, that's what we have to work with.
But when you put a number on it, you said essentially Reynolds caused $300,000 of that million dollars in harm.
Let me ask you to think about the next part. It has to bear a reasonable relationship to that amount of money that you awarded in compensatory damages. And this is how much more you will give Mr. Ward, not to compensate him for his wife, but to punish and deter Reynolds.
If you give him half of that, if you add on 50 percent of what you've already given, that's another $150,000. If you want to double the amount that you already gave him, that would be an award of $300,000 in
punitive damages.
And if you wanted to double that, if you wanted to make it two times what you've already given him, you would award another $600,000.
I think that's a reasonable range, and it gives you the opportunity to express yourself within the bounds of what is reasonable, in terms of the amount of money.
$4.5 million is -- It's... I don't know.
10,12,15	times what you awarded Mr. Ward in compensatory damages for Reynolds' conduct.
These aren't easy issues. Today I wanted to talk to you and give you a chance to see someone from R.J. Reynolds because this case is very important to them. They do take what you do here seriously, and they --
THE COURT: Two minutes, Mr. Baringer.
MR. BARINGER: They came here to tell you not only what they're doing today and how I think a lot of the conduct that you see addresses the very issues that were the subject of your verdict from Phase I.
They came here because they respect that, and they came here because they want
you to know that they have changed the way they do business. And in 2012 it is a different company, in terms of its conduct than what happened previously.
I'd ask you to consider whether you really think they still need to be deterred.
And if you do, we'll respect that as well.
But I ask you to keep in consideration that you are punishing and deterring them based on the amount of harm that they caused to Mrs. Ward, and that the law requires that your award be reasonable in terms of what you've already done. And I think that under that analysis, somewhere between 150 and $600,000 is reasonable.
Once again and for the last time, thank you all very much for your service. You've been diligent. You've been dedicated. And you've made our system work, and we are very grateful. Thankyou.
THE COURT: Rebuttal.
MR. GUSTAFSON: If it please the Court.
Only in a room full of lawyers could the language of the jury instruction cause so much controversy.
Mr. Baringer only talked to you about, we don't need to be deterred, we don't need to be deterred. We're different today.
The jury instruction that you're going to get, two of the elements for punishing, awarding punitive damages, imposing punitive damages on R.J. Reynolds, has to do with punishing them for past conduct, whether the wrongful conduct was motivated solely by unreasonable financial again.
There is no evidence otherwise in this case. That's all they cared about was financial again.
And the second one is whether the unreasonably dangerous nature of the product, together with the high likelihood of injury resulting from the conduct, was actually known by the managing agents, directors, officers, or other persons responsible for making the policy decisions at R.J. Reynolds. Well, you know now that they knew that. You learned that in this trial.
R.J. Reynolds doesn't want to talk about punishing them for the things that they did. They don't want to be punished for killing
Don Ward's wife.
They want to tell you, we don't need to be deterred because we're different now. And then you saw the candy-flavored cigarettes.
And you saw Camel number nine, light and luscious.
R.J. Reynolds net worth is seven and a half billion dollars. R.J. Reynolds makes $2.8 million a day.
You evaluated, you determined that Mr. Ward's loss, the loss of his wife, the damages that he suffered, were a million dollars.
I'm asking you to — I'm asking you to award four and a half million dollars in punitive damages, to impose that as punishment on R.J. Reynolds for what they did.
Each one of those dollar signs on that sheet represents $20 million. Ten of those dollar signs on that sheet is $500 million.
What R.J. Reynolds, the company who wouldn't even say Mattie's name but one time this morning, in the case about Mattie Ward, what they're recommending you impose on them
as punishment is 150 to $600,000, which they made this morning.
Ask yourself - Ask yourself if that's punishment. Ask yourself if that serves the purpose of the jury instructions that you're going to have with you back there.
It's insulting for them to get up and say that. It's insulting for them to say that we're different now. The FDA is telling us what to do.
And they're filing lawsuits against the FDA because they say their constitutional rights were violated.
But they know people are going to die using their product. And they want to keep that going. The way they keep that going is candy-flavored cigarettes, filters, novelty filters which you have on a pack of cigarettes.
We've put into evidence over there Camel Crush. That's what they're after. They're no different today.
Four and a half million dollars is reasonable, and it bears a reasonable relationship to the harm they caused. And
we're asking you to impose that damage on them as punishment for what they have done. Thank you.
