MR. BARINGER: Thankyou.
May it please the Court. Mr. Ward, counsel. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to begin once again -- This is my last chance to thank you for being here, but I want you to know that R.J. Reynolds appreciates your service, Dr. Figlar appreciates your service. And I think probably had the best way for me to convince you that I'm sincere about that is to be very fast and very efficient, so that's what I'm going to try and do.
Yesterday you came back with a verdict against R.J. Reynolds, and you indicated that you thought that there was an entitlement to punitive damages.
And what I'm going to talk about today is going to be whether, having heard the new evidence, whether that makes any difference or not.
But the one thing I want you to understand is we respect your verdict. R.J. Reynolds respects the verdict. Dr. Figlar respects that verdict.
And you've heard a whole lot about he didn't take responsibility. And I'm not sure of how Dr. Figlar was supposed to express that, but it is the fact that we respect it, and we understand what you mean by it that's most important. And Mr. Gustafson said that Dr. Figlar didn't take responsibility because he didn't talk about the past.
Dr. Figlar didn't talk about the past and I'm not going to talk about the past because we respect -- You've already heard the evidence about the past. You heard two weeks of evidence about the past. And we're not here to second guess or talk about your decision and what you thought about that evidence at all.
That would be, you know — That would be arrogant for me to come in here and have a witness or for me to talk to you about what went on in the past because that's over. And we understand and we respect what you decided about it. So we didn't come here today to rehash what we talked about over the last two weeks.
What we came here to talk about today is
whether, under all of the circumstances, you decide that you still think that punitive damages are appropriate and how much that might be. That's why we came today, not to rehash what happened before.
And I want to address that because the law even presumes - And from what you saw in the instructions, the idea is in this phase you're going to hear evidence that you didn't hear in the last two weeks because as the instructions that you saw point out, you're not bound by having in the first phase said there was an entitlement to punitive damages.
It doesn't mean you have to.
You hear new evidence, and you make a decision again. And the decision may well be exactly the same if you still think it's warranted.
But we've given you new evidence. And the law provides that you can consider that new evidence and decide if today in January of 2012 -- not in 1953, not in 1975, but in 2012 do you still think it's necessary to punish and deter Reynolds.
And the way I want to do that and try
and do it quickly is, we don't know.
Obviously, I can't read your mind. I wasn't in the jury room. I don't know exactly what your concerns were and what led to the verdict.
But we can take some clues from it. And I think --1 may be wrong about some of them, but we have an idea from what the verdict was what concerns you had. And I want to address that in terms of what is Reynolds like today with respect to that concern.
I think you told us that... your verdict told us that you thought that unreasonably dangerous and defective cigarettes harmed Mrs. Ward.
Negligence, the failure to use reasonable care, harmed Mrs. Ward.
Concealment of material information harmed Mrs. Ward.
And then an agreement to conceal information harmed Mrs. Ward.
And based on the evidence, that's what we think that you meant. And so I want to talk to you about those issues in terms of where are we today.
One other thing that you told us, and that is that you allocated fault based on all of the evidence you heard what everyone did. And that you allocated half of the fault to Mrs. Ward and 30 percent of that fault to R.J. Reynolds. And I think that reflects your view of the relative contribution or how it played out over what happened and why.
So we've talked about the fact that you are going to decide in this phase whether or not you want to, as in number three, the instructions say you can in your discretion to decline -- decline to assess punitive damages. It certainly doesn't mean you have, to but that's why we're in a new phase.
I want to talk to you very quickly about who -- about punitive damages because a lot of people don't have a lot of experience with it.
And punitive damages, frankly, are treated differently in different places. But there are a few basic things. I want to talk about to whom they're awarded. And you know that. It's Mr. Ward.
What's the purpose? To punish and
deter.
What are the legal standards? It has to have a reasonable relationship to the amount of compensatory damages you awarded.
And finally, should you, based on what you've heard.
I want you to... I want to talk first of all about the fact that --1 think the easiest way is, I want to go straight to the idea of whether or not punitive damages are needed today, based on some of the concerns that you had.
Can you go to demonstrative 15, please.
So the question here: Are punitive damages needed to force Reynolds to be open and honest with the public about addiction and the health effects of smoking.
The trial that you heard, two of the big issues were that R.J. Reynolds concealed information about addiction and it concealed information about the health effects.
You heard Dr. Bums and you heard Dr. Cummings talk about that for a long time.
And we cross-examined. And you made your decision, based on how you saw that evidence.
But I want you to compare that, what was going on back then that you decided on, to what's going on today and see if it's the same. See if it is the same person today.
And I want to go through it very quickly and show you what -- This is what Reynolds is telling people now.
It's not saying the case hasn't been proven, that smoking causes lung cancer or there's any doubt.
And this is what you saw, and this is on the Web site for anyone to see at all. This is Reynolds' public statement:
Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths. And then it lists the diseases.
May I have the next one?
No tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risks. Quitting cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk for serious diseases.
The best course of action for tobacco users concerned about their health is to quit. Nicotine in tobacco products is addictive but is not considered a significant
threat to health.
And as you heard Dr. Figlar say, if someone goes to the Web site to find out what Reynolds says about this, it links it to the Surgeon General.
And, in fact, if we can pull up the next one, individuals should rely on the conclusion of the U.S. Surgeon General, the Centers for Disease Control, and other public health officials when making decisions regarding smoking.
And the thing I want you to remember is, this Web site has been up and has had this content long before we got here and started this trial.
It didn't take a punitive damages verdict in this case to tell Reynolds to --not to confuse the message anymore, not to interfere with the message of the public health community and the Surgeon General. This happened long before this trial started.
So the question is, do you need to punish and deter Reynolds by awarding punitive damages, to have them state the position that people should rely on the
public health community for their information about smoking and health?
That's the question. Do you need to do it now, based on where we are? And I think you can see that Reynolds has put this information out, and it's available to the public now.
And there's one other thing I want you to think about right here. And I want you to think back to the first phase of the trial with both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings for a minute.
Now, in that context, it was a little different. But remember Dr. Burns said, if the company's had admitted causation and admitted addiction back in the '50s instead of waiting until 1999, the world would have been different? And we talked about that.
But what Dr. Burns was talking about is that Reynolds made the - put out publicly in 1999 that smoking caused disease. It said in 1999, smoking is addictive.
And he -- And what did he tell you about what the effect was? Can I have demonstratives 24 and -- 24 first. This is
what Dr. Burns said in the other phase, that since Reynolds changed its position, there's an uninterrupted message about the health risks associated with smoking. There are effective tobacco control strategies in place. Cigarette smoking rates have continued to decline. And that's talking about what Reynolds did 12 years ago before we got here.
Let me see Dr. Cummings. Dr. Cummings also testified to you about this in the first phase. Since R.J. Reynolds changed its position on addiction and smoking and disease causation, smoking rates have declined, cigarette sales have declined, fewer people are taking up smoking, all since Reynolds changed its position 12 years ago.
Ladies and gentlemen, think about that in terms of what you need to do to punish and deter.
Long before this case was ever filed,
R.J. Reynolds changed the way it did business and made these positions available. And Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both told you what the results were of those changes.
Is there a need to deter R.J. Reynolds, to make them be open with the public about the health risks of smoking and addiction?
That actually started a long time ago, and you've seen where they are today. And today is the day that you punish or deter them, not in the 1950s, '60s or '70s. That happened, and that is over. The question is, what do you need to do today.
We talked about products. During --During the first part of the trial, you heard a lot about how they designed their products, whether they -- you know, what happens with nicotine, what happens with filters, that sort of thing.
What do you need -- What's the situation today? Are punitive damages needed to force R.J. Reynolds to try to and develop safer products today?
Next slide.
Dr. Figlar talked to you about what they do now in developing product. Every time they make a change, they go through this product stewardship. And Dr. Figlar explained to you what it does.
It's a very methodical scientific approach to evaluate what they do and make sure they don't make anything worse.
Next.
He talked to you about products, the low nitrosamines, the tobacco-specific nitrosamines, and what they've done to try and lower the levels of those.
They published that research. They told the public. They told their competitors, even. And they paid the farmers to try and change it.
You talk - You heard about Premier and Eclipse. You heard about Snus, and you've heard that R.J. Reynolds now is even working with this company that they bought in Sweden, Niconovum, to design and market nicotine replacement products for people that want to quit smoking.
They tried to make the innovative products. You saw about the various efforts they made. Does it take a punitive damages award today to encourage them to do that?
Dr. Figlar told you that over the last 30 years they've spent over a billion dollars
trying to develop safer products if they can.
Let's talk about FDA regulations for a minute.
Can I have slide 34?
You heard that in 2009 the FDA was given regulatory power over cigarettes in a whole variety of areas. And Dr. Figlar had talked about that.
And Mr. Gustafson suggested to you that the fact that R.J. Reynolds sued the FDA over the new warning -- graphic warning labels means this is all meaningless.
Well, it's not meaningless. It's federal law. And the FDA has the power to regulate and the power to deal with tar delivery, with nicotine delivery, with the use of additives.
They can mandate that you don't use levulinic acid anymore. You don't use ammonia anymore.
Now, what happened when Reynolds sued them? Reynolds alleged that they -- that the FDA -- what -- the amount of package space and the nature of the warnings violated their First Amendment rights.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BARINGER: It is.
They alleged that they violated their constitutional rights.
And as Dr. Figlar told you, it wasn't because it said nicotine is addictive.
Reynolds -- Reynolds has had that on its Web site forever.
It wasn't because there was any particular message. It was the way that the FDA was trying to do it.
The FDA still ultimately will be able to mandate what the warning is, but there are constitutional limits on how they go about that. It's not their authority. It's the execution in that particular way.
And do you really -- Would we really have to stand here and say, Reynolds will surrender its constitutional rights? Is that what it would take for you to decide they don't need to be punished and deterred and don't need a large judgment?
They have a right to do business. They have a right because we as a society have
continued to decide that cigarettes can be manufactured and sold. I told you about that in the '60s when that took place.
And in 2009, Congress revisited that very issue: Should we continue to sell cigarettes in this country. And they said yes once again.
In 2009, do you think Congress didn't know that they were dangerous and addictive? Of course they did.
But what was the solution? That they will continue to be sold. We will give the FDA the power to regulate, and the FDA will have the ability to make decisions.
The FDA can decide if Dr. Cummings is right. The FDA can decide whether cigarettes should be uninhalable. The FDA can decide whether it should be a very, very low level of nicotine.
Is there a need on the product side for you to deter and punish Reynolds today? What else would you want Reynolds to do? They're not only working on their products; they're going to try and develop smokeless products and get people to switch away from cigarettes
to the smokeless products because there's less risk.
And they're taking the next step that they're investing in and trying to develop a business to sell nicotine replacement so people can quit smoking cigarettes.
What do you punish and what do you want to deter? Today. In 2012.
Ladies and gentlemen, we talked about this whole idea of punitive damages in terms of what's reasonable.
Mr. Gustafson did some quick calculations and talked about how much profit R.J. Reynolds makes in a day and said that giving a couple days' worth of profit is reasonable.
But the law, as you saw from the instructions, says that the amount of punitive damages you award has to bear a reasonable relationship to the amount of compensatory damages that you gave to Mr. Ward based on the harm that Reynolds caused.
And I want you to take a look real quick at how this --1 think this works. In Phase I you gave Mr. Ward -- You awarded $1
million, that that would be the amount of money that would make him whole for the loss of his wife.
And again, we don't need to get into whether money is appropriate, but that's the only mechanism we have.
You found Reynolds to be 30 percent responsible, so essentially, when you put a number on it, which, for what -- You know, that's what we have to work with.
But when you put a number on it, you said essentially Reynolds caused $300,000 of that million dollars in harm.
Let me ask you to think about the next part. It has to bear a reasonable relationship to that amount of money that you awarded in compensatory damages. And this is how much more you will give Mr. Ward, not to compensate him for his wife, but to punish and deter Reynolds.
If you give him half of that, if you add on 50 percent of what you've already given, that's another $150,000. If you want to double the amount that you already gave him, that would be an award of $300,000 in
punitive damages.
And if you wanted to double that, if you wanted to make it two times what you've already given him, you would award another $600,000.
I think that's a reasonable range, and it gives you the opportunity to express yourself within the bounds of what is reasonable, in terms of the amount of money.
$4.5 million is -- It's... I don't know.
10,12,15	times what you awarded Mr. Ward in compensatory damages for Reynolds' conduct.
These aren't easy issues. Today I wanted to talk to you and give you a chance to see someone from R.J. Reynolds because this case is very important to them. They do take what you do here seriously, and they --
THE COURT: Two minutes, Mr. Baringer.
MR. BARINGER: They came here to tell you not only what they're doing today and how I think a lot of the conduct that you see addresses the very issues that were the subject of your verdict from Phase I.
They came here because they respect that, and they came here because they want
you to know that they have changed the way they do business. And in 2012 it is a different company, in terms of its conduct than what happened previously.
I'd ask you to consider whether you really think they still need to be deterred.
And if you do, we'll respect that as well.
But I ask you to keep in consideration that you are punishing and deterring them based on the amount of harm that they caused to Mrs. Ward, and that the law requires that your award be reasonable in terms of what you've already done. And I think that under that analysis, somewhere between 150 and $600,000 is reasonable.
Once again and for the last time, thank you all very much for your service. You've been diligent. You've been dedicated. And you've made our system work, and we are very grateful. Thank you.
