MR. FURR: Thank you, Your Honor. Please the court? Counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. We have been here for ten days almost. You have been very attentive, you've been very patient. We'll ask you to be attentive and patient one for time. If you would I would greatly appreciate it.
Today you're being asked to punish R.J.
Reynolds in the year 2014, almost 2015, for the harm that it caused Mr. Horner and Ms. Webb.
I would ask that you think for just a moment about how it is that the plaintiffs tried to prove their case to you. They brought you one witness in this phase to talk about what Reynolds did and how it harmed Mr. Horner and Mrs. Webb, and that was Dr. Cummings.
What did he do?
MR. SALES: Objection, Your Honor. Speaks to causation. I object.
MR. FURR: No, it doesn't, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. FURR: Dr. Cummings never mentioned Mr. Horner and Mrs. Webb. Never mentioned them. All he did was talk about internal company documents, mostly from a long, long time ago.
I want to ask you to do a couple things when you think about those documents. One is you -- I hope that you learned a lot on cross-examination about documents, because, you know, a lot of those documents are awful. I'm going to be the first to say it. A lot of them are awful, they contain wrong-minded, wrong-headed thoughts, they contain offensive thoughts. A lot of them are just plain stupid.
But there is more to the story than the
documents. There is the question of what actually happened. Do these statements in the documents represent what actually happened? That's one thing you might want to consider. And, secondly, what do the statements in those documents have to do with the issue that you're actually here to decide today?
And as you do that -- you've seen me up here limping around. I'm one of those guys that never got enough of it. So I'm going to ask you to keep your eye on the ball. Keep your eye on the ball, and don't just rely on what the documents say, but if you would, please, think through what actually happened and how what the documents say relate to the issue that you're here to decide.
And I'm going to show you just a couple examples. We didn't spend a lot of time on the documents in this case, and I'm not here to defend all those documents, but I'm going to show you a couple examples of how you have to keep your eye on the ball and about what you learned about what was being said in the document world versus what was actually happening in the real world.
And this began in opening statement in the first phase and has continued throughout this phase. I'm going to show you all just a few things and
remind you what you learned.
You were shown a document where Mr. Gustafson claimed that Reynolds' lawyers would not allow Dr. DiMarco to work on less mutagenic cigarettes because that would be an admission that cigarettes were dangerous. What you heard through cross-examination of Dr. Cummings and Dr. Figlar's testimony is that that's not actually what happened in the real world.
What happened in the real world was beginning in the early 1980's, not later as was just suggested to you, but beginning almost at the same time this document was written Dr. DiMarco ran, as Dr. Figlar called it, the go-to-the-moon program at R.J. Reynolds where they spent a billion dollars, hired all those scientists, got 40 patents for new scientific work they were doing, developed the Premiere cigarette -- and y'all know the significance of the Premiere cigarette, where it fits in that risk continuum -- published that 477 page volume, and Dr. Cummings told you that developing Premiere was actually the responsible thing for R.J. Reynolds to do.
That's what happened in the real world, no matter how some lawyer wrote that Dr. DiMarco can't be allowed to work on a less mutagenic cigarette.
That's not what happened in the real world.
Give you another example. This is one of Dr. Teague's documents. The document was used, as Dr. Cummings claimed, that Dr. Teague's conclusions were concealed from the public. This was that 1953 document where he did a literature review. He reviewed the human epidemiological studies, the animal studies, and the chemistry studies.
What you learned on cross-examination is there was nothing secret about the information Dr. Teague had. It was all publicly available. You were told he went to the library, did a literature search, and pulled documents that anybody with any training could have gone and done the same thing. All of the things that he said were based only on what someone could go to the library and pull from the scientific literature, and were not based in any way on any secret internal company documents.
You sort of have to keep your eye on the ball about what's going on.
This was just raised, so I'm going to address it. Dr. Cummings told you that Reynolds knew that cigarettes were addictive in 1963 because Mr. Yeaman wrote it in a document. Well, what was the real story behind that? Dr. Figlar explained, Mr. Yeaman
was a Brown & Williamson lawyer, not a scientist, he was offering his personal opinions, and you've seen zero evidence that that document was ever circulated to anyone.
Another example. Dr. Cummings showed you a document, and he showed you part of the document to prove -- in Dr. Cummings' words -- to prove that Reynolds added nicotine to cigarettes.
Dr. Figlar explained to you what's going on in the real world. He told you that Reynolds was not adding nicotine to cigarettes in 1959, that Reynolds never added nicotine to cigarettes, and that in fact in the 50's what Reynolds was doing was looking for ways to reduce the toxicants, the substances in cigarette smoke that caused disease.
Dr. Figlar sat right there, they had the opportunity to cross-examine him. Not a single question was asked of Dr. Figlar with respect to Reynolds adding nicotine to cigarettes.
Another subject, related subject that came up is you were shown a document by Dr. Cummings claiming that R.J. Reynolds was trying to engineer products that would increase the rate at which nicotine gets to the brain. Dr. Cummings told you that Reynolds was concealing from the public that
they were using ammoniated additives to increase the pH to accelerate the rate to which nicotine gets to the brain.
Well, on cross-examination you learned what was actually going on in the real world. First, Dr. Cummings admitted that in fact Reynolds used ammonia to decrease, decrease nicotine in burly tobacco, and then Dr. Figlar explained to you how it actually works.
First, ammonia occurs naturally in tobacco, but perhaps more importantly, adding ammonia to tobacco actually slows the rate at which nicotine gets to the brain. Remember, Dr. Figlar explained to you -and this was actually during his videotaped deposition as opposed to his live testimony -explained to you that when you increase the pH you increase the free nicotine and the product becomes more like a cigar, and all of the nicotine gets inhaled in the mouth instead -- excuse me -- gets absorbed in the mouth instead of being inhaled into the lungs, and that the absorption of nicotine through the mouth is actually slower, slower than the absorption through the lungs.
So again things that people write down in documents -- and there's been a lot of documents
over a long time. You have been told there are 84 million pages of documents. A lot of documents, a lot of stupid statements in them. It's a hard task for y'all to keep your eye on the ball. Document world versus real world is one of the things you might want to think about.
Next. During his direct examination Dr. Cummings showed you a document which he said demonstrated that Reynolds believed that smokers couldn't quit smoking and were concealing that.
Dr. Cummings showed you a document that said many, but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so.
We don't know why people write things like that. We do what Dr. Cummings told you about smoking and quitting in the real world. Dr.
Cummings has spent a lot of time working with people on cessation, stopping smoking, his hotline, and all the rest of the things he told you about. He knows a bit about this subject, and although I had to bring this out on cross-examination, what Dr. Cummings told you was that anyone who smokes can quit. Anyone who smokes can quit.
You've got wrong-headed thoughts that people put in documents, and then have you real world
facts.
Another example. During Dr. Cummings' examination you were shown the Flintstones' Winston commercial used to make you think that Reynolds was targeting children with that commercial with the Flintstones. It looks bad, a cigarette commercial and a cartoon. That's what it sounds like.
But just today Ms. Lehman published for you the advertisement from the newspaper that showed you that at the time that R.J. Reynolds was advertising Winstons on the Flintstones that the Flintstones was an adult cartoon shown in the evening from 8:30 until 9:30 p.m., and that the other advertisers were products like Alka Seltzer and One a Day vitamins, other adult products.
I want to spend a little time on something you've heard a fair amount about, and that's the CTR. There were documents that described the CTR as a shield. Dr. Cummings said it was a fraud. Today Mr. Gustafson used several times this phrase. He called it fake science. He said what the CTR was doing was fake science, and that it was science unrelated to smoking and health.
That's the type of stuff that could come out of the document world, but through our
cross-examination of Dr. Cummings you now know what the CTR was doing in the real world. And here is what you know. Dr. Cummings admitted all these things on cross-examination:
The sole function of the CTR was to fund scientific research;
That it selected the studies to fund through an advisory board that it had made up of esteemed scientists from outside the tobacco industry, scientists from Harvard, Stanford, Michigan, the National Cancer Institute;
That over time the CTR awarded almost a billion dollars of research money, most of it to universities.
And with respect to this issue about smoking and health, were they funding things that had to do with smoking and health? 6000 scientific studies were published based on the CTR-funded work, and 600 of them were cited in the Surgeon General's report.
These are the reports that by definition are devoted to smoking and health topics. Over 600 times the people putting together Surgeon General's reports turned to research funded by the CTR with tobacco company money, because the CTR didn't have any independent source of income. It was a group
that was funded by the tobacco companies. 600 times articles were published, the Surgeon General relied on them, and you were told that very high quality research was done, and that a number -- I think Dr. Cummings told you ten people went on later in their career to win Nobel Prizes which were funded by the CTR.
MR. SALES: Objection, Your Honor. That's not the evidence. There's no evidence of that.
MR. FURR: Yes, there is, Your Honor.
MR. SALES: The evidence was that they didn't do that.
THE COURT: Approach on that.
(Sidebar conference outside the hearing of the j ury.)
MR. SALES: There's undisputed evidence from Dr. Cummings, who was the only witness that spoke about that subject matter, was that the work that they got Nobel Prizes for was not work that they did funded by CTR.
MR. FURR: Of course not. I said they went on later in their careers. I didn't say they got it from CTR.
MR. SALES: He said CTR-funded scientists later went on to get Nobel Prizes.
MR. FURR: Later in their careers.
This is interesting. This is the question and answer Dr. Cummings was asked:
Question. A number of scientists that the CTR went on later in their careers to win Nobel Prizes?
Answer. True. Not the work they did funded by CTR, but later in their careers, that's right.
Page 1340 to 1341 is that question and answer.
THE COURT: That's a true statement. If you want in your rebuttal argument to bring out that wasn't for any of that, you're able to do so. So overruled. Thank you.
MR. SALES: Thank you.
(Following sidebar.)
MR. FURR: As I was saying, high quality scientists funded by the CTR, ten of them went on later in their careers for work they did later to actually get the Nobel Prize.
What else did CTR fund? We're talking about what happened in the real world, not what somebody's writing in some document.
You heard Dr. Cummings admit that the CTR funded that big green book that I showed you by Larson, Hague & Silvette. We call it the Green Monster, that summarized thousands of scientific
articles, which including articles about lung cancer, emphysema, heart disease, nicotine addiction, and that the CTR turned that book over to the Surgeon General's committee that was drafting the 1964 report.
You heard that after that report came out, notwithstanding its results, tobacco companies kept funding through the CTR Larson, Hague & Silvette, and funded three additional volumes, so that there were books with the world's comprehensive literature on smoking and health abstracted accurately, as Dr. Cummings conceded, put together with tobacco company money for the world to read and reach their own conclusions.
There was another part of CTR that funded what was known as special projects. I want to talk about special projects for just a bit, because Dr.
Cummings spent a lot of time on those. Here is what you learned.
Dr. Cummings told you that almost 65 years ago in the 1950's lawyers were suing the tobacco industry based on claims about smoking and health.
In defending those early claims there were scientists funded by the lawyers through CTR to develop science that could be used in those cases.
No dispute that's what happened.
But you're also told that special projects gave away about $500,000 to fund 230 high quality research projects which ultimately resulted in high quality scientific research that was published.
So again you've got to keep your eye on the ball. Yes, the lawyers got involved in special projects separate and apart from the scientific advisory board funding research to help them defend those lawsuits 65 years ago, and that the research funded frequently resulted in high quality science that actually got published in the literature.
Okay. Your verdict form. What is the total amount of punitive damages, if any, which you find by the greater weight of the evidence should be assessed against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
Now that we have dispensed a little bit with the document world versus real world type issue I want to zero in more closely on this question that you're here to answer. And just like we did in the first phase I want to begin by refreshing you on what some of the legal rules are, the guidelines the court read to you today that are designed to guide your decision making on this subject, because it's actually a much narrower question than you might
think it is if all you did was read this verdict form. But if you read the instructions here is what you find out.
First, you will see an instruction that says you may in your discretion decline, decline, to assess punitive damages. There is nothing about anything that the prior jury did that requires you to assess punitive damages. The question of whether to assess punitive damages in this case is entirely yours, and there is nothing binding about the prior verdicts that require you to do so. When the court read you the verdict form you may have heard the court tell you there is actually an instruction that says you can write zero in if you think that's the appropriate amount.
So the first thing we need you to remember is it's your choice as to whether to award punitive damages or not.
Second, in this case punitive damages can be awarded only to Mrs. Webb. Just like throughout this whole trial, I don't have one negative thing to say about Mrs. Webb. She is a sweet, nice, loving woman. We've never said anything different, we're not going to start saying it now, but Mr. Gustafson just asked you to make her a millionaire 13 times
over with your verdict in this case. That's the issue that you have to decide.
And you may also want to remember the court's instruction -- I should say, you should remember, ask yourself whether Mr. Gustafson's request to make Mrs. Webb a millionaire 13 times over after you've already fully compensated Mrs. Webb, fully compensated her. In the first phase with your verdict you found that based upon R.J. Reynolds'
90 percent contribution to Mr. Horner's death and his own 10 percent contribution to his death that the proper amount of money to fairly and justly, in light of all the evidence, because that was your instruction, the proper amount was $900,000, and that would be full compensation to Mrs. Webb. And you have already done that.
Another very important part of the instructions that we ask you to keep in mind is the following.
You have heard a lot about general tobacco company conduct and about other smokers, but that's not what this phase of the case is about. Your instructions will tell you this. The amount of punitive damages must be based solely, solely, on harm suffered by Mr. Horner and Mrs. Webb, and not for harms suffered by anyone else.
You've been told that this case follows up on a class action. You were told by Mr. Avera during jury selection that people have an opportunity to come in and prove that they are members of the class. Other smokers -MR. SALES: Excuse me. Your Honor, irrelevant, contrary to the court's pretrial ruling. Ask that the court strike those comments.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: In this case you're only concerned with one smoker, and that's Mr. Horner, not with other smokers, not with other smokers. So putting that together with some of the other court's instructions here are some of the important guidelines that the court has given you.
MR. SALES: Your Honor, may we approach please?
THE COURT: Sure.
(Sidebar conference outside the hearing of the j ury.)
MR. SALES: Mr. Furr -- I'm not faulting him necessarily so far, but usually he gives me, when he starts, a copy of what he's going to do, so I'm having to jump up when I see them. I'd like you to show the court what the top of that says.
MR. FURR: It says Reynolds can only be
punished for conduct that caused Mr. Ward's death. That's in the instructions.
MR. SALES: That's not what it says, Your Honor. It says it can only be caused for things that are identified as torts. There is no dispute about causation in this case.
MR. FURR: This isn't inconsistent with that in any way, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Shh, shh, shh.
MR. SALES: Your Honor very clearly and expressly told Mr. Furr during the testimony of Dr. Cummings that we're not going to be talking about things of causation, we're not going to be talking about that.
THE COURT: Let me see that.
MR. FURR: I'm not challenging causation in any way, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I see the difference. There is no request for defective cigarettes or negligence. That's not for the jury. You're arguing something that's not evidence. That's my problem.
MR. SALES: I'm concerned because I don't have the slides to follow that we're fixing to get toward a jury nullification, Your Honor, because this jury cannot be told --
THE COURT: It's excluded in the instructions. Negligence and defective product are not in the instructions. So you're making an argument that doesn't exist, because there are no facts in front of the jury for that.
MR. FURR: They were read the findings, and the court has told them that they could only base a punitive award on fraud and concealment, agreement to conceal. I'm simply explaining to them that by virtue of instruction they can't base it on those other causes, those other findings that you read to them this morning.
THE COURT: They were not read to them this morning.
MR. FURR: Okay. I'll do this a different way.
THE COURT: Okay. Let's do it.
(Following sidebar.)
MR. FURR: There is no dispute that in this case you can only award punitive damages based upon agreement to conceal and concealment that caused Mr. Horner's death.
MR. SALES: Objection, Your Honor. I don't think Your Honor understands the objection without further argument.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. FURR: Agreement to conceal and concealment that caused Mr. Horner's death, and they cannot be awarded for harm caused to any other smokers, only for the harm caused to Mr. Horner.
So it's important to take a look at your legal rules, because they kind of operate as a funnel, and each legal rule sort of builds on itself and narrows and narrows and narrows the inquiry that you have to answer in the end, and that helps you parse through, or as I might say, keep your eye on the ball as to what evidence really matters and what doesn't.
Another very important legal rule to keep in mind is that the plaintiffs have to prove that they -- the amount of punitive damages that they are entitled to by the greater weight of the evidence. And that is as you have been told, the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in this case.
Let me explain it a different way. Before the plaintiffs prove to you a dollar, any dollar amount that they're entitled to -MR. SALES: Excuse me. Your Honor, may we approach, please?
(Sidebar conference outside the hearing of the j ury.)
MR. SALES: Mr. Furr keeps saying that we have to prove entitlement. When I objected previously Your Honor sustained the objections. We have to prove an amount that is sufficient to punish and deter. We don't have to prove the amount to which we are entitled.
I know it's a subtle difference, but we have language in our case law that means what it means, and they we not here on entitlement. They can argue it should be zero because there is no need to punish or deter, but what they can't argue is that are no grounds for entitlement.
That was proven by clear and convincing evidence which is a standard higher than the standard is being addressed.
MR. FURR: That's not what I said. I said they have to prove the amount to which they are entitled. I didn't challenge entitlement. I said the amount to which they're entitled. That's clearly correct.
MR. SALES: This may be subtle, Your Honor, but I believe this is a subtle nullification argument.
We shouldn't be talking about whether the jury should be asking -- we shouldn't be talking about whether the jury should be considering the issue of entitlement. The question is amount. It can be
amount of zero, but we don't have to prove by the greater weight of the evidence the issue of entitlement. We already proved that by clear and convincing evidence.
THE COURT: I understand. That's not quite his argument. His argument is -- I know what the argument is. Right now the way he has it phrased the objection is overruled.
MR. FURR: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: The number, the amount. The number is what he's arguing about.
MR. SALES: Yes, Your Honor.
(Following sidebar.)
MR. FURR: The burden of proof matters. The plaintiff has to prove to you the amount to which they are entitled. The scale starts at zero, and you can enter zero in this case, unless the plaintiffs prove to you their amount.
Another important instruction you got: It has to be based on the evidence. It has to be based on the evidence, not on sympathy, and you're not to be swayed from the performance of your duty by prejudice or sympathy for or against any party.
When you combine those last two slides together plaintiffs have to prove to you with evidence, with
evidence, the amount, the amount to which they are entitled. Not with anger, not with rhetoric, not with sympathy, but with evidence.
So you're going to have to ask yourselves, where is the evidence that proves that the plaintiffs are entitled to $100,000, or $200,000, or $500,000, much less $13.2 million. That's their burden to prove here.
Mr. Gustafson talked a bit about Mr. Horner in his opening. I want to remind you of a couple things about Mr. Horner. We know Mr. Horner attended private prep schools, Vanderbilt University. He enlisted in the military, he was a successful businessman, an insurance executive, a partner in his firm, and he loved Mrs. Webb, and she loved him, and they had a wonderful relationship.
We have never challenged that at all. She had a wonderful life with her father, just like she did with her mother, just like she did with Mr. Cavanaugh, her first husband, Mr. Webb, her second husband, with her children, whom you met, Noelle, and Bobby Cavanaugh, her son. She's had a wonderful life with all of them.
We also know that Mr. Horner was intelligent, that he watched the news every night at 5:00 p.m.,
discussed it with his family, that he read the morning and evening editions of the newspaper cover to cover every day, that he read magazines, and that he taught his daughter that staying informed about what was going on in our society was a duty you had as a citizen.
But there is a lot you don't know about Mr. Horner. There's been no evidence presented to you about when he started smoking. There's been no -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: There's been no evidence presented to you as to why he started smoking.
MR. SALES: Object, Your Honor. Behind the findings.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: May we approach?
THE COURT: No, sir. It's sustained.
MR. FURR: I want to talk to you about another very important issue about this document world versus real world. Dr. Cummings suggested to you that smokers kept smoking because R.J. Reynolds concealed from them that smoking is dangerous. But on cross-examination he admitted in the real world smokers were warned and that smokers quit by the millions.
Let's look at what the evidence was on these subjects. Dr. Figlar told you that beginning in 1966 every package of cigarettes that Mr. Horner would have smoked carried a Surgeon General's warning. Here is what Dr. Figlar told you:
The Surgeon General's health warnings began appearing on every package of cigarettes that Reynolds has made, and has appeared since 1966, that every cigarette advertisement and sign has contained warning labels mandated by congress since the early 1970's, and that every pack of cigarettes that Mr. Horner held in his hand after 1966 and every advertisement that he saw after 1970 had a warning label.
And Dr. Cummings, at Mr. Sales' request, when Mr. Sales requested that some additional questions and answers be read to a question that I asked Dr. Cummings, and we looked at an old transcript, Dr. Cummings told you the following with respect to the importance of information about the dangers of smoking.
I'm sorry. Let me play this first, because this builds on what we were just talking about, the warnings that Dr. Figlar told you about. You saw this PSA.
(Video clip played as follows.)
We receive many warnings in our life, and sometimes they can save our life. This message is brought to you by the American Cancer Society.
(The video clip concluded.)
MR. FURR: Warnings matter. Public service announcements matter.
Here is how Dr. Cummings told you they matter. He told you that quitting builds up over time as a function of age. Changes in the environment, the public health campaigns, the information campaigns, and the television counter-marketing in the 1960's. 55 years ago. Here is what Dr. Cummings told you how the quitting in fact did build up over time.
He told that you by 1965, one year after that first Surgeon General's report, 17.6 million Americans had quit in the preceding decade. He told you that after -- in the 15-year interval between the 1964 report and 1979 that 30 million Americans quit. Dr. Cummings did the math for us and told you that was an average of 5 million people a day,
365 days a year, for 15 years. Warnings matter.
And it mattered to the men in Mr. Horner's cohort, because here is what else Dr. Cummings told us. He told us that quitting accelerated in the
1960's after the Surgeon General's report and that 55 percent, more than half of the men in Mr.
Horner's cohort were former smokers by 1987, and that in fact 75 percent of men age 65 and older were former smokers by 1985.
The warnings matter. Smokers quit. And most smokers did quit over time.
Here is what Dr. Cummings told us. Despite all the discussion of addiction -- excuse me.
Apparently I said 5 million people quit a day. My mistake. 5000 people quit a day. Obviously not 5 million people.
Despite all the discussion about addiction and nicotine and the documents, and people making stupid or wrong statements about what that meant for people quitting smoking, here is what Dr. Cummings, the plaintiff's expert, told you about addiction and quitting smoking.
MR. SALES: Objection. Your Honor, it goes against Finding 8 on page 2 of this argument. The testimony was made. The inference counsel is suggesting is improper based on that finding.
THE COURT: That's sustained.
MR. FURR: Excuse me?
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. FURR: Well, here was the evidence. If you make up your mind to do it and make a quit attempt, anybody can quit. Any smoker can quit.
There was a suggestion during this trial that the tobacco companies made cigarettes dangerous and addictive and that they concealed that they made cigarettes dangerous and addictive.
Here is what Dr. Cummings told us about cigarettes in the real world.
I'm sorry. I did want to mention this to you, because with respect to quitting one of things you saw is that since 1981 the number of cigarettes sold in this country has been going steadily down. Just in the past 15 years since Mr. Horner died R.J. Reynolds alone has lost -- is selling 60 percent less cigarettes than it was selling in 1996, but this trend has actually been going on since 1981.
Dr. Cummings told you why. Because smokers are quitting, and smokers who continue smoking are smoking less.
Now, back to this topic about the tobacco companies and cigarettes in the real world. The evidence is clear that cigarettes can't be made safe. They just can't be made safe.
Here is what Dr. Cummings told us. If you burn
tobacco wrapped in paper you will generate smoke that includes carcinogens. If you burn tobacco wrapped in paper the smoke can cause cancer, and that is there no way, no way to remove all carcinogens in cigarette smoke, and there's no safe cigarette.
With respect to this issue of whether the tobacco companies made cigarettes dangerous and addictive when they didn't have to be, we asked Dr. Cummings to compare roll-your-own cigarettes to manufactured cigarettes. Here is what he told you.
Roll-your-own cigarettes can cause diseases including lung cancer. Roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous, more dangerous than manufactured cigarettes. Roll-your-own cigarettes are more -excuse me. Roll-your-own smokers are more at risk for smoking-related disease, and that roll-your-own smokers are more addicted.
He told you that per cigarette, on a per-cigarette basis, comparing one manufactured cigarette to one roll-your-own cigarette, that roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous than manufactured cigarettes.
There was a claim made during this case that R.J. Reynolds knew that low tar cigarettes were no
safer, and believed they were no safer, and that they concealed that from the public.
Then on cross-examination of Dr. Cummings here is what Dr. Cummings admitted. I'm sorry. I got ahead of myself. Let me back up, because another claim that was made during this case -- excuse me.
Can you go to the low tar slide? Okay. Here we are. We've got it.
Okay. Here is what Dr. Cummings admitted to you on cross-examination. He saw documents that indicated that Reynolds' scientists believed that lower tar and nicotine products might reduce the risk of certain diseases, and that Reynolds' scientists developed low tar and nicotine products based on recommendations from the scientific and medical community.
You've just got to keep your eye on the ball.
I know it's hard. There's a lot of information coming at you, things said in the document world that are not borne out in the real world.
I want to talk about additives, because there is a lot of discussion about additives in this case. But when we cross-examined Dr. Cummings here is what he told you: That cigarettes with additives and cigarettes without additives are equally dangerous.
The claim was made that Reynolds was concealing that it made cigarettes more dangerous by putting additives in. But when you ask Dr. Cummings whether that's borne out in the real world he says that cigarettes with additives and without additives are equally dangerous.
Dr. Figlar also told you that Reynolds discloses the additives that it uses in its cigarettes, and has been doing so for a long time. Beginning all the way back in the 1980's Reynolds had to disclose the additives to the Department of Health and Human Services. You know the FDA requires the actual formula to make cigarettes to be disclosed to them, and you know that Reynolds discloses its ingredients to numerous state health departments. No secret. The additives used in cigarettes are no secret.
Now, another claim that was made by Dr.
Cummings based on the document world was that R.J. Reynolds manipulated the nicotine in Mr. Horner's cigarettes.
Dr. Figlar was asked that question in that videotaped deposition you were shown, and here is what he said: Reynolds did not manipulate the nicotine in Mr. Horner's cigarettes. He was here.
They could have cross-examined him. Not a single question was asked about whether they had manipulated the nicotine in Mr. Horner's cigarettes.
Dr. Cummings also suggested to you that Reynolds increased the addictive qualities of the cigarettes that Mr. Horner smoked during his lifetime. Dr. Figlar was asked in his deposition and he said that Reynolds did not increase the addictive qualities of its cigarettes during Mr. Horner's lifetime. And he was here. You saw the cross-examination. It was all about that Reynolds is a for-profit company trying to make money. Not a single word about how nicotine is or is not manipulated in cigarettes.
Now, there is no dispute that Reynolds controls the levels of nicotine in its cigarettes. And Dr. Figlar explained to you in his deposition that that's done so that one Kool cigarette is like the next Kool cigarette. He told you that that control was a narrow balance, and it wasn't manipulated for purposes of developing or sustaining addiction. It was so that a person smoking a brand of cigarette would have a similar experience every time they smoked that brand.
I want to switch gears and I want to go to
mitigating evidence; in other words, evidence that lessens the need for punitive damages in this case, because you have this instruction from the court.
One of the things that you are to consider are circumstances which you determine by the greater weight of the evidence mitigate the need for punitive damages, lessen the need for punitive damages. I want to look at a number of lines of evidence that we would submit to you mitigate or lessen the need for punitive damages.
I want to start by reminding you here in the year 2014 you're being asked to punish Reynolds for things that happened a very, very long time ago, 60, to 70 years in many cases. The past, the distant past. The past is gone.
You know that all the people that you saw, the CEO Mr. Johnson, Ed Horrigan on Night Line, the people whose documents you read, Claude Teague,
Allen Rodgman, Murray Senkus, Addison Yeaman, they're all gone, they're not with the company anymore. In fact, Dr. Cummings admitted that after walking through a lot of documents with you, I think 40-some documents with you, that every author of every single document that the plaintiff showed you no longer works in the industry, none of the
recipients of those documents work in the industry, nobody carbon copied on those documents works in the industry, that every one that the plaintiff talked about from any of the tobacco companies that wrote one of those documents or who made a statement in the public about the dangers of smoking, they're all gone.
You were also told that the Tobacco Institute is gone, the Council for Tobacco Research is gone, the Tobacco Industry Research Committee is gone.
All of those organizations have been gone since 1988, about over 15 years ago.
Dr. Cummings also told you that no outside company -- excuse me. This is Dr. Figlar's testimony. Dr. Figlar told you that today in 2014 no outside company is employed by Reynolds to help it deny the dangers of smoking. There is no outside companies employed by Reynolds to help deny that smoking is addictive. There aren't any press releases issued by R.J. Reynolds denying the dangers of smoking. There aren't any press releases issued by R.J. Reynolds denying that nicotine is addictive, and that there hasn't been for a long time. Since the year 2000 Reynolds has straightforwardly admitted that smoking causes serious disease,
premature death, and is addictive.
The documents. One final thing to say about these documents. They're sure not secret anymore, and they haven't been secret for a long time.
Dr. Cummings explained this to you. There are about 84 million pages of tobacco company, tobacco industry documents that are housed in various warehouses and made available on websites around this country. There are universities and people like Dr. Cummings who have created these websites so the public can review any of these once-secret documents any time that they want to. No secret documents anymore.
So let's talk about where we are today, because today who the Reynolds company is that you're being asked to punish today, you know the following things: You know that today there is new ownership, there's been a series of mergers, that there are new executive, and there are new scientists at R.J. Reynolds.
So I'm going to ask you to focus with me for a little bit on this question: Are punitive damages warranted against Reynolds in the year 2014?
Because that's the question you're being asked.
Mr. Gustafson used the phrase several times a
leopard doesn't change its spots. A catchy phrase that we all know, but is that true in this case?
Has Reynolds changed?
You know because you've seen it. In 2014 Reynolds informs smokers about the dangers of smoking. You know that on their website they make clear unequivocal statements about the dangers of smoking, and you know that they have created a series of reduced risk products and cessation aids that help smokers understand the dangers of smoking and how they can decrease the dangers that they face.
You were told that Reynolds is still lying today about the dangers of smoking. Look at what they say: Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable death in the United States. Cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer, heart disease, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases and adverse health effects. Quitting smoking now significantly reduces the risk for serious disease. No tobacco product has been shown to be safe and without risk.
On its website Reynolds lists all the ingredients, including ammoniation compounds and
everything else it puts in its cigarettes. Reynolds also informs smokers about the availability of reduced risk products and cessation aids. The migration strategy.
Susan Cameron, the CEO of Reynolds, was celebrating with shareholders of the company the migration strategy that Reynolds actually informs smokers about on their website.
Reynolds' website advises smokers the best course of action for tobacco consumers concerned about the their health is to quit, but adults who continue to use tobacco products should consider the reduction of risk for serious diseases associated with moving from cigarettes to the use of smoke-free tobacco or nicotine products.
What more can a tobacco company do than create reduced risk products and encourage people who are going to continue to use tobacco products to migrate, to move down the risk continuum line.
Reynolds even explains to smokers how to do that. They put this diagram on their website to show smokers that the cigarettes, the burn-tobacco, inhaleable cigarettes are the most dangerous way that you can use tobacco, but that you can decrease your risk for chronic disease by moving down the
continuum to smokeless tobacco and nicotine products.
Dr. Figlar explained to you the migration strategy this way. He told you on Monday that Reynolds realizes that people will continue to smoke, that Reynolds wants to give smokers the opportunity to move to lower risk products, and that Reynolds wants to give consumers options because there is no single answer.
If you saw this once, you saw it 20 times. I'm not going to belabor this, but Reynolds is a legal business. It's legal to make and sell cigarettes. It's legal to profit from that business.
But rather than statically staying in the market of making and selling tobacco-burning cigarettes Reynolds had spent -- we know they spent a billion dollars alone on Eclipse and Premiere, they spent $235 million creating the equipment to make VUSE. They have created SNUS and they created Grizzly, which fits right in with SNUS, and ultimately of course they have created quit aids, nicotine replacement therapy.
I'll go through these quickly because you just heard it. I don't want to belabor this. But the go-to-the-moon project in the 1980's -- think about
it, 1980's, 30 years ago, Reynolds was spending a billion dollars of 1980's money to develop smoke -to develop heat-not-burn technology.
Dr. Cummings -- let's remind ourselves what Dr. Cummings had to say about the Premiere cigarette.
Dr. Cummings told that you it is safer than a conventional cigarette, that it is less mutagenic than a conventional cigarette. And he told you he was one of the people that got the -- who was sent the 744-page monograph explaining all of the chemistry and biological studies that had been done on Premiere.
Very similar story. We know that Premiere did not succeed. It was test marketed for six months. Mr. Gustafson seemed to suggest that there was something wrong with the fact it was pulled off the market. But if it tastes bad and it smells bad and it is hard to light and use, and people don't like it, won't buy it, won't switch to it, it's not helping anybody sitting on a shelf. So of course Reynolds pulled it off and went back to work on it, and spent a bunch more money to develop the Eclipse cigarette.
Dr. Cummings told you that Reynolds still sells the Eclipse cigarette. It's on the market even
though they lose money on every package that they sell, because smokers still don't like it very much. It was released nationwide in the year 2000. It's been pulled back.
But you also heard Dr. Figlar tell you that Reynolds has plans for Eclipse, it has plans to reinvigorate this brand.
Dr. Cummings again told you that -- first, of course, he didn't even want to call Eclipse a cigarette. He wanted to say it was a device. On cross-examination Dr. Cummings told you that Eclipse is the safest cigarette manufactured and that it is safer than conventional cigarettes.
VUSE. R.J. Reynolds electronic cigarettes. It creates a vapor with nicotine in it with chemistry so low that you can't even measure it. It's below the levels of detection. Dr. Figlar explained to you its it's now available nationwide in over 70,000 markets and still expanding. The company has spent about $250 million on it. Every reason to believe that it's much, much, much safer than tobacco-burning cigarettes.
The company wants smokers who smoke tobacco-burning cigarettes to migrate, to migrate to VUSE because it's so much safer than tobacco-burning
cigarettes.
Now, this morning Mr. Gustafson -- excuse me. This afternoon Mr. Gustafson made a comment that it's being put out on the market before the epidemiology is being done. Well, of course it's being put on the market before the epidemiology is being done. You can't do the epidemiology until it's been on the market and a large number of people have smoked it for a long period of time. That's the nature of epidemiology studies.
Dr. Figlar told you that despite the fact that electronic cigarettes are not regulated today by the FDA, and they're still in the stage of that deeming regulation that he told you about, that R.J.
Reynolds has voluntarily placed a warning label on VUSE cigarettes that tells smokers that no tobacco product has shown to be safe and without risk, and that this tobacco product contains nicotine which is addictive. Which is addictive. Reynolds voluntarily tells smokers that.
At the same time though Reynolds is unable to tell them without FDA approval that by switching to VUSE, a smokeless tobacco-burning cigarette, will significantly reduce the risk of harm. But that's coming.
SNUS, another product down the risk continuum. Dr. Figlar told you he went to Sweden because Reynolds wanted to replicate what he called the Swedish experience. Remember he explained to you that about 30 years ago men in large numbers began switching from tobacco-burning cigarettes to using SNUS in Sweden and the risk of lung cancer over time went down significantly.
Reynolds spent a bunch of time and money, and Dr. Figlar was very involved, as he told you, in creating SNUS because it is orders of magnitude safer than tobacco-burning cigarettes. It is available nationally, that it's regulated by the FDA, that Reynolds was the first company to bring SNUS to the United States, and that Reynolds Camel SNUS actually dominates the market with about an 80 percent market share. SNUS, of course, no one says it's safe product. Like all smokeless tobacco products, it carries a series of warnings, including it's addictive, it's not a safe alternative, and it can cause certain types of cancer.
A very important piece of the story. ZONNIC, nicotine replacement therapy gum made by Niconovum, a sister company of R.J. Reynolds. Reynolds invested about $40 million to acquire Niconovum.
MR. SALES: Your Honor, I object. It says Reynolds American informed smokers. We established in the evidence that bears no mention of company's name. None whatsoever. I object.
MR. FURR: Reynolds American is the parent.
THE COURT: I understand, but that's sustained.
MR. FURR: Niconovum informed smokers about the availability of ZONNIC. Reynolds American owns Noconovum. Reynolds American invested about $40 million to acquire Niconovum and to bring those products to this country, and then spent a substantial amount of time getting FDA approval to offer those products.
Dr. Figlar told you they had to get approval to market it and offer it the way they're doing now in small packets adjacent to cigarettes in convenience stores so that smokers had more of a real opportunity to switch to a nicotine replacement product instead of reaching for that cigarette package, unlike having to go to a drug store and lay out $70 to get a month supply of other nicotine replacement products.
What more -- what more can a legal business do to change its spots?
MR. SALES: Your Honor, that's not the
defendant.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, I've been very clear about who is who here.
MR. SALES: This -THE COURT: No speaking objections, please, or responses.
Sustained. Restate.
MR. FURR: Well, I haven't even gotten to this. What more can a legal business do? R.J. Reynolds informs smokers about the dangers of smoking. R.J. Reynolds has created and offered to smokers reduced risk tobacco products. What more can they do other than go out of business? And why would anyone want the most innovative company in the tobacco industry, a company that produces a broader array of safer tobacco products, to go out of business? What more can they do?
You also know that the tobacco industry, including R.J. Reynolds, is regulated by the FDA. Claims in this case involve concealment of information and agreement to conceal information.
You know that R.J. Reynolds is completely transparent now and has to turn over everything they know and everything they do to the FDA. You just saw it, so I'm not going to belabor all this. You
know that the FDA requires them to turn over all, all health-related information. You know that the FDA has jurisdiction over cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, nicotine replacement products, that they're going to have jurisdiction over E-cigarettes soon, that the FDA requires R.J. Reynolds to turn over research related to smoking and health, to addiction, to product ingredients by brand, to content and delivery of nicotine by brand, to quantity of carcinogens and other harmful constituents in tobacco smoke, and tobacco smoke -excuse me -- tobacco products and tobacco smoke.
You know that the FDA regulates the packaging, marketing, and sale of tobacco products, that they regulate any changes made to tobacco products, that they investigate manufacturing plants, that they make unannounced investigations at manufacturing plants, and that they have done so at Reynolds, and they regulate the development, introduction, communication related to less hazardous cigarette products. Reynolds is a highly regulated company today that operates with complete transparency.
You've also been told -- and Dr. Figlar was not cross-examined on this, but you've been told that Reynolds is committed to transforming the tobacco
industry with different types of products, and you were told that Reynolds American recently bought a company called Kentucy Bioprocessing that's actually using the tobacco plant to create pharmaceuticals, including a drug called ZMAPP that's been used to cure the Ebola virus in American healthcare workers who came back to the United States after working in Liberia, and that the drug has been sent to Liberia to help fight the pandemic of the Ebola virus.
I want to go straight to this question. Are punitive damages warranted against Reynolds in 2014? That's your question. And we respectfully submit to you that for all the reasons you've heard that you should indeed exercise your discretion to decide that this is simply the wrong case for punitive damages, and that you should write a zero on that line .
But the choice is entirely yours. And we recognize that you may decide to award some punitive damages in this case. So I'm going to suggest to you a way to think about how large a punitive damage award to make, if that in fact is what you decide to do.
I do want to remind you that as you decide how large an award to make, if that's what you do, there
are a couple important things to keep in mind from the instructions. First, the amount has to be based solely on the harm suffered by Mr. Horner and Mrs. Webb. Second, that the punishment can be based only on concealment of information and agreement to conceal information that harmed Mr. Horner and Mrs. Webb.
MR. SALES: Objection. Your Honor, that speaks to causation. Move to strike.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, you already overruled that objection.
THE COURT: Hold on just a second.
MR. SALES: I have no problem with the slide. Its counsel's argument to which I object.
THE COURT: The slide is correct.
MR. FURR: I couldn't hear you.
THE COURT: The slide is correct. Go ahead.
MR. FURR: So of course, as we discussed, punitive damages can be awarded only to Mrs. Webb.
So how to think about it. I want to suggest to you that your punitive damage award should bear a reasonable relationship to the compensatory damage award that you made in this case.
In this case you decided that for the 90 percent contribution of R.J. Reynolds to Mr.
Horner's death that a fair and just verdict was $900,000. That was your verdict, and we don't challenge that in any way.
I want to suggest to you that any punitive damage award that you award in this case should be related to the harm that was caused to Mr. Horner. The value you put on that was $900,000. So I want to suggest that any punitive award should bear a relationship to $900,000, if you found that to be the amount of harm caused.
It shouldn't be 13 or 14 or 15 times that amount, like was suggested to you this morning with respect to a $13.2 million award. Instead I want to suggest the following: That a punitive damage award reasonably related to the harm caused in this case would be an award that was somewhere from one-half of your compensatory award to equal to your compensatory award. So we're going to suggest that you think about this, that in this case, in Mrs. Webb's case that any punitive damage award should bear a reasonable relationship to your $900,000 compensatory award and should be in this range. We suggest to you that a fair and just punitive damage award in this case, based on the compensatory award that you found, would be
somewhere in the range of $4 50,000 to $900,000.
Just a couple more thoughts for you, because you have an additional instruction that I want to remind you of. You've been told that you may not award an amount that would financially destroy Reynolds. You've been told Mr. Horner's case is just one case in the Engle class action.
MR. SALES: Excuse me. I object. I ask that the court strike those comments.
THE COURT: Sustained. The jury will disregard that comment.
MR. FURR: You've been told by Dr. Cummings that he's already testified in 70 Engle cases. You should not award an amount that would financially destroy R.J. Reynolds.
Thank you very much for your time and patience. I've taken up enough of your time. Thank you.
