MR. GUSTAFSON: Good afternoon. There is a reason why we all stand when you file in and stand when you leave and it's because we understand the sacrifice you make by being here. We know it's not convenient for folks to come from our community to sit in judgment of cases like this. We know it's not convenient. We know it's a sacrifice. We know based on the holiday we had yesterday that it's a
very important right that's guarded by folks not here. And so we thank you for your patience and your attention. And for paying close attention in th i s cas e.
The rules in this trial are the same now as they were when we started the other day. This case is about the wrongful death of James Cayce Horner. It's about the wrongful death of a good man, an honest man, a decent man caused by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. R.J. Reynolds concealed what it knew about the health effects of smoking cigarettes and the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes.
They concealed their knowledge of a product that they made and sold to Jim Horner. And they lied about what they knew to be true. Cigarettes cause lung cancer. Cigarettes are addictive.
And they conspired with other companies to lie about those things. And it's why we showed you some documents from some of these other companies, Lorillard, Liggett, Philip Morris, because they were saying the same thing. This was a deliberate effort undertaken with purpose and discipline and they did it together. They lied and they knew people were going to die. They didn't care who. They didn't care how many. Just so long as they
got to have a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. That's why they did what they did. So what are you all going to do with a company like that?
The jury instructions tell us what you do with a company like that. So we look to the jury instructions. And you know based on what the Court told you, in prior proceedings, prior jury made certain findings with respect to these claims that were made in this case. That it caused lung cancer, including the lung cancer Mr. Horner had. That nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. That Mr. Horner died because he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine that were manufactured by Reynolds. That Reynolds concealed or omitted that material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature. And then you see number 5, the concealment or omission by Reynolds of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of Mr. Horner's death. That Reynolds together with those other companies agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers in the public would rely on that information to their
detri ment.
And if you look at finding number 7, Reynolds agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature was a legal cause of Mr. Horner's death.
They are liable for killing Jim Horner. The percentage of fault charged to Reynolds as a legal cause of Mr. Horner's death is 90 percent. The percentage of fault to Mr. Horner was 10 percent. And then under the circumstances of this case, clear and convincing evidence established that punitive damages are warranted against Reynolds.
Now, what do the jury instructions tell us about the claim that you're deciding here. You're going to determine the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment to Reynolds. The punishment to Reynolds for what Reynolds did, intentional misconduct that took the life of a human being who was loved dearly and who is missed tremendously. Reynolds is responsible for that.
So that the punitive damages are as punishment to Reynolds and as a deterrent to others so that others won't engage in this kind of conduct, not just regarding selling cigarettes, but about anything. About anything. Because you, you
collectively are the conscience of this community. You sit in judgement of what it is you're going to tolerate from other people and from companies.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. Conscience of this community is argument and is improper.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Punitive damages is absolutely proper.
THE COURT: It's overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: You are the conscience of the community to follow the law that the Court provides you here and the evidence that you witnessed in the trial. And you say, you say based on that law and evidence what it is that you're going to tolerate. You will send a message from this courtroom as to what it is you think about what R.J. Reynolds did. Because when you get the verdict form it's going to have one line for you to fill out. Two lines.
One's the signature of the foreman. But the other line is the verdict. The amount that you're going to impose on R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company as punishment for what it did and as a deterrent to others, as a deterrent to others.
You're going to -- this amount would be in addition to the compensatory damages you previously awarded. And then in making this determination,
you consider the nature, extent and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances. Now, as you heard from Dr. Cummings, there are millions and millions of documents, videos, and evidence collected from these tobacco companies over a tremendous period of time, decades and we would be here for years trying to show it all to you. But wh at we di d i s we brou g ht you wh at the y knew wh en they knew it and what they decided to do with that information. And you saw in those documents, you saw in those documents what their attitude was abou t wh at the y were do i ng . What the con s eq u en ces we re goi ng to be to oth er hu man bei ngs .
Here the amount that you impose on R.J. Reynolds for punitive damages to punish Reynolds has to be related only to the harm caused to Jim Horner and to his daughter Dianne Webb. Has to be related only to that harm. Not to the 400,000 people a year that you heard about in the evidence, the people who died from these kinds of diseases, just Jim Horner.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. There's no such evidence.
MR. GUSTAFSON: There was evidence on that.
THE COURT: Hang on a second.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Congressional hearings.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. FURR: I don't believe there's any evidence introduced about 400,000 people a year dying.
MR. GUSTAFSON: There was. It was Congressional hearings and they asked R.J. Reynolds CEO. And he said he did not agree with that.
MR. FURR: Well, that's evidence that the question was asked, that's not evidence that it occurred .
MR. SALES: The figure came in at another point in the trial.
MR. FURR: I would like to see the substantiation of that.
THE COURT: I don't recall that. I recall that being done differently as far as percentages of cohorts and things of that nature about the nu mbe r o f d eaths .
MR. SALES: Half the regular smokers -THE COURT: I don't remember the exact amounts .
MR. SALES: All right.
THE COURT: Let's move on. Let's let him
make his argument. It will be sustained for the time being. Go ahead.
MR. FURR: I move for a mistrial , Your
Honor .
THE COURT: It's overruled.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. GUSTAFSON: You've learned that Mr. Horner's age cohort, people that were born when he was born, one out of two of those males died from smoking-related diseases. And Jim Horner was one of those men.
You see here where it says that you're to consider the Defendant's financial resources. And you were shown that Reynolds nets $5.6 million in profit every day. And that Reynolds then pays dividends of $3.3 million a day as profit to the shareholders. $3.3 million a day in dividends. So you've seen the evidence of the financial resou rces .
And then it says number 3, you're to determine -- you're to consider the circumstances which you determine by the greater weight of the evidence mitigates the need for punitive damages. And so think hard about the case that R.J. Reynolds
presented to you, Monday and today, and ask yourself if you heard a word from R.J. Reynolds about Jim Horner and his death, its effect it had on Dianne Webb. R.J. Reynolds came in here with an executive and they talked about all these things that have occurred years, if not decades, after Mr. Horner died and they never mentioned his name. It was as if Jim Horner never existed and none of this matters. That he didn't matter. That what they did to that family didn't matter. Because they make patents. And they came up with an electronic cigarette that they haven't studied to see -- the epi is not in yet on what it does to human beings that inhale it into their lungs. You haven't seen anything to mitigate, to mitigate what R.J. Reynolds did in killing Jim Horner. You haven't seen anything that mitigates his death.
You haven't seen anything that mitigates the harm to Dianne Webb through the loss of her father before his time. Nothing. They brought you nothing to mitigate the death of Jim Horner.
And so Reynolds, the prior jury's finding says by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages are warranted in this case and you all are the only ones who can do that. You're the only
ones. No one else can do it. So your verdict needs to say something meaningful. It needs to have meaning. It needs to have meaning like Jim Horner had meaning. Even though Reynolds wouldn't acknowledge it here.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Because a good man lost his life and the company that did it hasn't been punished yet. Yet. And that's where you all come in. So I'm not going to go through all of it all over again. You know what they did. You know that sales dropped. You know that the companies got together at the Plaza Hotel and they plotted and schemed and they hired a PR firm and they said we're going to lie, we're going to assure people we're on their side. And they hatched this plan and they paid for fake science and they paid for scientists to go and say it wasn't proven when they knew that it was. You know that they lied over and over and over. And you know from the instructions that bind all of us here that they caused Jim Ho rne r' s de ath .
And so what I want to talk with you about is about the Defendant's attitude in doing what it
did. And you got to keep in mind the Defendant here today, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is three of these entities. It's R.J. Reynolds, it's American Tobacco who made the Lucky Strikes, it's Brown & Williamson that made the Kools. They're all one company now and those are the numbers, the figures they showed you with their cigarette sales. It's three companies, not one. They made that choice to all bind together.
So what were their attitudes? What was the Defendant's attitude in making the decisions that it made that the evidence shows it was immoral and wr o n g ? We r e t h e y c o n c e r n e d ? We ' r e g o i n g t o g o through some of these documents. Were they concerned? And ask yourself when you see what they put on there. You know, evil people can stay up nights and they couldn't come up with the stuff they put in these pages and that was the business plan.
They knew people were going to die. And Jim Horner was one of those people. You all are going to have to be the ones that say something about that. No one else can do it.
So we go to PT2061. This is that forwarding memo from the public relations firm that they hired
to figure out a way to get people from smoking again and get them off that cancer stick. And what was the -- what were the people in the company saying to themselves? What do they say when no one else is looking? That's that thing that we teach our children about your character is defined by how you act when no one else is watching. They never thought we were going to see this stuff.
It's fortunate for us cigarettes are a habit they can't break. Wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer-free cigarette, what we could do to competition. They knew it was addictive and they knew it caused cancer. What were they concerned about? What was their attitude? This is 1953.
What were their attitudes then? Suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40 billion a year. The stock market falls. It's terrible. When you consider dividends are going to be much larger next year without the EPT. There's those dividends again. That's what they said to themselves.
What did they say to the public a couple days later? There's no proof cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer. We accept an
interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. That's a promise folks. We believe the products we make are not injurious to health. Boy, wouldn't it be great if we were the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette, what we could do to competition.
Cigarettes are not injurious to health. We always have and always will cooperate closely with those who's path it is to safeguard the public health. That's what they said to the public. And then they said other things too.
They want you to think they're sincere. So what do they tell us? Here's dividends again. It is the position of the Tobacco Institute that the health of the American people is more important than dividends for the tobacco or any other industry. Dividends -- American people -- the health of the American people is more important th an di vi de nds or th e tobacco or an y o the r industry. We're going to contribute millions for unbiased scientific research. And you know what the truth is. You know that science wasn't unbiased. They weren't even studying smoking and health. They were studying other things.
And so what else did they say to the public? Next year, Dr. Clarence Cook Little, scientific director of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, today issued a comment on the statement of the public health service on smoking and lung cancer. Today, more than ever before scientific evidence is accumulating that conflicts with or fails to support the tobacco smoking theories of lung cancer.
And what did they say to themselves?
Obviously the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. Indictment. The evidence challenging such an indictment is a scheme. What's their attitude? What's their attitude when they tell people that the health of the American people is more important than their dividends? What are they discussing? The very document that recognizes that cigarettes cause lung cancer. Can the company justifiably assume the position that publication of data pertaining to cigarette smoke composition or physiological properties should be withheld because such data might affect adversely the company's economic status when the company has already complied in its plea that no such ideologic effect
exists that might affect adversely the company's economic status.
Money. Dividends. Dividends. Dividends. Money. Money. That's what they cared about. They didn't care about people. So what do they tell the public again? And yet they suggest a general campaign to discourage everyone from smoking. This is like prohibiting a particular food for everybody because a few people are allergic to it.
Allergies. We're talking about lung cancer and heart disease and COPD, bladder cancer and abdominal aortic aneurysms. The list goes on and on. Things that kill people and they liken it to allergies. They trivialize disease. They trivialize death. Death of their fellow man. For money. It's all for money and it's the only thing that you are going to be able to use to punish them because you can't bring Jim Horner back. You can't make R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company go away. You can't even award an amount of money that would financially destroy R.J. Reynolds. And believe me, from what you've seen in this courtroom, it will take a heck of a lot of money to do that. And nobody's going to be asking you to do that today. But what you've got to do is do something
meaningful, based on the law and based on the evidence, because you are the conscience of this community.
What did they do to try to sell this idea that they were sincere in what they were telling the American public. They were spending all this money. TIRC appropriated $800,000 in new funds to bring to $6,250,000 to total available to support grants made by the Board. That's 1963. $6,250,000 of money they spent on fake science to throw cold water on the idea that cigarette smoking caused di s eas e.
What did they say to themselves? What were they saying to themselves? Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. Present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. That's what they said to themselves in 1961.
And what did they say to the Surgeon General who they promised that they were going to cooperate with them? What did they say to the Surgeon General in 1963? None of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of a smoker in amounts recorded in smoke. That
doesn't sound anything like carcinogens are found in practically every class of smoke. And then they say it's possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters. They just got done saying you can't filter it out. Now they're telling the Surgeon General that you can.
What's their attitude? What's the attitude of these people? Who are these people who can enjoy long and successful and wonderful careers and got respect from people? Never got reprimanded.
The company today won't even admit that they're accountable for what they did. Three times he got asked, are you accountable for what you did to Jim Horner and Dianne Webb.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Three times. That's where you all come in. You get to answer that question. You heard it three times, never got an answer. You all answer it. You're the only ones that can make them accountable.
What did they say to themselves? Nicotine is addictive. We're in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the
release of stress mechanisms. But cigarettes, we will assume the Surgeon General's committee to say despite the bene -- the negative effects of nicotine has certain unattractive side effects. Unattractive side effects like lung cancer and cardiovascular disorders and emphysema.
Unattractive side effects. There's those allergies they were talking about. That's what they said to themselves.
Go to the next page, please. And we challenge those charges and we have assumed our obligation to determine their truth or falsity by creating the new Tobacco Research Foundation. In the meantime, we say here is our triple or quadruple or quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituent of smoke is currently suspect while delivering full flavor and incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. And if we are the first to be able to make and sustain that claim. What price Kent. Money. What's their attitude? That's all they care about is money.
And they had Dr. Figlar testify on that video that this is just written by some kooky employee of Brown & Williamson. It was written by Addison Yeaman, who was vice president and general counsel
of the company, who, as you heard from Dr. Cummings, went on to run the CTR for five or six or seven years. But they make it sound like he didn't know what the business of Brown & Williamson was when he's the vice president and general counsel of the company.
See, there's one thing that we learned when we were in kindergarten is a leopard don't change its spots. They ain't any different today than they ever were. When they brought that witness to say that Addison Yeaman didn't know what he was talking about, that was nothing but a lie. A lie.
What did they tell the public though? As human beings we are interested in the health of our fellow man. Second, we have a natural interest in the future welfare of our industry and of the industry's customers. They had an interest in the future welfare of our industry. That's 1963.
What did they tell fourth graders in 1963? They told fourth graders, despite many years of extensive research, medical science has been unable to establish that smoking has a direct causal link with any human disease. They're looking out for the future welfare of their industry by lying to school children about what they knew to be true.
And then what do they tell the public? 1964, we're now up to $7,250,000 towards the operation of the Council for Tobacco Research. And still they say Dr. Little -- Dr. Clarence Cook Little concludes the results failed to support the hypothesis that cigarette smoking can act as a direct contact carcinogen in the human lung. They just kept saying it like a drum beat. And they told you how much money they were spending. Now we're at seven million -- seven and a quarter million in 1963.
And then what do they do when the government is sniffing around about warnings? What does R.J. Reynolds do then? 1965. We don't believe that any governmental action is necessary or called for with respect to cigarette advertising or labeling. However, if any such action is to be taken, we believe it should be taken by the Congress and no one else said Bowman Gray of Winston-Salem, North Carolina, chairman of the board of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company testifying in the front of the Senate.
And what's American Tobacco say around the same time, March of 1965. I'm sorry. The next one, Jeff. American Tobacco -- I'm sorry.
December 1965. American Tobacco Company's president says, this is the 14th consecutive year that the American Tobacco Company sales will exceed $1 billion. Money. And then he says, the theory alleging a causal relationship between smoking and various human ailments has not been proved, as a number of distinguished and impartial scientists have testified. But they knew they were lying and they reflected on it.
They reflected on the lies they told. Our basic position in the cigarette controversies is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we're making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
Did they tell the fourth grade school children that? Did they tell Jim Horner that? Did they tell Dianne Webb that? Did they tell anybody that other than themselves? They knew they were lying, but what did they tell the public? Surgeon General's Report is a shockingly intemperate defamation. It's being defamed. Defamation of a industry which has lead the way in medical research to seek answers in the cigarette controversies.
You know there wasn't any controversies. Now you know there wasn't any controversies. You know
that. You know that. There wasn't any controversy, but they made one out of lies. They said they were being defamed. But they were going to bring us all the truth.
1968, we would like the public to be fully informed. We would like the information that reaches them to be factual rather than emotional or incomplete. The people of this industry are responsible citizens and have reacted to charges against tobacco with restraint and logic. The average American is a reasonable man, a thoughtful man. He will respond to the truth. He is entitled to the truth. He shouldn't be confused and frightened by inconclusive evidence. They were so si ncere .
And then what did they tell us? The 1972 Report of the Surgeon General to Congress on smoking and health insults the scientific community and that the number one health problem is not cigarette smoking, but the extent to which public health officials may knowingly mislead the American public. Now look at the date on that press release. And about 30 minutes ago R.J. Reynolds played for you six or seven public service announcements by the American Cancer Society, the
very same public service announcements that they attacked in the 1960s and 1970s. Look at the evidence that's in there because we didn't show you everything, there's more in that stack. Look at it.
They brought you public service announcements that they attacked. And they reflect to themselves around this time not just on the fact that they're lying, but the fact that they're so smart, they're so much smarter than all the rest of us. How smart they were in coming up with it and how successful they were in pulling it off.
For nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and public opinion. While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years helping us win important battles, it's only fair to say that it's not, nor was it ever, intended to be a vehicle for victory. After 20 years they reflected on what they were doing and they were pleased.
What's their attitude about what they were doing to their fellow man? And they knew it was all working because nicotine in cigarettes is addictive and they knew that.
And so what does Dr. Teague from R.J.
Reynolds tell us in 1972? Happily for the tobacco industry. Now, keep that in mind. Happily for the tobacco industry. Not happily for R.J. Reynolds, not happily for Brown & Williamson, not happily for Philip Morris. He works for R.J. Reynolds. He doesn't say happily for R.J. Reynolds. He says happily for the tobacco industry because they were in a conspiracy. They were conspiring to keep from the American people their knowledge of why it was that people can't quit smoking and why people smoke themselves to death. Not because we had generations of Americans in the 20th century that all of a sudden didn't love life and didn't love their families, didn't love their children.
We didn't have a generation like that. We had a generation of people who were addicted and that's why they died. That's why Jim Horner died. That is the jury's finding in this case. Happily for R.J. Reynolds. No. Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions. It's the sine qua non without which cigarettes would not exist. And so they focused on trying to make it harder to quit.
An d they s tu di ed why i s i t th at s ome bran ds are doing better than others and they looked at ammonia. They looked at pH data. Go back to the pH documents, the sales documents. And look at the complete pH data was available for the '64 to '72 for those brands. And then let's go to the next page. And they found that the results of the study show there's a very strong positive relation between smoke pH and sales trends. If you monkey with the, pH you're going to get better sales.
A high pH smoke is strong due to a high concentration of unbound or free nicotine in the smoke. They were freebasing nicotine and that's why people were buying those cigarettes. As the smoke pH is increased the amount of free nicotine in the smoke increases. And then they talk about physiologic actions of it. And the high pH smoke is strong in nicotine. And it drove sales.
So then they start experimenting with the different ways they can change the pH and they start messing around with ammonia. 1973. Recent investigations indicate that natural or added ammonia and its salts in tobacco and smoke play an important role.
And these documents are in evidence and I
encourage you to look at them. PT3569 looks like this, that's the sales trends document, RJR confidential, May 10, 1973. And then we got Dr. Teague and his research planning memo on the effects of ammonia and salts on smoke quantity. That's PT2278. Look at these documents and see if you can find the word microorganism in these documents that discuss ammonia and pH because the witness they brought you today said the reason they used diammonium phosphate is they don't want to -you know, microorganisms and stuff growing in the water that they add to cigarettes. They're not talking about microorganisms in this document, they're talking about monkeying with the pH so that smokers will freebase nicotine and that's why they are putting diammonium phosphate in their cigarettes today and that's why they been doing it ever since then. So that the nicotine impact would be enhanced just like that document says.
And what did they tell the public, though? 1979. The claim that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer has not been scientifically proven. And they had press conferences. Look at all the microphones in front of this gentleman at this press conference in Washington, D.C. If you can
you play it, please.
(The video clip was played as follows:)
It was suspect from the start. HEW Secretary Califano launched his anti-smoking campaign a year ago with all the zeal of a reformed sinner. And now, in an apparent attempt to bring some science to the side of his new evangelism, the former three pack a day secretary told the Surgeon General prepare a new report. Its issuance and internal HEW memo said and I quote, would be a media event, closed quote. Turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science.
America, beware if Joe Califano ever gives up drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most intimate.
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. GUSTAFSON: And they kept telling us all how they -- they kept telling the public how they were making all these financial contributions to independent and unbiased scientific research to try to find an answer to the question.
An d h e r e i n 1 9 8 2 , t h e p r e s i d e n t o f t h e Tobacco Institute, Mr. Chilcote said that the cogent review pinpoints the serious gaps in our
knowledge of cancer causation and demonstrates the critical need for more research, further research. And to this end, the Tobacco Institute's financial commitment will surpass $100 million. They spent $100 million in one year on fake science. $100 million funding people to not find the answer because they already knew the answer, but they just wanted people to believe them that somebody was looking out for them.
And they took out full-page ads in newspapers all over the country to lie. R.J. Reynolds did that. Can you have an open debate about smoking? They went on Nightline and the CEO lied. Then, you know, they hired a scientist, Dr. Di Marco, who ultimately went on to work on the Premier cigarette that none of us had ever -- none of you had ever heard of that before you came here. But Dr. Di Marco, when he got the job in 1982 wanted to work on a less mutagenic cigarette and the lawyers told him he wasn't allowed to do it. And they said oh, Mr. Gustafson had it wrong, you know, he got to work on Premier. Who here had ever heard of Premier cigarette before R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company told you about it in this trial?
Because the financial documents they talked
about, if you wanted -- they say it, if you want to drive cigarette sales, you got to advertise, you goT to support, because if you don't do that, it's going to fall by the wayside. That's what drives sales. No one ever heard of it before this trial because they didn't advertise it, they didn't try to make it popular, they didn't even list it as a brand on their website. Maybe they didn't have websites by the time they pulled it off the market. I think he said it was on the market for six months. Six months, seven months. 1988 to 1989, something like that.
But what's the other heat not burn cigarette they claim they make, Eclipse, the blue pack that doesn't have R.J. Reynolds website on it like they say it did and then you found out the truth. You can't find it on there. You go on the -- the brand website tells you to call an 800 number. It's like they don't want people to buy it. You can't get it e v e n i f y o u wa n t t o g e t i t .
What's the attitude of the people who did these things? What is the attitude of those people? Dr. Di Marco took that job in 1982, was told by the lawyers he can't work on a less mutagenic cigarette. He was finally allowed to do
it years later and then the company didn't support it, market it, advertise it and continued to tell the public at that time that cigarettes don't cause lung cancer. Of course, their new heat not burn cigarette that's supposed to be so much safer wasn't going to make it. Why bother if cigarettes do n' t cau s e cance r.
What was their attitude, though? Their attitude, they knew it was addictive, they knew it caused cancer and they knew people would get addicted and eventually get cancer and die and they didn't care. And they congratulated themselves on how well they pulled it off. And Jim Horner was one of those people.
And what did they tell themselves? We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
And then when the Surgeon General, eight years after that memo, came out with a Surgeon General's Report that said it was addictive. What do they do? They issue a press release that claims that cigarettes are addictive are irresponsible and scare tactics. It says the claims that cigarette smoking is a drug addiction similar to cocaine, heroin or alcohol abuse is irresponsible. The
message to the American public and in particular American youth is that using illegal drugs such as crack or heroin or alcohol has the same risk of addiction as smoking to convey this message is to invite disaster.
What's the attitude of the people that knew that their product was addictive and caused cancer, if you got addicted to it and smoked it long enough? What was their attitude? Well, you can see it on the ABC Nightly News.
(The video clip was played as follows:)
People quit smoking every day and there's nothing about smoking, there's nothing about nicotine that impairs someone's reasoned decision to quit and then to stay off cigarettes.
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. GUSTAFSON: To this day they put on their website and brought you an executive to say that nicotine addiction doesn't cause harm. To this day. A leopard don't change its spots. Where they've always been, always, always, is lying about the addictiveness of it, lying about the health effects of it so they can get more replacement smokers to replace the ones who quit or die or both. And what does Dr. Teague tell us about that?
If our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. And that document's long. It's the one with all the pluses and minuses in it about learning smoking and confirmed smokers and all that and how they design cigarettes with novelty filters and flavo ri ngs.
Just like that -- just like that Camel Crush you saw today where you get to squeeze the filter and you hear it click and it changes the taste of your cigarette. Ask yourself if they're making that for the hard core Camel smoker. Where they've always been, always, is lying about the health effects and ad di cti vene s s of the i r pro du ct s o they can get more replacement smokers.
They've got a 60-year retrospective that's in evidence from 1984. Her name is Diane Burrows and she was the vice president of marketing. And what does she say, remember the importance of younger adult smokers. It is a critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand over the last 50 years and they will continue to be just as important to brands and companies in the future and that's because everybody starts when they're a kid and that once they pick a brand, they pretty much
stick with it. Those are the two reasons.
And then you find out the truth about what R.J. Reynolds says about younger adult smokers. They're the only source of replacement smokers.
The only source of replacement smokers. And how do you define, how does R.J. Reynolds define a younger adult smoker, 13, 12. Younger adult smokers.
And what do they tell you that children in Willow Ridge in 1990 despite all the research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact is that scientists do not know the cause or causes of chronic diseases reported to be associated with smoking. Read that letter. It's addressed to the principal of the school, but it asked him to please share it with his kids. 1990. It's always been.
It has always been about a larger bag to carry the money into the bank.
A couple thoughts about Dr. Figlar. The case is about Jim Horner and Dianne Webb. And R.J. Reynolds acted like Jim Horner never existed and Dianne Webb wasn't here. Didn't talk about them at all. Didn't talk about the harms caused because that's what you're deciding. Do you punish them? The prior jury already said by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted. So what's
the harm that was caused and they didn't mention their names?
Dr. Figlar told you that he worked on reducing the toxicants in cigarettes and he called it harm reduction. And then he said that nicotine addiction, which as you heard from the stand from Dr. Cummings, is the fundamental reason why people persist in cigarette smoking and why they get diseases is because of nicotine addiction. That's the fundamental reason. He said it doesn't cause harm. A leopard don't change its spots. Nicotine addiction is meaningless. It doesn't cause harm.
And they talked about being a transformed tobacco company. And even though, you know, if you were to accept the fact that they're different, that they are all different now and they've transformed and they have become this beautiful butterfly now compared to what they used to be, it doesn't change a thing about what they did to Jim Horner. Nothing. Doesn't change anything.
Doesn't change anything of what they did to Dianne Webb or her dad. A transformed tobacco company is one that would admit that nicotine is not just addictive but causes disease. That's a transformed to bacco compan y.
R.J. Reynolds did all these things and they made a ton of money doing it. I showed you how much money they would just spend on fake science. American Tobacco is a billion dollars in sales every ye ar for 14 ye ars i n th e ' 5 0s an d ' 60s . A billion dollars. They got to keep all those profits all those years. And so what we're limited to is showing you how they're doing now and they're making more money now than they ever had.
They got to keep the money they sought while Jim Horner lost his life and Dianne Webb lost what she treasured and loved. And R.J. Reynolds hasn't been punished for doing that. And so today you measure the punishment, based not only what R.J. Reynolds did to cause Mr. Horner's death, but what resources they have right now today. And you saw the numbers that they profit, $5.6 million every day and they pay $3.3 million every day that goes to the dividends that they pay. Those dividends that all those documents all those years back talked about. And you can't make them disgorge all the money they made from way back then, we're limited to what they do right now. How they're doing right now. And the dividends is what they talked about all those years.
And so you know that R.J. Reynolds did what they did for money. And you're going to get an instruction in this case that the fact that R.J. Reynolds is a corporation must not prejudice you in your deliberations or in your verdict.
Corporations are persons in the eyes of the law and are entitled to same fair and impartial consideration by the same legal standard. Corporations are persons in the eyes of the law. They get to be treated like a person in here. And if you want to be treated like a person, you got to act like a person. Did R.J. Reynolds act like a person that doesn't deserve to be punished? Does R.J. Reynolds -- did they act like a person who should be able to benefit and keep everything that they took? That they did all these terrible things for money. They did immoral things to make money and they're going to ask you to put a zero on the verdict form because they make VUSE now and they only monkey with the pH to get rid of the little microorganisms in the water that they put in their tobacco.
They are no different today. They're required to tell the truth. They wouldn't be telling you the truth if they didn't have to.
So as I told you in opening statement when we started Phase 2, the currency that we're limited to, the currency that we're dealing with is the same currency that drove all their decisions all those. They did what they did for money. They knew people were going to die. They didn't care how many. They didn't care who it was. That was their attitude. So you get to adjust it. You get to do something about that.
And, you know, the jury instructions say you cannot award an amount that would financially destroy R.J. Reynolds. And we're not going to ask you to do something like that. We're not going to ask you to do something like that. We're going to ask you to award an amount that is meaningful and that tells them they are accountable since they wouldn't tell you themselves, you got to do it for them.
And that happens sometimes. Sometimes we got to be hard with people. Sometimes we got to be hard with companies because they're just like people, according to the instructions that you get under the law. They're just like people and we have to remind people of what the expectations are and how there are consequences. There are
consequences to the things that we do. R.J. Reynolds is not these folks. They're lawyers.
R.J. Reynolds up there in Winston-Salem, they're accountable to you because you are the conscience of this community. You are the ones who get to say what you think about what they did. So what I'm going to ask you to do is something that's meaningful. Punish R.J. Reynolds with four days of those dividend payments.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Four days.
MR. FURR: May we appro ach ?
TH E COURT: No , s i r.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Thank you. Four days of the dividend payments. The dividend payments that they make every day are $3.3 million. Four times 3.3 is $13.2 million. That's not going to financially destroy R.J. Reynolds.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: B as e d o n the evi den ce you heard, it won't, it won't destroy R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. And it should be meaningful, not just one day, not just one day, but four. Four days. They've been talking about those dividends
all these years.
Most importantly your verdict, whatever amount you put in that, that line because it's your decision and it's your decision alone. There's two things I want to say about that. One, don't award more than four days of dividend payments. Whatever you do, if you go back there and someone, says I want to hit them with $100 million that fake science spent that one year. Let's do that. But don't do that, don't do that. No more than 13.2.
But the number you put on that line and this is what the verdict form is going to look like.
The number you put on this line should be respectful of the harm that they did to Jim Horner because he paid the ultimate price and it should respectful of what the harm was that they caused to Dianne Webb. And it should mean something about what you think about what R.J. Reynolds did.
I really appreciate your attention. I'm not going to get to talk again. Mr. Sales will talk next time in rebuttal. I appreciate your attention. You all have been kind to all of us and I appreciate it.



MR. SALES: Thank you. These are the last words, and one of the things about -- thank you,
Your Honor, and good afternoon.
One of the things about that, because we have the burden of proof, in our system we get to go first in arguments and also get to go last. We get to go last in part not only because we have the burden of proof, but we have the right to challenge some of the assertions that have been made, some of the suggestions that have made to you with respect to the issues that are to be decided by you when you determine an amount by which you decide in your discretion R.J. Reynolds should be punished. And there was a lot of discussion in Mr. Furr's arguments about the concept of transparency.
If I understood him correctly, transparency is exactly what it suggests. It suggests a world in which everyone can see what is being done. It suggests a world in which a smoker, even after all of these years, as they indicate they believe, that's what they're telling you, that they are fully informed. It suggests a world that when you are trying to grow a line of cigarettes through new
packaging and new extensions, and if you truly want them to know what it is that they are putting at risk, particularly since you have seen that we live in a world in which it is overwhelmingly young people who are the new smokers, they suggest to you that they have put it all out there because it's on their website.
And the truth is, as you've heard now, and it's possible -- I'll submit to you it's possible that the vice president for the defendant in here, came into court after telling you all about the website, the signature accomplishment for their transparency, the way they communicate with smokers, I suggest to you that it's possible that he didn't know that he was wrong when he said, at least on these product packages which are a part of their growth brand, you may remember that, I suggest to you that it's possible that he didn't know in this age of transparency that a new or long-term smoker switching over from some other brand, that they don't get that information unless they go hunt for it.
And in fact, in this age of transparency for this defendant who returns, to return to some of the themes that Mr. Gustafson mentioned to you, in this
age of transparency, in fact what a consumer of this product from this defendant will find if he signs on to this website is a program which is designed to market the cigarettes -MR. FURR: Objection. Your Honor, there is no evidence.
MR. SALES: Dr. Figlar said it was a more marketing program, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SALES: What they will find is an effort to be sold more, not more Snus, not more ZONNIC, not more VUSE, if that's the plural, but more cigarettes. That's the age of transparency in which we live.
And I want to suggest to you that in this age of transparency that there were two kinds of companies. There was a cigarette company that wanted to celebrate their migration strategy and there was another cigarette company -- this is yours -- and there was another cigarette company that wanted to celebrate fabulous profits. Because Mr. Furr talked to you a little bit about what it is that the company celebrates these days, and why.
And he suggested to you that the press release from earlier this year where there was a celebration --
that was that ten-year anniversary when they joined up in 2004 with one of their former co-conspirators, that ten-year anniversary there was a celebration. That's what the document says. And I want to suggest to you there are two kinds of cigarette companies.
One is like the company of old, the one that hired public relations specialists, the one that denies -- you've seen that, the forwarding memo, that kind of company, and brag about how it would affect their stock. The forwarding memo, you remember.
And then there is another kind of company. The kind of company that in this era of migration strategy, if that's what they really wanted to celebrate, that they would link arms with officials in front of the American Cancer Institute, the American Lung Association, and say this is what we're doing today.
And what kind of company is this company?
Let's take a look. Because this is the same document you saw just a moment ago, and it speaks to the attitude and the reliability of some of the things that you've heard. Because when R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company through its parent
corporation celebrated the ten-year merger with its former co-conspirator they didn't do it in front of the American Cancer Society. They did it at the New York Stock Exchange with a ceremony at the bell, the ringing of the New York Stock Exchange. And counsel wants to suggest to you because the word migration doesn't appear, is this that strategy they talked about? That was for you. That was for you in this case. That suggestion that that's what they're about. Because when they went to celebrate the ten-year anniversary of the merger with the co-conspirator the last line on this document is the cause for celebration on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, and that's what I want to talk to you about a little bit about. It's about money.
542 percent return in ten years. An average of 54.2 percent. Everyone within the sound of everyone's voice would be very pleased and privileged to celebrate on the floor of the stock exchange when the rest of the world was not seeing those kinds of profits.
And the numbers and kinds of money you've heard about in this case, they're staggering. And they're staggering, and we present them to you not to suggest to you that Dianne Webb is entitled to be a
millionaire. Those are words that are designed, I would submit to you, to suggest to you that there is something wrong in coming into court after another jury determined all of those things that we have been through, all of those things we have been through, and this long road, an 18-year road to this courtroom this day here in Bronson. Those arguments are to suggest to you that there is something wrong to look at this defendant with its untold billions in profits over the decades while it was killing this man through lies, that for what it did in the past it shouldn't be punished.
And the question on the instructions which you've seen is punishment. It's not a token. It's not a match it to your compensatory loss. That isn't what those instructions say. Counsel made those arguments to you to suggest that there is something wrong in doing what the instructions say, which is to punish. And we know that the limits of the instructions are what they are, that you cannot bankrupt this defendant, and nobody has asked you to. Think about the staggering amounts of money that are involved.
And because we know in our system that when we get to this point in time and we talk about
punishing somebody for what they have done through intentional conduct and deceit and lies, and conspiracy to do those same things that take lives, we know that when we go to punish someone it makes a difference what their resources are. And that's why the instruction speaks to the question of resources.
And will it make one bit of difference to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, or RAI, if you do what Mr. Furr suggests to them? Will it make any difference? Will they hear your verdict anywhere? Will those others, not this defendant alone, but those others that are supposed to be deterred by corporate misconduct, will they be deterred?
Think about some of those numbers. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, as you heard from Dr. Raffa, has $900 million in tobacco leaf in inventory lying around.
This is a very small amount of money that we're talking about what the plaintiff has asked for you in relationship. We have tried to find a number that would get peoples' attention. If you take away a little bit of those profits that are talked about, that ability to distribute those retained earnings that are just sitting around unless they're given to shareholders. Does this corporation, RAI and R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company, is that where that money that you have the power to distribute to this plaintiff in this case for killing her father with lies, are the sums of 10, 11, 12, $13 million, are those unfair sums to make it sting for a few days of their fabulous profits, their 542 percent return, all since the time since Mr. Horner passed, and all in an environment that they have tried to come in and suggest to you has made it difficult for them to survive.
It's not magic. It's not magic that they're pulling, that they're able to continue to prosper, although some people have quit smoking. It's called, I say, addiction incorporated, because if your products are by design and with your knowledge products which are designed to and -MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. Improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SALES: That you have concealed from your customers that your products are for decades products that are designed to addict, that is a product that there is always some market for because people will return. And, you know, that's why transparency matters.
So doctor -- Mr. Furr has suggested to you that
-- and this is his suggestion, that it's untrue that they really knew that nicotine was addictive, and that they really ever have added nicotine to cigarettes, or at least experimented with doing so. And this isn't in 1963.
MR. FURR: Your Honor, I object. He's mischaracterized what I said.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SALES: This isn't 1963 with the Addison Yeaman memo. Here's a real bona fide scientist. Allen Rodgman. He's a major guy. You'll have to excuse me. I've forgotten his title. Dr. Cummings talked about that, but he was a major guy. And in 1959 he was telling R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company what you know now, that the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco.
There wasn't any mystery within the halls of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company about whether cigarettes were addictive back in the 50's. And in fact to straighten this out a little bit about the Battelle HIPPO study, I think it's 3615 in evidence -- remember that memo from Addison Yeaman? And it's been suggested to you in this case, as Mr.
Gustafson said, as a lawyer he didn't know what he was talking about. Well, you know different because you know he was in the thick of the planning and the selection of science.
But you remember this? There's that same AY, that's Addison Yeaman, Brown & Williamson. And in this instance they want to separate themselves from Brown & Williamson. When it's convenient for them to show cigarette sells they want to lump everybody together, but when they want to run away from what was happening in the offices of their co-conspirators they say, well, that's not us.
Well, it doesn't really matter. I just want to point out to you that the facts are what the facts are.
This is from Addison Yeaman in August '63. And I don't know if you remember this, but the point of the Battelle HIPPO studies wasn't just a memo. And Dr. Cummings testified about this. The industry was sponsoring secret research on the human brain outside of the country, and that resulted in reports which are summarized and discussed, and their implication by Addison Yeaman in the document that's in evidence.
So it's true that the record that we have been
able to identify that shows that this went straight to the offices of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, the studies on the hippo, the hippocampus part of the brain, they knew about that. And in this era of transparency y'all ought to remember that.
Let's talk about some other documents that were discussed with you. One of them was this Di Marco memo. And, you know, we've spent probably more time on this than this merits, because Mr. Furr pointed out, you know, this isn't true what they're suggesting to you about this Di Marco memo because Dr. DiMarco went on to produce Eclipse, Premiere, whatever it was. Headed it up.
Dr. Cummings told you that Premiere and Eclipse -- in fact, counsel is trying to back away from that now -- that it's not even a cigarette, and, in fact, a cigarette is something that burns.
Well, there is no dispute that Premiere and Eclipse don't burn, and the less mutagenic cigarette that this fellow wanted to work on back then, that's what was being discussed in this memo. Premiere and Eclipse weren't even a twinkle in his eye back then. That's what was being discussed.
But one of reasons we showed this to you is to show what people -- there were some people, and
apparently Di Marco was one of them, inside the company with a conscience, and what he said was, our medical and scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say.
And you know now that although the argument that they have been suggesting to you they have been transparent all along, their hero in the pre-Figlar area that they have raised up to you, because of Premiere and Eclipse, a billion dollars spent, that's what they say, on a product they have never really tried to support.
What do we know about the industry in this era of transparency and the access to documents? We know that they will spend any amount of money to try and convince people of things that aren't so. And I would submit to you that a lot of these things that you've heard about, a lot of these things on the website that people won't know about unless they look for it, unless there is some other cigarette that we haven't seen, because certainly the cigarette pack that Dr. Figlar brought, that doesn't direct you to the website either, it directs you to an 800 number. That's the transparency of Eclipse.
Let's talk a little about ingredients in this era of transparency. It was helpful I suppose to
have Dr. Figlar tell us what an end process pH adjuster is. He did that on redirect. But you know because you've seen the documents, and there isn't any question about it, and counsel certainly had the opportunity with the chemist, the vice president from his own company, his own client, to ask him to explain away these documents from the 70's. And you remember Dr. Cummings testimony? All of this was concealed.
The company was in a panic to try and figure out why it was getting beaten in the market by Marlboro. And they weren't the only ones. The coconspirators had the same problem. They didn't disclose any of this. And what they figured out is that Marlboro had an ingredient, and that was ammonia compounds. And those ammonia compounds changed the way in which a smoker experiences the smoke.
And, you know, some of us aren't chemists and biologists, and whether it's something that happens in your mouth or happens in your lungs, I cannot tell you that. But what we know is that they knew it was addictive, and they were certainly trying hard while concealing what they knew to make them more addictive. So those haven't been explained
away certainly. And you know that there is diammonium phosphate and all these sugars.
And what they say on their website is this era of transparency is those are just flavorings.
That's what they call them. That's what they call these ammonia compounds as well. And you know from Dr. Cummings that those actually affect the way in which a smoker responds to nicotine. Those are items that make cigarettes more addictive.
What else do we know about the website in this era of transparency? Remember when I showed that to Dr. Figlar and I asked him about -- let me make sure I get it right -- ethyl levulinate? It might have escaped your attention a little bit because it takes us back to the testimony of last week. Remember we have that document, counsel didn't talk about it, didn't explain that one away, where it says that they were experimenting on the brain of rats with levulinic acid -- it's in evidence -- to try and figure out what the smoker -- what the response was to nicotine, whether or not the uptake in the brain of the rat was really working, and so forth. They have never disclosed that.
So when Mr. Furr got up on redirect examination in this era of transparency, when he was asking the
witness, the face of R.J. Reynolds in this courtroom today, the face and voice, he asked him, is ethyl levulinate the same as levulinic acid, and he said no. He's the chemist, the Ph.D. chemist.
Well, this is in evidence, and I've forgotten the number. This is in evidence. April 21, 1998. And what it tells you is that a synonym for ethyl levulinate is levulinic acid.
And where on the website, you have to ask yourself, because there's certainly been no showing that they show smokers, if they can find the website, that they are still as of this point in time adding chemicals to cigarettes which they have determined through laboratory experiments change the uptake of nicotine in the brains of rats.
And that's what Dr. Cummings was talking about when he said that smokers have a right -- excuse me -- smokers, it would be useful for them to know.
And, you know, a little bit of a blast from the past. That's not the only one we can talk about talk about in this era of transparency, because one of the things on there is lactic acid. We didn't talk much about that.
And you remember that I was asking Dr. Figlar whether or not cigarettes produce certain chemicals
that are found in gasoline and other harmful chemicals, and what do those chemicals -- if tobacco smoke produces those chemicals, whether those are disclosed on the website. Actually he said he didn't know. He said that was in the scientific papers, which I guess if you could find your way to a medical research lab as a smoker you would find.
But in this era of transparency -- can we pull up 3681? Because we have now confirmed that they add lactic acid to their cigarettes. This is a document in evidence. It's actually one of those documents that predates the 1964 Surgeon General's report. And what do we know? And ask yourself whether in this era of transparency matters like this are being disclosed.
Lactic acid was identified by one of R.J. Reynolds' co-conspirators 40, 50 years ago as a carcinogen. They're adding it at least to some of their cigarette products in this era of conspiracy. And ask yourselves whether or not, you know, times may be different, but is it true that they are today a completely transparent company.
You know, we were dinged by Mr. Furr also because he said it was confusing what doctor -- Dr. Teague had said in the Nordine study document about
people wanting to quit. I just would like to point out to you that from the plaintiff's perspective the significance of this document, members of the jury, is that this document was written at a time when R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company was denying that nicotine was addictive. This was written at a time when R.J. Reynolds and its co-conspirators were purposefully and intentionally by design taking scientific funding that they had sponsored, because there was some leakage in this conspiracy, right.
Remember the document about Dr. Abood? They were sponsoring a scientist, and when they found out he was doing something that might lead to the ability to quit smoking, like we have today 30 years later, they cut that funding off.
And the point of this document is a recognition by this defendant 3 0 years ago we understand. We understand your struggle, we understand your difficulty, and we know, we know that most of you want to quit.
And it isn't 5 million a day, as Mr. Furr mentioned. It's 5000 a day. And those numbers, by the way, members of the jury, they don't account for the number of times people quit and fail, go back to smoking, because that's the nature, as you heard,
about addiction.
And the other thing about the Nordine study, all of which was concealed, is that at the same time the conspiracy was doing things like pretending that it was trying to find answers, it was actually trying to figure out ways to stop people from quitting smoking, because it recognized, and this is where the change in spots comes in, because otherwise they would have to go out of business.
And I give Dr. Figlar credit, because, you know, he's in the same place actually today, and there shouldn't be any mistake about it, because the suggestion of this growth strategy for growth brands, the other ones they don't support, I hope, respectfully, that it's apparent to you, as he later admitted, we're in the cigarette business, we're not trying to sell fewer cigarettes, although he says, I guess, we really do hope people quit buying and using our products.
And you have to ask yourselves as they come before you and suggest that it is a token of punishment that should be meted out against them whether or not that is where we are in this era of transparency.
Let me say one more thing about pH, because
counsel suggested that we are denied the power, R.J. Reynolds' own words, they said this over and over again, the documents, what we say to ourselves in our labs, and we talk to our lawyers, that's not the real world, and what you should look at is what we really do.
Well, we know from their website that when they talk about pH modification they don't say anything about what's undisputed that they clearly have tried to alter the effect, the impact, the kick of nicotine on smokers. And we know this is right in there: As the amount of ammonia or ammonia salts in smoke increases above a certain level the smoke becomes less acidic, more nicotine occurs in free volatile rapidly absorbed form, and the nicotine impact is enhanced.
There isn't any dispute about that. And counsel suggests that's not the real world. It was the real world. It was the real world that was confidential and secret until long after Jim Horner died.
I want to talk about that a little bit, you know, one of the things that you've been told many times about the work of the prior jury, and this was touched upon a little bit by Mr. Gustafson, but just
thinking about it in terms of transparency, is that the jury -- your Number 3 on the first page of instructions, that he died because he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine that were manufactured by Reynolds.
That's important information, we would submit to you, in this era of transparency, to have smokers that understand if they continue to smoke, if they can merge their way past the marketing gimmicks and find a way to the website, the flagship of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's accomplishment in this era of transparency, this is what they say: It is not a significant threat to health. That's what they say in this era of transparency.
And you have to ask yourselves why they say that. Why they say that is because in this era of transparency and migration when they're still trying to sell all of these products, and we could take the ones out of the box and put the continuum back up there, because we know and you know, we ask, we hope that you know, that that is a risk to human health, and it's a risk of what I like to call addiction incorporated, because that is really what it is all about, and not keeping peoples' eye on the ball about what really happened.
And ask yourselves therefore in this era of transparency if it makes sense why when you can tell a smoker don't throw this cellophane, don't throw this pack, and hopefully also don't throw these butts on the ground, when you include the required warnings, in this era of transparency if you really wanted smokers to know these things why not just tell them. Why not put it on the cigarette package? And you have the answer today from Dr. Figlar in this era of transparency that despite all this regulation -- and more on that in a moment -despite all this regulation they're not going to say that cigarettes are addictive, and it's the addiction that causes disease, unless somebody makes them.
And that's what killed Jim Horner. And they're lying about it. I don't mean in this courtroom. I mean they're lying about it in the past. And in this era of transparency that's what you have.
Let's talk a little bit about the FDA and some of the other matters that Mr. Furr raised with you that he suggested support the idea of mitigation.
And as Mr. Furr did, and Mr. Gustafson before him -before I do that I want to show you again some of the instructions. Keep everybody's eye on the ball.
How do they get to zero? Here is how they do it. They get to zero, I would suggest to you, by asking you to not focus on the instruction that I have highlighted here. They get to zero because they want to talk about things -- and I made a little list, which I would like to go over with you in a minute. They want to talk about things that all of which happened with two exceptions in their mitigation after Jim Horner died, after the thing that puts us in court occurred, and he was dead, buried, and gone as a result of their lies.
The punishment and the amount is a function of the harm caused, and due regard to the harm caused necessarily requires that you turn the clock back at least to 1996. You know, it isn't the fault of the plaintiff certainly, there is no suggestion that it is, that as we say sometimes, and judges say it too, that wheels of justice can grind slowly. And in our system we don't come to court, in our American system, and say, you know, it took you, Dianne, just a little bit too long to get here. Because I agree that if this was being tried in 1996 right after we had killed Jim Horner with our lies and our conspiracy that you might be entitled to more money, but not today.
And that's not the way things work in our American system, when as a result of things that are, no matter how hard counsel tries to explain them away, simply immoral. Immoral. Immoral.
MR. FURR: Objection. Improper argument, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. SALES: That isn't the way our system works, to come in and say you did these horrible things that took a life. They did what they did to Dianne and to Jim. Four years plus with cancer.
Four years and an ugly death. Loss of dignity, all that comes with it. It has to be based on that.
And they're suggesting to you that the punitive damage award should mirror what Dianne can get in compensatory damages. I would suggest to you it is unfair and wrong.
So in this era of transparency let's just look at what their mitigation strategy is -- excuse me -their mitigation argument is, because certainly the instruction does say that you should think about things that mitigate the harm caused to Jim Horner, and I would ask you, what circumstances by the greater weight of the evidence mitigate the need for punitive damages. And what did they talk about,
because you have to look at all these instructions together. And every single thing -- I have a list here, but I've misplaced it, and I apologize -- Mr. Furr has discussed with you, with two exceptions, took place after Jim Horner died. Every single one of them.
And the two exceptions are Premiere, which we now know Mr. Horner couldn't have even tried unless he was one of the few that wanted to taste that bad tasting cigarette in limited distribution back in the 80's, and the other was Eclipse, which apparently was coming out when he already had cancer and was destined for death. And everything else happened afterwards.
And, you know, it's true that there are more eyes on them now than there have been in the past. And it's true, as you have seen in this case, that even with all of that, that even with all of the eyes that are on them, and even with the legal requirements that they have to tell the FDA things, which don't necessarily, by the way, as counsel explained, get shared with the public, you have to find your way to what they really believe.
And even when they want to come in and take credit for things that others have made them do,
like the government, that's not mitigation, that's being forced to come along. That's somebody who needs another reminder. And that's where y'all come in.
So I would submit to you, members of the jury, that the amounts suggested by Mr. Furr, they don't represent fair and just punishment in the context of this case for a company that has earned billions.
We would submit to you that that would be disrespectful of the loss, and it's not just a compensatory loss, it is punishment for harm. The fact that it has taken us 18 years to get to this point is no mitigation at all.
Finally on that, with respect to the amounts involved, the figures that Mr. Gustafson has suggested to you, $13.2 million, that is a figure that is not only respectful of the loss, that is a figure that will no way bankrupt R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and that is a figure that will be respectful of the loss in this case as punishment for things that happened to Jim Horner and things that happened to Dianne Webb as a result.
So we urge you in your deliberations to think about those things and return a verdict as Mr. Gustafson said is respectful, and respectful of
those instructions from the court.
I want to be the last one to say thank you. I know I speak on behalf of everybody, too many lawyers here perhaps, for both sides. Too many to mention. We're all very grateful for your time and consideration, and I'd like to say that as well on behalf of everyone. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Your Honor.
