PLAINTIFF'S CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. PAIGE: Good morning. Nice to see you guys again. We've been a here long time, and
I remember a month ago when we had that big room, and I know it's been a long trial.
Usually the lawyers get haircuts at the beginning of the trial and it lasts us the whole trial; and even with my short hair, I had to get a second haircut.
So we've been here a long, long time; and first and foremost, on behalf of myself and Crane and everybody here, Sheila, and also the defense lawyers -- and I think you have seen that we work well together.
We may have differences, but we all pretty much think the same on this issue. We really do thank, you know, each and every one of you.
We know that you-all have your own lives, that you have your jobs, your kids. You know, the last month of school we've been here, and it hasn't been easy.
And, you know, this system wouldn't work -- when I go downstairs this morning to get something this morning, I see all those people in the jury room.
And it's amazing how this system works, how somebody like Sheila Weinstein can come
forward and have six or seven fair people from the community listen to the evidence and listen to the law and do what's fair and do what's right.
And that's what both parties want.
That's what Sheila wants, and that's what the lawyers for RJ Reynolds have to want.
And that's why when we picked you-all out of that whole big group, we knew that we had a good jury and, this is the jury who, regardless of your result at the end of the day, the lawyers are happy that you-all paid attention and gave us your time and your consideration.
We know and you-all know that this is important to the parties. It's important to RJ Reynolds, and it's important to Sheila.
And this is her day in court, and today -- you know, I've been on my feet a lot. I hurt my back the other day. So hopefully I can last this hour on my feet.
But, you know, today, you guys -- we sit down, and this is the part of your job that's important, where you go back, and you now have all the power, all the responsibility.
You know, we spoke a lot about opportunities, and now it's your opportunity to
decide what's right and what's wrong.
And the main issue -- not the main.
There are a lot of important issues in this case.
I'm going to talk about some of them, and then Crane is going to talk about some of the medical issues.
And then when we get done, I think Ray and Mr. Keehfus, Jason, are going to talk to you as well.
But the first issue in this case that's so important, that's so important is whether or not Irwin Weinstein is a class member or whether he should be excluded from the class.
And as you-all know, you've heard that it's not -- it applies to Florida residents who were smoking really in the '30s, the '40s, the '50s when things were different.
It's really for this generation's parents and grandparents who smoked at a time when we didn't know -- they didn't know what we know now. And so there was a class action for that.
And if Irwin is a member of the class,
Irwin Weinstein, the defendant must be, must be held accountable for their defective product.
It's a product that, if you use it as
intended, you will become addicted and you will most likely die.
The filters don't work. They manipulate the nicotine, and they're responsible for that.
If he's a class member, they must be accountable for putting profits over human lives.
That was their business model.
Anybody -- you know, I thought of something during this trial, actually during jury selection, that if somebody would go for their MBA, at a business school, and they said: Give me an idea. I want your model, your business model for what's going to work. How can we make money?
And somebody said: I've got an idea.
We're going to target kids -- and we're going to show the documents where they intentionally do this.
We're going to target kids with a drug.
We're going to disguise it as glamorous, and we know ultimately 45 percent of them are going to die, and millions more are going to suffer.
But we'll make billions of dollars, billions of dollars, and when these kids grow up and die, we'll go after replacement smokers.
And that's my business model. We can
make billions of dollars.
And I'm going to hand that in as my thesis paper for my MBA. That person would get kicked out of school. They would get an F. It would not be acceptable. It's not acceptable in society.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. PERSONS: There's no basis for this billions of dollars argument. I mean this is more appropriate for a Phase II as opposed to Phase I.
THE COURT: Okay. There's still an issue as to whether or not to assess punitive damages at all; and so based on that analogy that has just been given, the objection is overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: I'll try not to -- I'll try to say things that won't get objected to, but Ray, Mr. Persons, you know, he's doing his job, he objects, and that's what lawyers do.
MR. PERSONS: Object to the commentary, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Let's just move on,
Mr. Paige.
MR. PAIGE: Anyway, I'll move on.
So the first issue in this case, which is -- the important issue is, was Irwin Weinstein addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And, if so, was it a legal cause?
And we're going to go into what legal cause means, but: Was it a legal cause of his COPD, his stroke -- or his stroke?
And that's the issue. He's a class member if he was addicted.
You know, RJ Reynolds now says nicotine is addictive. They admit that now. You know, that was an Engle finding.
But they admit it now in this case, but not Mr. Weinstein. They want you to believe that, yes, it's addictive, but not if somebody like Mr. Weinstein brings a lawsuit. Then he's not a class member.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held
sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. PERSONS: Counsel needs to stick to the facts of this case and not talk about what position Reynolds has taken with respect to other prospective class members, and that's the basis for my objection.
THE COURT: I'm not sure I heard that reference to other class members.
What reference was there to other class members?
MR. PERSONS: He was saying -THE COURT: All right. Just stick to -I don't know that I'm sustaining the objection, but just stick to the facts in this case.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: So I guess the point I was trying to get to is, the interesting point is, when Mr. Weinstein was 12 years old or 18 years old and when he was addicted and they were lying to him, he was a member of their class, their club. That's what they wanted.
But now when he wants to assert his legal rights, under Engle, they want to exclude
him from the class.
So that's your decision. It's an important decision, and it's very important.
MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, objection. Misstates the legal standard.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Let's move on.
MR. PAIGE: So one thing that I want to be clear about is that class membership is not about fault.
Okay. The judge read you the instructions, and in the instructions, you're not going to see anything that says if Mr. Weinstein bears responsibility, he's not a class member.
It's not in the law; and, in fact, one of the laws that he read to you that you have is that addiction need not be the only cause, that -it's called concurring cause.
So we have admitted responsibility.
Irwin Weinstein didn't have to admit anything, and we admitted responsibility in the very first pleading.
But the fact that addicts can quit, the fact that heroin addicts or alcoholics or cocaine addicts can quit doesn't mean you're not a class
member. That's not the definition of a class member.
The fact that Irwin Weinstein bears some responsibility cannot exclude him from the class.
If that was the test of being a class member, if being able to quit or bearing some responsibility was the issue in being a class member, nobody would ever be a class member, and RJ Reynolds would never be accountable under the Engle case, and that's not in the law. That's not the law when you read the law.
So this is what it means to be a class member, and the judge has read it to you, so I won't go through it, but basically the addiction is a legal cause if it produces or contributes to substantially producing.
So "substantial" means important. So the addiction has to be an important cause. We know that. And -- so that you can say but for the addiction -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Approach.
MR. PERSONS: Misstates the legal standard.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PERSONS: Okay.
MR. PAIGE: But for the addiction, the loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred, and we know from looking at their documents that nobody, even when -- you'll see their documents. They're all in evidence.
They talk about the reason why people smoke. They know why people smoke. It's the addiction that sells their product.
If they removed the nicotine or lowered the nicotine, people aren't going to use their product.
They know that. So they sell addiction.
That's what they do, and that's how they make their money.
So but for the addiction, if he was not addicted, would he have smoked a pack a day every day for 60 years?
Do you think that Irwin Weinstein would have still smoked if they had removed the nicotine and he was not addicted, because if the addiction -- if -- but for the addiction, that's the reason he's smoking.
And I remind you, some of their documents talk about: We know people don't smoke
for taste. We know they don't smoke for these other reasons, so we have to get them to smoke in the hopes that they will become addicted.
That's their business model. So but for the addiction, without the addiction, would Irwin Weinstein, from what you know about him, do you really think that he would have been smoking first thing in the morning, all day long, every day, using the patch, as best as he could and those things had he not been addicted?
So when you apply the facts to the law, was he addicted to nicotine? And I submit to you that the evidence in this case, everybody said he was addicted.
Everybody who knew him, who put their hands on this gentleman, who met -- the doctors who treated him and cared for him, the people who knew him all said he was addicted.
The only person who said he wasn't addicted was Dr. Samuel, and Dr. Samuel didn't agree with anybody. He didn't agree with the CDC. He didn't agree with The World Health Organization. He didn't agree with The Surgeon General.
When you-all asked him questions, you
know, you decide if you think he was truthful with you.
When he told you that the 50 million number doesn't include people who relapse or die, that doesn't make sense, but he can say what he wants.
When he told you that they don't have inpatient clinics for nicotine, if you think he was being honest with you, I submit to you he wasn't.
Dr. Amos, the very next expert, told you they do have those clinics.
So the only person who they brought forward to you to tell you that he was not addicted was Dr. Samuel, and he had his own motivations, his own agenda.
All of the experts get paid. They all get paid, but he made the most by far. He made $100,000 to come in here and offer an opinion that was so far afield and so extreme from all the other experts, and that was what they needed. That's what they needed.
He wouldn't agree that there was tolerance, do you remember that, with the DSM, that somebody who smokes tobacco, nicotine, you
know, when you first smoke a cigarette, you have nausea, you're dizzy, you feel sick, and you have to build up resistance to the drug.
He wouldn't even agree that Mr. Weinstein, who was smoking a pack to a pack and a half a day of unfiltered cigarettes, had tolerance.
So, you know, I apologize if I was going back and forth with him. I didn't like that, to be honest with you.
I wasn't looking to argue with the man, and I just had a hard time getting answers out of him, and for that, I apologize.
But remember, when we're talking here about addiction, you know, was this man addicted, is nicotine addictive, in their own internal documents, they talk about things like: Doubt is our product.
The industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on major fronts, one of them being litigation, by creating confusion and doubt.
And that's all that Dr. Samuel tried to do. He tried to create confusion and doubt, to disagree with good doctors in the community like
Dr. Falkowitz, Dr. Lieberman, Dr. Babic.
We didn't know those doctors.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
May we approach?
THE COURT: Yes.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. PERSONS: He's calling into question the litigation strategy and suggesting that by calling a witness to testify as Dr. Samuel did that it is further evidence creating doubts, further evidence of the conspiracy, the improper conduct.
THE COURT: I don't think he's crossed the line yet.
Overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: And you'll have these documents. They're in evidence, this one which is PT02050. They talk about how this strategy was brilliantly conceived.
That's what they're talking about. They know that 450,000 Americans are dying every year.
That's not something they don't know about.
And they know that they're purposely marketing and targeting school kids. They know that. It's in their documents.
And to sit there and tell each other that this is a brilliant plan that they've executed over the years is something that has to be considered, and it's in evidence.
But this is their internal documents that were secret until we got to, you know, later when they were forced to turn them over.
And these are all what they talked about. Regardless of what Dr. Samuel has told you, they talk about: We are in the business of selling nicotine.
They know that's what they're selling.
They are selling nicotine. They're not worried about the taste. They are not worried about, you know, getting people to smoke for other reasons.
They know that they have to design the cigarette in such a way that nicotine delivery is the -- is what they're selling.
They're selling a nicotine delivery device. It's a drug delivery device, and they make it appear glamorous.
Without nicotine, a potent drug, a powerful drug -- they know it's a powerful drug. Everybody says it's a powerful drug.
The CDC says it's powerful, the World Health Organization, the Surgeon General. Everybody says it's powerful except for Dr. Samuel.
But even RJ Reynolds, in their own internal documents, talk about how powerful nicotine is.
And now we have to decide whether or not this man was addicted to nicotine; and if you look at his life, how he smoked, we know that he started smoking at 12 years old.
Ninety-five percent of smokers start as teens. That's their market. They can't get 30-and 40-year-old people to start smoking. They won't do it because -- and we went through that with Dr. Samuel.
He even admitted that; the brain of a teenager doesn't process this risky information the same way an adult brain does.
So they go after the teenagers, and that's their market.
After boot camp, he was already smoking
over a pack a day of unfiltered cigarettes. He would smoke a pack to a pack and a half for 60 years.
The first thing in the morning before he was shaving, he was taking in nicotine. And Dr. DiFranza, who published -- who consults with the Surgeon General, says that's the most important way to tell if somebody is addicted because when they sleep at night, the eight hours that they're sleeping, the nicotine leaves their body.
So when they wake up in the morning, somebody who is addicted, anybody who is addicted knows this, when they wake up in the morning and, if you're a smoker, you'll smoke within a half an hour of waking up because you need to get the nicotine into your body.
And that's exactly what this gentleman did. He would take 2 to 300 hits of nicotine to his brain every day, and nicotine is a drug.
He tried all these methods of quitting: cold turkey, plastic filters, gum, hypnosis, Smoke Enders, the patch, Zyban. He tried reducing the number of cigarettes.
And I'm going to show you those records.
Again, you've seen them a couple times. I know that you guys know that.
And he couldn't stop despite the adverse health effects.
You know, they used that to blame Mr. Weinstein. They said: Well, he's to blame because he knew it was bad and he continued doing it.
But that's what addiction is. See, that's the problem, because that's what addiction is, is that it's compulsive use despite knowing of the harm that's caused by it.
And that's why addiction is a brain disease. It's a disorder, and it shouldn't be taken lightly.
It's not to be compared to coffee. You know, Dr. Samuel tried to compare it to coffee. There's not 450,000 Americans dying every year from coffee. Coffee is not the problem.
And then at the end when he was on oxygen -- you know, this is a man, they tried to say: Well, he didn't know what he was doing.
When he was at the end of his life and whether he had Alzheimer's, dementia, or the stroke, all his body knew was that he wanted the
nicotine. So I think that says a lot about how addicted this gentleman was.
Now here's the records that we put up with Dr. Samuel, and they -- we included -- I'm a little color-blind.
So I know they told me that it's green, but we put in the records from the defense that are green because we had certain records, and I think they made a reference at one point that we didn't include some of the records.
So we put everything together so you could really see the whole picture of this gentleman.
Back in 1986, a doctor did write he was unlikely to get religion, and then we know in '87, he had tried hypnosis twice, that he was somebody who was trying to quit; he tried hypnosis twice.
In '89, he was trying to quit. He quit for four days. Then he was down to a quarter of a pack, back to a pack. Then he wanted to try the patch. Then they said he tried the patch. It didn't work.
Then Dr. Lieberman wrote that he had cigarette abuse, which he said was addiction. He stopped smoking. Now he's smoking five
cigarettes. Now he's not smoking. He does smoke.
This is somebody who was trying as best as he knew how. Listen, everybody could try harder. Any addict can try harder, okay, and he can only try what he knows.
You know, he didn't have all the information they had. He didn't know that he was dealing with a brain disease. He never knew -you know, for all he knew, it was a habit.
A lot of people back then thought it was just a habit; you kick the habit. So he had no idea what he was battling against. The tobacco companies knew. They could have helped these people.
And they had -- they spent $250 billion marketing their product. They could have spent that money helping people who started smoking in the '30s, the '40s, and the '50s before there was any warnings and help them quit.
And they didn't do that. They didn't want to do that because it would hurt their business.
In 1995, it was a pack a day, and then down to a half a pack, and then he's up to a pack, and then a cigarette a day.
And then he had his stroke, and then we know after the stroke is when a lot of these references that they've been making about this gentleman saying: I won't stop. I won't stop.
Most of those happened after he had his stroke. Okay. So all those references -- but he was trying, and, again, he went to a half a pack, a pack.
You know, they keep showing you this record, but there was a record about six months earlier that he had been quitting. He had not been successful despite trying Zyban.
Then the reference that he had a memory dysfunction, and he was saying: I won't stop. He threw away his Zyban. He refuses to stop. Then he's down to a half a pack. Then he stopped smoking. Then he won't stop.
You know, his wife says he's smoking, then down to a half a pack, and we know this is somebody who, you know, was doing the best he could. He was doing the best he knew how.
He tried things that were available to him at that time, and he tried everything.
I've never seen -- you know, if he would have quit at any one of these times, their
defense -- think about it, their defense would have been: Well, he quit. He could have quit whenever he wanted.
So if somebody quits the first time: He could have quit. If somebody tries one time:
They should have tried more. If somebody tries 15 times: They're not trying hard enough.
You can't win. You can't win with RJ Reynolds.
In 2000: I won't stop. The next month, the doctor is referencing he has a memory dysfunction. Then he did stop with Wellbutrin, and finally he did relapse at the end.
And these are the records from Dr. Epstein who was the psychiatrist who saw him long before any lawsuit was filed, long before anybody knew who Dr. DiFranza was or who Dr. Samuel was.
And he was an independent psychiatrist who wrote in the records that this is a gentleman who was addicted to nicotine.
There was a reference with Dr. Samuel about Dr. Lieberman saying what he believed "recalcitrant" meant, and I don't know if you remember this.
I remember it because I took it personally, but maybe I shouldn't have. But they said to -- I said to Dr. Samuel: You remember when Dr. Lieberman described what he means by "recalcitrant"?
And then on redirect, he said that Dr. Lieberman never said that.
Well, here's Dr. Lieberman's testimony that you-all saw in this trial, and he says: I think an addict can stop. However, addiction is a disorder. It's a brain disease.
And, you know, they try to make a reference that, because he was intelligent, he should have been able to stop.
Addiction affects millions and millions of Americans. It affects people who are female and male, black and white, smart and not so smart.
Some of the smartest people in the world have problems with addiction. It doesn't mean because he was smart, he wasn't an addict.
And, you know, Dr. Lieberman explains there is a high recalcitrant rate. He was the one who wrote that Mr. Weinstein was recalcitrant that one time.
And then they asked him again: But he
quit for a year. He had the ability to quit.
And he said: That's self-evident. He quit, so he had the ability, but the recalcitrant rate of that is actually very high. So with a lot of addicts, they will quit for a period of time and then renew their addiction.
That's called relapse, and it happens all the time because you have a drug memory, and you have cravings.
Cravings can go on for a long time. You can get in a stressful situation and go back to an addiction. It happens.
And so that's what Dr. Lieberman meant by "recalcitrant." If I didn't state it properly when Dr. Samuel was on the stand, I apologize, but this is Dr. Lieberman's testimony under oath.
Now this is their defense to addiction.
This is their own internal documents from I believe it's 1981.
That document is in evidence. You can read it yourself. It's PT02184. And in their own documents, they talk about how nicotine is as addictive of cocaine and heroin.
And here today -- and when they say it's as addictive as cocaine and heroin, it doesn't
mean you'll have the same -- I think heroin and alcohol addicts who stop have DTs or some severe withdrawal that you don't have with nicotine, or cocaine, for that matter.
But the way it works with the brain with cravings, how addictive it is, that's the similarity between the drugs, and that's what all the health organizations, that's what the tobacco companies are talking about.
And internally, they're saying -- the lawyers are reminding them internally -- this is what they were saying back before lawsuits were filed: The entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon an attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We cannot defend smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted.
They know that. They know that addiction is not a choice. Nobody chooses to be an addict.
These people don't choose -- at 12 years old or 18 years old or whatever it was, Irwin Weinstein never chose to be a lifelong customer of the RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
He would have been much happier if they had just left him alone, and that goes for
millions, 3,000 teens every day, and that's -they never changed their marketing strategy,
Dr. Proctor told you, and that's how they build their business.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
May we approach?
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. PERSONS: Object to the reference to
3,000	teens a day. That's post-death conduct. That's been ruled out by a pretrial ruling of this Court.
THE COURT: Where does that come from? Is there any evidence in this case of it?
MR. PERSONS: No, because the Court had ruled that out pursuant to a pretrial ruling, and so Dr. Proctor was precluded from making any reference to the current -THE COURT: All right.
Any response?
MR. PAIGE: Well, I mean the only way you could do it is mathematically. If 95 percent -THE COURT: Well, the objection is to
current activities of the defendant tobacco company as opposed to activities of the relevant time frame. That's the objection.
All right. The objection is sustained.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, may I have a curative instruction?
THE COURT: The jury will disregard counsel's comments in discussion of the defendants' current business activities.
Let's move on.
MR. PAIGE: Thank you, Your Honor.
So I just want to go back to this board
again.
When they're talking about smoking is not a free choice, that it's the addiction that's the problem, they know internally.
And that's why I go back to the word "substantial." Is addiction an important role?
Does addiction play an important role?
And obviously they know it does.
Internally, they know it does, and that's what they talk about.
Here's all the people who knew Irwin
Weinstein who met him in his lifetime; and every one of them, every one of them said he was addicted, everybody who knew him.
They described him as somebody who needed to smoke, who tried to quit. It was like a drug.
The doctors who knew him, Dr. Babic,
Dr. Lieberman, Dr. Falkowitz, Nurse Erickson,
Dr. Epstein, and Dr. -- well, Dr. DiFranza did not know him, but you know his credentials.
All these doctors say he was addicted.
The fact that I have to spend this much time talking about whether somebody who smoked for 60 years over a pack a day was addicted to nicotine,
I apologize, but I think it's very clear, and it's important.
And this is where it goes to the "but for," and this is how we know but for the addiction this gentleman never would have smoked for 60 years.
They know that. They know that, and to tell you otherwise, you have to decide if you think they're being straightforward with you.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Commenting on --
THE COURT: Overruled. Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: So this is what their own internal documents say. This is a different position, but this is what they say internally.
They're talking about, without the chemical compound of nicotine, the cigarette market would collapse.
They know that. They know that. They could -- if they wanted to make this about free choice, they could lower the nicotine level to a nonaddictive level.
They can do that if they want to. Maybe they wouldn't have 50 million smokers. Maybe they'd have 2 or 3 million.
The people who really choose to smoke, they'd have them, but that's not enough for them. That's not what they want. That's not what they're after. They're not after that.
We cannot be selling a product that most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to say, with the exit gate, if the nicotine was not there, we'd be out of business overnight.
So, respectfully to each and every one of you, it's very clear they know it. They know
it. They've known it for a long time. They've known it while they knew 450,000 people were dying.
They knew it while they marketed school kids. They know that nicotine is a business.
They know without nicotine, people do not smoke, not enough to sustain addiction, and that's what they say internally.
So how does addiction cause disease?
And that's another thing they try not to admit.
They try to say: Well, even if it's addictive, addiction doesn't cause disease unless you're mentally ill.
Dr. Samuel said he never, with all the thousands of addicts that he worked with, never saw one patient have a death or a disease caused by addiction, is what he told you.
So, in essence, he's telling you addiction doesn't cause disease. That's what they want you to believe.
It's not about Mr. Weinstein. It's about anybody who is addicted, Dr. Samuel doesn't believe that addiction causes the disease.
But we know if somebody who is addicted, they're inhaling these chemicals, arsenic,
cyanide, formaldehyde, butane, rocket fuel, urea.
Horrible things are going into their body every day, 200, 300 times a day, and that's how being addicted causes disease.
Forty-five percent of all long-term smokers die, and millions and millions -- it's
450,000	a year, and they said millions more are living with diseases like Buerger's disease -it's horrible -- throat cancer, COPD, emphysema, lungs removed.
This is not -- this is a serious problem, and I'm going to show you reports from the FTC where they comment about how serious it is.
So here's Irwin Weinstein. He's smoking for 60 years. He's inhaling this junk into his lungs 5 million times because he's addicted.
You know, if he wasn't addicted, if he was a social smoker, maybe he gets 100,000 inhalations.
And the Surgeon General of the United States, he even says it's clear -- you know, the American Society of Addiction Medicine, I had to show Dr. Samuel about how they talk about how addiction causes disease.
Everybody knows addiction causes disease. It's a medical condition that needs to be treated.
And the Surgeon General, in the 2004 report, links nicotine addiction, not choice, to disease, and here's Dr. Koop.
Can you do it?
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: We should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: So it really should not be a dispute in this case: Was Irwin Weinstein addicted? You know, but for the addiction, would he have smoked a pack a day at least every day for 60 years and developed COPD and stroke?
And I submit to you overwhelmingly that he should not be excluded from the class. It would not be fair. It would not be fair to single him out and exclude him.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
May we approach?
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held
sidebar:)
MR. PERSONS: That's just a misstatement, and I had to call it to the Court's attention.
It's not a matter of excluding Mr. Weinstein from the class. It's a matter of whether the proof that's been adduced is sufficient for his inclusion in the class. And so I object on that basis.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: Your Honor, can he make a legal objection from there? I don't mind if he says: Misstatement. It's not going to bother me.
THE COURT: The problem is -- he can. The problem is, if I'm going to get a response, I have to have you up here.
So I never know exactly what the objection is going to be.
All right. So you don't want bench conferences? I may still have to call you up here. I don't know. I'll see what the objection is.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
THE REPORTER: Give me one second.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. You ready?
THE REPORTER: Yes, thank you.
MR. PAIGE: So when Mr. Weinstein hopefully, respectfully, once he's determined to be a member of the class, they can no longer dispute this.
And these are the findings that were found in Engle in that case that were disputed that are now binding on you as a matter of law.
They've been upheld by this judge, by other judges, by the Supreme Court. They don't dispute them anymore. They can't.
And what they've been found to have done -- and now it's been determined, although they didn't admit it, that smoking causes COPD and strokes, nicotine is addictive and dependence producing.
Those are findings from the trial.
They were negligent, meaning they were careless. They didn't act like a reasonable corporation should act who is selling an addicted and deadly drug. That's not responsible. What they did was not responsible.
They sold and supplied a defective
product, that was defective and unreasonably dangerous.
They marketed a product with filters that don't work, with nicotine levels that are high that sustain addiction, making them inhalable, and knowing, knowing that the -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. PERSONS: Object to the interpretation of the findings. The Court has instructed the jury on what the findings say, and now for Mr. Paige to come in and basically -THE COURT: Mr. Paige, don't comment on it. You can review the findings with them, but don't comment on what they mean. Just talk about the findings.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: They concealed information that they knew about in their secret documents.
They concealed them on purpose.
And they conspired, they agreed with the other tobacco companies and the CTR and Tobacco
Institute to conceal important information from smokers with the intent that people rely upon it to their detriment.
They intended people to rely upon it to their detriment. So they knew people would rely upon it and get ill, and they concealed that important information.
And I submit to you it's not acceptable. Nobody would teach anybody to do that.
And it's interesting, when Dr. Proctor was here and they were cross-examining him about how great the CTR and the Tobacco Institute was -I don't even remember, it was so long ago that Dr. Proctor was here.
But they had these articles and said:
Oh, the CTR did this great study, and the Tobacco Institute did this.
They were co-conspirators. The judge has told you. It's in the findings. So it was like Dr. Proctor told you. They hired scientists who manipulate science and do things to benefit the tobacco industry.
So the question for you is, once he's a class member, is -- and this goes way back to jury selection. We spoke about this, and in opening
statement.
But to apportion fault, to apportion responsibility that you will assign to Irwin Weinstein and RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company, and I submit to you that you can't just look -- and I want to say this: We admitted responsibility in the very first pleading.
We said that Irwin Weinstein accepts some responsibility in combination with what they did, and I'm going to go over what they did.
But Irwin Weinstein, it's not just Irwin Weinstein in the '90s. It's Irwin Weinstein as a teenager. It's Irwin Weinstein in the '40s, in the '50s, in the '60s. It's his life.
And you have to look at what part of the blame he takes and what did they do and compare the actions of somebody who was maybe weak, maybe he was an addict who was not strong enough, versus a corporation's powerful -- the most powerful corporations.
You saw the political ties in the documents, and you have to compare the actions of an addict versus these corporations, and then you apportion fault.
And I submit to you that when you look
at what they did on purpose and this is -- and this is where it started with Irwin Weinstein, and these are their documents.
And, you know, whether you're a parent or a schoolteacher, you know that kids, what people do to influence our kids is so important.
And you would never, never expect in a normal society for somebody to influence kids to use drugs, get them addicted, and then 30, 40 years later bump into them and put all the blame on that kid who grew up to be an addict.
And they knew what they were doing when they targeted kids like Irwin Weinstein. In their own documents, they talk about: We must convince him for irrational reasons to start smoking in hopes that he will discover the real satisfaction, meaning addiction.
So they know that they have to convince kids, teenagers to smoke so that hopefully they will become addicted.
We must induce a presmoker to become a habituated smoker. He does not start to smoke for a craving for nicotine. He starts to emulate a valued image.
That's why they use sports stars and
movie stars. I still remember from when I was a kid -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: They used movie stars and athletes on purpose. They do it on purpose to get kids -- advertising works. $250 billion of advertising works or they wouldn't spend that type of money.
School days are here. That means big business for tobacco. Line up the most popular students.
Think about it. Who would do such a thing? They know 450,000 -- they know these kids are going to grow up to be addicts, and they know they are going to suffer and die.
And they know they are going to leave their families, their kids, their grandkids, and that's how they built their business.
And I would submit to you that really when you consider marketing to kids an addictive drug on purpose that really I can make an argument that they're fully to blame, that they don't share any responsibility with Irwin Weinstein because they caused this whole thing to occur, that it was
their product; they needed to do the opposite of what they were doing.
Okay. If they're not going to lower the nicotine, they needed to take steps to help people to stop smoking, help addicts who want to quit, and don't go after kids because they know that 95 percent of their market are teenagers.
Dr. Samuel said he doesn't see kids any more smoking, because now, in today's world, we know, you know, kids won't start smoking now. They won't.
But back then in the '30s and '40s -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, here we go again getting into post-death conduct, talking about the patients that Dr. Samuel sees now and how he doesn't see teenagers.
THE COURT: It was all evidence that was presented though, was it not?
Overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: I have a certain amount of time. I'm sharing my time, and I need to make sure everybody has enough time.
And I know you guys know a lot of this.
You heard all this evidence, and you know a lot of it, but this is really their business model. This is what I was talking about.
The other night, I was staying -- I live in Broward, and I was staying at a hotel up here, the Marriott, and I couldn't sleep. It was 1:30 in the morning, and I turned on the TV, and A Few Good Men was on.
And it's one of my favorite movies. I love that movie, but I've seen it so many times, I can barely watch it anymore.
And in that movie, there is a point where Dawson and Downey, they're getting convicted of their crime, and the little guy says: But we did nothing wrong. We did nothing wrong.
And the big guy says: No, we did because we were supposed to help people who couldn't help themselves. We were supposed to help the people who are weaker than us.
And that's the thing is with these tobacco executives. Somebody, somebody should
have spoken up somewhere along the line and thought about the people who they were harming, and nobody ever did until they were forced to.
So this is what they did. You know, this is the FTC report, and they're saying -- you know, this is in evidence.
But they're using this advertisement, young, sexy girls, famous athletes, doctors, Joe DiMaggio.
You can't see it here, but this says:
Prom ticket. It's a prom, 1952, I believe, John Wayne.
And those were the things that they would do to influence and induce children to smoke.
And they knew what they were doing, and they knew what the end result would be, and that's the sad thing about this whole industry, that they know what they're doing.
They're not stupid. They're doing it on purpose. They know what the end result is going to be, and they do nothing -- they do the opposite of what reasonable people would do.
So they have this meeting at the Plaza Hotel; and at that point, this is, again, a time
where they had opportunities, choices that they could have made.
It was 1953. Irwin had been smoking maybe ten years, and at that point, they really -that's why I talk about, somebody needed to step up.
I mean I can't believe that not one person in this meeting, not one businessman would worry about people outside of his own family and try to help.
And so in that meeting, they talk about things like: It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they can't break.
And they knew at that time that their product caused cancer. There was no dispute about that.
So in 1953 -- you know, today in 2013, they're saying: Well, what's the problem? This is a habit that Irwin Weinstein should have broken. Why is he suing us?
But back then, when they were trying to make money internally, they're talking about they know that this is an addiction that some people can't break, and they knew it caused cancer.
But despite that, they issued this Frank
Statement, and in The Frank Statement, they said: There's no proof that smoking causes cancer.
And they talk about: We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business.
And that's the way it should have been. That's what they should have done. They should have looked out for people's health.
That's what a reasonable corporation would do. That's what honest individuals do.
That's what somebody who is looking out for other people does. That's what we teach people to do, and they did the exact opposite.
Internally, they knew; there was no doubt that their product causes these diseases. Carcinogens are found in every class of smoke.
The evidence is overwhelming, and cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects that cause -- lung cancer is in there, but that cause COPD and stroke.
They knew that. There was no secret to them. There was no doubt in their mind. They didn't admit it until 2000. They didn't admit it until they were forced to admit it. They didn't
help anybody.
And then internally they have all these documents that you've seen where they talk about, you know, giving smokers a psychological crutch and rationale to continue smoking.
They knew at this point, they knew there were people like Irwin Weinstein who they could help. They knew that, and they did nothing to help him. They did nothing.
They knew that they were trying to create confusion and doubt: No, nicotine is not really addictive. Nicotine, if it's addictive, people can quit. It's a choice. Nicotine doesn't really cause stroke. Oh, maybe you got it from your genes.
You know, they have every excuse known to mankind. They won't accept responsibility for anything; but internally, when you look at their documents, you know why we're here.
And they knew that they were going to be here because, in their documents, from 1968, somebody wrote that: We may be subject to the finding -- one day, we may be subject to a finding that we're lying to sell cigarettes.
They knew this was going to happen, but
they kept doing it for years and years, decades and decades, and they did it on purpose.
And here's some of their statements, and these are opportunities that some of these people had to come forward and tell the truth.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business, and that's where we stand today.
VOICE: If we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we'll remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
VOICE: We want to be the detective just as much as the Surgeon General and the AMA, and we'll cooperate in every way.
VOICE: Well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements.
If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them; and if they are found, they will be removed.
VOICE: We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
VOICE: Do you believe that cigarettes are safe? Have they been proved to be safe,
Mr. Cullman?
VOICE: I believe they have not been proved to be unsafe.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: You see, and those were the types of statements that addicts looked for. You know, when somebody is trying to quit and they fail and their family says: Quit, quit, quit; you should quit, and they fail, that's the type of statement that provides reassurance for an addict.
That's the type of statement that makes an addict feel: Well, maybe it won't happen to me. Maybe it won't happen. Maybe it's not true. Maybe they will remove the dangerous ingredients.
They do it on purpose, and they talk about doing it on purpose in their documents.
They talk about that it's a brilliantly conceived -- the strategy is brilliantly conceived and executed.
And that's the thing that really -- if you think about it, they're doing this on purpose. They're playing with people.
Okay. It's not just kids. It's people who are addicts, and they're taking advantage.
It's almost like bullying.
They have all the power, all the money, all the resources. They can do what they want, when they want, to who they want, and internally they talk about how brilliant they are.
And, you know, it's so brilliant that they've made enough -- and that's what I'm saying, the $250 billion that they're spending to promote this product, to promote this addiction, to promote this disease.
And when you talk about the power that this industry had, the influence -- and that's why we sit here, and we're ordinary citizens. Okay.
Everybody works hard to get where they are in life. I know each and every one of you have worked hard, as have the attorneys.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Let's move on.
MR. PAIGE: But when you look at what they did to get to where they are, you know, the struggles it takes in life to get where you are in life, to see the shortcuts that they took to get to where they want to be, they talk about: Who ain't for more money? Who ain't for more money? Do we really want the cigarette smoke touted as a drug? There's dangerous FDA implications.
They didn't want the FDA in their business. They were able to finagle that. They were able to keep the FDA -- even though nicotine is a drug, they were able to keep them out.
Then the Tobacco Working Group, you know, that was -- the National Cancer Institute put together the -- the National Cancer Institute put together the Tobacco Working Group.
And the lawyers, the subcommittee and counsel, were telling them: Get on this group so you can give the tobacco industry as much protection as possible. Don't admit anything wrong, but just get in there and infiltrate the Tobacco Working Group.
And they talk about: Eliminate or
modify proposals like smoking clinics. So this is 1973.
The tobacco industry, you know, they criticize her husband who tried as hard as he knew how, he did the best he could, and they criticize him for not trying hard enough.
And, meanwhile, back at the time when he was trying, rather than promote smoking clinics for people who started in the '30s and '40s and '50s, rather than help those people who started before any warnings were on the cigarettes, to help people who started as teenagers back in the day, to help them with smoking clinics, they're talking about eliminate obstructionists. They're obstructionists.
They want to obstruct and eliminate any smoking clinics. They don't want the National Cancer Institute doing that.
And then they talk about all their friends in Congress: We can count 300 representatives and 75 senators as grade "A" contacts.
You know, they know us; we know them.
And that's what we're dealing with here. We're dealing with an addict, Irwin Weinstein, this boy
who joined the Army, who dedicated his life and enlisted voluntarily for the Army.
And he's battling his addiction against these guys, these companies who have all the money, all the power, all the resources, and the ability and the opportunity to do the right thing, but they won't do it. They won't do it.
And here are more statements.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: The cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown. In fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer.
VOICE: Are you saying that cigarettes are harmless?
VOICE: I don't know that. I don't know that they're harmful or harmless. I wouldn't be in the business if I thought cigarettes were harmful to people.
VOICE: And as far as I'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply don't know.
VOICE: The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
VOICE: It may not be harmful; you're not convinced?
VOICE: It may be, or it may not be; we
don't know.
VOICE: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
VOICE: All right, sir.
VOICE: It has not been causally established.
VOICE: Do cigarettes cause cancer?
VOICE: I don't know if they do or
not.
VOICE: I'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer.
VOICE: We don't know what causes cancer in general right now. So I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: And that shows how far they'll go. That was a gentleman from the industry in front of Congress swearing to tell the truth.
And it's -- you know, it just doesn't seem right that they can take a position publicly for decades, this brilliantly conceived and executed plan, and say they don't know and expect Irwin Weinstein to know everything that he was
dealing with, to know -- to expect him to know that he had a brain disease, that he should have tried harder, and to know that 45 percent of smokers who start as teenagers are going to die.
It just doesn't seem right. It's not fair for them to take those positions.
Now here, and here's another opportunity where they could have really helped, you know, some people, some addicts who needed different things.
You know, some people were able to stop with the patch, the gum, cold turkey. It depends who you are, your genetic makeup.
Everybody is different, and some people need Chantix, Wellbutrin. Well, they had a chance -- and this is back in the '70s.
The CTR was looking into a grant to this Dr. Leo Abood, and Leo Abood was looking -- this is 20 years before Zyban came out, and Zyban is ultimately what worked with Mr. Weinstein.
And so 20 years earlier, the tobacco industry has Leo Abood looking into medications that work as an antagonist to nicotine.
And they're talking about, rather than helping people, how it's going to damage the
industry, how it will put them out of business, and they cut his funding off.
So if you think about it, at that point in time, I mean 20 years they delayed the development of medications to help people who they're now blaming.
Twenty years earlier, they had all the opportunity, all the money, all the scientists on their side, the best scientists in the world.
And if somebody was looking to invent something to help people who were addicted, they didn't work with them and they cut their funding off.
And with nicotine manipulation, they asked Dr. DiFranza: Was nicotine manipulation relevant or irrelevant to Irwin Weinstein?
He said it wasn't relevant to him. He doesn't know about cigarette design. To him,
Mr. Weinstein was addicted.
But Dr. Proctor, who has looked at their internal documents, internally, they talk about how enhancing the pH levels are so important in selling cigarettes. It's the west way to exploit nicotine satisfaction.
Dr. Proctor talked about how they could
manipulate the chemistry and it could make it more or less inhalable and also increase the fraction of the nicotine so it increases the potency, like crack cocaine when it's in its free-based state.
They add ammonia. They add diammonium phosphate. They add chemicals to cigarettes to make them more addictive.
They don't lower the nicotine. They can. There's so many ways to manipulate nicotine. Dr. Proctor told you they can grow tobacco with less nicotine. They can put less nicotine in the cigarette. They can do what they want with their nicotine, but they choose to make it as addictive as possible.
This is from a Brown & Williamson document, that their sales patterns are positively correlated with the nicotine level in products, and they talk about: We can regulate fairly precisely the nicotine to almost any desired level.
And they talk about doing it through genetic means, and that's what Dr. Proctor is talking about.
They have the ability. In the '70s, the '80s, the '90s, when this man was trying to quit,
they could have done the opposite if they wanted to.
They could have made -- well, for him, it was probably too late. You know, once you're addicted, you're going to smoke the cigarettes with the nicotine in them.
But for people who were starting to smoke, who were choosing to smoke, adults who were starting, you don't have to sell them the addicted cigarettes.
And we know that all of their lies, all of their marketing to children, all this brilliantly conceived plan and strategy, we know it worked because you look at the graphs and we know back in 1900, nobody was smoking and nobody was dying.
And we know that, and we know once they started marketing to children, building their business, lying about it, getting government, getting the FDA, Congress, people on their side, we know now what happened.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: We know what happened, that the smoking levels went up and the death rates
went up in America.
Twenty percent of all deaths, that's what we heard, 20 percent of people die in our country from nicotine addiction.
And this is what the FTC report says, that smoking is, without question, the single greatest public health problem this nation has ever faced.
For anybody who cares about public health, who has dedicated their life to public health, they see how bad this problem is.
The cost to society in human terms is staggering. That's not me. That's the government. The FTC is saying that.
And we talk about 450,000 Americans dying every year, and that number is a tremendous number.
And to put it in perspective for you, if a plane crashed tomorrow, it would be horrible.
It would be horrific, and we would all -- it would be on all the news channels, and we'd all feel horrible for what happened.
To get to 450,000 people dying every year, it's the equivalence of three 747s crashing every day, every single day for a year. That's
what 450,000 is. That's the harm that they're causing, and there's millions more who are bearing the brunt of this addiction.
So they wasted five opportunities to tell the truth and save lives, and that's who this is about, Irwin Weinstein.
He does accept partial responsibility; but when you do the things that they did, when you lie on purpose to make money, when you don't care about cancer, when you don't care about -MR. KEEHFUS: Objection, Your Honor.
Can we approach?
THE COURT: Yes.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. KEEHFUS: The objection is this is a misstatement of the law. You've already ruled the comparative fault does not apply to intentional torts.
Mr. Paige has now gone on to tell the jury that they should reduce comparative fault because of intentional conduct.
That's out. You've already ruled that comparative fault doesn't apply to the intentional conduct. They can't have it as a sword and a
shield.
THE COURT: I haven't connected those two in his closing.
MR. KEEHFUS: He said because of the lies and because of the intentional conduct, and I know it's coming, Your Honor. That's an improper argument based on the law.
THE COURT: The objection is overruled.
MR. JOHNSTONE: We still have about over 20 minutes.
Can we have a bathroom break? I saw a couple jurors -THE COURT: All right. We'll take ten minutes.
Okay.
MR. PAIGE: Your Honor, will I get additional time because of -THE COURT: Yeah. Just hang on. I'll tell you how we're doing it.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: All right. Members of the jury, we're going to take about a ten-minute break.
Okay. So we'll take ten minutes. That
gets us back, I guess, at around 11:30. See you in ten minutes.
Do not discuss the case. We're not there yet. All right?
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. PAIGE: Thank you, Your Honor.
Okay. So you know, we were talking about apportionment of fault; and, you know, so you look at what the tobacco companies did, and you have to compare it to what Irwin Weinstein
did,	and that's how you apportion fault between the parties.
And I want to talk about Irwin's life in two parts because we really have -- he was born in 1926.
So if you take 1926 to 1966, is when they first put the warnings on cigarettes, and you use that as one-half of his life, and the other half, if you look at 1966 to 2006, he died in 2005, you divide his life into two halves to help you apportion fault.
And I want to say this, when you guys get back into the jury room, I know that you guys have been together for a month now. You guys are friends.
I remember when -- I just know that you all have been together, and it's great. You guys have molded together; but everybody, everybody on the jury has a voice, and it's just good to let everybody have their say.
Everybody, every single person has to be involved and stick up for what they believe and what they know is right and what they know is wrong.
But in 1926 to 1966, starting as a kid, starting as a teenager, starting in the military, smoking when everybody was smoking, smoking in hospitals, and they were smoking on airplanes, you know, athletes -- that's Lou Gehrig.
Everybody was smoking, and the fact that he was smoking during that time period before they had any warnings on the cigarettes, I submit to you that he can't be held for have been doing anything wrong during that time period. He did nothing wrong.
They targeted him as a kid. They gave free cigarettes in the military. It was their defective product. They were careless with it, and they didn't help anybody.
And during that time period, he was doing the same thing that everybody else was doing. Sixty percent or fifty percent of doctors were smoking. You know, you could smoke everywhere.
So for the first 50 percent of his life,
I would submit to you that the fault for the defective product, for the negligence, for the carelessness rides with RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
And RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company, and I just want to remind you -- I know you guys know this -- they're not one company. It's RJ Reynolds, American Tobacco, and Brown & Williamson. So they buy the fault for all three of those companies.
So it's three corporations. How you have to divide the responsibility is three companies versus Irwin Weinstein.
You know, we know that they were spending, you know, $250 billion making smoking appear glamorous and healthy.
So to blame him for anything during that time period when he was 15, 20, 25, 30 years old wouldn't be fair. It wouldn't comply with the evidence, and it wouldn't be right.
And this is a little clip, and it kind of shows how society was at that time when he was growing up, when he was smoking, what type of things were normal and how they were teaching people to inhale the smoke as deeply as they can.
Doctors were smoking, athletes, et cetera.
If you could play that.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: Tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked: What cigarette do you smoke, Doctor?
The brand named most was Camel. Yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette.
VOICE: Do you inhale? Then you're better off smoking Philip Morris, and here's how you can prove it. Light up a Philip Morris. Take a puff. Get a good mouthful of smoke, and slowly let the smoke come out...
VOICE: Give them Pall Mall famous cigarettes in this special Christmas carton.
There's not much time, so go out and get several cartons of Pall Mall...
VOICE: A carton of Camels are sure to please. The cartons are handsome under Christmas trees. So easy to give, so good to get, it's Camels, the nation's favorite cigarette.
VOICE: Don't miss the fun of smoking,
Don't miss the fun of smoking. Mildness is a pleasure with Pall Mall. Don't miss the fun of smoking...
VOICE: And here's Yankee's great outfielder Mickey Mantle. What do you say, Mickey?
VOICE: It's not hard to see why more folks enjoy Camels than other brands. I found that out...
VOICE: Hey, I've got a better idea.
Let's take a Winston break.
VOICE: That's it. Winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. Winston's got that filter blend.
VOICE: Yeah, Fred.
VOICE: Why don't you settle back, settle back and have a full-flavored cigarette.
VOICE: Do you think cigarette manufacturers had something to do with that?
VOICE: Yeah, I think that -VOICE: Cigarette manufacturers don't make movies.
VOICE: But what do you think, that the moviemaker just showed Marlboro on his own? VOICE: Perhaps the moviemaker was a
Marlboro smoker.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: So, you know, the point really is, for part of his life, he wasn't doing anything wrong.
It was before there was warnings. He was a kid. He was young. He was smoking. He was doing what 50 percent of the doctors were doing, and I submit to you that they're responsible for the first 50 percent of his life.
The next 50 percent, I ask that you compare the acts of an addict, somebody who is addicted, his weaknesses.
And I submit to you that his failures were motivated by being an addict, by being addicted.
His failures were part of being weak, but he's not a liar. Irwin Weinstein wasn't a liar. He wasn't deceitful. He wasn't greedy. He didn't hurt anybody on purpose. He didn't try to make money at the expense of other citizens.
He didn't do that, and the next 50 percent of his life, he tried, and I submit to you that every addict could try harder.
I know I don't take that away from RJ
Reynolds, and I agree that every addict, every smoker should try harder, and they have to bear some responsibility.
They do. I don't run from that, and neither does Sheila. Sheila accepts that, and she knows that.
But he was not a liar, and they were.
And he did not target children. They did. He did not manipulate nicotine. They did. And they need to be held accountable for that.
And we know quitting is not easy, and we know that, over time, there have been a lot of people who have quit successfully. It's happened.
And Irwin Weinstein, he did quit at the end, and if he would have been part of that 50 million, that poll, at one point in his life, he would have been included within that poll of people who quit.
But just because you quit doesn't mean that you don't relapse, it doesn't mean that you don't die, it doesn't mean that you don't suffer.
But quitting is hard. You've seen these numbers from Dr. DiFranza. There's 45 million smokers.
On an average -- you know, some smokers
don't try to quit at all. Some might try three times in a year.
We know there's an average of 1.5 quit attempts per smoker per year, and we know that there's a very low success rate.
And because he failed, as hard as he tried, you know, he was like a lot of other people.
And we know from their own documents, from the FTC report and from the Surgeon General report that smoking is a disease.
It's not a free choice. It's not an addiction. If it was a free choice, he would have quit.
If it was a free choice, he would have quit a long time ago. He would have quit in 1987 when he tried the hypnosis if it was just a choice.
THE CLERK: Counsel, one hour.
MR. PAIGE: Thank you.
So from their own -- this is the FTC report: Smoking is not a matter of choice but becomes a matter of need.
Their own internal documents: We can't defend smoking as a free choice.
And the Surgeon General report, and this applies directly to Mr. Weinstein. You know, they're talking about people just like Mr. Weinstein, and they say, the Surgeon General, on their own -- they're unbiased. They're a government agency who is looking out for the welfare of citizens of our country.
And they write in their own reports:
Two factors refute that smoking is a matter of free choice. Smokers start as teenagers and then become addicted. And that's what happened with Irwin Weinstein.
And they'll tell you about teenage smoking. I know after I get done talking,
Mr. Persons, who I respect -- I like Mr. Persons.
He knows I like him. He's not RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. He's their lawyer. He's not them.
But I want to hear and I want you to listen to what he says about their marketing to children, whether he supports that or whether RJ Reynolds will admit that they should not do that because it causes disease, addiction, and death in our country.
So for the last 40 years, knowing -- so we divided, and some of you may be better at math
than I, but if you take 50 percent and you put it on RJ Reynolds for the first half of his life, and for the second half of his life, I submit to you, when you compare the acts of Irwin Weinstein, an addict, his weaknesses to the actions of RJ Reynolds, Brown & Williamson, and American Tobacco, if you split it up equally between the four of them, he would buy 25 percent of the fault for the last 40 years, the last half.
And I submit to you that it makes sense that RJ Reynolds be 87.5 percent and Irwin Weinstein be 12 and a half percent.
You cannot -- the evidence does not support, I submit to you, a portion of fault where he, a kid and an addict, should bear the same responsibility as these companies.
The next issue in the case -- and I'm going long, but these are important issues, as you know.
You know, class membership is important. Apportionment of fault is important, and there's been a lot of talk in this case about concealment after 1982.
It's a legal doctrine. It's called the statute of repose, and in fraud claims, you can
only go back a certain amount of time in time.
So for the negligence and the carelessness, you can consider the actions of RJ Reynolds in apportioning fault for that.
But for the concealment claim, the fraud claim, under law, the judge has instructed you that you can only consider fraud after 1982 for the fraud claim.
And if you -- part of punishing RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company is based upon -- not part. All of it is based upon the fraud claim.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Misstatement of the law.
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: Which part do you claim is a misstatement?
MR. PERSONS: The part about punishing RJ Reynolds, concealment, punishing RJ Reynolds.
THE COURT: What's the objection? Part of the issue here is punitive damages, isn't it?
MR. PERSONS: Part of the issue is punitive damages, but now he's talking about the evidence of concealment post 1982. I'm just --
THE COURT: That's the only basis upon which he could rely on punitive damages. The objection is overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: So we're going to get to the instruction.
For punitive damages, the judge told you -- you may not remember, but it has to be clear and convincing evidence, and you have to find certain things for there to be warranted punitive damages.
But to get to the punitive damage question, it has to be based on fraud. So it's a little complicated, or maybe not.
So you need fraud. It has to be after '82, and then you have to have clear and convincing evidence, and it has to hit at least one of those prior four criteria.
So you can consider how bad their conduct was in causing not only harm to Irwin but harm to others.
You could look at the totality of what they did, but the first issue before you get there is, was there fraud after 1982?
So basically there's two findings of what they did. The first thing that they did that we know is that RJ Reynolds intentionally concealed information regarding what they knew about the addictive nature and the health effects of smoking.
They didn't share everything they knew. They concealed that on purpose, and then they entered into a conspiracy, an agreement with all the other tobacco companies and the CTR and the Tobacco Institute with the hopes that people would rely upon their lies with the -- and the public would rely upon those to their detriment, meaning the public would -- they wanted people to rely upon their lies so that they would keep smoking knowing that people would die.
But to find for the plaintiff on that claim, there has to be -- in all candor, there has to be a concealment of material information after 1982, and I submit to you that there is evidence of that.
There's evidence in two ways. Number one -- well, three ways really. Number one, under the law, you can infer reliance.
You know who Irwin Weinstein is. You've
heard about him. He was a quiet man. He was an intelligent man.
And if you believe that these statements, this conspiracy, either the concealment by RJ Reynolds or the conspiracy by the industry did something that made a difference to him, you could find by inference that there was reliance.
But we know that they had many opportunities to tell the truth.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates the legal standard.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Move on.
MR. PAIGE: We know they had so many opportunities to tell the truth, and when I look at these videos, I think to myself: This is 1984.
This is the CEO of RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. He knows that there's millions of Americans watching him.
He could have been a hero at that time.
He could have been -- he could have helped people. He could have saved lives.
I mean it would have taken courage on his part to go to the other tobacco companies and
say: We're not playing anymore. We're done.
We're not going to play with you anymore. We need to tell the truth. We need to help people.
Grandparents, parents are dying who started smoking in the '30s and '40s. We haven't been upfront with these people.
We haven't helped them, and we've lied to them, and we need to tell the truth.
And this is what he was saying in 1984.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: You're saying that smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
VOICE: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
VOICE: All right, sir.
VOICE: It has not been causally established.
VOICE: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
VOICE: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
VOICE: No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
VOICE: No. As a matter of fact, there
are studies that -- while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: So here was an opportunity for him -- that's just one opportunity, and you've seen many -- where they could have told the truth, they could have helped people.
And when people are addicted, that type of statement where they're concealing important information that they know about is detrimental.
It doesn't give people the motivation they need. It doesn't -- you know, a lot of people -- you know, now in 2000 and 2010 or 2013, now we have Chantix or Zyban.
And we have -- you know, we know. You can go on the Internet, and you could find out how bad addiction is and how it works on the brain and so forth and medications that are available.
But back then, especially for people who started smoking as kids in the '30s and the '40s, they needed help.
They needed -- all they wanted -- they
deserved, they were entitled to have this company to be honest with them.
And if he would have went on the news and explained to people like Irwin Weinstein that: Look, this is not just some habit that you have. Nicotine addiction is a brain disease. You may need medications like Chantix or Zyban to help you quit.
We've been cutting off funding for Dr. Abood, but we're going to start helping again. We're not going to conceal that from you.
And, by the way, if you're addicted, you need to know that your body is being exposed to not only tobacco but cyanide and arsenic.
Do you think Irwin Weinstein knew that?
Do you think he knew what he was putting in his body?
They needed to tell them that, you know:
It's not just maybe it will happen to you or maybe you will get lung cancer. You will get sick. You will get sick. You will get Buerger's disease, throat cancer, emphysema, strokes. You're going to get sick, and they're almost a 50 percent chance you're going to die a painful death.
You know, COPD is not an easy way to
die.	You basically suffocate to death, and Irwin Weinstein did not understand what these people knew.
And they needed to tell him that the filters that they were touting as being a safe alternative did not remove any of the deadly toxins that he was getting into his body.
Now 99 percent of people smoke filters, and there's still 450,000 people dying from the product. They're not safe at all. They're not safe.
And we know from their internal documents that they know that filters aren't healthy.
That's another part of their lies, another part of their game, another part of their way to make money at the expense of putting profits over human lives.
They do it on purpose. In their own documents, they talk about the illusion of filtration, the cigarette -- this is, I believe, a Brown & Williamson document: The cigarette smoker of a filter cigarette is getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette, but he abandoned the regular
cigarette on the grounds of reduced risk to health.
They knew that. They knew that. That's what that market -- I don't remember if you remember, but all those ads: More scientists smoke this filter than others. It's been a long time ago.
And this is what Sheila said about her husband, he felt it was safer for him. He felt a filter would filter out the tar and the nicotine.
That's what they wanted him to believe to his detriment. That's the whole point. To his detriment, they wanted him to believe that, and he did.
You know, she took -- you know, and I'm -- this -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. May we approach?
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. PERSONS: Your Honor, I knew where he was going with that. It's highly improper.
THE COURT: I don't know where he was
going with that. Tell me where he was going.
MR. PERSONS: Well, he was pointing to his client, and to single her out and -- that's just not appropriate during closing argument. He should stick to the facts of the case.
THE COURT: It's overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: Look, you all saw Sheila testify, and you heard about her relationship with her husband, and it wasn't easy for her.
And she did the best she could. She was under oath. She told you the truth. She knew this man better than anybody, better than Dr. Samuel, better than anybody.
And she told you he believed that the filters were safer. You know, did he ever stand up and declare outwardly, you know: I'm relying on cigarette advertisement?
Nobody does that, but everybody was switching to filters, and he switched to filters.
THE CLERK: Counsel, one hour, ten minutes.
MR. PAIGE: Thank you.
I've got to speed up.
So here is pictures of him. These are after -- do you remember this picture here was in 1986. So he did smoke filters. He thought they were safer, you know.
And whether or not those are the cigarettes that caused his cancer, imagine that he smoked filters, whether it was 20 years or 5 years or 6 years, if he had that time back to work on quitting.
He thought he was doing nothing wrong.
If he had those years back to work on quitting, but they didn't want him to quit because they wanted him to smoke and rely upon their statement to his detriment.
So that is the reliance after 1982, and that's why I say to you, respectfully, I submit to you there is evidence that he did rely after 1982 on their lies just like they wanted him to, just like they wanted him to.
To now come here and pretend like he didn't believe them because he was a smart man, believe me, there is a lot of smart people, a lot of smart people who unfortunately believed their lies.
Punitive damages, this is -- if you find
that there was reliance after 1982, you can consider the -- you can consider all these things in terms of whether or not punitive damages is warranted.
And so you could award punitive damages if you believe that they showed a reckless disregard for human life.
Well, I submit to you obviously they
did,	and they didn't care about human life. They say so in their own documents.
You can talk about their entire lack of care, their indifference in consequences. They knew in 1968 -- they were indifferent. They knew back then that they were going to be held subject to these findings.
Whether they disregarded -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Approach.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: Wait until Mr. Paige is
here.
You're objecting to the part where he
said --
MR. PERSONS: They've known that they were going to be held -THE COURT: -- subject to these findings.
MR. PAIGE: The document in 1968 I was referencing said they may be subject to the findings that -THE COURT: Yeah, I don't know what findings you're referring to.
Okay. The objection is overruled, but don't -- you should not imply that back in 1968 they knew that they were going to be subject to the Engle findings.
Overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. PAIGE: I hurt my back.
JUROR GENTRY: Do you need a nurse, Doctor?
MR. PAIGE: I didn't know about it until a couple hours later.
Anyway, the issue of punitive damages is very important. It's very important more so so the tobacco companies -- one of the reasons for punitive damages is to deter others from engaging
in this type of conduct.
It's to, you know, punish RJ Reynolds from engaging in this type of conduct, to tell corporations that they can't do what they did and get away with it, to tell other corporations like Philip Morris and Lorillard, other cigarette companies who are watching this, to tell them that: No, we don't tolerate what you did. You cannot have this type of conduct and walk away from here and pretend like nothing happened.
This is why punitive damages are important, why these companies need to know that they will be held accountable if they do this stuff on purpose.
You know, if it was just some act of:
Hey, we made a mistake. We're sorry.
But there's no acceptance, and they don't have to. They don't have to accept any -they don't have to legally come forward and accept that they did anything wrong.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. Pretrial ruling.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Move on.
MR. PAIGE: But just, you know, they
need to know, RJ Reynolds and cigarette companies need to know that they're not above the law, that they're liars, they do it on purpose, and they put profits over public health, and that's not right.
It's not acceptable, and they need to know that.
And the only way they know that is if you tell them by your verdict that you don't find these type of things to be acceptable in our society.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: If you'd raise your right hand, do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
VOICE (collectively): I do.
VOICE: Please consider yourselves to be under oath.
VOICE: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
Let me ask you first -- and I'd like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive.
I heard virtually all of you touch on it. And just yes or no, do you believe nicotine
is not addictive?
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
VOICE: Mr. Johnston?
VOICE: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxications -VOICE: We'll take that as a no. And, again, time is short. If you can just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We just would like to have this for the record.
VOICE: I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. PAIGE: That was them under oath, all of them under oath before Congress lying on
purpose.
They did it for a reason, and, you know,
I'm proud to represent Sheila Weinstein today.
You know, to bring this case has not been easy on her, I assure you.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: And whatever you decide in this case, she'll live with it; she'll accept it.
She knows that you guys have been here working hard, and I assure you it's appreciated by everybody.
But I wish -- you know, we know that there's 450,000 people dying every year, and I wish I could ask you for $100 million, but I can't. The law would not support such a verdict.
Okay. I can't ask you to award damages -- despite all the harm that they've caused, despite all the people who have died, despite all the kids that they got addicted on purpose, I wish I could ask -- they spent $250 billion on marketing.
I wish I could ask 100, $200 million, but I can't. The law doesn't support that, but you know that she suffered and her husband
suffered.
And regardless of whichever claim you decide she's entitled to be compensated for, I submit to you that, under the law, that a fair and reasonable number would be $8.5 million.
You could award less if you want or more if you want, but I will tell you, under the law, that if you award more, the law will not support a verdict probably over $10.8 million.
So we ask you, respectfully, for the harm that they caused her and her family on purpose, the lies that they got away with, putting profits over human lives and the lives of other families, we ask that you award that amount.
I thank you all very much, and I hope and pray that -- I know you will do the right thing.
Thank you very much.
