MR. BAYUK: Thank you, Your Honor.
If it please the Court, Counsel, Mr. Wendel.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I've stood up here before you a few times in the last three weeks now. To reintroduce myself, my name is Frank Bayuk. Along with my law partner, Ursula Henninger, it has been a privilege to try this case in front of you and it is a privilege now to deliver our closing argument.
So I really thank you guys, you have been a very attentive jury over the past three weeks. You have been very patient and I would submit to you you've been more patient than you needed to be because this case took much longer than it should have. This case could have been tried in a few days. It took three weeks.
Now, why did it take that long? It took that long because, as Mr. Kaiser's closing argument just demonstrated, the plaintiff put on a bunch of evidence that has nothing to do with the issues you are here to decide in the case, a bunch of evidence that will not help you answer any of the questions that you need to answer on the verdict form in this case, questions about Miss Carol Wendel.
What do I mean by that? Well, for example, they called Dr. Proctor. Mr. Kaiser talked a lot about Dr. Proctor during his closing. Dr. Proctor
was here for the better part of three days to talk about generic tobacco company conduct, generic smokers, what was told to the generic public.
And you remember during Ms. Henninger's cross-examination of Dr. Proctor, we established right off the bat, he knew nothing about Mrs. Wendel. He made no effort, even though the information was available to him, made no effort to learn about Mrs. Wendel or what she knew or what information she had or what decisions she made.
By the same token, you remember how the plaintiffs finished their case. They played you a video deposition from the 1980s of a man named Robert Heimann. What did Mr. Heimann know about Carol Wendel? Nothing.
And Mr. Kaiser today says that Carol Wendel smoked a cigarette brand called Pall Mall. What was the evidence of that? What was the evidence of that? Did Charlene Wendel tell you she smoked Pall Mall? Did Mr. Wendel tell you she smoked Pall Mall cigarettes? Maybe more than one?
Why did they spend an hour? The deposition was an hour long. What did it have to do with the issues that you are here to decide in the case? It is generic evidence. And I submit to you it
doesn't help you one bit.
Now, when you boil the case down, I think you'll find it's pretty simple, it is a pretty simple case and there are very specific legal issues, very specific legal concepts that you are here to decide. And all of them, all of them relate to Carol Wendel. They don't relate to smokers in general. They don't relate to tobacco companies in general.
And it's not just me telling you this. It's not just me telling you that there are narrow legal concepts. All you need to do is look at the verdict form. You all have copies of it. You'll have it back in the jury room. I have a copy here I'm going to put on the Elmo and you'll see, of the seven questions on the verdict form, the first six have the name Carol Wendel. They don't have generic smokers.
I was surprised that Mr. Kaiser didn't point this out. Every question on here relates to Carol Wendel. That's how you know this is Carol Wendel's case. This isn't a generic case. This doesn't require generic evidence. This requires specific evidence, evidence specific to Miss Carol Wendel.
You see every question on the verdict form,
the first six relate to Carol Wendel. And that tells you how narrow the issues are, how narrow the issues are.
His Honor instructed you before opening -- or before closing started, gave you the jury instructions that you'll use to decide this case.
You have copies of those and you'll have them back in the jury room. I want to ask you -- I want to point out a few, I want to emphasize a few that Judge Rodriguez read to you. All right?
And the first one deals with what you can base your verdict on. It's instruction number 2. I think it's the second page of your instructions.
And it tells you very clearly that your evidence must be based -- or your verdict must be based on the evidence in the case, must be based on the facts that were proven to you and the testimony of witnesses that were given to you in this case.
More importantly, it tells you what you cannot base your verdict upon. It tells you specifically you are not to guess about things that were not proven to you. You can't base your verdict on guesswork. You can't base your verdict on speculation.
And this is a key instruction for you, because
there is a lot of -- there are a lot of things that were not covered here. There is a lot of evidence that the plaintiffs did not bring to you. And I submit once we walk through -- I'm going to walk through some of the issues on the verdict form and then my partner, Ms. Henninger, is going to get up here and walk through the rest. You are going to see claim by claim the complete lack of evidence that the plaintiff has brought to prove their -- to prove their claims. They have not carried their burden.
That's the next instruction I want to direct you to, their burden of proof, this is instruction number 6 in your packet. This reminds you that the plaintiff, they brought the case. They carry the burden of proof on each and every claim.
And we talked about this dating back to when y'all were going through jury selection, and it was explained to you, the defense has no burden in the case. If the plaintiff doesn't carry their burden, the defense can sit at the table, it doesn't have to cross-examine witnesses, it doesn't have to bring our own witnesses or put on evidence, and your verdict must be for the defense. That's how the burden of proof works.
And so when you boil all this down, what does it mean? This is a framework that we'll use as we walk through the verdict form.
The case is about very specific legal issues tied to Ms. Wendel, tied to Mrs. Wendel, all right?
In answering those questions, you have to base your verdict on evidence and you have to remember on each claim, you have to see if the plaintiff has brought you the evidence they need to prove that claim.
And I submit to you they have not done it, they have failed on each and every claim, and we're going to walk through methodically and show you the lack of evidence and the evidence, even though we have no burden, the evidence we've brought to you that shows why their claims fail.
I'm not sure how to work this. Could we switch it back over, Ryan?
Bless you.
JUROR YANEZ: Thank you.
MR. BAYUK: This is a -- first slide, this a key issue and it's key after having listened to what we just listened to from Mr. Kaiser. I can't tell you how anxious I was to get up here and set the --
MR. KAISER: Objection to how anxious counsel
was.
THE COURT: Sustain.
MR. BAYUK: -- set the record straight on the issues, to talk to you about what the evidence really is, what there really is evidence of. And it's important you remember the plaintiff must prove their case based on evidence.
And you heard a lot of argument. You heard a lot of argument in Mr. Kaiser's closing. Argument cannot fill the gaps in the plaintiff's case. They can't ask you to look past the holes in their case and fill it with lawyer argument. The instructions tell you that. The Court told you that when he read the instructions to you. You must look for evidence. You cannot rely on lawyer argument.
Now, I hope it was clear, I submit to you it was clear that based on the closing that you heard from Mr. Kaiser, their case is based on argument, their case is based only on argument because of the significant gaps in their case.
Now, an example of this. Remember when Charlene Wendel testified -- and I mean no disrespect if I use someone's first name. There are a few Wendels in the case, and so I may call
Charles Charles, I may call Charlene Charlene. I don't mean any disrespect by that, all right?
Do you remember when Charlene was on the stand, and there has been an issue in the case about how this case even ended up in Miami. Remember that? All the witnesses, the Wendels live across the state. They live in Naples and Fort Myers. All right. There is no evidence that Mrs. Wendel -- Mrs. Carol Wendel ever set foot in Miami, ever.
And we learned how the case ended up in Miami because when Miss Charlene Wendel testified, you remember she told you she is a plaintiff's personal injury attorney. And when this case came up, she called her boss, a plaintiff's lawyer, and said,
"What do I do about this case?"
And he said, "For a case like that, you'd better go to Miami. You'd better go to Miami to bring a case like that."
What does that mean? Why couldn't they bring the case where they lived? Nobody lives here. Nobody lives in Miami. Did they think that -MR. KAISER: Objection, there is no issue in this case they are going to answer about where the case should be brought.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: Did they think a jury in Naples or in Fort Myers would be less likely to overlook the gaps in their case, to overlook the fact that they can't fill those gaps with argument? Why are they wasting your time? Did they think you are more likely to buy into the arguments?
You have to think about that. Those are the types of things you have to think about when you weigh the evidence in the case.
Now, and I have said it a few times now, the case is about one smoker, it's about Carol Wendel. It's not about generic smokers. The plaintiff's closing discussed a number of documents, a number of generic tobacco company conduct, and other smokers.
I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, you have heard this case stems from a class action. Those were issues in the 1990s in the class action.
If those issues answer the questions that you are to decide, you wouldn't be here. You wouldn't be here.
You are here to answer Carol Wendel's questions. You are here to answer why did she smoke? What was her smoking behavior? What
choices did she make? What did she know? Why did she do things? You are here to answer those specific questions. You are not here to decide generic issues and generic evidence, and attorney argument doesn't help you answer those questions.
Ms. Henninger during opening, she put a board up here. I'm going to put it back up. And she told you during opening that there is four facts we would establish in the course of this trial.
Can everyone see that?
Four facts we would establish during the course of this trial, and there are facts that answer every single question that you will decide on the verdict form, these four facts.
Carol Wendel did not start or continue smoking because of anything that R.J. Reynolds said or did. Carol Wendel knew smoking was dangerous and addictive before she ever smoked an R.J. Reynolds cigarette. Carol Wendel never tried to quit smoking.
You know, it's funny because Mr. Kaiser, when he was going through the comparative fault board, pointed out at the bottom, they accept fault for Mrs. Wendel not trying to quit hard enough.
I didn't hear any evidence during this trial
of her ever trying to quit. In fact, the evidence is undisputed that she never did. We're going to talk a lot about that. But it's key Carol Wendel never tried to quit smoking.
And number 4, Carol Wendel liked smoking and did not want to quit.
All of these things have been proven, proven overwhelmingly, and they are undisputed. Nothing the plaintiff has done in their case, nothing they have said in closing refutes any one of these four facts, and these are all you need to know to answer the questions in the case.
But there is more. There is more. Because as you heard from the testimony, you heard from Mr. Wendel on the stand, you heard from Charlene Wendel, you heard from Dr. Abramson, who looked at all of the depositions, people that the plaintiff did not bring into court to testify, Ms. Wendel's son Craig, they didn't bring him to testify, but Dr. Abramson looked at all of the testimony, all of what people said before trial to learn about Ms. Wendel, thousands of pages of deposition testimony.
And so he told you based on reviewing everything, what was known, what people said, how
information about what Mrs. Wendel knew relates together and so we have more information. We have more information that gives context to these four points.
And so we have statements, and these will probably look familiar to you, statements from the people that knew Mrs. Wendel the best, statements from her husband, statements from her daughter, and they speak volumes about Mrs. Wendel's smoking behavior.
They speak volumes about why she smoked, why she did not quit, and why she did not want to quit. Statements "She just wanted to smoke." "She didn't want to quit." "She liked it." "She liked it."
And we're going to talk about this.
Dr. Abramson walked through these comments. He's a board certified addiction psychiatrist.
Walked through the comments and explained to you what these mean.
Does addiction drive people to say these things? He explained no. He's treated thousands of addicted smokers in his career. Thousands.
He's diagnosed thousands of people with nicotine addiction.
When Mr. Kaiser gets up here and says
Dr. Abramson has no concept of addiction, he doesn't recognize addiction. I don't know if he was here when Dr. Abramson was testifying.
Dr. Abramson says he's diagnosed thousands of people.
He's worked in these cases, has diagnosed smokers in these cases as addicted. He knows addiction. And these comments, as he explained to you, are the antithesis of addiction. These are people that are in control -- these are statements about a person who is in control of her behavior.
But we have more. We have a statement from Mrs. Wendel herself through her husband.
What did Mrs. Wendel say about her smoking?
"I don't want to quit." "I don't want to quit."
Not "I can't quit." Not "Help me quit." Not "I'm powerless" or "I'm compelled." "I don't want to quit."
I submit to you it doesn't get any more powerful than that. It doesn't get any more clear than that about why she smoked and why she made the decision she did, why she made the choices that she did about her smoking.
This is all of the information, all of the evidence you need to know to answer the questions
on the jury -- on the verdict form. This is it.
This is undisputed. The plaintiff can't dispute this. They haven't. This is what you need to know.
And so with this in mind, what I want to do is I want to walk through the first part of the verdict form, this class membership issue that Mr. Kaiser spent 20 minutes talking about. I want to walk through that and look at the evidence on each and every element.
So what I'm going to do is, we're going to do a very brief run-through of the top-line evidence on each of the claims and what the evidence is through the whole verdict form, and then I'm going to go back and more methodically walk through the class membership portion. Ms. Henninger is going to get up behind me and discuss the concealment and the agreement to conceal and the damages issues.
So we're going to do a very brief run-through right now, kind of cliff notes version. And this is kind of a roadmap for how it's going to go.
So class membership, there is three components, medical causation, addiction, addiction causation, then there is this thing we call Winston causation, only in a tobacco lawsuit would you have
something titled like that, but essentially what that means is the plaintiff must prove that it was R.J. Reynolds cigarettes and Winston cigarettes that were the cause of Mrs. Wendel's lung cancer and not the other cigarettes that she smoked. The plaintiffs bear the burden on that as well.
And then we will discuss the concealment and agreement to conceal, and Ms. Henninger will discuss those in more detail.
So just a brief run-through, the cliff notes version, medical causation. We have a picture of Dr. Reed there. I'm sure you all remember Dr. Reed. He was the plaintiff's first witness.
He testified the first Friday of trial. He's a pulmonologist in Miami.
And the brief version of what he said, before we get into the details, he reviewed a very limited subset of records, you recall, 51 pages, 51 pages of records. And what did he tell you? He said that there is no evidence in those records that anyone ever found cancer in Ms. Wendel's lungs in 1955. They found cancer in her mediastinum.
Remember, the mediastinum is the area between the lungs. Plaintiff has to prove the cancer started in Mrs. Wendel's lung to be primary lung
cancer. That's their burden. They have to prove the cancer started there. If the cancer started in the mediastinum and spread to the lungs, they failed their burden of proof.
What did Dr. Reed tell you? He said, "Records I looked at showed first there was cancer in the mediastinum, only later was there cancer in the lung."
He also told you that he did no investigation into the facts or -- it was clear, we'll discuss this in detail when we walk through this in more detail, he didn't review all the records, you recall it was a little embarrassing when I asked him about the first three records, he claimed he had never seen them. They just happened to be the records that showed that Mrs. Wendel did not have cancer in her lungs. It was a little odd he didn't have those records.
What else did he tell you? He gave you an opinion that smoking caused Ms. Wendel's cancer and he told you -- he told me on cross-examination that that opinion was based on nothing about Mrs. Wendel other than that she smoked.
He did no independent -- he did no assessment whatsoever except Mr. Kaiser told him, hey,
Mrs. Wendel smoked, it's in the medical records, and he said (snaps fingers) I think smoking caused the cancer.
That's not carrying your burden of proof.
When you walk into court and you ask for 7 million to maybe $13 million, that is not your burden of proof. That's not carrying your burden of proof.
That's relying on attorney argument. That's what we heard in closing. Argument doesn't fill the gap there. And that's what I mean when I say they need evidence, not argument.
What else did Dr. Reed tell you? Well, what he didn't tell you was he didn't know anything about Mrs. Wendel's brands. I heard today for the first time in Mr. Kaiser's closing that Dr. Reed actually reviewed deposition testimony. He didn't review deposition testimony. That much was clear when I asked him about asbestos.
He said, "I was told not to review the depositions. I reviewed a couple pages of medical records."
And so what he didn't tell you, because he had no knowledge, what brands Mrs. Wendel smoked. And because of that, he can't tell you what brands caused her cancer. What cigarettes caused her
cancer. He has no knowledge of her smoking history.
And so when we get to that issue, which cigarettes caused her cancer, look in your notepads, jog your memories, there is zero evidence that the plaintiff brought you to carry their burden on that issue. Zero evidence.
And finally, maybe most importantly, this is a wrongful death case. The plaintiff has a burden to prove to you what caused Mrs. Wendel's death. Again, I submit to you, look in your notepads, jog your collective memories. There was zero evidence of what caused her death.
The plaintiffs brought the expert at $750 an hour. They could have asked him the question. In fact, he said he had an opinion about it. Why didn't they elicit the opinion? There was no opinion on what caused her death. That much -that alone is fatal to their case. That is a failure of the burden of proof.
And when they get up here in rebuttal, they won't dispute that. They won't dispute that they had that. You didn't hear it in their main closing and they're not going to tell you in their rebuttal that they have evidence of what caused her death
because they didn't ask the question.
Second issue, addiction. Second hurdle of class membership. Well, some basic facts, no dispute, not every smoker is addicted. Of course, as I said, we brought Dr. Abramson, board certified addiction psychiatrist. Who did the plaintiffs bring?
You know, they want 7 to almost 13 million dollars and they want you to do some kind of self-assessment, do-it-yourself analysis of addiction based on something that the plaintiff in the case said?
Come on, that's not common sense. That's attorney argument. That is not evidence.
And so Dr. Abramson came and he explained not every smoker is addicted. We saw the medical records. Mrs. Wendel was never diagnosed by any doctor who saw her as being addicted.
They want to talk to you about a tobacco abuse record. Dr. Abramson explained that record pretty clearly. If they think it meant something different, why didn't they call that doctor? Why didn't they call that heart surgeon that wrote that? Why didn't they call an expert in their case in chief to explain to you that they had a
different interpretation of what it meant?
That's their burden. We didn't have a burden upon us, but we did anyway. But they have to carry the burden of proof. They didn't call an expert.
That is fatal to their case on the issue of addiction.
Dr. Abramson explained to you in the thousands of people he's treated, the people he has diagnosed as addicted to nicotine, he's never seen someone who is addicted who hasn't tried to quit smoking. Never.
That's because that's what addiction is. If you are addicted and you want to quit, you try to quit smoking. Addiction can make it difficult to quit smoking, no dispute about it, but you have to try to quit. You have to try to quit before you can say someone is addicted. He told you that based on his decades of experience treating thousands of smokers.
And finally, he walked you through the DSM criteria. We're going to talk about the DSM criteria as the definitive diagnostic tool for determining addiction. He walked you through, we put up the criteria, we put up the threshold, there has to be significant distress or impairment, and
he walked through methodically and gave you his opinion as to why Mrs. Wendel would not meet the medical diagnostic criteria for nicotine addiction.
It was clear. It was clear. We brought you that evidence. We disproved it, even though plaintiff didn't carry their burden on that issue.
That's the only evidence in the case, it's undisputed, if they wanted to dispute it, they had to bring an expert in their case in chief, and they didn't do it. They didn't do it.
Finally, addiction causation. This is the third hurdle of class membership. Here you look at -- we'll look at it in a little bit more detail, but for lack of a better explanation, this looks at even if you are addicted, is it the addiction that is compelling you to smoke, that's driving you to smoke against your will, or are you smoking for some rational reason like I think it helps me keep weight off. I actually like smoking. I think it tastes good. I like to have a cigarette after I have sex. I like to have a cigarette when I'm having a drink. I like a cigarette with my coffee.
Are you smoking for those reasons, or are you smoking because you've been rendered powerless by nicotine and you were compelled with no control
over yourself until you die? What was the evidence? Dr. Abramson came in and explained this concept.
Who did the plaintiff bring to talk about this? Who did the plaintiff bring in their case to talk about this concept? No one. They brought no one. There is a failure of proof on this issue as well.
And here, you know, the quotes, "Mrs. Wendel liked to smoke and did not want to quit." This is her husband. This is her husband's testimony.
"She wasn't going to quit or she would have." What does that mean? If she wanted to quit, she could have. Of course. That's undisputed as well. And we're going to see that admission in a little bit.
And finally -- well, there it is, the last bullet, "Plaintiff admitted that Carol Wendel could have quit if she wanted to." Mr. Kaiser, he spent about -- I timed it, he spent about 20 seconds on this issue of addiction causation, maybe 15 seconds. And he told you addiction causation means that you have an inability to quit cigarettes and that compels you to smoke.
Respectfully, that is attorney argument. If that was the truth, they would have brought an
expert in their case in chief to tell you that's how it works.
We brought Dr. Abramson. On cross-examination, did they cross Dr. Abramson on that topic? Did Dr. Abramson change his story and give up this answer? No. And we don't even carry the burden on this. This is the plaintiff's burden.
Finally, again, you-all took notes during the trial. You have a memory of the last three weeks. Check your notes and your memory to see if anyone testified that addiction caused Mrs. Wendel's death.
I submit to you the only time that has ever been said in this courtroom is when Mr. Kaiser stood up here an hour ago in closing, that's the only time that statement has ever been made in this courtroom. That is a complete failure to carry the burden of proof. That's why we have the burden of proof.
Ms. Henninger talked to you about these three hurdles. These are the three hurdles of class membership. Just based on that brief run-through, the plaintiff has failed on each and every hurdle to carry their burden. And it is not a close call.
I submit to you I don't think we get past class membership. I think based on the overwhelming lack of evidence and the evidence that the defense has brought to you, I submit to you that you can't. But I recognize that you may, so I have to cover issues beyond class membership on the verdict form.
As I say, Ms. Henninger is going to cover this issue, concealment and agreement to conceal. These deal with whether Mrs. Wendel reasonably relied to her detriment on some statement omitting information about smoking, the dangers of smoking or the addictiveness of smoking, whether she was harmed by relying on something that a tobacco company said. That's what these issues deal with.
Well, what's the evidence on this? What's the evidence on this that comes from her husband, comes from her daughter, and comes from her through their words?
Mrs. Wendel knew and understood that smoking was dangerous and addictive before she ever started smoking R.J. Reynolds cigarettes. That evidence is undisputed in the case.
I heard Mr. Kaiser say that Charlene Wendel testified that she said, who "Can you believe,
tobacco companies or the Surgeon General?" I would ask you to search your notes for that. That didn't come from the witness stand. That came from Mr. Kaiser. There is no evidence of that in this case, none.
This is the only evidence, and it's undisputed, Mrs. Wendel received -- continued to receive warnings about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking throughout her life and never disputed them.
You recall Mr. Wendel's testimony. Hundreds of people were warning her. She was warning her own children not to smoke. She had internalized the knowledge of the dangers and addictiveness and was warning others, was warning others about it.
And there is no evidence, there is zero evidence that she ever relied on any statement made by a tobacco company, no evidence was brought to you in this case, they want you to infer it.
Mr. Kaiser highlighted this inference or they want to infer. Ms. Henninger is going to talk about that.
You can't infer it -- information, you can't infer reliance when there is direct evidence of no reliance and there is direct evidence of knowledge
and understanding for the entire course of her smoking history.
You have to use your common sense about that. You have to use your common sense and look at what the evidence was.
This is from Mr. Wendel. You recall the story about how he quit in response to the 1964 Surgeon General's Report and he told his wife to quit and his wife said, "You know what, you can do what you want, I'm going to keep smoking. I don't want to quit. I don't want to quit."
And there's been some suggestion that in response to -- this is when Mrs. Wendel switched to filtered cigarettes, switched to Winston filtered cigarettes. Mr. Wendel admitted himself that Mrs. Wendel was already smoking filtered cigarettes, she was already smoking filtered Parliament cigarettes because that's what he smoked when he quit. She was smoking it before 1964 because she was smoking what he smoked, and he quit in January 1964.
He told her. And what else did he tell us?
He told us from the witness stand not only did he tell her, not only did he tell her the Surgeon General is saying you can get lung cancer, that
smoking will kill you, but he says that she knew.
She knew. Not that she was just aware; she knew.
And she knew even before this.
Remember the testimony about his mom, his mother, warning Mrs. Wendel that smoking was harmful, warning them that it was expensive, but also that it was bad for your health. At the same time, he says, "Hey, I knew smoking could mess up your lungs. I knew it could mess up your lungs."
That's in the 1950s, 1956.
What else did he say, no evidence of reliance.
So what do we have? We have overwhelming evidence of Mrs. Wendel's knowledge and understanding and a complete absence of evidence that she ever relied on anything the tobacco companies said or did.
That's all you need to know. That's what you need to know.
I submit to you you won't get to these questions on the verdict form, but if you do, that is what you need to know, and Ms. Henninger is going to talk to you more about it.
Ms. Henninger used this demonstrative in opening to demonstrate to you the plaintiff has to prove to you in linking up the chain. The chain of causation. The evidence I just discussed and the
evidence that she will discuss show you overwhelmingly the plaintiff has failed to bring you proof to connect the chain up.
Mrs. Wendel's longstanding knowledge, belief, and understanding of the risks guaranteed that this chain is broken. There can't be causation given the evidence in the case. And that evidence is undisputed.
And so now I'm going to do the more methodical walk-through. Mr. Kaiser showed you this question on the verdict form, this is the very first question, this is the class membership question.
"Was Carol Wendel addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" These are the three hurdles. And you can see what's required in each of the hurdles.
For medical causation, plaintiff has to prove that she had lung cancer caused by smoking and that it resulted in her death. For addiction, they have to prove that she was addicted to nicotine and addiction causation, they have to prove that the addiction as opposed to other choices, other decisions, other reasons for why she smoked, the addiction is what led her to smoke until her death.
Not that she liked it, not that she enjoyed it, but that she was rendered powerless by nicotine addiction.
It's also key to remember, you know, you have the Engle findings in your instructions, the Court read the Engle findings to you, Mr. Kaiser talked to you about the Engle findings. In determining class membership, it's kind of a dirty trick, you have to forget that you ever heard the Engle findings. You cannot consider them in any way in determining whether the plaintiff has met their burden on class membership on these three hurdles. So you have to put them out of your mind. You can't use them -- you can't base any decision on class membership on the Engle findings.
So the first hurdle, medical causation.
Dr. Reed, he came in here and told you all the things that he didn't look at, all the things he didn't review. Mr. Kaiser said he could have looked at pathology, he could have looked at radiology and CT scans.
Well, that's not what Dr. Reed said. Dr. Reed said I didn't look at any of those things. I didn't look at x-rays, CT scans, MRIs, any of those things. There was no autopsy to help me determine
cause of death.
Remember the 51 pages of medical records. He didn't review all the medical records in the case.
And so the very first record I showed him, February 22nd, 1995, I handed it up to him, he said, "Ah, I don't think I've ever seen this before." I couldn't believe it. He had never seen it before.
MR. KAISER: Objection what counsel believed.
THE COURT: Sustain.
MR. BAYUK: And the record when he looked at it, remember we had to give him time to read it, because he was unfamiliar with it, we had to wait for him to read it, at $750 an hour, we had to wait for the expert to read the medical record.
Said that the record showed cancer in the mediastinum, no cancer in the lung. That's what the CT scan showed, no cancer in the lung. And remember, plaintiff has to prove to you that there was cancer that started in the lung. At this point, there is only cancer in the mediastinum.
That's fatal -- this record alone is fatal to their case.
But what's more -- what's the next record I showed them, bronchoscopy report, another record he hadn't seen. This was a record that showed when
the pulmonologist at the time looked into Mrs. Wendel's lungs he saw no cancers, he saw no lesions and he took samples, he took samples to biopsy, to send to the pathologist.
And the pathologist came -- first, I don't want to get ahead of myself. The bronchoscopy showed no evidence of cancer. Another record Dr. Reed hadn't seen.
He admitted on the stand no evidence of cancer in Mrs. Wendel's lung at the time.
Next record, the bronchoscopy pathology report, this is the pathology reading of the tissue taken from Mrs. Wendel's lung. This showed no cancer. Remember they did bronchial brushings, bronchial washings, they looked at this under slides. Dr. Reed said none of this showed cancer.
And remember, the last three records we looked at Mr. Kaiser didn't send to him. Mr. Kaiser didn't send to him the three records that showed Mrs. Wendel did not have cancer in her lung. Why did he do that? Why wouldn't he send those records to their expert to review?
And remember another thing, Dr. Reed said he reviewed his deposition the day before he came and testified before you-all, and in his deposition, he
was shown these records. He charged Mr. Kaiser $500 an hour to reread his deposition the day before he came in here and he didn't remember that he had seen these in his deposition.
So Mr. Kaiser talked to you about the believability of witnesses instruction in the jury instructions, I think it's instruction number 3, it's the third instruction you have, I'll put it on the Elmo.
Thanks, Ryan.
"Testimony about expert witnesses. You have heard testimony from people as experts. You can accept, reject such testimony or give it the weight you think it deserves." Now, I submit to you this instruction was designed for someone like Dr. Reed. You are going to have the instructions. Only you guys get to decide what Dr. Reed's testimony means based on this instruction.
This instruction also discusses other witnesses' testimony because you are the judge of the credibility of the witnesses who testify. You get to judge their demeanor. You get to judge whether they have an interest in the outcome of the case. You get to judge whether you think they were being honest with you, frankness or lack of
frankness. And so I submit to you, this doesn't just apply to experts, this applies to how you judge the testimony of, for example, people like Charlene Wendel.
When Charlene Wendel was up here, Mr. Kaiser repeated in their closing, he was up here, he said Charlene Wendel has a clear recollection of watching the Flintstones with her mother.
Dr. Proctor told you the Flintstones with a Winston advertisement ran for one season, 1960, Charlene Wendel was three years old, and she told you she remembered like it was yesterday sitting with her mother at age three watching the Flintstones with Winston being advertised.
She also told you she has no memory of her mother smoking at that time. She told you she has no memory of her father smoking at that time. How could she remember a specific Winston ad on the Flintstones at age three sitting with her mother?
That's the kind of thing you're going to have to think about when you read these instructions and weigh the credibility of the witnesses. That's your job. That's your job alone.
Back to the presentation. Thanks, Ryan.
And so we have the three medical records that
Dr. Reed failed to look at. The only medical record he did look at showed that she had cancer in her mediastinum, not in her lung, I've told you that. This is the opinion about cigarette smoking causing cancer based on nothing more than the fact that she smoked. That's a failure of the burden of the plaintiff's proof.
This is another thing. You know, I asked him about asbestos on the stand. Mr. Kaiser said the attorneys' questions aren't evidence. Well, the problem is there is evidence of asbestos exposure in the case. You heard the deposition of the coworker that the place where Mrs. Wendel worked for two decades was laden with asbestos and had to be remediated after she left.
MR. KAISER: Objection, that's a misstatement.
THE COURT: Jury will remember. Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: The deposition was read to you and you will recall the testimony, I'm confident. What did Dr. Reed say when I asked him, hey, you are a pulmonologist, what are the hallmarks of asbestos if you are going to look for asbestos, because he said asbestos can cause small cell lung cancer. He admitted that to you. What are the hallmarks you look for? He said hallmark finding, the gold
standard finding is interstitial fibrosis on an x-ray.
This is the first record I showed him that he hadn't seen before. What was the pulmonologist's finding in this record? "The chest x-ray showed mild increased interstitial fibrosis." Dr. Reed had never seen this record.
Plaintiff didn't ask him about this on redirect. It's their burden to rule out other causes. They have to rule out asbestos as a cause. Their expert didn't even know about this record, didn't know about this finding.
I asked Dr. Reed, hey, if you are going to have asbestos to the level it can cause small cell lung cancer, where would you find it, where would the asbestos deposit in the lung? He said, hey, it would go in the parenchyma. You look in the parenchyma for evidence of exposure.
What did the pathology report find that he hadn't reviewed? There was fibrosis in the parenchyma. These are things he didn't know about, things he could not rule out, things that Mr. Kaiser did not ask him because he didn't know, he hadn't done this review.
I submit to you all of that, the plaintiff
failed miserably on their medical -- on the medical hurdle of class membership.
Addiction. Plaintiff has to prove Ms. Wendel was addicted. What is the evidence? This is the test, this is the gold standard test for diagnosing addiction. That's what Dr. Abramson told you. It was undisputed. The plaintiff brought you no test, the plaintiff brought you no expert in their case in chief to say, hey, this isn't what she used.
The undisputed evidence for y'all is this is the test to use, the DSM-IV, and Dr. Abramson walked you through it, and he told you why Mrs. Wendel would not meet a medical diagnosis of nicotine addiction.
She was able to control her smoking. Now, there was a statement during the closing about the grandson Justin, how Mrs. Wendel would have to go over there and would have to bring her cigarettes.
She didn't say that. The evidence is Mrs. Wendel watched Justin at her house for eight hours a day. Justin came to her house, and when she wanted to smoke a cigarette, she went outside to smoke.
There is no impairment. They could have crossed Dr. Abramson on that point and they didn't.
Mr. Finger could have done that and he didn't. So I'm not sure where it came from in Mr. Kaiser's closing. Wasn't in the evidence.
What's the most important thing? Dr. Abramson told you based on everything he saw in the records Mrs. Wendel never tried to quit smoking, never tried to quit.
In addition to telling you that she was not addicted to nicotine, he explored, he looked at all of the thousands of pages of materials and came up with what everyone said, what all the witnesses said about why Mrs. Wendel smoked, what rational reasons, what they were about why she smoked.
She enjoyed smoking. She liked the taste. It relaxed her. She used it to help her control her weight. These -- as he explained to you, these are all non-addiction reasons why people smoke.
If they disagreed with it, if they thought it's not right, they have the burden of putting on proof in their case. They have the burden of calling an expert in their case to say, you know what, all these are evidence of addiction. They didn't do it. It's their burden. That's what the burden of proof instruction means. They didn't do it.
What did Mr. Wendel tell you? You know, there were statements about Carol Wendel saying "I'm addicted, I think I'm addicted." Well, what did Mr. Wendel himself tell you? This isn't on cross-examination. This is during the plaintiff's examination of Mr. Wendel. This is during Mr. Finger's exam.
"What was the primary explanation your wife would tell you for why she smoked?"
It wasn't "I'm addicted." It wasn't "I'm controlled by nicotine." It wasn't "I'm powerless over nicotine or I'm compelled to smoke" or "I can't quit." It was "I enjoy it." "I enjoy it."
What else did Mr. Wendel tell you? Well, first of all, I wanted to have a slide for the plaintiff's expert who could have explained these things to you in a way that supported the plaintiff's case. They didn't bring an expert in their case in chief, that's their burden. That's their burden.
Both Mr. Wendel and Charlene Wendel told you Mrs. Wendel never tried to quit. She never cut back. She never changed her smoking behavior in any way. She didn't even try to smoke one less cigarette per day in some effort to quit smoking
over the 40-year history of her smoking, not one single effort.
She did not want to quit, that's -- that's why she didn't make an effort. She was not interested in quitting. She liked to smoke and did not want to quit.
This is what Dr. Abramson said. I asked him "What does it mean when someone says they are addicted or when other people say, hey, I think so-and-so is addicted?" And Dr. Abramson explained to you, addiction is kind of a lay term, it's a colloquial term, all of us have probably used the word "addiction" to describe any number of things,
I'm addicted to chocolate, I'm addicted to shopping, I'm addicted to the internet, I'm addicted to football.
That is not a substitute for the proof when you come into court and ask for 7 to 13 million dollars that someone made a statement about addiction, a layperson. That is not the proof that you need. You need medical proof. And the plaintiff has failed to bring it. You need medical proof.
If this was a case about addiction, if there was proof of addiction, these are the types of
things you would expect there to be evidence of to prove that Mrs. Wendel was addicted, that she had a bad relationship with her cigarettes.
I	want to quit. Help me quit. I can't quit.
I'm going to try to quit. Further down. I'm too scared to even think about quitting. I'm too scared to do it. I don't think I can do it, so I'm not even going to try. Any evidence of statements like that? No. There is none of that. What do you have instead? "I like to smoke. I don't want to quit."
Dr. Abramson walked you through these quotes. These are things taken out of the deposition testimony.
"Did you ever ask your wife why she didn't even try to quit.
"She said liked it. She wanted to smoke.
She's a grown woman. She does what she wants to do with her life. There was never a time where she said, well, I'm going to quit smoking. Obviously she wasn't going to. She wasn't going to quit or she would have. That was the end of it."
Does that sound like someone who is powerless over their smoking, who is powerless and controlled by nicotine addiction or is this exactly consistent
with everything you've heard about Mrs. Wendel, everything you have heard about her personality? Was she someone who let people tell her what to do?
You remember the personality traits,
Dr. Abramson described them, Mr. Wendel described them, Charlene Wendel described them. You didn't tell Mrs. Wendel what to do. You didn't dictate her behavior. If you tried to tell her what to do, she would do the opposite just to prove a point.
So these are statements. Addiction doesn't make you say these things. That's what Dr. Abramson told you. Control, your own self-control, your own choices make you say these things.
Final point on this, you can't say she is addicted if she never tried to quit. Dr. Abramson told you as a practical matter, he's treated thousands of patients for nicotine addiction. Not a single one of them has ever not tried to quit before he's diagnosed them. That's powerful.
That's the evidence you need. That's the evidence the plaintiff has to bring you and they have not done that. They haven't done it.
Final hurdle, addiction causation. Plaintiff has to prove that addiction was a legal cause of
Mrs. Wendel's lung cancer and death. Another way to think about this, a simple way to think about this issue is was Carol Wendel rendered powerless, powerless by an overwhelming compulsion to smoke so that she was unable to quit until she died? Was she prevented from quitting? Was she compelled to smoke against her will until she died? That is what this means. That is what this means.
This is the instruction you are going to get, "Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced the lung cancer and death so that it can be said that but for the addiction, the death would not have occurred."
But for the addiction, she would not have smoked herself to death. That is the standard.
That's the standard that the plaintiff has to prove.
And what evidence did they bring you to prove it? Nothing. Nothing. Check your notes. As I said, the only time anyone has ever said in this courtroom that addiction caused the death was when Mr. Kaiser stood up in closing. Closing is too late to put on evidence. The evidence is closed in closing. They have failed miserably on this count
to bring you evidence.
Under that definition, I ask you to think about how to view this concept, whether addiction can compel you to smoke. What do we know about this? Well, it's undisputed in this case that smokers, even addicted smokers can quit. Everyone can quit if you want to quit.
How do we know that? Dr. Proctor came in and said 60 million people have quit. He told you based on the historical record, most of them would have been addicted. Most of them would have been addicted. We know that addiction doesn't prevent quitting. Dr. Abramson was in complete agreement, he said addiction does not prevent quitting.
Dr. Proctor told you most of the people who quit not only were addicted, they were heavy smokers. There was some suggestion during Dr. Abramson's cross, oh, you know, these 50 to 60 million people, they only smoked five cigarettes a day or they only smoked a cigarette a day.
They forgot what their own expert said. Most of these people smoked more than a pack of cigarettes a day. All of them would have been exposed to this conduct that Dr. Proctor talked about, this psychological crutch, the tobacco
company statements in advertising.
Did that prevent 60 million people from quitting? It's Exhibit A right there, Mr. Wendel.
He got concerned about his health in 1964, quit cold turkey and never looked back, because he wanted to quit. What was the difference with his wife? She didn't want to quit. She didn't want to quit.
Try to put your mind around what 60 million means, what kind of number 60 million is. Because we're in Miami and I'm a football fan, I thought maybe Sun Life Stadium would be a good illustration of the magnitude of 60 million people. And ladies and gentlemen, 60 million people would fill up the Dolphins and the Hurricanes stadium every Sunday, sell-out game every Sunday for almost a hundred years back to 1920.
It's massive amounts of quitting, quitting by people who Dr. Proctor told you most of them were addicted, most of them smoked more than one pack a day. The same level of smoking that the plaintiff has proved Ms. Wendel smoked.
So you have to ask yourself -- well, here is what Dr. Proctor said, 22 cigarettes average a day in the '70s, 24 cigarettes in 1975, 25 a day in
1980. 20 cigarettes per pack and so you can see, based on their own expert's admission, the people that were quitting were people just like Mrs. Wendel.
And so these are questions you need to think about when you think about whether addiction could have been said to cause her death, her disease.
Was she any different than the 60 million people who quit? Were the cigarettes that she smoked more addictive? Were the Winstons more addictive? No.
Dr. Proctor told you that. Was she exposed to advertising different than smokers who quit? No.
Dr. Proctor told you everyone is exposed to advertising.
Was she exposed to tobacco company statements different than the other people who quit, 60 million? No, no evidence of that. Did she smoke more or longer than the smokers who quit? No. Did she like smoking and refused to quit? Yes, that's the difference. She didn't want to quit. She wasn't compelled to smoke. She made the choice not to quit. She did not want to quit.
Another way to think about this issue, did Mrs. Wendel have the ability to quit, but chose to continue smoking, or did nicotine addiction control
her, did it take over her mind and leave her no choice but to continue smoking until it resulted in her death?
That is the issue on this -- on addiction causation. That is the issue. That's how to think about, you know, it's undisputed by now, I feel like a broken record saying this, there is no dispute that all smokers can quit, any smoker can choose to quit.
The smokers you heard from in this case, we're going to drill down from the 60 million, think about the other smokers you heard from in this case, the people who have smoked, Mr. Wendel, Charlene Wendel, Mr. Wendel's current wife, Sylvia, the coworker, Rose Mancuso, all of those people smoked at least a pack a day and each one of them quit smoking. Were they addicted? Who knows, but they quit smoking because they wanted to stop. Why was Mrs. Wendel different? She did not want to stop.
When Mr. Wendel was on the stand, he admitted she could -- Mrs. Wendel could have quit if she wanted to. She could have quit if she wanted to.
And what does that mean? It means that she had the ability to try to quit at any time she decided I
want to stop. She had that ability. She had the keys to be successful in quitting if she wanted to quit.
She had the responsibility to quit smoking and protect her health if that's what she wanted to do.
And she could have quit smoking at a time that would have prevented her lung cancer and death. There is no dispute about these things.
And the plaintiff when they get up in rebuttal won't dispute these things because they can't.
There is no dispute. This is the evidence. This is the evidence we've brought you, even though we have no burden to. The plaintiff has not brought you evidence. They have failed on their burden.
You have heard evidence about how Mrs. Wendel was, the type of person she was. She was intelligent. There no dispute about it. I am not here to disparage her in any way. I'm not here to question her choices or her decisions about smoking or her personality in any way, but this is the type of person she was.
She made her own mind. Look at the box at the bottom. This is a quote from Mr. Wendel, "My wife was her own independent person, her own body, her own life to do what she wanted to do."
Does that sound like someone who is controlled by nicotine addiction or someone who is making their own decisions, making their own choices about what to do about whether to smoke?
These are the statements, I have already shown this slide, but these are the statements that she made. These are the statements that show that she was in control. Addiction, that she was in the driver's seat, she was not controlled by addiction.
The only thing that controlled Mrs. Wendel was Mrs. Wendel. And you don't need to go any further than Mr. Wendel to know that. He admitted it.
"I'm not going to quit. You do what you want to do. You want to protect your health, you quit. I want to smoke. I want to smoke. Don't tell me what to do. I'm going to live my life like I want to live my life."
And now Mr. Wendel and his attorneys want you to come in here and second guess that decision. They want to come in here and paint Mrs. Wendel as some nicotine-addicted victim that she never was in life. She never was in life. You see the statements. That's the evidence. Now they want to come in with revisionist history and come at you with arguments, arguments to make up for their lack
of evidence, their lack of proof.
"I don't want to quit." It doesn't get any clearer than that. "I don't want to quit."
Dr. Abramson explained to you about motivation and persistence. If you're going to quit smoking, you have to be motivated and you have to stick with it, you have to persist.
We know that Mrs. Wendel was able to muster up those behaviors if she wanted to. You heard about the testimony about controlling her weight.
Changing her weight was a behavior -- was something that she wanted to do and she tried everything to do it. She tried everything. She sought out medical advice. She went on diets. She changed her diet to Weight Watchers. She tried everything.
She tried hypnosis to change her weight. If she wanted to change her behavior, she certainly had no lack of motivation if she wanted to do that.
And Dr. Abramson explained to you what was the difference with smoking? What was the difference with smoking? She did not want to change that behavior. She knew it was dangerous. She knew it was addictive. There is no dispute about that.
And the plaintiff won't get up and tell you otherwise.
But she was not interested in changing the behavior. That is fatal to the plaintiff's ability to prove their case. That's the evidence. That's the evidence in the case.
Mr. Wendel said it best, he said it on cross-examination, about what Mrs. Wendel -- how to change her behavior, words versus action. Right? About dieting. The only thing that works is if you don't put it in your mouth, everything else is just bullshit.
The same thing can be said for smoking. The same exact thing. If you want to change. And the evidence is, the undisputed evidence is Mrs. Wendel was not interested in changing.
Dr. Reed told you had she wanted to change her behavior she could have prevented her death. Had she quit in all these years, she would not have gotten lung cancer. If she wanted to quit. If she was interested in quitting. She had the power to do it, she didn't want to do it. "Did you ever ask her why she never even tried?" "She said she liked it."
I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, there has been an overwhelming failure on the part of the plaintiff to prove these three hurdles of class
membership, overwhelming. We brought you overwhelming evidence for you to find that she's not a class member. Not even our burden to do it.
And the plaintiff has not brought you anything except for argument on addiction causation, 20 seconds of argument during closing, 20 seconds.
And they want you to look past a medical issue, look past addiction, addiction causation, something that requires expertise and training, and they want you to do some kind of self-assembly, do-it-yourself, at-home diagnosis of addiction based on something that Mr. Wendel said and ask you for 7 to 13 million dollars. That's something you are going to have to use your common sense for.
Look at the evidence on that.
They haven't -- this is an illustration, another way to show they have not met their burden on class membership, not met their burden on addiction, addiction causation. And so -The Elmo, Ryan.
On this issue, ladies and gentlemen, the very first question on the verdict form, I submit to you the only reasonable answer for this question is no, basing your verdict on the evidence, the question is no.
Now, recognizing that you may get past that, I need to talk about the next issue, and then Miss Henninger is going to come up here and talk about the rest, but the next question, number 2, "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of Carol Wendel's lung cancer and death?"
This is the question I referred to as Winston cause. That the plaintiff has to prove that it was Reynolds' cigarettes in particular that caused the death. And what's the evidence on this? They can't rely on argument. They can't rely on argument and rhetoric to fill the gap in the case.
So what evidence did they bring?
They brought you none. They brought you none. They brought you a medical doctor who they intended to elicit causation opinions from. They could have had him read the depositions, they could have told him the brand history and the length of time that she smoked different cigarettes, but they didn't.
They didn't.
They didn't put on any evidence. Check your notes. Jog your memories when you all go back there and discuss it and use your collective memory, think about what the evidence was before
closing arguments today on how plaintiff met their burden of proof on this.
Dr. Reed had no idea about Mrs. Wendel's smoking other than that she smoked. This would have been the person to get the evidence from, and they didn't do it.
And I submit to you on that question that it took me two seconds to discuss because the evidence or lack of evidence is so clear if you even get to this question, I submit to you the answer has to be no because the plaintiff has completely failed to carry their burden.
I'm going to sit down. I really appreciate your attention. It has been a pleasure to try the case in front of you, in front of this court.
Thank you very much.



MS. HENNINGER: I'm not going to waste any time. I'm not even going to wait for him to sit down because I'm over there chomping at the bit to get an opportunity to talk to you, ladies and gentlemen. So good afternoon.
JURORS: Good afternoon.
MS. HENNINGER: It's always my opportunity to talk to you late on an afternoon, and I know that nobody likes the last person to stand up, but the
good news is, for me, I'm not exactly the last person.
There is going to be another opportunity for plaintiffs to get up and talk with you and a little bit briefer than what happened earlier this morning or this afternoon, so let me just start off where Mr. Bayuk left off and that's by thanking you. Because if the judge says I'm out of time, then I don't want to fail to thank you for your attention and giving up your time for the last three weeks.
Now, I want to focus on the rest of the verdict form. And Mr. Bayuk did a good job going through the verdict form and told you that you won't get past class membership. We submit that the evidence is such that you shouldn't get past class membership.
But if you do, I would be remiss if I didn't walk through and talk to you about the other issues on the verdict form. And I'm going to start with questions 3 and 4. And they're very similar, so I'm going to talk to you about them together.
And question 3 says, "Did Carol Wendel reasonably rely to her detriment on any statement made by R.J. Reynolds which concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to
her concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
Now, some important things in there. And we're going to go through that. But one of the most important things that I wanted to point out right there is that R.J. Reynolds had to have concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to Carol Wendel.
And we know that the undisputed evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, is that Carol Wendel knew smoking was dangerous. She knew it was addictive. And not only did she hear those things, but she believed those things because she repeated those things to her children.
She told her children, Craig and Charlene, that smoking was dangerous and addictive, and Dr. Abramson told you that that's very important because that shows that not only did she hear those things, but she believed them as well.
So that goes to something you're going to hear, part of the chain you're going to see again.
You can't conceal something that is already known.
And the fourth question is also very similar,
and it's, "Did Carol Wendel reasonably rely to her detriment on any statement in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit material facts regarding the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
Now, both of these questions contain something that lawyers may know the meaning of, but it's not necessarily clear to everybody, and it's something called a material fact. And Judge Rodriguez gave you the instructions, you're holding them now.
I've blown some of them up.
But in instruction number 19, you'll see in your packet, it defines a material fact. So when you get to these questions 3 and 4, look at what material fact is, because a material fact is one that is of such importance that Carol Wendel would not have acted as she did but for the concealment or omission of that fact.
So not only do they have to show that she didn't know something because of something R.J. Reynolds or someone else, another tobacco company said or did, they have to show that she didn't know it before and that she reasonably relied on it.
We're going to talk to you about it in a second.
They have to show that it was a material fact. And but for that material fact, something would have been different.
There is no evidence of that, because every single solitary witness you heard from in this case, by deposition, live or otherwise, came in here and told you that Carol Wendel knew that smoking was dangerous.
She knew it, she believed it, she repeated it, and she made the decision to continue smoking, not to quit, not to even try to quit. She had the information. Not only was it available to her, she had it and she internalized it.
So when you look at the instructions, remember Mr. Bayuk, he pointed out you have to use your common sense, you have to use your common sense, and this is an example of using your common sense and putting aside the words of lawyers and looking at the evidence. Because when you do that, what you're going to see is that the chain is broken.
It's never connected with the evidence in this case.
Whether or not there was a concealment or agreement to conceal as read to you by the Engle findings, there is no way that's linked to Carol
Wendel's death because you cannot conceal something that is already known, and we know it is undisputed, not a single witness came in here and told you she didn't know.
Not a single witness came in here and said, hey, I was talking to my mother, I was talking to my wife, and she said I don't really know who to believe. I'm confused. I just don't know.
That's not the evidence in this case. You cannot conceal something that's already known.
And another instruction that you should look at in this regard is instruction number 13.
Because there is the Engle findings. You've heard them. I can't dispute them. There is not going to be any fight about the Engle findings. They are what they are. They're in your instructions.
But the Engle findings, as Judge Rodriguez told you, do not establish that R.J. Reynolds is liable to Mr. Wendel. They do not establish the claims in this case. As Mr. Bayuk put it, it's kind of like a little dirty trick, we tell you about these findings, and then tell you you can't consider them when rendering your verdict in this case.
It also tells you not to speculate or to guess
and to use or -- use the evidence in this case in rendering your verdict.
Now, they spent a lot of time reproving the Engle findings with generic evidence. They brought in Dr. Proctor to talk about what was known in the world, what the tobacco companies did, what they didn't do. And it comes down to the simple fact that the dangers of smoking by all accounts, undisputed, were not a secret. Nobody told you that those dangers of smoking were a secret. And, in fact, you know that Mrs. Wendel knew the dangers of smoking.
But Mr. Kaiser spent some time in his closing argument talking about the world in which Mrs. Wendel made her decisions as to whether or not to become a smoker. So let's look at what else was in the world, besides this advertising.
And believe me, we're going to talk about advertising later, because I've been chomping at the bit to do it, because what we heard from Dr. Proctor is for hundreds of years, before Carol Wendel was even born, that the -- it was known that smoking causes cancer and can be life-threatening. People wrote about smoking causing cancer. People wrote about tobacco being bad for you. People
wrote about tobacco being addictive. It shows up in books.
And starting in the 1850s, there is slang for it, you heard about coffin nail, et cetera, and Dr. Proctor talked about Lady Nicotine and all sorts of things.
And smoker's cancer, he told you, when I asked him on cross-examination, that's been an official cause of death in the United States for over hundreds of years.
And we also went through and he said, yes, school textbooks talk about it. Schools have been warning about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking for years well before Carol Wendel was ever born and then also while she was in school.
Reader's Digest. You know, a lot has been said about Reader's Digest, but I think it's incredibly important to point out what Dr. Proctor told you and that Reader's Digest, the American Cancer Society and public health agencies in the United States have applauded Reader's Digest, have said that they've had a profound effect in getting out the dangers of smoking to the American public.
And how is that? How is it that a magazine like Reader's Digest has such a big influence?
Well, number one, it was the number one magazine in the United States for numerous decades. And number two, the owners of Reader's Digest were anti-tobacco, they didn't allow advertising, and they published articles.
And, sure, Mr. Kaiser likes to point out that they published articles on a whole bunch of things, but they published lots of articles on tobacco, and we went through them, and I'm not going to do that to you again today.
But the first one they did was in 1926 and "Does Tobacco Injure the Human Body", and that was by Professor Irving Fisher. And you may remember he said, "Tobacco is injurious to the human body.
It sometimes induces cancer." And guess what,
Dr. Proctor showed you, he also showed you that that Professor Irving Fisher he's been quoted in text -- I'm sorry.
JUROR LEWIS: I'm sorry.
MS. HENNINGER: In textbooks in the state of New York. Again, before Carol Wendel is the born, 1926, textbooks in New York are saying that Professor Irving -- or Professor Fisher, sorry, was saying that smoking causes cancer. Then in 1936, again before she is even born, tobacco contains a
poisonous substance called nicotine. It is habit forming.
So this is the world in which Carol Wendel was born and this is the world that continued in her educational system because as Dr. Proctor told you, New York State law required what should be taught to children in the schools.
And when Mrs. Wendel was in junior and senior high school, and she's in high school in 1949, there is a law in the state of New York, and they say here is the syllabus, here is what you need to teach your children in school, and one of the things they tell them to teach them is the problems related to tobacco, harmful substances, that nicotine can be addictive, and then Mr. Kaiser gets up says to Dr. Proctor, you don't know if Carol Wendel ever said that.
Well, you know that -- I found that question -- I'm sorry, you don't know if Carol Wendel ever was taught that in school, and he makes a big point with that with Dr. Proctor. And I found that really interesting because Dr. Proctor didn't know anything about Carol Wendel, so of course the answer is no.
But what Dr. Proctor did tell you when I was
asking the questions was that this was state law in New York. So unless Carol Wendel's schools were breaking the law, they were teaching her in high school that tobacco caused disease and was addictive.
Now, Mr. Kaiser in closing suggested that somehow I would not mention Dr. Teague. That I would not -- I would fail to even address the tobacco company documents.
I'm dying to talk about Dr. Teague, because they spent -- gosh, they spent a long time talking to Dr. Proctor about Dr. Teague. Remember one of the first documents they showed Dr. Proctor was this 1953 document from Dr. Teague called the Survey of Cancer Research. And Mr. Kaiser gets up here in closing and says, "Oh, they're not going to talk about Dr. Teague, they're not going to say anything about him. You know why?"
Well, I do want to talk about Teague because Dr. Teague, in 1953, he wrote a paper called the Survey of Cancer Research, and Dr. Proctor, when I was asking him questions, said, yeah, you are essentially, Dr. Teague walked out of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, goes to a library, looks at published literature, and reviews the work of
others. 78 articles he reviews.
And one of those articles that he reviews, actually there were 17 by this doctor, Dr. Roffo, and I think Mr. Kaiser even mentioned Dr. Roffo this afternoon, and he wants everybody to infer and believe that Dr. Roffo's research was some kind of secret that only R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company knew. That this guy down in Argentina was doing things and writing it in Spanish and we were translating them and keeping them secret and nobody knew. We hid it from Carol Wendel. We hid it from the American public.
But you know what? Remember what Dr. Proctor said? Seven years before Claude Teague ever published the Survey of Cancer Research, there is something called the Reader's Scope that talked about Dr. Proctor's research. The Reader's Scope was a very popular magazine, much like Reader's Digest. They reported Dr. Roffo's findings, they reported that the rabbits were getting tumors in their ears, and this was public knowledge not only for scientists and doctors but for laypeople.
Use your common sense.
And this wasn't secret information. Claude Teague reviewed publicly available information.
Now, the time that Carol Wendel was making her decisions about smoking, there is lots of publicity. Not only Reader's Digest, but in newspaper articles, national newspaper, TV, magazines, her local newspaper. And I'm not going to belabor this, but this was all public knowledge before the cancer studies in the '50s that we were talking about and the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
And you remember one more Reader's Digest, Cancer by the Carton, because as Dr. Proctor told you, that title says it all, when you go and buy a carton of cigarettes, you're buying a carton of cancer. And he said that was a strong admonition to people not to smoke, and Dr. Proctor said that's correct.
But you remember in 1954 something -- '53 something big happened. You had first the epidemiology, remember the studies of human populations, and in 1953, some doctors named Wynder and Graham do a mouse skin painting study. And this shows that when you paint tar on the backs of mice, they got tumors.
And this was huge news. This was giant.
Because this was the first time that anybody had
shown that cigarettes could produce a tumor on an animal in the United States and it became big news.
It was in LIFE magazine, a magazine that Carol Wendel read.
And remember Dr. Proctor described, you know, the pictures were in LIFE, LIFE was a big magazine back then, and pictures are worth a thousand words. And this was in Carol Wendel's magazine. And not only was it in magazines and newspapers, and I'm not going to go through all of them, but remember Dr. Wynder, the gentleman who performed the first epidemiology studies in the United States and then the gentleman who did those mouse skin painting studies, he goes and, throughout the United States, and he gives presentations to tell and inform the public about what his findings were.
And he goes to Poughkeepsie, he goes to where Mrs. Wendel lives, and he gives a presentation about his epidemiology and his mouse skin painting studies. And it becomes news in her newspaper, the newspaper in which Mr. Wendel worked at one point, but a newspaper she read on a daily basis. They say, hey, Dr. Wynder is coming, and then the next day after his presentation, they report on what he said.
Public health campaign worked. And you heard Dr. Proctor, we talked about this with him in 1957, there was some testimony in front of Congress, the Surgeon General at the time, Leroy Burney, said "Our position is that we have informed the public through excellent coverage of the press, radio, and TV."
And Dr. John Heller, who was the director of the National Cancer Institute, ladies and gentlemen, he again also echoed those words when testifying before Congress, saying that "They've done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public."
Now, this is all at the time that Mrs. Wendel was making her decisions to start smoking. At the same time that all of these public health messages were coming out, Dr. Proctor told you that people started quitting and people started quitting by the millions, before the 1964 Surgeon General's Report came out, people were quitting when they saw the mouse skin painting studies and the epidemiology.
And then we all know what happens in 1964. I don't think that you're ever going to need to be reminded what happened in 1964 after hearing it for
three weeks in this courtroom, but you also heard that not only did the Surgeon General determine that lung cancer was caused by smoking, it was big news. And no doubt about it, it was big news.
There is no dispute about that.
And this is about the same time that -- well, in 1964, big news, national papers, local papers, the Poughkeepsie Journal, where Mr. Wendel worked, what Mrs. Wendel read on a daily basis.
And not only did the public hear about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, you know that Mrs. Wendel had personal knowledge of that report, because Mr. Wendel heard about the report, he heard about the findings, and he went to his wife, and they talked about it, and he said, "From what I heard, smoking can screw you up and kill you and I'm going to quit. Why don't you quit?"
And her response was, "I don't want to quit."
She didn't say anything about being confused or the tobacco companies saying something different. She said she didn't want to quit.
Now, the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, it was a big report. Thick. Had a lot of scientific things in it. But it was reported, as you know, in the newspapers and magazines, and when it was
reported, all the information there told you that smoking was bad for you, smoking would kill you, you needed to quit.
And that information was sufficient for Mr. Wendel to make the decision. Mr. Wendel told you when he was sitting right here, he said, "You know, I heard that, I made my conclusions, and I got" -- him and his friends got together and in his own words, they said, "Boom, to hell with it, we quit."
Mr. Wendel and his friends quit in 1964 because they heard what the '64 Surgeon General's Report said. Mrs. Wendel didn't want to quit, and she didn't.
Now, 1966, the warning labels go on the packs of cigarettes. You heard Dr. Proctor talk about how Congress told you where to put them, what they needed to say, the font, et cetera.
Mr. Kaiser comes in and wants to talk all about this lobbying and all sorts of things and that it might have been different but for the tobacco industry, but the fact of the matter is that those went on packs of cigarette starting in 1966, and whatever he may want to say about what we did or did not do in front of Congress, he cannot
escape the fact that Charlene read that to her mother.
Her own daughter, when she was ten years old, hears in school that smoking is bad for her, the teachers tell her that, and she comes home, a ten-year-old little girl comes home and goes to her mother and tells her what she learned in school and she reads this warning to her mother.
If that doesn't trigger her to quit or try to quit, do you think that something that Claude Teague said or CTR said or Robert -- or Mr. Cullman from Philip Morris, do you think any of those statements that Mrs. Wendel may or may not have known would have made a difference?
Her husband begs her to quit. Her daughter begs her to quit. Her son begs her to quit. And they want you to believe that had they only known what Claude Teague knew in 1953, things would have been different?
Use your common sense. The people that loved her the most were telling her smoking was bad for her and that she needed to quit.
Dr. Horn, one of the earliest cancer researchers, he was the ACS guy, Dr. Proctor talked about he did all these different studies, but in
1968 he said, "You could stand on a rooftop and shout 'Smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know."
And we know that Mrs. Wendel knew this because she knew it as early as 1964, if not earlier.
So what happened when all of this publicity came out about the dangers of smoking? Well, people started quitting. Mr. Bayuk talked about the millions of people that started quitting and most people like Mr. Wendel just gave it up cold turkey.
But at the same time following the '64 Surgeon General's Report, there were groups forming, people were forming groups to help others, to kind of have like support groups to help each other stop smoking.
And you remember I asked Charlene when she was on the stand, I asked Ms. Wendel, I said, "Hey, did your mom ever try to go to a support group? Did she ever try to go to something to help her quit smoking?"
She said, "No, those didn't exist at that time."
Well, these are articles in the Poughkeepsie
Journal, the journal that Mrs. Wendel read on a daily basis, from 1964, immediately following the Surgeon General's Report. Look at all of these articles that talk about programs available where Mrs. Wendel lived to help people try to quit smoking.
She didn't want to quit. She never tried to quit. So of course she never went to one of these programs. But they did exist for people who wanted to try to quit.
And millions and millions of people did quit.
Mr. Bayuk went through some of the figures with you. And Dr. Proctor, remember, talked about how these people were just as addicted, heavy smokers, exposed to the same kind of psychological crutch and campaign of doubt that you've heard about in Mr. Kaiser's closing, all of those people were exposed to these things, but yet they quit by the millions.
By 1979, 30 million people had quit smoking in response to these types of information.
And then you now have 60 million and you can fill up football stadiums back for hundreds of years.
Now, that's what people knew. So let's talk
about what Mrs. Wendel knew. And it's clear, it's undisputed that Mrs. Wendel did not die because the dangers of smoking were unknown to her. The questions on concealment and agreement to conceal,
3	and 4, they have her name on them. So we need to look at what she knew. And there is no dispute she knew smoking was dangerous and addictive.
Mr. Wendel told you that himself. "I told her, everybody else told her, hundreds of people, the papers and everything." Her family, her husband, the newspapers, she knew the dangers of smoking. And she knew it at least in 1964.
And what's important again is not only the '64 Surgeon General's Report, but the fact that at this time, she wasn't smoking Winston cigarettes. This was at least a year before she switched to Winston cigarettes.
She was 30 years old the first time she picked up a Winston cigarette. That means every time she smoked Winston cigarettes that were made by my client, she knew that smoking was dangerous. Every time.
Now, there is no link between these denials that Mr. Kaiser and Dr. Proctor talked about because Carol Wendel herself knew that smoking was
harmful. There is never any evidence that she was confused, that she had doubt, or that she questioned whether or not that was true. No evidence in this case. None that you can even infer she was confused.
Now, I'm not going to go through these, but these are just some of the dangers or the warnings about the dangers of smoking she received over time, starting in 1956 going all the way through to 1989.
Now, none of these times, you've heard about this endlessly, none of these times did she say, hey, you're right, maybe I should quit. I'm confused. I want to quit. Help me try to quit.
Never. Never once did she dispute the dangers of smoking when people told her she needed to quit and never once did she try to quit. Never once did she even cut back one cigarette, one less cigarette a day. Never even made an effort.
Now, I want to point out something briefly, because this is something that Dr. Abramson had to tell you, and that's something Craig said in his deposition, and that's in 1976, Craig, her son, starts to warn her about the risks of smoking, and he also reads pack warnings to her. And we'll talk
about that in a second.
But she then tells Craig, "Hey, don't smoke."
Just like she told Charlene don't smoke and it's addictive, she's telling her son, which is evidence that she not only knew it, she believed it.
Now, you have seen all of these warnings.
Just remember, 1966 they start, that's the warning that her daughter read to her. In 1969, 1970, there is a different warning. And this one says "Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
That's the one her son read to her.
In 1985, you heard Dr. Proctor, these started -- these are the rotating warnings that started in 1985 and they continue till today. Two of her children read these to her. Nobody is questioning that she read these and understood these. And there is no evidence she ever disputed what she read.
Now, I want to point out just one quick instruction that you were read this morning from Judge Rodriguez, and that's instruction number 15. And I don't have it blown up, but it's in your pack there, and that's the instruction that "Warning labels placed on cigarette packs and advertisements
were sufficient as a matter of law starting on July 1st, 1969." And there is not any claim that Reynolds should have done any different warnings. There is no claim for that. So that's instruction number 15.
And, you know, I failed to mention something else that's very important about these warnings, because not only were these on every single solitary pack of cigarettes that Mrs. Wendel smoked, starting in 1971, these warnings were on every single advertisement. Every advertisement carried the Surgeon General's warning starting in 1971 as well.
So let's look at jury number -- jury instruction number 20. And this is a very long one. But I want to focus really on the last sentence, because Judge Rodriguez was kind enough to read this lengthy one to you. You have it, you can read it when you deliberate, but let me focus briefly on the last sentence.
And it's "Carol Wendel cannot be found to have reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement concealing material facts if she knew it was false or its falsity was obvious to her, or if the facts allegedly concealed were otherwise known or
available to her."
Reasonable reliance. Whatever reliance you have, if it's Mr. Kaiser's inferred reliance or direct reliance. Regardless of the type of reliance, it has to be reasonable. And it can't be reasonable in this case because she knew smoking was dangerous and addictive. She knew it, so she could not have reasonably relied on anything that was omitted by any tobacco company ever.
Now, generic testimony. Heard lots about Dr. Proctor. Dr. Proctor told you a lot both on direct examination and on cross-examination. And you heard also in instruction number 21 that -well, let me back up for a minute.
Why did they bring Dr. Proctor? You have the Engle findings. I told you in opening statement that they're probably going to spend a lot of their case trying to reprove the Engle findings, and they did.
They brought in Dr. Proctor, who knew nothing about Carol Wendel. And remember, Mr. Bayuk showed you the verdict form, and we're going to go through it in more detail, every question except for the last one has her name on it.
So why did we spend three days with
Dr. Proctor? Well, that's because Mr. Kaiser and the plaintiffs want you to do something called infer reliance. So they want you to infer that if Mrs. Wendel had known something that we concealed or failed to tell people, that the tobacco companies failed to tell people, that things would have been different.
She wouldn't have started smoking. She wouldn't have continued smoking. She would have quit earlier, even though she's never made a quit attempt in her entire life. He wants you to infer that these things may have happened.
But they need to be based on the evidence.
And there is no evidence to support that inference.
You can't infer things that simply don't exist.
Now, they want you to infer reliance because the direct evidence in this case eliminates their claims. She knew smoking was bad. She knew it was dangerous. She knew it was addictive. There was nothing concealed.
So listen to the evidence. Forget the lawyer rhetoric and argument and focus on the evidence in this case.
And now ask yourself when you're looking at the evidence what does this generic testimony have
to do with the issues I'm supposed to decide?
We spent a lot of time on it. And plaintiffs spent a lot of money obtaining that generic evidence.
You remember Dr. Proctor? Dr. Proctor came in here and knew nothing about Carol Wendel. He testified for three -- well, four days. Some of them were half days. And he gets paid $4,800 a day to testify whether he testifies for one hour or eight. And he gets a $5,000 retainer. And he -you remember, he didn't review one lick of medical records, one page of depositions. He just charged $24,200 to give the testimony that he gives in every case.
Remember I said, "Hey, last time I had the pleasure of cross-examining you, it was in September. Since that time, how many trials have you testified in?
"Six.
"Okay. Out of those six how many were in Miami?
"Oh, five since September were in Miami.
"Okay. Now, out of those six, how many were for Mr. Kaiser?
"Oh, three."
Half of his cases were for Mr. Kaiser and five of them were in Miami and each time he's charging the same amount of money to give the same testimony because it doesn't matter who the plaintiff is, the testimony is the same.
And remember, the day that he left here, Thursday, I guess a week and a half ago, or two weeks from today, I forget my Thursdays, maybe one week ago today, Dr. Proctor gets off the stand, he gets off, half day, he's done before lunch, and I say, "Boy, that was an easy $4,800 you got today; right? And you're going to drive over to Ft. Lauderdale, aren't you, and you're going to get on the stand in Fort Lauderdale today; right?
"Yep.
"And are you charging the same $4,800 today that you charged Mr. Kaiser? Are we getting it twice today?"
And he said, "I sure am. I'm very blessed."
And he smiled. "I'm very blessed."
You're darn right he's blessed. He goes from courtroom to courtroom saying the same things and getting paid giant amounts of money for it.
Now, he told you lots of things. R.J.
Reynolds' statements, American Tobacco, CTR, TI,
all sorts of things he talked about, but he didn't say any of that had anything to do with Carol Wendel because he couldn't.
And there has been no witness that came in this case to give you even a smidgeon of evidence upon which you could make that inference that Mr. Kaiser and plaintiff want you to make. It doesn't exist. There is nothing, no evidence that she relied on anything R.J. Reynolds or any other tobacco company said or did.
She knew. She knew and she continued to smoke.
Now, Mr. Kaiser said both in his opening and in his closing that this case is about why Carol Wendel started smoking. That's what this case is about to Mr. Kaiser and the plaintiff.
And I thought that was very interesting because there is no evidence that Carol Wendel started smoking because of something R.J. Reynolds or any other tobacco company said or did. Because there is no witness who saw Carol Wendel smoke or starting to smoke. First person to see her smoke was in 1955, when her husband met her.
No witness knows why she started to smoke. Carol Wendel did not smoke an R.J. Reynolds product
until she was 30 years old.
Now, let's talk about what we do know about why she started to smoke. We asked Charlene, "Hey, who can tell us why your mom started to smoke?"
And she said, "No one can answer why she started to smoke."
So I guess Mr. Kaiser must not have asked Charlene because then he would have known that the reason why we're here to find out why she started to smoke, there is no evidence of.
I had to cross-examine her on that point. Remember I had to show her her deposition because she wants to say things like, oh, I think it had to do with advertising. But her mother never said she started because of the ads. Charlene says that, the plaintiff's lawyer says that, but then she has to admit that no one can answer why her mother started smoking.
Mr. Wendel doesn't know why she started smoking.
Now, finally, advertising. Boy, Mr. Kaiser gets up here and says $250 billion is spent for advertising. Dr. Proctor spends days upon days talking about this massive campaign of advertising. Massive. So massive that people couldn't move
without being influenced by the tobacco companies' advertising.
We were all automatons, where we couldn't do anything unless the tobacco company advertising told us to. This created this environment where smoking was normal, according to Mr. Kaiser and Dr. Proctor. Everybody smoked.
You heard lots about skywriting and billboards and human trademarks, somebody called Johnny that we never saw. You know what else we didn't see?
We didn't see any evidence of any of this. There was no evidence.
You know what you have in evidence in this case? Ladies and gentlemen, you have four ads.
Four. Four ads in evidence in this case to prove this incredible, massive, ginormous, the biggest advertising campaign in the history of the United States that made everybody smoke and everybody want to smoke and nobody want to quit and they put in four ads?
Two of those are for Chesterfield.
Chesterfield unfiltered cigarettes.
Now, let's talk about the only evidence of advertising you do have in this case, and that comes from Charlene and some conversations that she
had with her mother. And let's be clear, your notes will reflect this, but what happened was in
19	-- mid 1970s, when Charlene was smoking, she was smoking Newports.
And remember, she said, "I wasn't an athlete, and I saw some Newport ads and it caught me off guard, it's kind of funny, because I said, 'Hey,
I'm smoking Newports so I'm going to become an athlete now.'"
And she brought it to her mom's attention and she said, "Look, isn't this funny, I'm smoking Newports, I'm going to be an athlete." And they laughed about it, they joked about it because they knew it isn't true.
And then what happened is Mrs. Wendel during that same conversation when they were mocking the advertisement for Newports, she says, "I remember that Chesterfield ads had glamorous women and portrayed women as being beautiful and glamorous and patriotic."
She didn't say, "Geez, I couldn't do anything but start smoking, or those ads made me want to be like those women. I started smoking because of Chesterfield ads." She never said that. Never said that.
There is also testimony that she knew the Winston jingle. Mr. Wendel talked about the Winston jingle, Charlene talked about the Winston jingle, but nobody said, geez, Mrs. Wendel said the Winston jingle made her want to buy Winston cigarettes. There is no evidence of that.
And you got the Flintstones things. And Mr. Bayuk addressed this, but Charlene wants you to believe that she remembers specifically watching the Winston ads on the Flintstones in 1960 when she is three years old, when it is on at 8:30 at night and it is an adult cartoon.
And what you have to remember about that is the Winston ads on the Flintstones in 1960, that's five to seven years before her mother ever smokes Winstons. She is not smoking Winstons then.
This massive advertising campaign, the proof of it is four ads.
There is zero evidence that R.J. Reynolds' advertising affected Carol Wendel's decision to start smoking, continue smoking, what brand to smoke or to never try to quit. And that goes for R.J. Reynolds or anybody else.
And there is evidence that she chose her brands based on what her family smoked. And I'm
going to go quickly, but when she was smoking Chesterfield, her mother smoked Chesterfield. Her then husband smoked Chesterfield.
And importantly, let's not lose sight of this fact that before he quit smoking, Mr. Wendel switched to filtered Parliaments. He was smoking filtered Parliaments before the 1964 Surgeon General's Report and he told you that his wife was also smoking filtered cigarettes before the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
So when Mr. Kaiser gets up here and says that she switched to Winston cigarettes because it had a filter in response to the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, ask yourself, hey, does that make sense? She was already smoking filtered Parliaments, a brand made by Philip Morris, the same brand her husband smoked.
And then when she did switch to Winston cigarettes, she switched to them because her mother was switching and her sister. So there is evidence in this case that you can say she made her brand selections based on what her family did, not because of advertising.
And one of the things I thought very telling in this case is when I asked Charlene Wendel, you
know, she said she asked her mother why she smoked. She asked her mother why she smoked. And what did her mother say in response? She said, "What difference does it make why I smoke? I do smoke."
She didn't say, oh, I was duped by this advertising, those four ads in evidence and this massive campaign that nobody has seen. She said, "What difference does it make why? I just do."
That says it all. There is no evidence that R.J. Reynolds or anyone else withheld information that would have affected her decision to start smoking. No information that R.J. Reynolds or any other tobacco company withheld information that would have affected her decision to continue smoking.
And if she was going to listen to anybody, ladies and gentlemen, her husband said it best, he said, "If she was going to listen to anyone, she would have listened to me." And he asked her to quit and she said no.
Now, there is no evidence that this campaign of doubt that Mr. Kaiser likes to talk about, zero impact on Carol Wendel. She never expressed any doubt. Look through your notes. See where she's expressed doubt about the dangers of smoking. She
did not rely on any of these psychological crutches that Mr. Kaiser and Dr. Proctor like to talk about.
She knew smoking was harmful in 1964. And she never said anything about tobacco company statements when Mr. Wendel told her to quit in 1964 when the Surgeon General's Report was released.
Now, I do have to address this conversation that Mr. Kaiser brought up in his closing, and that was during the same conversation when Charlene and her mother are talking about advertising in the 1970s, in the mid 1970s, and Mrs. Wendel reports to Charlene, she says, "You know what, I remember some of these Chesterfield ads, that's when they're making fun of the athletics, you know, and the Newport."
She goes, "And I also remember when the '64 Surgeon General's Report came out and the tobacco companies weren't saying it wasn't bad for you."
She didn't say I was confused, because we know she wasn't. Her husband went to her and talked to her about it. He said, "Smoking can kill you and screw you up for good. I'm quitting." She knew it. No confusion. She didn't want to quit.
Now, ads. We talked about ads. Mr. Kaiser wants you to infer reliance from these ads. Well,
let's talk about first her decision to switch to filters. Is that based on any inference you can make that cigarette companies were advertising that filters were safer?
Well, there are four ads in evidence, and two of them are for unfiltered Chesterfields, so clearly that had no impact on her decisions. The other two ads were television ads for Winston cigarettes, both on TV, one was the couple from 1950, that's dated in the 1950s, they go out to dinner, they're smoking Winstons, they don't say anything like filters are better, filters are safer. And then the Flintstones. The Flintstones didn't say anything about filters. So there is no evidence she switched to filtered cigarettes because of ads.
And let's talk about the ads that encouraged her, that Mr. Kaiser talked about in depth this afternoon about ads that encouraged her, told her to quit -- to switch to lights. Don't quit, switch to lights. Remember that? He said that she saw these ads and that she switched to light cigarettes because of it.
Well, where are those ads? There are no ads. You saw absolutely zero ads for light cigarettes.
Nothing for you to infer that she would have chosen a light cigarette for any reason other than whether or not she wanted to try it. They didn't show you the evidence, they didn't bring it to you.
Now, there is evidence that one of the reasons why she switched to filtered cigarettes was to keep the tobacco out of her mouth. Charlene said she didn't like picking it out of her mouth and that when she started smoking a filtered cigarette, she remembers her mom and other people talking about the fact that they didn't have to pick tobacco out of their mouth. And remember, her first filtered cigarette is Parliament.
Now, there is inconsistent testimony at best whether or not she even smoked lights. We know you haven't seen any ads that said lights are safer or you should switch to them. But it's not really clear as to whether or not she smoked lights.
Mr. Wendel remembers Winston Lights, but he also tells you that she smoked cigarettes from a red pack. The woman, Rose Mancuso, who worked next to her for several years, said she smoked from a red pack. And Charlene testified that if she did smoke lights, that she switched to it very briefly, and it would have been less than a year.
So inconsistent evidence at best if she even smoked lights, but no evidence that she smoked lights because she thought they were safer based on some kind of ad that R.J. Reynolds or anyone else put out there.
Undisputed evidence, undisputed evidence from Dr. Abramson based on what he saw in the depositions, Carol Wendel knew that smoking was dangerous from the time in the mid 1950s, when she started smoking.
"And did you see anything from anything you reviewed about whether or not she may have relied on something a tobacco company said or did?"
And he said, "No."
Undisputed. We brought the expert to review this material.
Also undisputed, based on the thousands of pages, "Did she know and understand the addictiveness of smoking?"
And he said, "Yes, there is such evidence, she did understand it."
Was she ever confused? I asked Dr. Abramson, who reviewed everything, "Was she ever confused or expressed doubt about controversy?"
And he said, "No, no evidence of confusion."
Dr. Proctor, he came in here, he couldn't dispute this because he doesn't know anything about Carol Wendel, and he specifically said, "I can't tell you whether she saw anything that I am talking about, whether or not she relied on it, because I know nothing about Carol Wendel."
So the chain that I showed you in opening statements remains broken. They cannot connect the links because Carol Wendel knew smoking was dangerous and she knew it was addictive. You cannot conceal something that is already known.
So I finally get to move from behind this podium and I come over here, I forgot my pen, to respectfully submit that if you do get to questions 3 and 4 on your verdict form, that for all of the reasons, and most just simply the fact that she knew and understood the dangers of smoking, that you answer questions 3 and 4 on the verdict form as no.
Now, let's go on, talk about the next issue, which is comparative fault. And if you do get here, it's important to point out what fault you are comparing. Because if you read the question, you compare -- you state the percentage of fault that was a legal cause of Carol Wendel's lung
cancer and death.
And what that means is you are looking at, you are comparing the actions, the fault of both parties as they relate to causing her lung cancer and death. It's not all the conduct of the tobacco companies, or as Mr. Kaiser likes to call it, all of the lies and the deception. It's not this world of the Engle findings.
No doubt you've seen and heard things that the tobacco companies, including my client, might have said that you think is stupid and wrong. I'm not debating that. But what you can't do is say I think that's stupid and it has nothing to do with Carol Wendel and I'm going to use this to analyze comparative fault because that's not the issue.
You compare only the fault, if any, that R.J. Reynolds had in causing her lung cancer and death. And, ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you that there is none. And we're going to talk about that in detail. Not too much detail, but some detail.
So she knew. I'm not going to go through it. She knew. Hundreds of people told her. She knew the dangers. She knew in 1964, she never tried to quit, she never wanted to quit.
And I'm going to submit to you, just like
Mr. Kaiser had this board where he pulled things off of to get -- to talk about comparative fault, let's look at the fault on both parties with regard to the legal cause of her lung cancer and death, and that's the fact that she never tried to quit.
The plaintiff admits she could have quit if she wanted to. Carol Wendel ignored warnings from her mother-in-law in the '50s. Carol Wendel could have quit with Charles in 1964, but she didn't even try. Carol Wendel said I don't want to quit in 1964. She knew in 1964 it's harmful and she doesn't try to quit.
And I'm sorry I'm rapid fire on this, but I'm running out of time.
And Carol Wendel never tried to quit when Charlene told her in 1967 what she learned in school. She didn't try to quit when Charlene read her the pack warnings. She never tried to quit when Charles her husband, as he told you, every year he asked her to quit and she never did try to quit.
She never tried to quit after Charlene saw those public service announcements, remember Charlene said she saw these things saying tell your parents to quit, et cetera. She never tried to
quit then.
Carol Wendel would open another pack in a snit when Mr. Wendel would hide her cigarettes. You remember him talking about that? She never tried to quit with Charlene, when Charlene was smoking, say, hey, let's quit together. She never went to the hypnotist that Charlene pushed her to go to, the one that came with the lifetime guaranty, she never did that.
Carol Wendel wasn't going to stop smoking even when Charlene encouraged her. She said, "I like it" when Charles asked her why she never even tried to quit. Plaintiff admits that Carol Wendel wanted to smoke and did not want to quit. Carol Wendel never cut back her smoking by even one cigarette.
And she never tried to smoke {sic}.
Ladies and gentlemen, that is why, I respectfully submit, that you answer, if you get there, the question that Carol Wendel is a hundred percent at fault. But I think -- I want to show this because this is -(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's Committee.
MR. REASONER: Almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report of the Surgeon General's Committee. This, in summary, is what the committee says:
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases.
Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed.
In short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
In this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going
to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Good night.
(Video clip stopped.)
MS. HENNINGER: The decision was Carol Wendel's. PSAs talked about how the next step is yours. She was the one that held the keys to be able to quit smoking. She is the one that had the ability to quit, to even try to quit. We don't know if she could or couldn't quit because she never tried.
So if you get to question number 5, I respectfully submit that you should write 100 percent next to Carol Wendel's name and zero next to R.J. Reynolds.
And I want you to read the next part because under here, it says, if charge Reynolds -- or if you charge Carol Wendel with a hundred percent of fault, you go no further, that's it, sign and date.
And I respectfully submit that she's the one that held the keys to avoiding the lung cancer. If she had quit, as Dr. Reed said, she could have avoided her cancer.
I'm sorry, can I get back to the -Now, I have to talk about the next question and that is the question about damages. Defense lawyers hate damages, so I'm going to be really quick.
And I want to point out that the damage question says, "What is the total amount of damages sustained by Charles Wendel for the loss of Carol Wendel's companionship and protection and for pain and suffering as a result of Carol Wendel's injury and death?" That's question number 6.
Now, if you get there, keep in mind, plaintiff is not seeking economic damages. No medical expenses, funeral expenses, Charlene's pain and suffering or Carol's pain and suffering. They're asking for 7 to 13 million dollars for loss of companionship and pain and suffering.
Now, Judge Rodriguez has instructed you when you get to damages, your award should be fair and just. And remember, he also instructed you that you need to put your sympathy aside.
This is not a case where you have to check every -- you know, your common sense at the door, but you do have to check your sympathy at the door. We talked about that in great detail in jury
selection. Remember, each of you agreed that you could decide this case based on the evidence presented instead of based on sympathy. And that's an instruction that Judge Rodriguez gave you.
Now, there is no doubt that Mr. Wendel suffered the loss of his wife. And I am by no means belittling that. I feel sympathy. It's natural for human beings to feel sympathy for that.
But your award, if you get there, must be just and fair. And I submit to you that 7 to 13 million dollars defies common sense. Because you also heard evidence in this case that Mr. Wendel met his current wife Sylvia within months of his wife's passing, that they started dating, that they moved in together, in three years they were married, and they've had a fantastic marriage for 15 years.
He's lucky he has found love. But that's evidence you can consider in considering what's fair and just for loss of companionship.
7 to 13 million dollars because she knew it was smoking {sic} and she liked to smoke? That defies common sense. So if you get to that question, just use your common sense.
And now I want to talk while I can about the last question is, do you believe that -- "In the
circumstances of this case, whether clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds?"
And I want you to remember that instruction number 32 talks about this being a higher burden of proof, clear and convincing evidence, and instruction number 28 tells you that it has to be more compelling and persuasive. This isn't the tipping of the scales, this is clear and convincing evidence. And I submit to you that the answer will be no to this question for a variety of reasons, which I will go through very briefly.
First, it has to be clear and convincing.
We've talked about that. Punitive damages can be awarded only for conduct that was a legal cause of Carol Wendel's death. Punitive damages can be awarded only to Mr. Wendel. And they are damages that you -- are provided to him in addition to the damages that you've already determined he has to fully compensate him for his pain and suffering.
The Engle findings cannot be considered in any way. The Judge has read you that instruction.
And when considering punitive damages, you can consider mitigating evidence. What is mitigating evidence? Well, Mr. Kaiser talks a lot about CTR
and Dr. Proctor talked about it, it's a shield, it's a front. And what I found most interesting perhaps is that Mr. Kaiser talked about a study, and a study from 1962.
THE CLERK: You have five more minutes.
MS. HENNINGER: Thank you.
1962 about addiction. That was a study funded by CTR, $480 million, 7,000 papers, 600 articles cited by the CTR, it was a lot of money spent for research into the issues of smoking and health and it was cited by the Surgeon General and it was in on all four lines of evidence and that's what the Surgeon General relied on, studies from CTR and others. And it's interesting because Mr. Kaiser relied on it today as well. They may call it leakage, but they used it in their closing and the Surgeon General used it as well.
Should RJR be punished. Well, they were thanked, that's true, but they were thanked for something very specific. And I'm not getting up here saying, oh, geez, they were thanked, don't punish us. What I'm getting up here saying, they were thanked because they gave them the information about the carcinogens Dr. Rodgman found in 1962, they gave them to the Surgeon General.
Inhalability.
Boy did Dr. Proctor blow that theory out of the water when he came because he said cigarettes have been inhalable since the 1800s, that Reynolds did not invent flue curing, that Turkish tobacco is just as inhalable as flue-cured tobacco, and cigarettes from the 1800s are just as dangerous and addictive as they are today.
And he blew out this idea that cigarettes are somehow made more addictive by R.J. Reynolds. Ammonia, additive free, none of those things increases the addictiveness of smoking. In fact, ammonia used in manufacturing reduces the nicotine up to 67 percent.
No more dangerous and addictive than cigarettes -- the cigarettes she smoked no more dangerous and addictive, according to Dr. Proctor, than cigarettes in the 1800s, and, in fact, no more dangerous and addictive as roll-your-own cigarettes if you go pull it, dry it, burn it. Same addiction, same disease. The tobacco companies don't make them any worse. No reason to impose punitive damages. Your answer to question 7 should be no.
Now, R.J. Reynolds also did a lot to try to
make cigarettes safer. And I'm just going to focus on one of the things that Dr. Proctor said is how we spent billions of dollars developing those heat-not-burn tobaccos, the cigarettes like Premier and Eclipse.
Eclipse is still being sold today. Big flop.
Giant flop. Tobacco companies also tried to make nicotine-free cigarettes. Big flop. Big flop. No surprise. But people are trying. Reynolds is trying. Making lots and lots -- spending lots of money trying to make a cigarette, but cigarettes cannot be made safe.
Warning labels have been on cigarettes, still working to make cigarettes safer. The dangers and addictiveness are known. Punitive damage verdict in this case is not going to tell people things that they don't already know and it's not going to make cigarettes safer.
And importantly, instruction 30 says that punitive damages are warranted, "you may not seek to punish Reynolds from harm suffered by individuals other than Carol Wendel."
It's not harm to all those other people, it's harm to Carol Wendel.
THE CLERK: You have two more minutes.
MS. HENNINGER: Thank you.
So I submit that your answer to that should be no. And I'll check it off in one second, but let's look at what Dr. Hammond said.
Is that play? Well, we'll end with the words -- okay.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: Good evening, this is See It Now, produced by the partnership of Friendly and Murrow. Tonight, the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer.
MR. MURROW: In 1952, Drs. Hammond and Horn of the American Cancer Society began an extended study of the smoking habits of American men. Here is Dr. Hammond reporting on the results of the first two years.
DR. HAMMOND: It is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer.
In my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.
(Video clip stopped.)
MS. HENNINGER: And that's the way we look at it in the United States and we've looked at it that way since 1955. And when you get to question 7, you check no. You check no.
And then you look at instruction number 28, which says that the trial of the punitive damage issue is divided in two parts. This is the first part. You will decide whether or not the conduct of Reynolds entitles them to punitive damages, it is no.
"If you decide that they are warranted, you will proceed to a second part of the issue in which the parties may submit additional evidence and witnesses." But I will submit that you will never get to that because your answer will be no.
Again, I thank you, thank you very much for your time. R.J. Reynolds thanks you. Everyone in this courtroom thanks you. It's been an honor.
Thank you.
