MR. KELLEY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning. I guess I should begin by thanking you all, my volunteers, who over two weeks ago raised your hand and said you would be willing to participate in this judicial system that we have, and I do sincerely, sincerely, each of you, because, listen, we know this has been disruptive of your lives, how could it not be, sincerely thank all of you individually and jointly on behalf of the judge and on behalf of the defense attorneys, on behalf of Karen and all the people that you see in this courtroom, for your sacrifice over the past two weeks. Thank you. It’s an important job. It is an important job.
You know, these days -- well, in court, in a trial like this, this is the one place, really, the
one place where an individual like Karen Whitney can be -- can have equal rights with a large, multinational corporation like Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds. This is the one place.
You know, in the halls of Congress, where do we get these days, right? The money and the power. But this is a place, here, where everybody is considered equal. And Karen Whitney has a right to present her case to you all as a jury of her peers in this community to decide what is right and what is wrong, who should win and who should lose under the facts of this case based on what you’ve heard over the past two weeks. Right? This is the place. And your job is important.
And I know Miss Pritchett has been on a jury before, but none of the rest of you have. And I hope that when this is over that you will feel that your time, someday, some other lawyer asks you five years from now have you ever been on a jury before, you’ll say, yeah, my time was well spent and the jury did justice in that case and we were glad we served.
So I was trying to figure out where to begin. Because I’ve got to talk about 50 years of conduct in 45 minutes. Two and a half weeks of evidence in
45 minutes. And that’s not easy. And I know I’m not going to be able to do it, but I’m going to try. And Nancy is going to try and take everything down that I say.
But what’s undisputed? What do we know about cigarettes? We know that 80 percent of people who smoke every year try to stop smoking. Right? Most of them wish they had never started. Every year,
20 million people in this country try to quit smoking. But less than 5 percent succeed. 95 out of a hundred people who try to quit smoking every year because they hate the habit can’t do it.
Right? That’s the truth. That’s the truth.
And so the question arises, what is driving the demand for cigarettes in this country. What’s the driving force behind that? Is it these consumers who are desperately trying to quit? Or is it the conduct of these cigarette companies that control and maintain nicotine levels to keep people addicted?
Whose choices are driving the demand for cigarettes in this country? Because at the end of the day, they’ll tell you, that’s what this case is all about, right, choices. Whose choices are driving the demand for a product that kills almost
a half a million people a year? Whose choices are doing that?
So at the end of the day, that’s what this case is about, you’re right, it’s about choices.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. KELLEY: Personal choices.
MR. DAVIS: I don’t think he should be addressing us directly.
THE COURT: That would be correct.
MR. KELLEY: It’s about personal choices and corporate choices; personal responsibility and corporate responsibility. Responsibility, a fundamental part of what we think is important in our lives. Accepting responsibility. Right? And who here has accepted some responsibility?
Sitting there missing a lung, coughing up blood, with some other unknown mass growing in her good lung. You saw her, right? Do you think she wanted to smoke cigarettes? Do you think she wanted to smoke cigarettes?
And she accepts responsibility for what she did. She says I should have tried harder. It wasn’t till I was coughing up blood that I suddenly realized I could stop. All those other things, nicotine gum, the lozenges, which she probably has
in her mouth right now that she still sucks on till this day, none of that stuff worked. But she tried.
And you know what, she’s human; right? None of us are perfect. She tried. And she accepts responsibility. But who doesn’t; right? Whose choices are driving the demand for this product and who told you we accept zero responsibility -MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. KELLEY: -- for what happened to her?
MR. DAVIS: Your Honor, objection. May we approach?
THE COURT: No, sir. Objection is overruled.
MR. DAVIS: May I get a curative instruction on the basis of the pretrial ruling?
THE COURT: Later.
MR. DAVIS: Thank you.
MR. KELLEY: They accept no responsibility for what happened. That’s what they’re going to come up and tell you, we didn’t do anything wrong. It’s all their fault.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: So that’s what this case is about. And there are some questions that you have
to answer for us, five questions on the verdict form. And you’ll get it, the judge I think will go over with you at the end of the closing arguments here, is going to say we, the jury, we, the jury, the community here, based on what we saw, return the following verdict.
The first two questions are the easiest questions, in my opinion, and they’re essentially the same question rephrased in a different way.
And those questions are simply this, simple questions:
Before July 1st of 1969, did the defendants fail to properly warn about the dangers of their product, that’s what it boils down to, did they know what was going on with their product and did they not tell people about it?
And the answer is crystal clear, I’m not going to spend a lot of time on it, yes, they did.
Right? We’re going to go over that in just a second. But yes, they did. They knew beyond a doubt that cigarettes cause lung cancer, they knew beyond a doubt that nicotine was addictive, they knew, knew, knew that, Dr. Cummings told you, and you’ll see by the documents without a doubt by at the latest 1958, they knew. They knew. And yet
they did nothing, nothing, to tell anybody about it. Nothing.
In fact, they did just the opposite, and we’re going to talk about that in a minute when we talk about punitive damages, which is why we’re all here in this courtroom, what did they do once they knew?
Set out on a campaign to mislead Congress and the American public, everybody out there for 50 years about the truth of their product. But they knew well before 1969 that what they were selling was addictive and it would kill you, and they did nothing to tell anybody about it.
So, you know, to get back to -- to think about that, and the good thing about the jury system is that you all are different ages, you have different occupations, you come from different walks of life; right?
Some of you have -- you don’t know what it was like back then. We tried to show you the commercials. But some of us who are my age know, we remember, okay, the cigarette companies on television saying, oh, there’s no proof it is addictive, there is not proof it causes disease, everything that they did -MR. DAVIS: Objection.
THE COURT: Mr. Kelley, I’m going to have to sustain the objection to the extent you’re talking about what you may have remembered.
MR. KELLEY: Yes.
THE COURT: We need to stick with the evidence in the case.
MR. KELLEY: Thank you, Your Honor.
But for some of you who I know are in your mid 20s, it’s like in your lifetime, it’s like what are you talking about? Everybody knows cigarettes are dangerous and addictive; right? Right?
But back then, the public didn’t know, but they knew. They knew. And so, you know, that’s why we showed -- tried to put -- put together some of these videos from commercials and slides back then.
Robert, if you could, and we’re going to see if I can make this go smoothly and try and get through this without everything going -- ending up all over the place, put up that first slide about what they knew.
Right. This is 1953. This is one of the internal company documents, okay? "Studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and
incidence of cancer of the lung.” Right? That’s 1953. That’s an internal document.
And remember, all these documents were secret, hidden, internal documents that the public never got to see, the public health community never got to see, nobody ever got to see until the end of the 1990s as a result of the litigation that was brought by the state attorney general’s against the companies.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: You’re going beyond the evidence in the case.
MR. KELLEY: I believe that was in evidence.
THE COURT: You’re going beyond the evidence in the case.
MR. KELLEY: But at the end of the 1990s, that’s when these documents were finally turned over to the American public and to the public health officials so that in the year 2000, the following year, they say, oh, yeah, we admit it, we admit it’s addictive. Oh, yeah, we admit it causes lung cancer. Oh, yeah, we finally admit all this stuff that they’ve been denying for 50 years.
So all these documents that we’re about to
see, starting with that one, then go to slide number two, these are Exhibits 16, 17, 6, in evidence, these are all the internal documents that say that "Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds of smoke. Obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming."
These are their internal documents. They know the evidence is overwhelming. 1962.
"The evidence challenging such an indictment is scant."
MS. HENNINGER: Your Honor. Objection to showing of the B&W document in light of Your Honor’s ruling.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: "Cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects."
So certain unattractive side effect to the tobacco companies, they cause lung cancer. So they knew all this back in the ’50s and the ’60s.
Go to the next document, please.
And they knew in 1963 -- now, remember 1994, all the CEOs are in front of Congress, right, they’re all up there lined up, they all swear under oath that nicotine is not addictive. Swear to God.
Swear to God, it’s not addictive, just let’s keep -- let us keep selling these products, Congress, please, it’s not addictive.
But back in 1963, the first of many documents which you will see, "Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug."
Right? That’s their product. It’s not a cigarette. A cigarette is like a container to deliver nicotine. That’s their business. They’re in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug.
Now, they knew all that, right? Did they tell anybody? No. Why? Why would they not tell you? You think it might make people stop using the product? They might not make so much money?
I mean, if -- if -- if -- think about these days, if someone were to come up to you and say, you know what, I’ve got this great business idea, I’ve got this great business idea, I’ve come up with this product that I think people are really going to like, the only problem is it’s going to addict them and it’s going to kill them. You want to get involved in that with me?
What do you get? What, come on.
But that’s what they did. That’s what they knew. They’ve been doing it, making money, making money, making money, making money, when all this came out, -MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor, it’s not proper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: -- they decided not to tell anybody.
So what do we have? We put these ads in -Put up our next slide, number 4.
All of these are in evidence. Some of you will remember these slides; right? I mean, come on, Santa Claus smoking a cigarette? Can you imagine that? Santa Claus smoke cigarettes?
Lucy, Virginia Slims, little babies, everybody, cartoons. "More doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarettes."
If you could, play some of the video clips that we have from back at that time. These are in evidence. This is what people were seeing, this is what she grew up on.
(Video clip played as follows:)
Tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union,
doctors in every branch of medicine were asked, "What cigarette do you smoke, Doctor?" Brand named most was Camel. Yes, according to this survey, more doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette.
Do you inhale? Then you’re better off smoking Philip Morris. And here is how you can prove it. Light up a Philip Morris, take a puff, get a good mouth full of smoke and slowly let the smoke come directly through your nose.
Camels are sure to please, besides they look so handsome under Christmas trees. So easy to give, so good to get, give Camels, the nation’s -Don’t miss the fun of smoking. Don’t miss the fun of smoking. Mildness is a pleasure with Pall Mall. Don’t miss the fun of smoking.
Outfielder Mickey Mantel. What do you say Mickey?
It’s not hard to see why more folks enjoy Camels than other brands, I found that out.
Let’s take a Winston break.
The Flintstones. Winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. Winston’s got that filter flavor.
Yeah, Fred.
Don’t say cigarette, say Philip Morris.
Oh, is there any other kind?
Not for you there isn’t. Nothing but the best for Mr. Ricardo.
Settle back and have a full-flavored smoke, settle back with a Marlboro.
Cigarettes, three puffs longer, four puffs longer, maybe five puffs longer than the king size, once you get the hang of it.
You’ve come a long way, baby. Introducing new Virginia Slims, the slim cigarette for women only. Tailored for the feminine hand. Slimmer than the fat cigarettes men smoke with flavor women like. Rich, mild, Virginia flavor. New Virginia Slims in the slim purse pack. You’ve come a long way, baby.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: The evidence was that during the years that she smoked, the tobacco companies spent $200 billion on advertising to try to make it look like it was the healthy, fun, safe thing to do, everybody’s doing it. You’ve come a long way, baby, come on, start smoking it, inhale, inhale. That’s what it was like back then. None of this on TV now, but that’s what it was like back then.
So you’ve got to look -- you’ve got to look at what was going on back in time when you judge the
conduct of Karen Whitney when she started smoking; right?
Do you blame her? Little 14-year-old girl who wouldn’t want to be cool, right? Friends are doing it, everybody’s doing it, your parents are doing it, everybody’s smoking, Santa Claus even smokes, the Flintstones smoke, Lucy smokes, everybody smokes, want to be cool, want to be in the in-crowd, for them knowing what they knew about their products.
So the questions to one or two are easy, did they know before ’69? Yes. Did they do anything to warn people about it? No. So the product was defective, they didn’t have any warnings, they were negligent, it didn’t have any warnings, negligent, they didn’t use reasonable care, that’s what that means. Talking about gross negligence right now. But negligence, yes, easy, questions 1 and 2.
Now, the important question is number 5. And the judge told you there’s three claims here, there is those first two which is the negligence and the product claims, and then the third claim is the punitive damage claim, and that’s what I want to talk to you about. Because you need to look at all that evidence.
First of all, you need to look at all the evidence to understand, to be able to compare, because you know that you’re going to have to apportion fault if you disagree with them, and think they might have more than zero percent responsibility, you’re going to have to apportion percentages of fault between what she did and what they did.
So you need to look at the overall picture, not just when she started as a child, but through her lifetime, what they were telling her, right? What they were telling her. And that’s where punitive damages comes in because -- and this is the great thing about the jury system.
Because the verdict that you return for punitive damages, as I just told you, serves to punish them for what they did, which we’re going to talk about, and to serve as a deterrent, it’s the great thing about the jury system, your verdict will serve as a deterrent to other companies, don’t do this, it’s not right, otherwise, you will be punished, too, by a jury someday.
That’s the great thing about the jury system. You have the opportunity in your verdict not only to compensate Karen, which we’ll talk about, but
also to punish the defendants for what they did and to tell others don’t do it, it’s wrong.
What did they do? What did they do? Right? Why am I talking about punishment? And I think you know why, but let’s go through the evidence real quick.
Put up the next slide, Robert, if you can.
So here’s what happened; right? You know,
1953, back when they saw that cigarettes were causing lung cancer, all of these competitor companies got together and the CEOs went to the Plaza Hotel in New York and met to figure out how are they going to handle this problem.
Because remember the mouse painting studies had come out then, also it was in LIFE magazine, and cigarette sales started to drop. How are they going to handle this.
So they all met at the Plaza Hotel, it’s all documented, and they brought in a public relations firm, Hill & Knowlton, and they decided at that meeting that what they were going to do was to create a controversy to cause people to doubt whether cigarettes caused disease. They weren’t going to come out and flat out deny it. They were going to create a controversy, which we’re going to
go through.
So even though they knew, they knew internally that it was clear it caused lung cancer and other diseases, they were going to go out without actually denying it and create this controversy so that people would keep smoking.
Because you remember the document about psychological crutch, you’ve got to give them a psychological crutch. It’s doubt. Oh, come on nobody knows for sure; right? Some of you remember those times. Some of you do, I know you do. I mean -- I can’t say about what I thought, but that’s what they were doing. They created a fake controversy.
You know, some people say it’s still being done by other entities, other corporations out there today.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. DAVIS: To other entities.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection. Jury will disregard it.
MR. KELLEY: But what we’re looking back is what these corporations did in the last half of a century. So they met at the Plaza Hotel and they
came up with the idea for this Frank Statement.
This was published in all major newspapers across the country. They formed this thing called the CTR or TIRC, I think it was, the Tobacco Institute which is a cigarette-funded industry, to make it look like they were independent, this independent organization that was going to go out and start putting evidence out there about what happened.
But anyway, they put out this document that said, 1954, "There is no proof that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. We believe the products we make are not injurious to health." And all the other stuff. This is in evidence, you can see they told the American public in 1954.
Then, next slide, they had to deal with the Surgeon General six or seven years later, right, because the Surgeon General was about to come out with a report to warn people that cigarette smoking caused disease.
So you look at their internal documents from 1961 where the cigarette companies say,
"Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke." And that the "present technology does not permit filtration of the particulates of smoke."
So they knew that, but what do they tell the Surgeon General? This is the letter they sent to the Surgeon General in 1963. "None of the chemical substances listed therein to our knowledge has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in the amounts reported in smoke.
So if you look at their document in 1961 that says carcinogens are in every class of smoke and see what they told the attorney general, none of the substances are found to be harmful. Right?
And, of course, if it is, we can modify it by the use of filters, which, of course, they knew was not true too.
Next slide.
And then this was the document they said where -- it’s unfortunate that we have to give anything to the Surgeon General, right, "It’s unfortunate as a industry we have to turn anything over to them, but what we will turn must necessarily be so vague and incomplete as to be irksome to the reader."
So then they went about -- and these are their internal company documents about the doubt and confusion and the concealment that they were
creating during this time period, all their internal documents which we got at the end of the 1990s which are in evidence which you will see, "TIRC has been a successful defensive operation. Obviously, the key word is confusion, and anything we can do to confirm such will work to our advantage. We must in the near future provide smokers with a psychological crutch and the self-rationale to keep smoking. CTR and the industry have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth."
"Let’s face it," internally, "we are interested in evidence which we believe denies that the allegations that cigarette smoking causes disease."
Next slide.
And then they went on television. Let’s go ahead and play this clip. This is 1955.
(Video clip played as follows:)
If we find anything that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette.
We want to be the detective just as much as the Surgeon General of the AMA, and we will
cooperate in every way.
Well, obviously, the filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. I don’t think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed.
Here in Washington, a lot goes on that you never hear about. Take the controversy about cigarettes. In the 91st Congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: This is their Truth Squad, what they put out.
(Video clip resumed.)
The record shows that many of the country’s most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. A California doctor said, "As a scientist, I found no persuasive evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer."
A New York doctor told Congress, "To claim there is now sufficient scientific evidence to establish that cigarette smoking causes disease is,
in my opinion, unjustified." There is another side to the cigarette controversy, it’s all here in this white paper.
We -- we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don’t accept that, because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
Do you believe that cigarettes are safe, have they been proved to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
I believe they have not been proved to be unsafe.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. DAVIS: I’m going to object to this, the headings here, the argument, is all relating to claims that are no longer in the case and haven’t been since the beginning of the trial, and I would ask that the jury be instructed to disregard these headings and I get a curative instruction on that.
THE COURT: Overrule the objection.
MR. KELLEY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Next slide, please.
Now, this is a document that is dated 1972.
THE COURT: As long as the jury understands that the headings are provided by plaintiff’s counsel -MR. KELLEY: Correct.
THE COURT: -- as part of their closing argument.
MR. KELLEY: If you look at -- in Plaintiff’s Exhibit 27, this is a -- if you want to write down an exhibit number that you should go -- because you’re going to go back and there’s going to be big stacks of paper, right, you’re going to have to be flipping through things, but I’ll tell you, write down 27, because 27 is a good one, okay. And it refers back to that meeting they had in 1954, right, at the Plaza Hotel.
It says, "For nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and public opinion. And while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. On the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without
actually denying it."
So that was their plan that they conceived at the Plaza Hotel and that they brilliantly executed for 20 years and got her in that 20-year period to start smoking.
They set up -- we already talked about that. Let’s go to the next slide.
So that -- that was in 1972. So now we’re up to the 1980s, right, and they send out these people. 1980s -- 1980s, excuse me, 1980s and 1990s, they call it the Truth Squad, they’re out in the public, making these statements about cigarettes still in the 1980s and 1990s. And you can play those.
(Video clip played as follows:)
ANNOUNCER: The cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown. In fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer.
MAN: I don’t know. Frankly I think smoking may be hazardous, it may not be.
ANNOUNCER: Smoking may be hazardous, it may not be. No one, including TV 7, knows for certain.
MAN: As far as I’m concerned, the bottom line is that we simply don’t know.
MAN: I don’t know if cigarettes are bad or
they’re not bad.
WOMAN: We don’t know what causes the elements that have been attributed to the cigarette smoking. I am not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people.
MAN: I am saying that the science to date and the over a hundred million dollars of our industry -(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: It is the CEO of R.J. Reynolds, one of the defendants.
(Video clip resumed.)
MAN: -- indicates that there is no causal
link.
WOMAN: Basis to all of them. The jury has not come in.
MAN: It may not be harmful, you are not convinced?
WOMAN: It may be or it may not be, we don’t
know.
MAN: Do cigarettes cause cancer? I do not know if they do or not.
WOMAN: I am not in a position to give you a does or does not answer.
MAN: It is not known whether cigarettes cause
cancer -(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: Former CEO of RJR.
(Video clip resumed.)
MAN: -- it has not been established.
MAN: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
MAN: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
MAN: We don’t know what causes cancer in general right now, so -(Video clip stopped:)
MR. KELLEY: CEO, Philip Morris.
(Video clip resumed.)
MAN: -- I think we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: So half a century, and listen, they’re trying to blame her saying that she should have known that smoking caused lung cancer? They didn’t know, apparently, is what they’re telling the public. Well, we don’t know, we don’t know, we don’t know.
But you know they knew, and they were just out there trying to create doubt, create a controversy and provide a psychological crutch to keep her smoking, which they did, kept her smoking, so that they could keep making money. That’s what they did. And then they attack the Surgeon General.
Play the -- I think it’s two slides from now.
MR. PHILIPSON: This one.
MR. KELLEY: I don’t have time for all these. We’re going to have to -(Video clip played as follows:)
MR. DWYER: It was suspect from the start. HEW’s Secretary Califano launched his antismoking campaign a year ago with all the zeal of a reformed sinner. Turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. America beware if Joe Califano ever gives up drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most intimate.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: I agree with one thing he said. You know what that is? America beware. Okay? Beware. You know why? Tobacco spin can be hazardous to the truth. Right? So beware of that. Attack the Surgeon General. Tell everybody there
is no proof. Go out and keep people smoking. The whole time that they know that nicotine is the product that they are really selling.
Let’s go to the next slide.
Again going back to 1963. This is the slide we saw at the beginning, "We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." They’ve known that since 1963. For the typical smoker -well, you’ll have all these documents. You can see it’s nicotine delivery.
Exhibit 61, 1972. These are their internal company documents. "Tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. Our industry is based upon the design, manufacture, and sale of an attractive dosage of nicotine."
Next slide, Exhibit 79, this is another good one, "Who ain’t for more money?" Okay, they asked the question internally, who is not for more money? "I would be more cautious of using the pharmaco-medical model. Do we really want to tout cigarette smoking as a drug? It is, of course, but there are dangerous FDA implications to having such conceptualizations ever go beyond these walls."
Exhibit 82, "Without the chemical compound,
the cigarette market would collapse. Philip Morris would collapse and we would all lose all our jobs and our consulting fees."
Exhibit 71 from 1982, "If the exit gates from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. Nicotine, nicotine, nicotine." They knew what it was that was keeping people -- next slide -- keeping people addicted, and they would manipulate, you heard the testimony from Dr. Cummings, they manipulate and they control the nicotine levels to keep her and their customers addicted.
Those people, those 20 million people this year that are going to try and quit and only three or four are going to be able to make it, that’s because they control the levels of nicotine to keep them addicted.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor, relates to the design claims.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: I know. I know. I’m never going to get through this. It’s too much stuff.
You all are going to have to go back and look through these documents yourself. Okay?
Listen, it’s clear, we played you that thing
where the genetic engineering. They can completely remove nicotine from the tobacco leaf; right? They can put out a cigarette that doesn’t have nicotine in it, and they did, and you know what happened? People stopped, wouldn’t buy them. Why? Because it doesn’t satisfy the urge. Right? It’s the drug in there that keeps people coming back. That’s what they do, that’s what they manipulate, and that’s what their business model is and always has been.
What do the consumers know? This is back 1978, the next slide, this is their internal documents in 1978, "Very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, that it’s addictive and that it’s a poison."
Next slide. "They will likely insist on a clandestine effort in order to keep nicotine the drug in low profile." That’s Exhibit 80.
Next slide. This is from 1978. "Opiates and nicotine" -- this is their internal documents. "Opiates and nicotine may be similar in action. We accept the fact that nicotine is habituating."
They go through a whole thing here because there is a Dr. Abood doing independent research as an antagonist of nicotine, and they say it is their
strong feeling that if progress has been claimed in that area, we are digging our own grave if they come up with something against nicotine.
Next slide.
And then the Surgeon General comes out in 1988 and says:
(Video clip played as follows:)
WOMAN: The nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, very addictive.
DR. KOOP: I would say it is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine. Our nation has mobilized enormous resources to wage a war on drugs, illicit drugs. We should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 Americans each year.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: So as soon as he -- they come out, and, listen, they just said they know it’s like opiates, they know it’s addictive, they’ve known it since 1963, and the Surgeon General finally catches up with them in 1988 and warns the American public it’s addictive, what do they do?
Next slide.
They put out their press release, "Claims that cigarettes are addictive are irresponsible scare
tactics."
And then in 1994, 1994, the CEOs of the tobacco companies, knowing what they knew for all those years, get up in front of Congress and testify.
(Video clip played as follows:)
MAN: Would you raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth?
MEN: I do.
MAN: Please consider yourself to be under
oath.
CONGRESSMAN WYDEN: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first, and I would just like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it. Just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
MAN: I believe nicotine is not addictive,
yes.
CONGRESSMAN WYDEN: Mr. Johnston.
MR. JOHNSTON: Congressman, cigarettes and
nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxicants.
CONGRESSMAN WYDEN: We’ll take that as a no. And again, time is short. If you can just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We just would like to have this for the record.
MAN: I don’t believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
MAN: I believe nicotine is not addictive.
MAN: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MAN: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MAN: And I too believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. KELLEY: Now, this is right at the end of the last Senate hearing, before these internal documents came out. So they were comfortable lying to Congress.
MR. DAVIS: I’m going to object to the argument, Your Honor, as being related to claims that are not in the case.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: They’ve known for the entire half century what they were selling that it was addictive, that they controlled and maintained the levels to keep people addictive, and then they get up there under oath, under oath, in front of Congress, and say it’s not. The CEOs, the top guys for all cigarette companies. Someone should wash their mouths out with soap; right?
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor, improper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: Skip over to -- a couple of slides.
MR. PHILIPSON: This one?
MR. KELLEY: No.
So where do they get their customers for their addictive client? They get their customers from teenagers. That’s the basis, and they’ve known it for years, and this is what their internal documents show. 7 0 -- and this is government statistics, too, but Philip Morris knows it.
75 percent of smokers begin to smoke either before or during high school. Okay. 75 percent of smokers start before or during high school. Which means they start before the age of 18; right? 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. They’re kids.
This is an internal document from 1969 from Philip Morris. "Why do 70 million Americans and countless millions outside the United States smoke despite parental admonition, doctors’ warnings, governmental taxes, and health agency propaganda? The 16- to 20-year-old begins smoking for psychosocial reasons," the same reason she started.
"The act of smoking is symbolic, it signifies adulthood. He smokes to enhance his image in the eyes of his peers, but the psychosocial motive is not enough to explain continued smoking. Some other motive takes over to make smoking rewarding in its own right."
"Long after adolescents" -- adolescents, adolescents, adolescents, little kids, right, adolescents, young teenagers. "Long after their preoccupation with self-image has subsided, the cigarette will preempt food in times of scarcity on the smoker’s priority list."
Next slide.
This is RJR’s internal documents. "Young adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. They will continue to be just as important in the future." And they go
through why are they important?
Because less than a third of smokers start after the age of 18, and after the age of 24, only 5 percent; right? You heard the developing brain from testimony in this case, how kids’ brains are still developing. By the time you hit 24, you are developed, you are not going to smoke. You know better.
But their audience, their target, their customers are those teenagers, those adolescents, and they’ve known it, and their internal documents show they’ve known it.
Next slide.
This is Exhibit 49. "Younger adults’ importance as" -- they call them replacement smokers; right? What are they replacing? Think about that for a second. People who died? Right? They need replacements for those people. And where do those replacements come from? Kids.
Smokers start -- this is their internal documents. 12-year-olds start by -- 10 percent of them start by the age of 12, 13 percent by 13, 20 percent by 14, when she started smoking. 20 percent of their smokers start by the age of 14.
That’s that gawking period, right, where we’re
all weird and what do we want to do, we want to look cool. Right? They know it, that’s who their audience is, that’s who they’re targeting.
And you’ll see internal documents, they go to bowling alleys, beaches, drive-in movie theaters, everywhere they can, studying these kids, trying to figure out how to market to them, preying on them to make money. And that’s what they did.
Next slide.
We don’t even have time to talk about this.
I’m going to have to sit down. But when you go back, take a look at these documents about Dow and Nicorette. And what it shows is that in the 1980s, when they came out with Nicorette gum, Dow Chemical was the company that came out with it to help people stop smoking, and what did Philip Morris do?
They exerted economic pressure on Dow because Dow would -- Philip Morris would buy chemicals from Dow to make their cigarettes, they said, well, we’re not going to be your customer anymore, we’re not going to buy any of your product unless you stop doing this, essentially.
You’ll have to look and see what the documents say, but Dow was putting fliers in doctors’ offices to help people stop smoking. At one of the Dow
plants, they had a program to help their workers stop smoking. Philip Morris said stop, stop.
That’s the kind of company that they are.
That’s why punitive damages are appropriate in a case of this nature. You lie to the American public, you conceal the dangers of your document, you control and manipulate nicotine levels, you get in front of Congress and say it’s not addictive.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor, Williams, State Farm.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: And then you come in here and you say we have no responsibility? We have zero percent responsibility?
Next slide.
So we’ve got two pictures of Karen. We tried to find two right around the ages. And this is 1961. This picture is in evidence and you can see. This is when she was -- this is the year before she started smoking. She is 13 years old. Okay. This is who they were targeting. You already saw their documents. This is who they wanted to get smoking, and they got her to smoke. Right?
And you heard a story with her best friend, they would sneak around and smoke together, and
then they got into the car and they would smoke on their way to school, and then she got her job, so she was able to work at Miami Rug, whatever it was, and smoke in the afternoons.
And by the time she finished high school, she was an addicted smoker. Not everybody gets addicted; right? It doesn’t happen to everybody. You heard that. Not everybody becomes an addicted smoker, but some people do and they cannot quit. That’s why 97 percent of them can’t quit every year. They want to, but they can’t.
She was in that group, she couldn’t quit.
They targeted her as a young, young girl, and got her addicted. How addictive is it?
Let’s slide up.
By the way, that picture was taken when she was 18, and that’s in evidence too. And I think if you look at her -- I mean, let’s go to the next slide.
I’m not going to have time to talk about this, this is another important exhibit, 81. If you want to write one down, take a look at it, this went into evidence yesterday, it talks about how addictive nicotine is, it’s a highly addictive drug. This is from the Surgeon General in 2010.
Let’s skip over that.
And then let’s talk about choice, okay, and percentages of fault. Skip over a couple of slides. Let’s go to the next one. There you go.
Okay, this is another one to write down, Exhibit 85, okay, because it has to do with choice. And this is another internal company document from 1980 -THE COURT: Put that down. Put that down.
MR. KELLEY: That’s a different document, Your Honor. It is.
THE COURT: Make your argument without it.
MR. KELLEY: Okay.
In 1980, they knew that the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer or cigarette case, which is exactly what this is -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. KELLEY: We can’t defend free choice, we can’t defend free choice if the person was addicted. They’ve known that for years. And that’s exactly what they’re coming in here doing, isn’t it, it’s her choice. Don’t blame us, it’s all her fault.
So you’ve got to look at all this evidence,
all this stuff that she saw in her lifetime and then apportion fault. What percentage is she responsible for her lung cancer, and what percentage are these two defendants responsible for her lung cancer?
And that’s something I’m sure you’ll do appropriately. I’m not going to suggest any percentages. It’s up to you based on what you think the evidence has shown in this case.
That’s question -- by the way, that’s question
3	on the verdict form. So 1 and 2 were the ones about 1969, warnings before 1969. Question 5 is the punitive damages. I just backed up to question 3. This will all make more sense once you see the verdict form, which is the percentages of fault. Sorry to confuse you and be jumping around.
Let’s go to number 40, because I’ve only got a couple of minutes, in fact, I’ve spoken longer than I should, and talk about damages in this case, which is question number 4 on the verdict form.
You know, you’ll have to decide, and to make it easy, we reached an agreement with the defendants in this case on Karen’s economic damages, but the judge read you the jury instructions.
In a case like this, the compensatory damages, as we talked about in jury selection, they have two components, they’ve got economic damages, which are her past medical bills, future medical expenses, right, things that are necessarily -- necessarily related to her lung cancer and what the cost of those are, and what we did, with an agreement with the defendants, in order to make it easy for you all, instead of putting all the bills in evidence and calling experts in, to try and move the trial along, we stipulated what that evidence would be.
I think you all wrote it down. I think the past medical expenses were something $350,000, if I’m not mistaken. And then two numbers were read to you all for future medical expenses, and it was under two different scenarios, you may remember.
One of them was if she has a recurrence of her lung cancer, that her future medical expenses will be about $750,000. Why is that? Because she will have a very short life expectancy if she has a recurrence of her lung cancer. She has only got one lung left.
If she does not have a recurrence, if that thing they see on her right lung right now is not lung cancer, God willing, everybody prays for that,
and she lives her normal life expectancy, which that’s why we read you her mortality tables, her normal life expectancy is approximately 20 years for a woman her age, then the cost of the future medical care for her over the next 20 years is about $2 1/2 million, somewhere in that range, because you know she is dependent on oxygen, she has to have scans done, she has to have check-ups, she needs to have treatment over the next 20 years.
And so the economic damages, depending upon what you think the evidence shows in this case, are going to range anywhere from a million to $2 1/2 million. Is that right? Maybe it’s almost $3 million, $2.8 million, but I’m sure you all wrote it down, so you’ll know what those numbers are.
And as I told you, when we started the trial those are the easiest things, they are so easy we stipulated to them to make it easy for you all. That’s the easiest part of the damages in a case like this.
The hard part for you and for jurors in these types of cases are the noneconomic damages.
Remember we talked about things like loss of ability to enjoy life as a human being or diminished ability to enjoy life. Pain. Remember
that mask she had on? Remember that? That’s scary, right? And fear, things like that, having your head strapped down, having the radiation, the fear that she told you she has.
Imagine every night when she goes to bed with just one lung and worrying about what that spot is on her other lung. I can’t imagine how she must feel about those type things.
And, you know, you heard terms like disfigurement. I mean, if you put up -- the judge read you instructions like that, when the cancer spread to her neck, the next slide, she has scarring as a result of that and from having her lung removed. So those are noneconomic damages.
And there is two separate lines in question 4 for the compensatory damages, and the one is the economic, which we’ve talked about, and the other is the noneconomic.
And you all will have to use your best judgment in this case as to what her future noneconomic -- past and future noneconomic damages are, for her pain, her suffering, her disability, her loss of ability to enjoy life, all those human elements that go on in a case like this.
And that’s your discretion; right? The judge
is going to tell you there is no exact amount, it’s what you all think is fair and just in light of the evidence, what you think will be reasonable.
And I’m going to suggest an amount to you that I think is very conservative, and you can certainly award more, but I think $5 million, does that sound like too much? If they take away 20 years of her life? I don’t think so. Or compensation for what she’s been through in the past and in the next 20 years? I would say at least $5 million for those noneconomic damages.
Or economic damages are, like I said, probably about 3 million, 2 1/2 to 3 million, I think that might be right or it could be more. It’s up to you all. I wouldn’t begin to infringe on that area, but that’s up to you all to decide.
So I did the best I could. And also, before I sit down, I need to thank my team. You know, I’ve got a group of people here, I’ve got Todd and Eric and Keith and Robert over there doing the slides for us, and all the people that have -- and where is Katy?
There she is, Katy, helped read depositions and work with us on this case. And we’ve all worked long hours and worked hard to be able to
bring this evidence to you so that you could see it. I want to thank them for the work they did helping us make this presentation. I certainly could never do this by myself. Never.
So I’m going to sit down. The defendants are going to have the opportunity to come up and tell you why they are zero percent at fault. They’ll have the opportunity to do that over the next however long they’ve got, hour and a half, I think. And then Mr. Mitnik will have the opportunity at the very end to come back up and address you one more time on behalf of Karen.
So what I’m going to do now is sit down, I know you’re happy to hear that, I’m going to sit down. But before I do, I want to share one thing with you, and this is from Exhibit 1, this is the back page of Exhibit 1, from the Surgeon General’s Report, it’s the concluding remarks from the Surgeon General’s Report, and what they said is this, "If we do not act decisively today, a hundred years from now, our grandchildren and their children will look back and seriously question how people claiming to be committed to public health and social justice allowed the tobacco epidemic to unfold unchecked."
So what I would suggest to you is that you need to act decisively today in your verdict, so that your children, your grandchildren, whoever hears about this -MR. DAVIS: Your Honor.
MR. KELLEY: -- will know that you took action.
MR. DAVIS: I’m going to object to the improper argument.
THE COURT: Sustain. Sustain the objection.
MR. DAVIS: May we get a curative instruction, please?
MR. KELLEY: We come -THE COURT: Jury will disregard the comment so far. Please continue on and finish up.
MR. KELLEY: We come here seeking justice. That’s why we’re here. But only you can deliver, only you.



MR. MITNIK: Yes, sir, thank you.
THE COURT: And do you want me to give you a five-minute warning.
MR. MITNIK: I would appreciate it.
Thank you for your time. I’m going to move quickly because I got more to talk about than I have time to talk about it. I know you’re tired of hearing lawyers talk, but I got some things to say that it’s hard for me not to talk about because this is such an important matter on behalf of my client and on behalf of the purpose we are here for.
First thing I want to tell you about is this failure to warn in this time frame here. You know what’s not on here? You know what’s not on here? How about "we target teens"? How about our product if you inhale it when you’re a youngster while your brain is still developing, you’re going to have permanent changes to the neuro pathways that are going to be hardwired into your brain so that if you stop smoking while you are pregnant, you will go right back to it. It is irrational, it is illogical, it defies common sense, but it’s the product we sell and you’d better know, young lady, before you start what you’re getting into. Where is that warning?
And we know if you don’t get you young, we don’t get you at all because if you are 25 years old by the time it happens, it don’t happen at all. And we want to warn you because it’s our responsibility, because we also know what we’re selling, when you smoke it in an addictive fashion where you do it all day, every day, every opportunity that you can, and get up the next morning before your feet hit the ground and do it again, it’s likely to cause cancer. And you need to know it, young lady. Where is that warning?
Where is the brain changes that are permanent? Where is the don’t inhale it, that’s what gets its speed of delivery up to your brain and addiction and that’s what’s bathed in the lungs, don’t do it, as opposed to the ads you see encouraging it.
Where is the warning about inhalability?
Where is the warning that says this isn’t some nincompoop over-worried Chicken Little out saying the sky is falling crying wolf to public health officials and people trying to warn you? This is for real. It’s our product. We have a responsibility to our customers. Remember, that’s what they said in that Frank Statement, we have a responsibility to our customers, and, boy, if we
ever find it, we’re going to take it out. That’s what they said.
Where is the warning that says it isn’t somebody else saying it about our product that doesn’t know? It isn’t if you put anything on a mouse that will make them sick. It’s we, the manufacturers, who know our product better than anyone tell you, yes, this thing is causing cancer, this epidemic, this dreaded disease is coming from our product and we know it. Where is that warning? Where is that warning?
Where is the warning, this talk about everybody knew about nicotine fiend, everybody knew about coffin nails, the suggestion in this court of common sense where we worked hard to get people who could see common sense and see through things that don’t make sense. How -- you can’t have it both ways. How can you have on one side everybody knew it at the turn of the century, including this young lady, everything they needed to know about coffin nails, everything you needed to know about nicotine fiends, a horrible addiction that kills, but they don’t know a word about it. They’re in the dark, the ones that make it.
Not at the turn of century, in the ’50s, in
the ’60s, where is it with them? You can’t have it both ways. America, everybody was smoking, the doctors. You heard her doctor and her brother’s doctor was smoking. That’s outrageous to think he’s not only smoking but in the examination room. It was a different time and place. If the doctors and the scientists and everybody knew what they claimed to impose upon my client as a young girl, explain it.
Did America go nuts, 65 or 85 or whatever the percentage was of the men were smoking, just mass suicide, let’s get an addictive drug, get it in our system and die. That’s the impression they give you when they want to pin it on her.
But when it comes to their responsibility for not warning, science didn’t really know, it was all a confusion to us about whether you use the word "addiction" or not.
Which is it? She knew because everybody knew, but they didn’t know?
You saw the internal documents. I have not the time to go back through them. They celebrated that addiction. That is the business they were in, selling. They converted into the business of selling an addictive drug. To this day, you saw on
their website they don’t want to admit it’s a drug. It was a drug. She didn’t know she was tangling with a drug that was addictive as heroin as a kid.
She not only had all that advertising -- and remember, they want to make some little pinpoint in time at the moment she picked up her first cigarette or became a regular smoker. It don’t work that way. The plate got set years leading up to it, from all of that advertising.
Advertising from other cigarettes, what’s that got to do with this case? Because they ingrained into the fabric of society a right of passage into adulthood for kids.
And it wasn’t just her, a generation was swept into it and you saw the cohort, her age cohort and the women they swept up into it and the consequences of an epidemic of addiction and death and lung cancer. She got swept up into it.
Did they back here warn her when there was a chance to say more likely than not, you steer clear, you steer clear, young lady, it’s our obligation to tell you you’ve got no business picking it up, it’s not because your parents said it, who, by the way, interestingly, her parents didn’t care if she smoked, they just didn’t want
her to smoke until she was 18. Remember that?
And all this tell me, you don’t smell smoke, if somebody walked in -- if I was smoking and I walked in and came close, you’d smell it because there is not smoke around. Back then, their home had smoke in it. The cars they rode in had smoke in it. Everybody was smoking. You couldn’t go anywhere and not smell the stink of smoke. You can’t tell who it’s coming from. It may be Dad, Mom, who’s it coming from?
It was a different time and a different place, and they -- but you know who it wasn’t a different time and place for? Them, they’re the ones that knew. They’re the ones that knew about the product, and they did not warn. It was worse. It was worse than they didn’t sit quiet.
They didn’t just sit there and say I’m not going to warn you what you’re getting into, that you’re tangling with a nasty addiction that in all likelihood you’re going to struggle for the rest of your life with and there’s a good chance you’re going to end up losing a lung from it. We know it, we know it as a fact and we’re going to tell you. They didn’t just say let’s zip our mouth and sit quiet.
They got together as an industry, these defendants, with their cohorts in the industry and decided we are going to make up a controversy to lower the threat level. We’ve got a bunch of addicted customers who it doesn’t take much that’s music to their ears. Hey, you don’t need to cross that bridge, we’re nowhere near that.
We don’t believe it’s causing harm, but we’ve got the best and the brightest and we’re going to -- let’s be a little smarter about how we do it, let’s set it up in some separate little entity that sounds different from us and we’ll fund it by our market share, but to the public it will look like we got the best and brightest and if there ever is anything, we’ll find it and we’ll take it out.
You see Dr. Dupuis up there with all the fancy machines hunting for something they already know exists, but we haven’t found it, but if we do, we’ll get it out with filters, we’ll get it out with something and we’ll stop selling it.
And it wasn’t that they walked up to her door and knocked and said, Karen Whitney, we want to tell you. That’s not how it worked. They were firing a whole lot higher than Karen Whitney. They weren’t going door to door. They influenced the
entire information environment at the time. They took a steady stream that was coming from public health that was crystal clear and they manhandled, these two defendants with the help of the industry, manhandled it and turned it into a twisted muddy mess and they said what’s it got to do with her smoking?
Well, how about telling this young girl find something else to express your independence with. Steer clear. You’re going to likely get addicted because you are so young your brain is vulnerable as a youngster to getting a -- look, she smoked when she was a teenager. That’s the evidence. But you know all this talk about maybe she was 18.
Well, that may sound good because now she is an adult. That’s got nothing whatsoever -- she smoked when she was younger. The evidence is clear. She isn’t in here making this up. Her friend isn’t making it up. Her brother says she likely was but I was older and gone, isn’t making it up. Her sister who says she likely was but I wasn’t in the midst of it. They’re not making it up.
But what kind of defense is it they put so much effort into trying to prove. It’s still you
ought to be warning an 18-year-old. It’s a young, developing mind. It’s no defense. It’s just trying to take some of the sting out of targeting teens.
How about this one, the filters don’t work.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor, defect claim argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. MITNIK: 19 -- we’re talking about this time frame, when she picked up a cigarette, how about telling them the filters don’t work? It’s a parlor trick, they don’t work. Don’t feel safe. There is this mixed message out there, it sounds like we haven’t reached that bridge, if we ever do, we tell you hold your horses, quit worrying, we’ve got the best and brightest, they’ll find it and tell you, in the meantime go on enjoying yourself.
But just in case you’re still worried about it, youngster, who’s about to think about you’re going to pick up a cigarette like everybody else is doing, I want you to know if you’re taking any solace from that filter that, what’s a filter do other than purify, if you’re taking some solace from it, don’t, because we have an obligation to tell you that won’t make it a lick safer for you,
so don’t do that.
How about if they’d have done that? This product causes a dreaded disease that has become an epidemic on America, it is a seriously addictive drug, you’re young and vulnerable to a life of struggle with it, and a filter -- and we admit, we, not somebody else trying to warn you, we’re telling you about our own product, and filters don’t work. How about telling that to her? Is that asking too much.
Remember, when you look at this instruction that you’ve got up there, they talk about what other reasonable manufacturers would do. Not other cigarette companies would do, other reasonable manufacturers would do.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor, it misstates the instruction, it says cigarette manufacturers.
MR. MITNIK: It does, other reasonable cigarette manufacturers.
THE COURT: Overrule the objection.
MR. MITNIK: Not anyone, the fact that other cigarette manufacturers who had gotten together and agreed isn’t the measuring stick, it’s what other reasonable cigarette manufacturers would have done.
What reasonable cigarette manufacturer would not have warned people who would have steered clear of kids, not target them, told them the truth, our product is causing this horrible disease, told them the truth, if you start -- it isn’t like gummy bears, chocolate. This is a real deal, it’s a drug that addicts miserably.
What reasonable company doesn’t tell that to Karen Whitney and all the other Karen Whitney’s of her age cohort? She was a cigarette company’s, these defendants’ success story. She did precisely the way they mapped it out and they said we don’t take any blame.
You know what doesn’t happen? She doesn’t say I was your success story so it’s all on you. She said I understand because I started young but I kept smoking as an adult and I struggled and I tried and I tried, but I can’t come in here and say I have no responsibility.
But how can the people who worked so hard for that result and been so successful in that result say, what’s this got to do with us?
MR. DAVIS: Your Honor, I object, basis of the pretrial ruling.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. MITNIK: The key element of this case, why ’69 is so important, they -- there is -- it is undisputed evidence in this case, undisputed, no one has presented any evidence to the contrary that she was addicted and deeply addicted by that time. Addicted and deeply addicted by that time. That’s an essential -- why that’s such an important date. Whether this stuff about starting when you’re in high school or whether you started right after you graduated or you’re an adult, she did start in high school, but take their version. No one says that she wasn’t deeply addicted before here. Warn her before, and in all likelihood, it doesn’t happen.
Can you absolutely prove to you it didn’t -she would have not picked up a cigarette if she had been told all that horrible truth and that they knew and warned? No. I mean, we’re going back in time and trying to retell what would have likely happened.
But the burden of proof isn’t what would have certainly positively happened. The burden of proof is what’s more persuasive, more convincing, using common sense, which makes more sense, if you’d have told not only her but the parents and everybody else and the doctors and the entire society back
when you knew it was true that she picked that up?
Is everybody around her still smoking if they know all that? Doctors smoking if they know the truth of what they know? The environment the way it is? Certainly the more persuasive, more convincing force and effect of the evidence is that would have made a difference.
And that’s one thing I need to pause on for just a moment and talk to you about the law for just a second. I want to set the record straight because the judge gave it to you, it’s not Mitnik on the record, it’s the instruction the judge gave you on legal cause. Legal cause. They keep saying but for, but for, but for.
They keep leaving out the significant part of this that is in there in part because of when you’re talking about something, what would someone have done but for, you have to put it in a fair, reasonable context so jurors can do justice without being held to some ridiculous standard. It’s not fair to you, it’s not fair to the sake of justice, it’s not fair to her if there isn’t some reasonable parameters and there happen to be.
And those parameters include that in order to be the legal cause, first and foremost, it says it
needs to be a legal cause, not the, not the one and only reason wasn’t their failure to warn that she started, it wasn’t the only thing, it needs to be one of them, a cause.
And it needs to be a cause that contributes substantially to producing the injury. Contributes substantially. Meaning it’s not insubstantial, it’s not insignificant reason, it’s not some frivolous reason, it’s got to be a meaningful reason. Goodness gracious, how can we say that’s not a meaningful reason that this young lady decided to pick up a lit stick and smoke -- pull hot smoke into her lungs?
It’s before ’69. Did they warn her menthol?
By the way, don’t inhale, and that menthol that numbs your throat and that you’re inhaling down into your throat and making it so much easier to get down into your lungs that increases the likelihood of addiction through the ceiling like when they have crack cocaine that’s started from powder cocaine, the pH changed and it becomes freebased.
MR. DAVIS: Objection to -MR. MITNIK: When you inhale -MR. DAVIS: -- the design claim.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. MITNIK: Man, I want to warn you that menthol makes it so easy for you to choke it down when you’re young and start learning the process of getting into your lungs and inhaling, beware, don’t inhale, I want to warn you the menthol is going to tempt you and make it easier.
Don’t -- if you want to do it and look cool, keep it as a mouth puffing, do not (indicating), because that’s going to trigger addiction and that’s going to bathe your lungs and that’s going to bring about this horrible lung cancer.
You -- Karen, I’m a manufacturer, I need to -I have an obligation and I’m going to tell you what a reasonable manufacturer of cigarettes would, if you inhale it, you’re going to get addicted, if you get addicted, you’re going to be sitting years later with oxygen on your nose and you’re going to have lost a lung.
The filters don’t help, and we know that’s going to happen to you, and you need to know it before you pick up a lit stick with fire on the end and suck it into your mouth, and all those ads that made it look so exciting before ’69 and so wonderful, it’s not so wonderful.
You tell that, does not Karen Whitney and the Karen Whitneys of her age do a little something different?
And then when we pass that period of time and we get into the going forward, past ’69, we are now talking about, because they got her on the addiction train, there is no question, the defendant R.J. Reynolds and the defendant Philip Morris took that young lady, arm on one side and arm on the other, between ads and Flintstones and Barney and the Marlboro Man and later, "You’ve come a long way, baby," and ushered her on to the train of addiction and without telling her what she was getting into for profit.
Let’s make no mistake about it, consciously, fully aware of it, got together in the Plaza Hotel and planned together to do just that on purpose.
And ushered her on to that train.
They are responsible for that. They take the lion’s share of responsibility for that.
Now, as she gets older and we pass this ’69 time period, we are now talking about the comparative fault we talked about from the day we picked the jury, when we picked you people. That’s when you start comparing and contrasting. All
right, they addicted her, they take substantial blame for that.
Now let’s talk about as she gets older and more information comes out and she’s starting -she has that mixed message that is played right into the denial of someone they addicted that they’re profiting off of that addiction, but nonetheless take some responsibility.
Then you look at what else were they doing? Will they continue to push a mixed message with a vengeance? They attack the Surgeon General public health officials with a vengeance. The polls that are in evidence, that I don’t know if I have time to flip up the polls.
Pull up if I have time, I’ll talk to them. We put a bunch of polls in, rather than you dig through them all, they show no question that their methods of trying to create this mixed message work. There is no question they did.
Before I go through the polls, let me just finish this thought. They did all this, and it worked. Now going forward, they continued to manipulate and make it sound like it’s a big doubtful thing. And then they offered up low tar, low nicotine.
When you compare fault back and forth, on her part is, look, you should have pushed even harder,
I know you struggled mightily, I know you tried nearly everything known to man, but you should have -- you do have some responsibility. But she takes it.
But then you have to look at what were they up to at the same time? Pushing the -- pushing this message that they were creating a fake controversy. They’ve given her something that felt safe. Switch to something safer, the light.
And they want to say, well, everybody -- you look at their internal documents. I don’t have time to go through the internal documents. But the internal documents are clear. Look at the federal findings from those Blatnik hearings we went over, the FTC findings.
People were misled because of the things they were doing with those lights, and she’s one of them that got misled. They call it deceptive.
They talked about it in the Surgeon General Reports and those other official documents that you have access to. You’ll see them back there. She didn’t have them back when she smoked. But they talk about how the cigarette industry was years
ahead, they knew what was going on. She didn’t. Even the public health officials didn’t.
So when you compare and contrast fault, here is someone who is deeply addicted, who ought to be trying harder, versus someone who is intentionally being a stumbling block on purpose for profit, grownups behind closed doors of corporate rooms.
MR. PRYSOCK: Ten minutes.
MR. MITNIK: How much?
MR. PRYSOCK: Ten.
MR. MITNIK: Okay.
There are three rules -- I’ve heard that before, of personal responsibility. Before you point the finger of blame at someone else over responsibility, you hold the mirror up to yourself, you hold the mirror up first, and then sometimes there really is a legitimate situation where it’s not fair to heap all of the blame on one person’s shoulder and it ought to be spread and there is plenty of blame to go around, but the first step is you hold the mirror up.
The second step is if you’re going to talk the talk about responsibility, you walk the walk. And the third step is don’t ever be a stumbling block to somebody who is trying to deal with their
personal responsibility.
Karen Whitney has done that from the onset.
She has come in here and told you she is taking responsibility. They want to talk about her, they won’t put the mirror up. She has -MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor, that’s the pretrial ruling issue.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. MITNIK: She has walked the walk, not just talked the talk. Have they?
And then lastly, she wasn’t a stumbling block to them, but were they to her on purpose, over and over and over, lights, filters, mixed messaging?
Imagine this for just a moment. They were giving analogies. Let me give you an analogy that came to mind. Cellphones. Boy, there is some scientific evidence but nobody really knows. Then someone says, gosh, have you heard that cellphones might cause a brain tumor, that there is some evidence out there, but scientists can’t agree. Yeah. So people put them up to their head over and over. They’ve heard. They don’t know.
Then move out decades. Decades. And find out it’s true. And there is an epidemic of tumors in the brain all over. And then it turns out the
makers of the phones knew back then it was true, it was causing brain tumors.
And they all had gotten together and agreed let’s make it sound controversial so people will quit using them in a, quote, holding pattern so we can keep making money, even though we know we’re creating brain tumors.
And then when it’s all out, the defense being of those phone makers, well, they heard, they’ve heard. You were sufficiently informed. Hearing and knowing are different and they banked on it and it worked. Sales took back off, skyrocketed back off, right when she was there.
They talk about the warning that isn’t a warning, the cautionary label that came out in ’66. The ’66 cautionary label, the records are in evidence, they celebrated it. These defendants celebrated that.
Why? Look at what it did? It was a governmental agreement, official government statement, nobody really knows, it may, may. They know it is, and the government who’s saying -trying to say it does, it does, comes out with something it may. That was nothing different.
It’s old news, it’s what she’s been hearing.
That was a victory for them. They should have been saying the truth. And it likely would have changed history for her and lots of people. And they didn’t.
It wasn’t until 1970 that it said the Surgeon General warns. And up till then, remember, all they had been saying is that Surgeon General, remember, "wouldn’t it be terrible if he -- if he ever sets his sights on other pleasurable activities like the most intimate kind." That’s the guy.
And by then, she’s addicted and the FTC and all of these public documents that you have, and I’m -- pants are on fire to stop and show them to you, but I just don’t have time, but they’re in evidence.
Give me those numbers. They’re in evidence to show how they didn’t work, once these people were addicted, they didn’t work, and they played on it and they played on it and they pushed the -- just made up doubt, and they gave false alternatives to quitting. And in spite of all that, she tried and tried and tried.
MR. KELLEY: It’s there.
MR. MITNIK: Okay. Show me the next one. I’m
not going to stand here and read. What is the numbers? Do we have numbers? Okay, numbers are up there if anyone wants to write them down, these are important documents. Next.
All right. Pop up the polls real quick. How much time do I have left?
MR. PRYSOCK: Five minutes.
MR. MITNIK: Five minutes. Let me talk about the polls and then I’ll hush.
MR. KELLEY: Yeah. Just a sampling of these polls that are in ’83. "In addition, people increasingly believe smoking is an addiction.
While 45 percent say it’s a habit, people are increasingly inclined to say it’s addiction," up from 29 percent in ’80 to 33 in ’82. Look at the dates. They claim at the turn of the century everybody knew it.
This is them internally looking at it ringing their hands, that goodness gracious, we've gone from 29 to 33 percent in ’82. And they knew it and they celebrated it. They took advantage of definitional names in the public, but in private they were popping champagne over the addictive nature that people couldn't quit, was their own words people were using, how people wouldn't do it
if it wasn’t for that.
"What is your opinion, do you think cigarette smoking is or is not one of the causes of lung cancer?" This is 1964 after the Surgeon General Report’s come out.
I’m sorry, they’re tracking back over time. This is a later one. And this is the 1964.
Current cigarette smokers, only half, look at the trending, when you trend from ’54 back when they all got together in ’53 at the Plaza Hotel, 29 percent of smokers, 32, now we’re all the way up to the Surgeon General, you’re just barely eeking over 50 percent of the smokers.
It should have been, whew, skyrocket to the top right away had they done what they should have done when they should have done it.
Okay, next.
When asked directly what were their attitudes toward the tobacco industry on the way they have reacted to the smoking and health controversy, the public is still somewhat more favorable, 48 percent than unfavorable. This is 1970. Do you think Karen Whitney up to ’69 was the only one out there that had figured it all out? These are polls.
Next.
MR. PRYSOCK: This is it.
MR. MITNIK: What’s that?
MR. PRYSOCK: This is it, ’79.
MR. MITNIK: The percentage of adults who smoked was established for the first time at 34 percent.
MR. PRYSOCK: Stabilized.
MR. MITNIK: What? Stabilized.
MR. PRYSOCK: Last paragraph.
MR. MITNIK: Last paragraph, all right, "The number of cigarettes smoked per day per smoker continues to climb, in part at least because of low-tar cigarettes seem to cause people to increase the number of cigarettes they smoke." These in ’79 are internal polls.
THE COURT: You’ve got two minutes remaining.
MR. MITNIK: Yes, sir. Give me another poll here real quick.
Okay. In my last two minutes. There are -there are -- there is one more phase to this case that is so important, because we brought you here to do justice, but this case is more than just compensating Karen Whitney and just punishing.
It is also about that important opportunity to do something that matters called deterrence. We
don’t do it right now in this phase. What we do is ask your permission for one more day of your time, to say yes, these were warranted. Yes, punitive damages were warranted under these circumstances. And when we get to the next phase, we then can talk to you about how we can try to accomplish that together.
I ask you to give us that one more day. I ask you to stick and fight for what's right, because when the right thing to do is so important and it is important here. And we know we’ve taken of your time. We ask that we make it all count. Thank you.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Members of the jury, at this time, because of the hour, I'm going to ask the bailiff to go ahead and get you to lunch. After you eat lunch, we’ll reassemble here and I've got some final instructions to read to you before you actually begin your deliberations.
So we're not at that point yet where you can start to talk about the case, so please remember not to do that, but I do want to make sure that you have lunch at some reasonable period of time, and I want to not hold that up any more.
So I’m going to ask the bailiff to go ahead and take you to lunch, and when you get back, we’ll go ahead and continue. I’ll read you the final instructions, and then you can begin your deliberations. Thank you.
