CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. BAYUK: May it please the Court, counsel, Mr. and Mrs. Wilcox.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I told you a couple of days ago that that would
be the last time I was going to talk to you, it turns out not to be true. I'm here today. I can tell you -- I'm sure you're happy about it -- today is the last day I'll talk to you.
So it's my last chance to get up here and talk to you. The case will be over after we are done here.
So what I want to do -- I need to talk to you a little bit longer than Mr. Barnhart did. I'm going to talk to you for a little bit longer, and then Mr. Gustafson is going to get up and give a rebuttal closing, you all understand how that works now, where the plaintiff goes first, and then the defense goes, and then the plaintiff gives his follow-up. So that's what's going to happen today. Like I said, a little bit longer.
But I want to talk to you about a lot of the evidence that you heard because this is a separate phase of the case. You all decided by your verdict yesterday to come back today and to hear evidence in a separate phase of the case.
As Ms. Henninger told you this morning, we heard your verdict. We respect your verdict.
I'm not going to get up here and question your verdict in any way. I'm not going to call it into question or call out on it, and I hope you don't think that anyone -- anything that's happened here today has done that. We all heard your verdict. And Mr. Barnhart ended by saying, "Send a message to Reynolds."
Reynolds got the message yesterday with your verdict of $7 million. So I'm not here to question that or disparage it in any way.
What I want to do today is I want to go over this separate claim that you all have to decide today, separate instructions that you have when you're assessing that claim, when you're assessing whether you are going to award punitive damages; and, if so, how much.
So that's what I want to talk to you about. I want to talk to you about the instructions that you're going to get, you're going to have back in the jury room, and I want to talk about the evidence that you heard today, because this is almost like a separate trial, it's like a mini trial on separate issues than you all have decided upon up to this point in the trial.
That's why we have the additional evidence today, that's why we have the new law, the new instructions that Judge Lindsey read to you and you guys are going to take back to the jury room.
So I want to go over that because that's your task here today. The task that you all did yesterday is done. So this is a new issue.
So I hope that it became clear today with Dr. Borgerding with the opening you heard this morning, and then the testimony you heard about what Reynolds is doing today, I hope it become clear that everything's changed.
And you all were at kind of a disadvantage for the first part of the case, for the first three and a half weeks we were here, because everybody in the courtroom, both sides, we were limited to evidence and limited in what evidence we could bring you to a certain time period. And that time period was 1994. Of course, Mr. Wilcox passed away in January of 1994. So we didn't -- neither side put on evidence of anything that happened after that.
You may recall during the plaintiff's closing argument two days ago when Mr. Sales
was giving the rebuttal, he ended it by saying, you know, Reynolds doesn't admit that smoking is addictive. Reynolds doesn't admit that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. They don't admit this and they don't admit that.
And we were limited to 1994.
But in this phase of the case, we are not limited. We are not limited. And so the next 20 years up to today, up to 2014, that is fair game. That is why you had the evidence that we brought today.
So I want to talk about that a little bit. But I will be clear, I hope you found it clear, that everything from what you heard in Phase I of the case has changed in terms of how Reynolds behaves. And why is that important?
It's important because of the instructions that are going to guide you for how you assess your verdict in this phase of the case. What do I mean by that?
One of the instructions you are going to get, and Judge Lindsey already read it to you, this is instruction number 3 in the packet you're going to get. The first thing you need to think about is you don't have to award any
punitive damages. The instructions read, it says: You may decline -- in your discretion, decline to assess punitive damages against Reynolds.
And the reason the law provides that is because it recognizes that there are separate legal issues in this phase. It recognizes that there is additional evidence that while yesterday you thought, you know what, I want to see what Reynolds would bring, I want to see what evidence could justify punitive damages, I want to see if there's a need for punishment and deterrence.
It recognizes that we can bring you that evidence. That's why we have this phase. And that's what we tried to do. Because having seen that evidence, having seen how Reynolds is today, it helps you decide whether you need to punish and deter. So the instructions are very clear, you can decline in your discretion.
And of course it's your discretion, just like yesterday. It is in your discretion. You guys are the trier of fact, you're the decision-maker. So that's up to you. This is an important instruction.
Another instruction that's really important. Punitive damages can only be awarded to Lorraine Wilcox, to the estate of Mr. Wilcox.
This is another area where the rules have changed because when we had closing arguments two days ago, you got instructions that you could consider harm to other people. You could consider figures like millions or hundreds of thousands of people.
This phase of the case is about Mr. Wilcox [sic] and the fact that any damages you award can only be awarded to her. That's important. We aren't here to talk about other people. We aren't here to talk about other smokers or other conduct. We are here to talk about the damages, if you award some today, they will go to Mrs. Wilcox.
What's the flip side of that?
I'm sorry if I'm blocking the screen.
JUROR PICKENS: No, no.
MR. BAYUK: The flip side of that is that you can't award damages to a number of other entities.
MR. BARNHART: Objection, Your Honor.
Outside the scope of this entire trial. It's irrelevant.
MR. BAYUK: This is argument about damages.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: So what do I mean by that?
The plaintiff has asked you for additional damages, substantial damages, $20 million,
Mr. Barnhart said, in addition to the verdict that you rendered yesterday, on top of that verdict, these are additional damages that would go to Mrs. Wilcox.
So it's important to understand, when you see that they only go to Mrs. Wilcox, that they don't go to things like improving public health. They don't to public health agencies.
MR. BARNHART: I object. That's speculative. That's entirely speculative.
It's improper in a closing argument like this.
MR. BAYUK: This is the slide.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: They don't go to public health agencies. They don't go to things like smoking cessation clinics or charities or other smokers, or setting up quit hotlines or
anything like that. Any damages you assess will go to Mrs. Wilcox. So it's important to understand where the damages go. And this is also instruction number 3 in the packet that you all are going to get.
Now, an additional instruction, and I just touched on it with what I've said. This is additional compensation. By law -- and you remember Mr. Barnhart standing here, he had a blowup of the verdict form. He walked you through it. He came up and said, the damages have to be fair and just and they can't be unfair or unjust, and they have to be full. There was that discussion.
And the instructions you got and what you did yesterday required you, if you're going to award damages, you had to fully compensate Mrs. Wilcox. That's what you did with your verdict. By law, following the instructions, what you awarded was full compensation for her loss and for the conduct that you found to be the cause of her husband's death. So you have fully compensated her under the law. That's what the instructions and the law mean.
If you award more money, it's important to
understand, that's in addition to fully compensating Mrs. Wilcox. And so that's something, as I said, this is also instruction number 3, you need to think about this.
And when Mr. Barnhart was up here -- it's important to understand the amount. You all wrote down $7 million on the verdict form.
When Mr. Barnhart was walking you through the blowup of the verdict form, he explained to you question by question, addiction, comparative fault allocation, concealment, agreement to conceal, total dollar amount, punitive damages. And he walked you through one by one and said -- remember he suggested $10 million, and he said -- he also suggested 5 to 10 percent fault.
He said, so if you award $10 million and you check yes to concealment and conspiracy, agreement to conceal, and give 10 percent fault and give $10 million, you all shouldn't make the reduction of taking 10 percent off to 9 million. Mr. Barnhart told you that the Court would do that after the fact.
And so based on your verdict yesterday, you all assigned 30 percent fault to
Mr. Wilcox. So what that means is $7 million, 30 percent reduction, the verdict was $4.9 million. Almost 5 million.
It's important to know the figure that we are talking about. So I wanted to make sure -I'm sure you all understood that yesterday. I wanted to make sure we are all clear. So $4.9 million is the amount you found fully compensated the plaintiff in the case,
Mrs. Wilcox.
Another important instruction, and the judge read this to you, any damages you award today can only be based on the intentional conduct that you found to be the cause of Mr. Wilcox's death.
And so Mr. Barnhart, as he was talking, he said this is concealment and agreement to conceal or concealment and conspiracy. Any damages you award can only be for that type of conduct as it specifically harmed Mr. Wilcox.
And it's important because there was a lot of evidence in the first phase of the case, evidence about negligence, about defective cigarettes and so on, advertising. That's not an issue in this phase of the case. Any
damages you award have to be limited by this instruction, limited to the specific intentional conduct you found harmed Mr. Wilcox.
This is instruction number 2 in the packet that you're going to get.
So what does that mean broken down? What does it mean?
It means if you decide that Reynolds needs punishment, if you award punitive damages, Reynolds can only be punished for concealing information or agreeing with others to conceal information through 1994. We know Mr. Wilcox passed away in 1994, so any conduct after that couldn't have harmed him. That's the 1994 limitation. That was a cause of his death.
That means that you cannot award any damages for harm to any other smokers, you can't award them because you think cigarettes are defective or unreasonably dangerous or the filters didn't work. That's not what this phase of the case is about.
And also not for negligent conduct. So there's advertising in the first phase, that's not an issue in this phase of the case.
Very specific direction on if you're going to award damages, what they have to be based on. And it had to be intentional conduct through 1994. Obviously, we are here in 2014, 20 years later.
And the law recognizes, and I'm going to show you the instruction, that that is a major thing that you all can consider when you're assessing the question of punitive damages.
It's a major thing you have to consider, the judge instructed you, it's called mitigation. You can consider mitigating evidence to see whether 20 years after the fact, in 2014, there is any purpose to serve punitive damages, whether Reynolds needs punishment or deterrence, when you see evidence like we brought you today about what type of company Reynolds is. That's not me saying it, it's the instructions you're going to get.
And so we are going to look at that instruction.
One more instruction, though, and I've probably said this a few times, you can't punish, you can't impose damages for anyone else, any harm other than Mr. Wilcox and
Lorraine Wilcox.
Also, Judge Lindsey told you, the Engle findings that were read to you, those don't play a role in this phase of the case. You can't consider them. You weren't instructed on them today. They can't be used. You have to put them out of your mind, for lack of a better word.
So this is what I was talking about, mitigation. This is instruction number 11 in the packet you're going to get. Mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages or that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed.
So you recognize in instruction number 11, this refers back to instruction number 3, where it says you can decline if you find that the evidence you've heard today in this phase of the case warrants that. And again, that's up to you. It's up to your discretion.
And so when you put all this together, this framework, really, the question becomes, the question for you all to think about is whether it makes sense, whether punishment is
needed in 2014 for conduct that had to have ended as to Mr. Wilcox in January of 1994. That's the question you all have to think about when you go back there and consider your verdict. That is the issue.
And so one more instruction I want to talk to you about, I don't have a slide for, but this is also instruction 3, and this speaks to what I'm saying. One of the things, as the judge read to you, you're going to have it back there, one of the things that you're instructed to consider when you're looking at the evidence in this phase is the extent to which Reynolds' conduct has changed from the conduct that you found caused Mr. Wilcox's death. You can see that clearly in instruction number 3.
And it tells you, whatever you found caused his death that was the intentional conduct, you have to weigh, you have to assess whether that conduct is different today. And that's why we have this phase. That's why we had the witness that we brought today, to talk about Reynolds today, because that is what the law tells you to consider. So I wanted to point that out.
So what's changed? What's changed since 1994? And I'm not going to belabor everything that Dr. Borgerding came up here and talked you about. What he talked to you about, a lot of things that have changed. He talked to you a lot about what Reynolds is doing today, what Reynolds has done since the time when Mr. Wilcox passed away. And that is -- that is what will guide you when you go back to the jury room.
So I want to walk through some of that evidence. But as I do, it's important to keep in mind, I want you all to think about this issue of how has Reynolds changed because that's what you're instructed. So think about this evidence when you think about this instruction.
It's also important, though, to think about how distant the conduct was that you did find caused his death, how distant in the past, whether it's going on today.
And so a couple of things that Dr. Borgerding told you. You heard a lot of evidence in Phase I about these industry organizations, back to the Frank Statement in
the 1950s, Tobacco Institute, the CTR, and the TIRC, the press releases. You had them back in evidence when you were deciding your verdict yesterday.
In this phase of the case, you can consider the remoteness, the distance of that conduct, and whether there has been a change sitting here today. And so there has been. There's no organizations. They haven't existed for 15 years, Dr. Borgerding said. There is no comparable organizations today. There is no organizations that the tobacco companies belong to that speak to the public. It doesn't happen. Those things were disbanded. They don't exist. The past has changed. It doesn't happen today.
By the same token, the executives are gone. Jim Johnston, who they played the video to show you the picture in front of Congress. Robert Heimann, you saw a deposition of him. Claude Teague, the guy who wrote some memos that you saw during the first phase of the case. Alan Rodgman, a chemist from Reynolds. All of these people are gone. They have been gone for a long time. In fact, most of them
are deceased. They are not with the company anymore. The company is not run by these people.
Now, you saw these documents, and I am sure you didn't like them. And I'm not going to stand here and defend them. I'm not going to stand here and defend what they did, defend the memos that they wrote. That was probably a basis for why we are here today.
Now we are in a separate phase. The issue for you to decide today is the fact that these people are -- that conduct doesn't hurt anyone, that the conduct that you found caused harm isn't happening and hasn't been happening for a long time. That hasn't been happening for a long time.
What do we know today? R.J. Reynolds -Dr. Borgerding explained this to you, there's new ownership, there's new leadership, there's new science. It is a different company than the evidence that you saw when we were limited to 1994. A completely different company in the last 20 years.
So everything has changed about the company. There's no debate. There's no
campaign that -- Mr. Barnhart stood up here, he said this is what you have to think about. That's what you thought about in the first phase of the case. That's what got you here.
But in this phase of the case, you look at what's changed. You look at the punishment and deterrence, and you assess it based on what has changed. And as I said, everything has changed. There is no campaign, there's no psychological crutch, there's no concealment, and there's no conspiracy, and there hasn't been for a very long time.
So these are key issues you need to think about. By the same token, the documents. You saw the memos, you saw press releases, you had boxes back in the jury room yesterday. All of that, all of the information that plaintiffs put on their case and said was concealed from Mr. Wilcox and concealed from the public, all of that is public, all of that is public today. Fast forward 20 years. These documents have been made publicly available for a long time, over a decade.
In total, Dr. Proctor told you 85 million pages of documents, millions of documents.
Dr. Borgerding told you just Reynolds alone,
1.6 million documents, 6 million pages. When you all go home today, after the case is over -- Judge Lindsey has been telling you, no research, no Internet, no talking to anyone about the case. When you're discharged from the case, you can go home and get on the computer and go to a number of different publicly available databases, including the one that R.J. Reynolds runs, RJR.com, and you can find any of the documents that you saw in this trial, any one in the public can find those. That is a change.
And so during the Phase I closing, when the plaintiffs were arguing to you about how to answer those questions, concealment and agreement to conceal, they told you, sure, the evidence that we have is that Mr. Wilcox was aware and knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive, but this specific document says this about a rat, or this document says this, don't you think those would be material. That's what they argued to you.
And if that's what you based your verdict on -- again, I'm not challenging that, but if
that's what you based it on, that can't happen today because the documents are here. So nothing about that is concealed. That is another change that you need to consider.
So the question, are punitive damages needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing and agreeing to conceal information now, in 2014. August 2014. Are damages needed now for conduct that you heard 20 years ago as to Mr. Wilcox.
Well, you heard Dr. Borgerding. He walked you through it, what Reynolds does today. Everything has changed. Reynolds tells smokers everything. They choose to access information, if they want to go to the website. If they want to read what's on the boxes that they sell in cigarette packs or smokeless tobacco or nicotine replacement therapy gum, it's there for the smokers to make the decision.
He showed you the website. He showed you the website pages. He walked you through the website and he walked you through the continuum of risk products. And we are going to talk about these things, because this is what Reynolds does today. This is why we brought
the evidence, because that's what this phase deals with, whether there's been a change, whether the conduct that you found caused harm can happen today. And it doesn't happen today. It can't happen today. So we are going to walk through that in a little bit more detail.
One excerpt from the company's website.
As I said, you go home today, you can get on the website and you can read all of this for yourself. This is what Reynolds tells smokers and tells the public today.
By the way, the website is completely voluntary. It's completely -- Reynolds puts it up. They aren't forced by court order to do it. No one makes them do it. No one governs the content of what's on the website. This is a voluntary thing that they tell smokers because that is how they behave today. They didn't behave like that in the past when you heard the evidence. That is a change. That is a way that everything has changed. This is what they tell people.
Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States. Cigarette smoking significantly increases the
risk of developing lung cancer and those other diseases. It's unequivocal, it's clear, it's easy to find on the website. They warn the public today.
If this was the basis for your finding of concealment or agreement to conceal of punitive damages, ladies and gentlemen, this conduct has changed and it has been changed for a long time. A very long time.
Another page. "Quitting cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk for serious disease." You heard Dr. Borgerding, this is a tobacco company that today tells smokers that the safest course of action if they want to protect their health is to quit smoking.
There's no internal documents about that today saying people shouldn't quit or it's not addictive. That's the past. Reynolds has turned the corner. This is what they tell people. A tobacco company tells smokers, if you're concerned about your health, quit. Quit smoking.
We are going to talk about the products that now they have if people are interested in doing that are going to less risk, then they
can do that, but they tell you, first and foremost, to quit smoking.
The ingredients, that was a big issue of Dr. Proctor's testimony in the first phase of the case. What did Dr. Borgerding tell you?
All of those things that Dr. Proctor said, the ingredients, ammonia, additives, everything is publicly available for anyone that wants to find it, every ingredient.
Mr. Sales, during cross-examination of Dr. Borgerding, was saying it doesn't list everything. Certainly can't list everything. Dr. Borgerding said every ingredient we use is listed for the public to find it if they want to learn what's in cigarettes or any other product that we make. They disclose everything. This is voluntary. It's unequivocal. There is no hiding involved, there is no concealment, and there hasn't been for decades. It's all on the website.
Dr. Proctor told you there's no such thing as a safe cigarette. You all have heard that a few times in this trial. And Dr. Borgerding came in and admitted it to you as well. If you have a cigarette, a convention cigarette that
burns tobacco that combusts, there is going to be disease risk, no matter whether there's a filter or it's a light cigarette or it has less tar, it can cause cancer. There's carcinogens. There's simply no way to make it safe. There's no way to make it safe.
And so, you know, it's important to consider what Reynolds has done about that. Because we know they told the public and they've told the public for a long time that cigarette smoking is dangerous. It causes lung cancer. It causes other diseases. And Reynolds could have stopped there. They could have stopped there and said, we've informed the public, we tell them about our products now, it's up to them to decide. But Reynolds has done more. And this is -- they've done more, they've tried to create products.
And you heard Dr. Proctor talk about it in Phase I with Premier, and you heard Dr. Borgerding talk about it today. They have tried to create products and they have spent billions of dollars and decades of research trying to find safer products.
So if people want to protect their health,
they have options. If they want to quit smoking now, they have options with replacement gum. They are trying to migrate smokers with this migration strategy. This is what the company is doing today.
And it's important when you think about whether punishment is warranted when you are going to look about whether there's mitigation, whether there's a need today in 2014. This is the kind of evidence you have to think about that Reynolds didn't just say, you know, we are going to tell you it causes lung cancer. But we are going to try to give you products that reduce your risk or help you quit if you want to quit.
So that's the kind of evidence that you all need to consider that will help you back in the jury room when you are looking at this issue.
Another aspect to the website, and Dr. Borgerding admitted this, even though they have these other categories of products, they don't tell the public that they are safe. And they are not allowed to.
We are going to talk about the FDA a
little bit. They don't tell anyone that any of their products are safe. There is no concealing about that. There's no concealment about health risks today, and there haven't been for a long time. No concealment about that, no concealment about addictiveness.
Dr. Proctor admitted to you nicotine is addictive. It's addictive by nature. It's addictive in the tobacco plant. So there was some cross-examination of Dr. Borgerding. You know, you come up with -- you have these less risk products, you have Snus and nicotine gum, and these things are addictive. And there's no dispute about it. Nicotine -- if the product has nicotine, it's going to be addictive.
But the point is, because you all found concealment and agreement to conceal, whether information like that is concealed. And it's not. There's warning labels.
When we get to talking about the e-cigarettes, Mr. Sales showed a cigarette label for that. That's a voluntary warning label where R.J. Reynolds voluntarily tells the product, this product is addictive. It's not even governed by the FDA yet, and they tell
voluntarily this is addictive, and no tobacco product is without risk.
But this is what -- the type of information you all need to consider when you are thinking about concealment or agreement to conceal and whether that could ever happen today. It can't, and it hasn't happened for decades. It hasn't happened in terms of applying to Mr. Wilcox after 1994. It couldn't have impacted. That's the point.
And Dr. Borgerding told you when these organizations were disbanded, all of this happened 15 years ago. 2014. This is the change. This is what you have to consider.
Reynolds informed smokers about the availability of other products and cessation aids. They say this on their website. And I alluded to this a minute ago. The best course of action is to quit smoking. They are a company that sells cigarettes, and they tell their customers now, if you want to quit smoking -- if you want to protect your health, quit smoking. If you want to try to reduce your risk, move to a less-risk product. We have these other products.
And, by the way, Dr. Borgerding said, Reynolds is the only company that has this risk continuum and offers products in all of those categories. So you have to decide whether you want to punish that, you want to punish R.J. Reynolds for trying to develop products and tell smokers about the risks of those products for people who want to protect their health. You have to decide if you want to punish that effort. This is evidence that you all have to consider when you look at that issue.
Dr. Borgerding showed you this chart that illustrates the migration strategy, and he told you unequivocally it's Reynolds' position as a tobacco company that they want to move people from combustible cigarettes to less risk products. That's why they are making these products and that's why they are bringing them to market, through the FDA, through FDA approval process.
Their strategy, transforming tobacco, migrating people to less risk products. And if they want to quit smoking, to give them the ability to quit smoking for things like
nicotine. That's what they are doing today. That's what you have to think about when you decide whether you think punitive damages are warranted in this case, is the conduct you heard in the first phase a lot different than what you have today?
You saw this chart with Dr. Borgerding. These are the specific products. I'm not going to spend as much time as he was on the stand going through them, but I want to remind you of these things. They were passed up and down.
You all -- we brought the demonstrative aids. You looked at the warnings -- bless you.
And he explained to you how this transition, how this migration plan works and why Reynolds has done these things, because today they participate in helping smokers protect their health, and that's what they want to do if they want to move to a less-risk product.
First thing you heard about Premier, then Eclipse. Dr. Proctor touched on Premier.
Dr. Borgerding told you about Eclipse.
Dr. Borgerding told you just between those two cigarettes, billions of dollars spent trying to
make cigarettes safer with this heat-not-burn technology.
First you heard about Premier, hundreds of millions in the 1980s. It actually was safer and less mutagenic, but it tasted awful. It tasted like dead fish or some other description. Nobody would buy it. If nobody buys it, it's not helpful, and that's the point.
Reynolds couldn't help. They said, we tried, you know, we spent these billions of dollars. We had this large monograph and we done our part, but they went back to the drawing board and said, we are going to keep going, we are going to apply what we learned and try to get some new paths and go out and try to make another cigarette. And that's what they've done progressively until today, and that's what they are still doing. That's what they are still doing.
In fact, a one-off topic at the end of Dr. Borgerding's direct examination, he told you about using tobacco -- Reynolds's scientists using tobacco plants to extract proteins to try to treat this Ebola crisis.
I'm not going to focus on that, but that's an example of the things that Reynolds is doing compared to this conduct that you saw in the '40s and '50s, the '60s and '70s that you based your last phase verdict on. Because this is all mitigation evidence. This is what you have to consider today.
Eclipse, it's available since 1996. You can still buy it in Florida and elsewhere in the country. This is kind of the successor to Premier, safer in terms of lung cancer risk. Reynolds loses money on every pack, but you heard Dr. Borgerding say Reynolds is committed to keeping this going because they believe in the product, and it does offer smokers a less risky alternative for this heat-not-burn technology.
This is what they have done. This is how they have changed. This is an example.
Snus, if you're going to migrate to smokeless, noncombustible tobacco.
Dr. Borgerding explained to you because there's no smoke, there's no inhalation and you reduce your risk of cancer by 90 percent. Now, of course, there's a warning label that says it
can cause mouth cancer. Dr. Borgerding explained that to you. It's governed by Federal law. It carries a warning label. Reynolds tells people that. I mean, they put it on -- you saw various canisters of Snus.
There's no dispute about it. There's no concealment of the risk. That's what's happening. That's what's been happening for a long time. So this is an additional mitigation evidence.
You have to think about what Reynolds tells people about their products and about the risks associated with the products.
VUSE, e-cigarettes, this is kind of the ultimate successor to things like Premier and Eclipse. This is a vapor noncombustible cigarette that significantly lowers risk of disease. What's safer than conventional cigarettes? Dr. Borgerding told you $200 million spent to develop this technology. And it's a very specific and sophisticated technology to make sure that it doesn't develop into something that is harmful. It doesn't heat up too much.
He described it being made in the U.S.,
not someone buying something from China, developed and engineered here to make sure that it's as safe as possible. This is what Reynolds is doing today. This is another area, another aspect of how they've changed.
This is the warning label I was referencing. Mr. Sales put this up on the ELMO and asked Dr. Borgerding some questions and says, doesn't it say that this is not shown to be safe and without risks and nicotine is addictive. Dr. Borgerding said absolutely.
What Mr. Sales didn't ask was, Reynolds has no obligation to put this on the package. This product is -- it probably will be soon, but it's not governed by the FDA yet, and Reynolds still tells people this voluntarily. This is what the company is today.
You have to ask yourself, is that a change? That's what the instruction asks you to assess. How has the conduct changed from the conduct that you found caused harm. So think about how this applies to that. All of this is an example of that, that you need to think about.
And then quitting aids. Down the
spectrum, down the continuum of risk, combustible smokeless nicotine replacement if you want to quit smoking. And Dr. Borgerding explained to you, this is governed by the FDA. It comes in different strengths. What they put on the package is governed by the FDA. And you've heard a lot about FDA oversight. We are going to touch on that and what that means for Reynolds today.
But Reynolds, a tobacco company, is now in the business of making nicotine replacement for people if they want to quit smoking. And there was some cross-examination about, you know, it's only available in Missouri and Iowa or two states. But it's an FDA-governed product.
They said -- that's not Reynolds limiting it. That's Reynolds going through the FDA approval process.
This is another example of what Reynolds is doing today compared to the conduct that you found harmed Mr. Wilcox.
In addition, in addition to the developing a product, Reynolds developed a specific packaging so the product could be sold right next to cigarettes. And it's a difference
because formerly, if you wanted to get nicotine replacement or to get Nicorette or some other type of gum, you would have to go to a pharmacy. It's not by prescription anymore, but you would have to go to a Walgreens or CVS and buy an 85-dollar regimen of full complement of nicotine gum.
Reynolds has designed this package with FDA approval so that it could be sold in convenience stores and other places right next to cigarettes so that a smoker, if you're going to go into the convenience store, it's right there. It's a point of sale right next to the cigarettes, to give smokers a choice to say,
I'm going to try nicotine gum, I'm going to quit smoking. That's what they do. Some smokers do that. Some don't. But Reynolds give smokers the option. They want to reduce their risk to quit. They provide a product to try to make it happen. That is different conduct today, ladies and gentlemen.
And so to answer the question, are punitive damages needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing in 2014, I mean, is there really any other answer to that? No. Do you
think it's a changed company? I mean, think about the evidence we put on today. It's an one-day case today.
The plaintiff in their case lasted two minutes and consisted of a financial statement. We brought you a witness who explained, whatever you all found Reynolds was doing 2 0 years ago, it's not happening today. It hasn't happened for a long time. Because that is what this case is about. That's what today is about. So think about just the difference in the evidence brought to you.
The answer resoundingly, I think, in your discretion has to be no based on how Reynolds acts today and acts as a good corporate citizen. That's all in evidence now in terms of today and how it's been at least for the last 10, 20, 15 years. That is the only evidence you have today. And that's the evidence that we brought you.
And so I want to go back to the mitigating instructions, instruction number 11. I'm not going to read it to you again. I want to remind you of it, though, because the evidence we just walked through, this is why we walked
through it, because of this instruction.
But there's actually more. There's more to show you that Reynolds is a different company, and there's more to show you that the conduct that you based your verdict on yesterday can't happen today. It would be impossible today.
So with that in mind, I want to talk to about the FDA. I told you I'd talk to you about this. The FDA regulated tobacco products and manufacturers since 2009. Dr. Borgerding described to you, the FDA governs research and new products. And anything Reynolds wants to do in terms of developing a product, selling a product, marketing a product, testing a product, R&D specifications, they are under the FDA's thumb. They are under the FDA's microscope.
And the FDA has significant oversight.
They can show up at a factory, they can show up at R.J. Reynolds at any time, and if they find some violation of this federal law, they can shut Reynolds down. They can seize products.
They have significant enforcement powers so that even if you found that by itself
Reynolds hadn't changed the way it operates today, think of the oversight that the FDA has. Even if Reynolds wanted to do things that you found it was doing decades ago, it couldn't happen. It couldn't happen because the FDA has significant oversight, significant control over everything that Reynolds does.
There's no concealment and there's no agreement to conceal, and there haven't been those issues for a very long time. And it can't happen. It can't happen today. There is no dispute about it.
This is also kind of extraordinary, it's kind of unique that you're under this type of oversight, this significant oversight where this government organization can come in and shut you down with no notice, and yet Reynolds has to pay a policeman to police itself. Hundreds of millions of dollars a year.
Just in the last five years, $440 million paid by R.J. Reynolds to the FDA for the privilege of the FDA governing R.J. Reynolds. They not only are policed with significant oversight, but they have to pay the policeman to do that. No other organization has to do
that. It's a very unique and extraordinary thing that Reynolds has to do that.
Other aspects of mitigation. Other aspects. You heard Dr. Borgerding touch on some of these things. And all of this goes -like I said, this conduct can't happen today.
A lot of this comes back to this concept of transparency and how Reynolds does business.
Is it a transparent business?
You've seen evidence today, it's undisputed evidence. It wasn't disputed during the cross-examination of Dr. Borgerding. Reynolds business practices are transparent. They are transparent to the public. As I said, when you leave here, you can go search anything you want about Reynolds and find everything that you saw in this case, everything.
MR. BARNHART: Your Honor, I object.
That's redundant. We've already gone through this .
THE COURT: Sustained. Move on.
MR. BAYUK: It's transparent to the FDA. It's transparent to you all.
But when you think about other aspects of mitigation, other aspects of mitigation, you've
heard, 5,000 cases just like this one pending in Florida. They call these the Engle cases.
And Dr. Borgerding talked to you about the number of cases just pending in Florida around the state that have yet to be tried. These are additional pieces of evidence that you need to consider when you decide whether you think Reynolds needs to be punished in 2014, whether they need to be deterred in 2014.
And I think, I hope, that when you see the evidence, you will find that Reynolds has been paying for its historical conduct for a long time. These FDA fees, these lawsuits, the MSA, the FSA, we're talking about millions and billions of dollars based on the same conduct you all saw in this case.
So you think about that in terms of mitigation, whether you think there's additional punishment, additional deterrence that's warranted today. I submit to you there's not, and we are going to talk about that in a moment.
But the Master Settlement Agreement, the specific Florida Settlement Agreement, in terms of the other states, payment so far,
$42 billion. Payments just to Florida under Florida agreement, $2 billion so far.
$2 billion. And as long as Reynolds stays in business, even if they migrate to these other products, even if they have their customers migrate, as long as they operate, they have to pay these billions of dollars in perpetuity, every year forever. Billions of dollars every year forever.
So this is another type of evidence that you need to consider when you weigh this issue, when you go back to the jury room.
I talked about the Engle case.
$102 million. Mr. Sales and Mr. Barnhart were kind of disparaging about this, that it's only been paid in a few cases. $102 million is a lot of money, and there are a lot of cases left, 5,000 cases. That's the remedy. That's the point of talking to you about it.
There are a lot of cases yet to be tried, over 5,000 of these cases, all with different facts, different issues, different brands, different smokers, but 5,000 cases.
So let's talk about this case. Let's talk about -- let's recap what you all found
yesterday, what you've heard today, and some specific things to think about before I sit down. I'm wrapping it up.
I want to end the discussion by talking about this. Mr. Barnhart told you $20 million. $20 million. And so I want to talk about whether that is a rational amount, whether it's a reasonable amount that's connected to anything rational in this case. Because I submit to you it's not. So I want to talk to specifically about that issue.
But one thing I want to -- I want you to think about, you know, we've marched through this evidence, different products, the past is gone, the old executives are gone, documents are public, Reynolds is under this oversight, they paid billions of dollars.
This is all mitigation, so all of this will help you answer the question under the instructions that you have. The instructions will guide you how to answer the single question that you're going to answer back in the jury room.
And I submit to you, based on all that, based on all of that evidence, there's no
reason, no reason to deter a company that doesn't need to be deterred today because it's doing all the right things. There's no reasonable need to do that.
But let's look at what happened yesterday. As I said, the verdict was $7 million, with the reduction, $4.9 million. That's a significant amount. Millions of dollars. And as I said, I'm not calling that a dispute or questioning it in any way, but that is multiple millions of dollars for Mrs. Wilcox. And as we discussed, that was full compensation that you found for her for her loss.
The instructions will tell you, this is also instruction number 3, when you look at this issue of punitive damages, the compensatory amount, because it's full compensation, can be considered a punitive component -MR. BARNHART: Objection. That's a misstatement of the law, plus it's redundant.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: You'll have the instructions. You'll have the instructions, and it will tell you about your verdict being full compensation
and whether there's a need for additional -THE COURT REPORTER: I'm sorry, sir, you're going to have to speak up.
MR. BAYUK: I'm sorry.
This instruction number 3, read it, please. Please read it when you go back to the jury room.
But in addition to that, in addition to fully compensating Mrs. Wilcox, you heard the evidence. So I submit to you, there's no need for more. But I recognize that you may find there's some more. I recognize that you may, because we came here today, think that Reynolds needs to be punished or needs to be deterred for something. And so I need to talk to you about that.
I suggest to you, you heard $20 million, and I would suggest to you, that has no reasonable basis for anything. No reasonable basis.
Mr. Barnhart was up here, he kind of gave you a short closing, and then he ended with 20 million. And his closing I think was designed, me listening to it, designed to make you --
MR. BARNHART: Excuse me. Objection.
That impugns.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: And I don't mean to impugn Mr. Barnhart. But it has no relationship, except a financial statement and some calculations about how much Reynolds makes in a day divided by seven hours, I couldn't follow the calculations, but $20 million because of a SEC filing, 20 years after Mr. Wilcox's death. It's a number picked out of the air. It's a number picked out of the air.
And so I want to suggest to you something that may be a more appropriate way to think about, if you want to award something, a more appropriate, a more reasonable way to think about it.
I would suggest to you, if you're inclined to award anything on top of the almost $5 million; half a million dollars. And where do I get that? Where I do get that half a million dollars? You've heard 5,000 cases. You've heard 5,000 cases. In those cases, if every smoker -MR. BARNHART: Excuse me. Objection, Your
Honor.
MR. SALES: May we approach, please?
MR. BARNHART: We need to approach.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: $500,000.
You're instructed, you will be instructed that you cannot award an amount that would destroy Reynolds. And one of the things that you need to think about, because you're entitled to consider, as mitigation evidence, the fact that there are other -- there's a potential -MR. BARNHART: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SALES: Objection, Your Honor. May we approach, please?
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: All I can tell you is please read the jury instructions. Read the jury instructions of what you are allowed to consider about the evidence. You heard the evidence about the other cases. Some things have come into evidence that you have to consider it when you assess whether punishment or whether more punishment is awarded on this case on top of your compensatory verdict. On
top of your full compensation.
$500,000. If you find something is worth -- and I recognize you may want to award more than that. If you're mad, if you're mad about the documents, if you don't think you've seen evidence today that tells you that Reynolds is a different company, I submit to you, that's all the evidence was because there was no dispute from the plaintiff about that.
But if you're mad, a million dollars on top of almost $5 million, the money goes to Mrs. Wilcox. I've told you my position, our position about it, but it's in your discretion. It's up to you. You all decide. You're the decision-maker, and we will respect what you do no matter what. So it's up to you.
All I would ask you is please be guided by the instructions. Please be guided by the instructions you will take back with you.
Plaintiff asked you for $20 million. You may know -MR. BARNHART: Your Honor, I object to this. This is exactly what Your Honor sustained before.
THE COURT: Next question.
MR. BAYUK: A common-sense approach to punitive damages, as I said, you fully compensated her. You have to ask yourself, would punitive damages, are they needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing or agreeing to conceal information? I submit to you they are not. That's the evidence you've seen today.
MR. SALES: Your Honor, the last -MR. BAYUK: What message does additional damages send?
Mr. Barnhart ended by talking about you need to send a message. You need to do something that's going to make phones ring at R.J. Reynolds in North Carolina. He asked you to send a message with $20 million.
I would ask you, based on what you've seen today, in the past 20 years, has Reynolds significantly changed the way it does business? The only answer to that is yes. That's all the evidence has been today.
What punitive damages award does Reynolds need punishment today to change? They've changed. They've turned the corner. No amount of money is going to make them become a better company. That's what they are doing today.
They've changed the conduct that you all found in the first phase. So that's what you have to consider.
Will a punitive damage award motivate other corporations to modify their behavior?
We heard about this concept of deterrence. For Reynolds and for other companies, will a large verdict motivate other companies to change their behavior, or will the message be, even if you change everything, even if you tell smokers everything and you offer help to them in terms of nicotine replacement or less risk, you can change and yet still be punished over and over and over again.
Is that the message that you want to send? Mr. Barnhart said, send a message. I ask you to please think about that. Please think about it in combination with the instructions you're going to get.
And finally, also on this concept of sending a message, would a large punitive damages verdict, would it improve public health? You know the answer to that because it goes to Mrs. Wilcox. It's not going to do anything to improve public health.
Would it make people more aware of the dangers of smoking, no. There's no concealment on that.
Would a punitive award stop people from starting to smoke? The answer is no. There's no evidence of that. You know what the evidence is on that.
Would a punitive award cause more people to stop smoking? No. Would a punitive award make Reynolds more transparent? You heard the evidence today. Do you think there's more transparency? There's no contrary evidence.
And finally, and I think probably the most important issue, you will decide when you go back to the jury room, is a punitive award needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing or agreeing to conceal? The answer is no. It hasn't happened in a long time.
And so I'm going to sit down now. I thank you for your time. This is the last time I'll talk to you. It has been a pleasure the last four weeks. Please read the instructions and render a just verdict. Thank you. Thank you so much.
