CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. BARNHART: Thank you again and thank you for the verdict.
So let me begin. This is going to be short. It's going to be one of the shortest closing arguments I've ever given. I know that's going to distress you, but the evidence
is in, you've paid good attention. You know what to do.
So this is about punitive damages. How do we do punitive damages? How do we do them fairly? How are we fair to the defense? How are we fair to the Wilcox family?
We look to the law. We look to the law. And you'll get the instruction. I'm only going to talk about two things, because that's what punitive damages are limited to: Fraudulent concealment and an agreement to conceal, conspiracy to conceal.
What's fraudulent concealment? That means covering up, deliberately hiding something. Hiding the ball, not telling someone like Mr. Wilcox what they should have told him when they knew it, when it was important, when it was deadly, when it was injurious to health, when it was killing people like him. That's fraudulent concealment.
And agreeing to conceal is all of that, but you're doing it with somebody else, other tobacco companies. The Tobacco Institute, the Tobacco Research Council.
All right. So the purpose of punitive
damages is twofold. It goes back in time, back to the common law of England. The first purpose is to punish. Not too much, not too little; just right.
The second purpose is to deter. Deter this kind of conduct from happening again, both for this defendant and other defendants in similar circumstances. That's it. Common sense. That's it.
So when we talk about punitive damages in this case, I want to mention one other point, and that is that the punitive damages have to deal with the damage done to the Wilcox family. Not somebody else, not Smith or Jones or whoever else, the Wilcox family. So the wrongs have to equal the harm to the Wilcox family.
And with that, we can go.
So the theme of the compensatory case, the long part of the case was actions that hurt and actions that kill. You learned a lot of science, you learned a lot of medicine.
The theme of this case, though, is punishment. What do you do with that kind of conduct, how do you evaluate it, and what do you do in the future.
Well, profit in the United States is good. Profit above safety is not good. Profit above life itself is reprehensible. And that is what we need for punitive damages.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BARNHART: And if it please you -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor, it's the wrong standard.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. HENNINGER: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Granted.
MR. BARNHART: You will be instructed under the law that punitive damages should be awarded only if the defendant's culpability -that is what they did wrong -- after having paid compensatory damages, is so reprehensible as to warrant the imposition of further sanctions. A bigger burden, to achieve punishment and deterrence.
So what we are going to be talking about is reprehensibility, because that's what you're instructed on as far as the law.
So, look, when you profit and you know that people are dying, like Red Wilcox, that's reprehensible.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor, harm to others.
MR. BARNHART: No. Red Wilcox.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BARNHART: That conduct, when you're killing Red Wilcox and leaving his wife a widow for 20 years, needs to be punished. When you engaged in that kind of conduct day after day, year after year, decade after decade, the punishment has to equal the extent of the wrong. And the wrongs continued for 60 years of Red Wilcox's life, from the time he was eight until the time he was 69 -- actually, 61.
And that, based on the deliberate acts of concealment that you've seen in this case, is what leads to what we need to do.
So you made a decision to get to this point in the case that R.J. Reynolds' conduct was reprehensible. And we have to decide how reprehensible that was relative to the Wilcox family.
Actions in their campaign, their decade-long campaign of doubt and denial, which is fraudulent concealment, it's covering up. Create doubt, deny. Create doubt, deny.
Concealment. Concealment and conspiracy with others. Fraudulent conspiracy. It's the same thing.
So that's what we are talking about. So this phase is not about what R.J. Reynolds is doing now; it's about what R.J. Reynolds did -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BARNHART: -- relative to Mr.
Wilcox -MS. HENNINGER: Instructing the jury.
THE COURT: Overruled -- or sustained.
MR. BARNHART: It's what they did to Red Wilcox for the 60 years of his smoking life.
So the -- if you'll remember yesterday, you had an instruction, you treat a corporation like a human being, right? Something like that.
Well, human beings are punished routinely. And it is no defense to punishment that, I'm a new man, you might mitigate the damages -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BARNHART: -- but there's no defense to punishment.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BARNHART: This is closing argument, Your Honor. It's based on the jury instruction you gave yesterday, if it please the Court.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BARNHART: All right.
The -MS. HENNINGER: We would like to make a motion sidebar.
MR. BARNHART: It's sort of a general common understanding of the law.
THE COURT: Reserved.
MR. BARNHART: And that is that people who commit terrible wrongs deserve significant punishment. People who commit minor wrongs deserve either little punishment or a moderate punishment. So the punishment needs to fit the act. Not too little, not too much.
In this case, Cleston Wilcox received the ultimate punishment. He died from a smoking-related illness that was caused, you found, by his addiction to cigarettes, which caused his primary lung cancer.
So -- so we talk today, or at least R.J. Reynolds talks today about their new guiding principles and their core beliefs. And
so I ask you to think, where were those values when Red Wilcox was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes which caused his lung cancer? Where were those values when the CEOs were raising their hand in Congress in 1994, the year that Red died, swearing to a congressional panel that cigarettes were not addictive and did not cause lung cancer?
Now, that is concealment. That is fraudulent concealment. It is under oath. And it is a conspiracy with others. And that's directly what we are talking about.
In the year in which Red Wilcox died, these CEOs, these heads of these corporations, swore to tell the truth in the United States Capitol of the United States of America, and you know what they told the public? It's not addictive. And they knew it was. It doesn't cause lung cancer, and they knew it did. And you've seen those documents. We don't have to go back over them. You've seen them again and again and again.
And when you come up, and when you tell people, the public, in the United States Congress, in the Capitol building under oath
that our products don't harm people and they are not addictive, you, my friend, have concealed. You have fraudulently concealed.
And so that conduct needs to be evaluated as it killed Red Wilcox.
So I want to talk about one other thing, and that is what kind of things did they conceal. Where were the values they had when they pushed filtered cigarettes -- filters on cigarettes after the cancer scares in the '50s and '60s? They pushed filters knowing -knowing that filters were a fraud.
In most cases, however, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. He has abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of reduced risk to health.
Well, why would they do that? Because the smoker wanted to reduce his risk, and they concealed what they knew. This information.
And you saw it again and again and again that cigarettes -- that filters on cigarettes provided as much nicotine and as much tar as nonfiltered cigarettes. It was a fraud. It
was a sham. It was an illusion of filtration, in their words. So where were those values then?
Well, the value that drove them is a value to make revenue. And that revenue, in part, resulted from how much they concealed, how beautifully they did it, and how they fraudulently conspired with others so that Red Wilcox no longer walked this earth. And that's the bottom line in this case.
All right. So this is -- this is the day, I mean, this is the reckoning -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BARNHART: -- for the Wilcox family -MS. HENNINGER: Objection. Motion.
THE COURT: Reserved. Go ahead.
MR. BARNHART: -- based upon the law and the evidence, based upon the fraudulent concealment which they did.
So, look, there was testimony today about other juries, about five cases where R.J. Reynolds paid -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor, not in evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BARNHART: -- about five cases where R.J. Reynolds paid $102 million, if I got that right. But you're the only jury that's going to hear Red Wilcox's case. The only jury. You're the only jury who will decide in this case what R.J. Reynolds should pay as punishment for what they did to the Wilcox family. This is Lorraine Wilcox's only day, only day, for them to achieve punishment for what they did to her husband.
All right. So how did we decide what's fair? Well, we went through the law, and then in a civil case, we look at things like financial statements. And, fortunately, many of you can read financial statements.
If you can show that, Baron. And blow that up.
So David Sales went through this, and generally speaking, the 2 million 587, that's the yellow bar at the bottom -MR. SALES: That would be billion.
MR. BARNHART: I know. Excuse me, 2,587,000,000 is the profit. So I did some calculations, so I'm not doing it here, but if you divide that by 365 days -- let me show you
what I did so can you follow the math.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BARNHART: -- times 28 days is about 198.5 million, or about 200 million. 1/20 of that -- actually, I missed one here. It's 100 -- it's $7 million a day, 7.1 million a day -- that's what happens when I'm not using my reading glasses -- as profit.
So you if you divide 365 into about 2.587 -- pardon this spaghetti splurge over here -- it's about $7.1 million a day.
We've been in this trial roughly a month. So what I did, it's about $200 million for that month, give or take, of profit. About 1/10 of that is $20 million. And that is what I suggest is an appropriate amount for this defendant -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BARNHART: -- in this case for what they did -THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BARNHART: -- to this family.
Because what that has to do is it has to measure what wrong was incurred in this case,
but then it has to be sizeable enough to make a difference to the defendant.
So if this defendant were a newsstand, that would be a ridiculous amount of money.
But if this is a company that has -- is making two-point -- almost $2.6 billion in profit a year -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BARNHART: -- then in that event -MS. HENNINGER: Motion.
MR. BARNHART: Excuse me, I didn't hear you. I didn't hear that, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BARNHART: Okay.
It has to be appropriate to the defendant based upon their financial circumstances. You certainly can't -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BARNHART: You'll be instructed under the instructions -THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BARNHART: -- that you cannot destroy them. And that amount will not. But what I do ask you is, and you may think that's right, you
may think that's too little, you may think it's too much, but please don't go over that number. Please don't go over that number.
All right. So what -- you are going to send a message with your verdict. You're going to send a message to the headquarters of R.J. Reynolds in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. There is going to be a message. And if you send a message of either zero punitive damages or a small amount, then the message is, it's okay. This jury thought it was okay what they did to Red Wilcox, this concealment, the fraudulent concealment -MS. HENNINGER: Objection.
MR. BARNHART: -- and everything they did is fine.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BARNHART: On the other hand, if you send a message with a sizeable amount for what they did to Red Wilcox, then phones will ring and they will get the message that in this courtroom on this day in this trial, this jury punished R.J. Reynolds appropriately for the fraud, the concealment, and the conspiracy to conceal that led directly to Red Wilcox's
death.
Thank you, Your Honor.



CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. GUSTAFSON: I want to start by saying thank you. You all have been patient with us. I'm going to be the least talking lawyer today.
I wrote that down when Mr. Bayuk said what he said to you in his closing argument, and I want you to think about why it is we are here today and what question you are here to decide.
The verdict form you're going to get says: What is the total amount of punitive damages, if any, which you find by the greater weight of the evidence should be assessed against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company? That's the one question you are here to decide today.
And the instructions give you an idea about how to go about answering that question.
Instruction number 5 says: In determining whether punitive damages are warranted; and if so, in determining the amount of any such
damages, you may not seek to punish Reynolds for any harms suffered by any persons other than Cleston Roy Wilcox.
The instruction number 6 is like unto it: If you decide to award punitive damages against Reynolds, the award should be no greater than the amount that you find necessary to punish Reynolds for the smoking-related injury caused to Mr. Wilcox. Caused to Mr. Wilcox by Reynolds' conduct, and to deter Reynolds and others similarly situated from engaging in such misconduct in the future.
They brought a witness from Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and had him on the stand over four hours today. That was their evidence to you. That's what they brought to you. You didn't hear Cleston Roy Wilcox's name one time. Not a peep. It was like he never existed, like he was never here.
And they put that slide up -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
Ever.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: They put that slide up that said everything has changed. Ask
Mrs. Wilcox if anything's changed. She still sleeps alone. Her husband's still dead 20 years. That ain't changed. She still sleeps by herself. She wakes in the dark. She sleeps -MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
This is not compensatory damages.
MR. GUSTAFSON: This is about Cleston Roy Wilcox's death.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Nothing at all has changed for Mrs. Wilcox. Nothing.
This case is about the harms caused to the Wilcox family.
R.J. Reynolds ought to punished for what it did to Cleston Wilcox, whether they went and put up a website, whether they did a monograph about a cigarette nobody ever heard of before you walked into this courtroom, none of that changes a thing about what they did to Cleston Roy Wilcox. He is dead. He's been dead 20 years. And the purpose of this verdict is to recognize that and to punish Reynolds for what it did. You should follow the instructions the Court gives you. They will
guide you to justice.
I want to say one thing about the amount of the award. The amount of the award is totally up to y'all. It is your decision and yours alone, and we can't tell you what to do. And you may think the amount that we suggested to you is wrong, and you may think the amount that Mr. Bayuk suggested to you is wrong. You may think it should be more, you may think it should be less.
What I have to say to you is this: We are asking you, please, don't award more than what we've suggested. Please don't do that, whatever you do. It should -- it should recognize the harms and be meaningful to punish R.J. Reynolds, the amount should be. But please don't do more than what we suggested, please.
They got up this morning and they told you that they heard you yesterday. They brought a witness and he said we heard you yesterday in Winston-Salem. They need to hear you today, too. What you do here, what you do here matters.
MS. HENNINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Thank you.
