                  CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. SALES:  My partners left me 39 minutes
     to speak to you.  I don't have enough time to
5425 tell you everything that I want to tell you.  I
     am going to say thank you.  I'm going to do it
     a lot shorter than they did because of that.
          I want to begin by suggesting to you that
     you know, now, that when a case like this is
     tried, and that -- when a party puts up on a
     screen from a document, it may be hundreds or
     thousands of pages, you've seen, because
     there's been a lot of it, the party selects
     what the party wants to show from that document
     in evidence.
          An advantage that you have as you fulfill
     the obligation there above Her Honor, Judge
     Lindsey, we, who labor here, seek only truth,
     to find out the truth in this case.  Does the
     truth reside in the yellow highlighted sections
     of slides just shown to you?  Does the truth
     reside in snips from depositions, from pieces
     of trial testimony?  Is that where the truth
     resides?  Or does the truth reside in the
     entirety of the evidence in this case?
          And we would urge you on behalf of
     Mrs. Wilcox, on behalf of the Lieutenant
     Wilcox, to think about it that way.
          And I want to just start -- my arguments
5426 are going to hopefully, if I have time,
     generally track the arguments that have been
     made by everybody else about the verdict form
     and the issues that you're going to decide.
          But I want to begin by focusing on what I
     just talked about, because it will not come as
     a surprise to you that I'm going to urge you to
     view many of the arguments you heard today with
     a very skeptical eye.
          And why am I holding the Canasta Pajamas?
     Because it just has sort of become an icon for
     the case and we joke about it.  Because if this
     is what we are talking about, does all of the
     information that you need to know about this
     case reside in the pictures, the people
     standing in laboratories showing the work that
     they've done, showing tumors on the backs of
     mice?
          Because in the way in which this case is
     argued to you by the defense -- and it's not
     only this document, it's not only this
     document -- the defense would have you believe
     that a very well-read apparently, very
     knowledgeable, very sophisticated Red Wilcox
     sees this, he sees this, but that he doesn't
5427 actually read the article.
          And so if Red Wilcox were to have read the
     Canasta Pajamas article, and by the way, if he
     were to look through the entirety of the
     magazine, he would have seen that.  It's almost
     Christmastime.  Advertisements for Lucky
     Strikes.  On the back, more cigarette ads.  In
     their view, he doesn't see those things.
          Why is that important?  Because you know,
     and it's unrebutted in the case, that over the
     history of his lifetime, based on the
     unrebutted evidence, we have economic measures
     of the power of this defendant's message versus
     the power of the public health message.  The
     message that they say he was hearing.  That's
     only his message that he heard.
          But you know what?  If this same Red
     Wilcox were to be reading, not just looking at
     pictures, what would he have read?
          "The American Tobacco Company hastens to
     point out that tests on mice do not prove that
     tobacco can cause lung cancer in man."
          They got their message out.  Counsel said,
     you know, that none of this starts until the
     conspiracy starts and after Christmas -- or I
5428 guess it's New Year's Eve in 1953.  These
     messages -- you know the American Tobacco
     Company, that's the predecessor, they're
     responsible for American Tobacco Company.
     Before this got started, before that meeting at
     The Plaza Hotel, they were conducting their own
     experiments.
          It's true they were blowing the smoke on
     the mice instead of painting the tar on their
     backs, and they were conducting those
     experiments in conjunction with the paper
     company.  They knew already.  They didn't need
     a LIFE Magazine.  They didn't need
     publications.  They didn't need Doll and
     Wynder.  They knew.
          But in the view of the evidence that's
     been suggested to you by the defense, we only
     see what the defense says that Mr. Wilcox would
     have seen.
          And, you know, I've been carrying this
     thing around the whole trial.  And I just been
     trying to figure out a time to tell you about
     it and trying to put -- it would be impossible
     to show you everything in this document.  I
     think it was admitted when you all were here,
5429 it's PT2555.  And it's a collection of some of
     the press releases that were made by American
     Tobacco, by the CTR, the TIRC, and many, many
     of them from The Tobacco Institute for decades,
     for decades.
          You've heard that in one day, the
     public -- the tobacco industry had more
     economic power to put out their message that
     they wanted smokers to hear, addicted people
     vulnerable to a message, that it's okay to keep
     smoking and if it's not okay to keep smoking,
     switch to a product that is healthier for you.
     They did that for years and years.
          If you have a chance, take a look at
     what's in these documents.  You've seen --
     you've seen the microscopes in front of --
     Dr. Proctor says maybe some of them are fake.
     But over time, you know from the news
     articles -- PT5504 says on it PT2555.
          THE TECHNICIAN:  Look in the middle.
          MR. SALES:  PT5504.  Excuse me.  That's
     the compilation of those press releases.
          And what you will find if you look at them
     is a drumbeat consistently for a period of
     decades of the same thing over and over and
5430 over again.
          Now, counsel would suggest to you, well,
     you know, that message -- nobody was really
     listening.  Is that possible?  And I don't know
     if you remember this, but do you remember
     during the cross-examination of Dr. Proctor
     that they showed one of these Stars and Stripes
     articles?
          We got up on redirect.  Well, wait a
     minute.  Wait a minute.  Even in the Stars and
     Stripes, The Tobacco Institute, if it's true
     that Mr. Wilcox read this newspaper, they were
     getting the same time, same air time, the same
     print time as anybody else who was talking
     about it.  That's the power of their message.
          Dr. Proctor told you, it's unrebutted,
     unchallenged in this record that the message of
     the tobacco industry was carried consistently
     in newspapers around the country and also in
     Stars and Stripes.
          So, the suggestion that they weren't
     getting heard and that the only messages out
     there were messages that nobody -- nobody would
     pay any attention to, you know, let's talk
     about the way that case has actually been tried
5431 by the defense.  Because this is what Mr. Bayuk
     said.  Cigarettes were dangerous and addictive
     before R.J. Reynolds ever came around.
          Okay?  So the question that I ask you to
     ask when you go and deliberate is, why did you
     lie about it for 62 years, the entire period of
     time.  It started with 1932, that's when
     Mr. Wilcox smoked.  They're telling you that
     Mr. Wilcox, an eight-year-old boy, growing up
     where he grew up, the way he grew up, knew at
     least as much about these same hazards as
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, its laboratory
     science, its officers, its directors?  That's
     the defense of this case.
          Well, what else do we know?
          Talking about coming around.  Now's the
     time that it's time to come around.  Because as
     of 1994, you know that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company still had not come around.  And both
     lawyers for this defendant have told you there
     is not a question on this verdict form that
     asks you to evaluate the conduct of
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.  They are wrong.
     That is the last question.
          Are all of the things that they have done,
5432 is the marketing of cigarettes to children, is
     the purposefully concealing the information
     that you know about the things that you're
     trying to do to cigarettes, hiding it from the
     public while you are simultaneously telling the
     public you do not sell a drug, we're going to
     talk about that.  That makes a difference.
     That's wrong.  And it meets, just as
     Mr. Gustafson suggested, every one of those
     four criteria for the imposition of punitive
     damages.
          Now, just to show you, just to show you
     the way that this case is being argued to you,
     I want you to think about something else.
     Counsel was up here a few moments ago and
     dinged Mr. Wilcox for trying to use the Aqua
     Filter.  Remember that?  Suggested that he's at
     fault because he didn't quit when he used the
     Aqua Filter.
          There are two documents in evidence that
     you have not yet seen.  One of them is a memo
     from A.W. Spears to Stevens and Judge at the
     Lorillard Tobacco Company.  There's one for
     R.J. Reynolds coming in just a minute.  And
     what do we know from them?
5433 They were just as interested in the Aqua
     Filter as Mr. Wilcox.  And it's true that they
     didn't make it, Judge Lindsey told you that.
     It's true they didn't make it, but they studied
     it.
          And counsel in this case is asking you to
     find fault with Mr. Wilcox because he went out
     and bought this thing that was advertised on
     The Tonight Show, The Today Show, the Phil
     Donahue Show, it was featured as an item on The
     Price is Right.  We showed you that.  Maybe too
     much of that.
          And what do we know from a co-conspirator?
     "Based on the structure of the Aqua Filter, we
     considered the claim theoretically impossible."
     It's important for two reasons.
          One is because it's just not fair to
     suggest that somebody who goes out and buys
     this product is doing something wrong because
     they don't come off of cigarettes when these
     defendants -- this defendant knew it doesn't
     work.
          Why do I say R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company?  PT13031.  In the ultimate irony of
     ironies, irony of ironies, in this case, you
5434 have before you evidence that reflects --
     couldn't make this up -- that R.J. Reynolds
     Tobacco Company tested the Aqua Filter on Camel
     and Salem cigarettes.
          What did they find out?  Well, what they
     found out was just what Lorillard Tobacco
     Company, its co-conspirator, found out.
     Doesn't work.  Doesn't do any good at all.
          And why is the other reason that this
     document is important?  I want to suggest to
     you that it's also important for another
     reason.  And that is that this is part of a
     consistent pattern and trend when it came to
     the issue of light cigarettes and filtered
     cigarettes that begins back in 1953.  1953.  Do
     you remember that?
          1953, that was when Claude Teague -- the
     document is called, Disclosure of Invention --
     said, you know, seems to me like people attach
     significance to whether or not the filter turns
     brown.  And so we ought to come up with a way
     to make that filter tip turn brown.  Knowing
     full well that it wasn't doing anything.
          Counsel suggested it's not relevant to
     show that just three years later that when
5435 testing Camel cigarettes against, at that time,
     Reynolds' flagship filtered cigarettes, new on
     the market, Winston, that they determined that
     two and a half times an important carcinogen
     come out of the smoke in the filtered
     cigarette.  Two and a half times.
          It's undisputed, it's unrebutted, that
     they never told the public that, ever.
          Mr. Gustafson showed you the document from
     the co-conspirator, Philip Morris.  It's
     unrebutted, they never told -- the industry
     never told the public that filters are a mere
     illusion.
          And what do you know from Dr. Proctor?
     Because you were just told that Dr. Proctor
     agrees with the defense that this whole issue
     is insignificant and doesn't matter.  It
     matters in a very important and significant
     way.  And Dr. Proctor explained that to you.
          From 1953 until the time of Mr. Wilcox's
     death, by that time, cigarette consumers had
     migrated almost exclusively from nonfiltered
     products to almost exclusively to filtered
     products.
          And you know, now, because the industry
5436 internal documents, including those of Brown &
     Williamson, there was a memo from Mr. Pepples,
     you might remember that, we showed it, they
     acknowledge there is no reduction in the things
     that are hurting people at that time.
          Now, Dr. Proctor told you, yes, the public
     health community was saying otherwise.  But as
     you now know from the evidence, there is no, no
     evidence whatsoever, that this defendant or any
     of its co-conspirators ever revealed to the
     public health community that light and filtered
     cigarettes don't make a difference.  They
     don't.
          Counsel herself repeated several times
     during this trial an acknowledgment by
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company that there is no
     such thing as a safe cigarette.  Think about it
     this way, if you would, please.  You know, none
     of us has training in epidemiology, none of us
     is a specialist in any of these areas, and we
     have to rely on the skilled witnesses that come
     in and the documents that teach us about these
     things.
          But sometimes, sometimes -- and there's an
     instruction on this.  I think counsel for
5437 R.J. Reynolds went over it.  Sometimes you just
     have to use your common sense.  And think
     back -- Baron, do you have the consumption
     curve and the death curve?  Think back to where
     we started in the case.
          You know, the idea in this country that
     there was a controversy about whether or not
     cigarettes caused harm first and whether or not
     they were addictive, those are the two elements
     of the conspiracy.
          So you get all those instructions that
     counsel went over in the end, that's what we're
     talking about.  That's what hurt people.
     That's what killed the other people that one of
     the instructions that Her Honor Judge Lindsey
     read to you, you are allowed to consider.
          But use your common sense.  You know about
     the increase in the filtered and light products
     over time.  They come to essentially erase
     unfiltered products.  But what happens?  Even
     if you take into consideration what some
     witnesses have referred to as the latency
     period, incubation period between the time
     people smoke and the time they get disease,
     even after, even after cigarette consumption
5438 starts to taper off and go down, the rate of
     male lung cancer death in this country
     continued through the date of Mr. Wilcox's
     death.  Just then, just then, it was rising and
     starting to level off.
          So how can it be?  How can it be that
     filtered cigarettes are better for you?  These
     facts don't lie.  And it is true, as
     Dr. Proctor explained, that the robots, the
     smoking machines that were used to study these
     things, which he told you -- nobody's mentioned
     this yet today -- were actually designed by the
     cigarette companies to measure tar and nicotine
     yields.
          What do we know?  We know from the
     industry's documents, they don't smoke like
     people do.
          Because people, you now know, if you
     didn't before, smoke for one reason:  They
     smoke to get nicotine contained in cigarettes.
     That is the fundamental reason that people
     smoke.  That is the fundamental reason that Red
     Wilcox smoked cigarettes.
          So let's talk a little bit about
     addiction.  You've been told that the greater
5439 weight of the evidence in the case is the more
     persuasive and convincing force of the
     evidence.
          Can you put that up?
          And on the question of addiction, there is
     some things that are unrebutted.  Counsel for
     R.J. Reynolds, Mr. Bayuk, made a big deal about
     whether things come up in cross or direct
     examination.  But the evidence is what it is.
          There's unrebutted evidence that
     Mr. Wilcox met the Fagerstrom test for nicotine
     dependence, was medium to highly addicted,
     depending on how that was scored.  And he gave
     you a range.  That he met the test for
     dependence in the heaviness of smoking index.
     That he met the test for nicotine dependence,
     the test that he uses for the State of Florida
     to evaluate whether or not people, doctors,
     lawyers, respectfully, judges have problems
     with substances under the DSM-IV-TR.
     Dependent, that means addicted.  There's no
     dispute about that.
          And he did, he did actually evaluate
     Mr. Wilcox according to the DSM-5.  He found
     severe addiction.  And their answer to that is
5440 rely on the testimony of Dr. Abramson.
          I'm not going to repeat.  Counsel's
     described for you what the believability
     standard is, the standard that you're to apply
     in whether or not you should consider that
     testimony.  And I urge you with respect to that
     witness to reject it in its entirety because it
     is unreliable and not worthy of belief, for
     reasons that you all know.
          What else went unrebutted and, in fact,
     was confirmed by the testimony of Dr. Abramson?
     That this isn't is a disease about ashtrays and
     lighters and where you put them in your cabinet
     or how many times you put your cigarettes in
     the trash can.  It's a brain disease.
          And the defense wants to, as Dr. Abramson
     says -- I mean, you have to be a poster child
     for perfect cessation efforts, 100 percent of
     the time, your whole life, or be mentally
     retarded or have an organic brain deficit, and
     if you're not one of those things, you're not
     addicted, according to him.  They know that
     because he's testified before, before they
     hired him.  They know that before they hired
     him.  If you believe his testimony, no
5441 plaintiff can win one of those cases.
          It doesn't matter whether he says they're
     addicted or not, which he says he's done in a
     case he can't remember, because according to
     Dr. Abramson, addiction doesn't cause disease
     unless you are the poster child, the poster man
     for cessation.  That's not worthy of belief.
          What do we know?  It's unrebutted that
     this is a disease of the brain.  Counsel poked
     fun at that a little bit, but it's unrebutted
     what nicotine does to your brain.  I'm not
     going to repeat all of that.  It changes the
     way that your brain operates.
          Why do people go through withdrawal?  Why
     do they go through withdrawal?  Why do people
     say cigarettes make them feel better?  They say
     it because when they don't have nicotine, their
     brain isn't normal anymore.  It's hijacked.
     It's been hijacked by the nicotine.  And that's
     what happened to Red Wilcox.
          Do you have any dispute about it?  Because
     one of the things that Dr. Abramson said -- you
     may remember this -- he says 50 percent of the
     people are addicted.  You know from Dr. Herkov
     the figure is much higher.  But he also says
5442 50 percent of the people have withdrawal.
          From that same 50 percent of the
     population, it would be very important for a
     witness who never wants to see an addicted
     smoker, never wants to find someone who is
     truly addicted, to say that they don't have
     withdrawal.
          But you know from Dr. Caruso's notes, you
     know from the nurse's note that he was
     addicted, because he describes -- Dr. Caruso
     describes a period of agitation in the hospital
     when this man does not have nicotine.
          And you know -- and this is extraordinary,
     this is absolutely extraordinary -- that after
     Mr. Wilcox had a lung removed from his chest,
     he is described in the hospital where people
     are controlling his breathing, his blood work,
     his oxygenation, everything about him, making
     observations of him in the ICU 24/7, and what
     are they doing?  They're giving him a Habitrol
     patch.
          I don't want to say too much more about
     that.  But ask yourselves if there was ever a
     case where someone who needed nicotine
     replacement just to be a hospital patient, that
5443 we could reasonably say was not addicted to
     nicotine.
          And the clincher?  I wrote this down when
     Mrs. Wilcox said it.  She was being
     cross-examined by Ms. Henninger, and they were
     talking about the patch.  And Ms. Henninger
     brought out Ms. Wilcox said, that was something
     you wanted to do for a long time, and you
     finally got your wish.  And her answer?  It
     says lot about her and a lot about the way she
     felt about her husband.  But it also says
     something about addiction.
          What she said was:  Yes, and I knew that
     he was being satisfied with the patch on.
     That's when Red Wilcox had relief from his
     addiction, when he had another form of nicotine
     that was applied to his skin, that allowed his
     brain to receive the drug that it had required
     for so many years.
          Let's talk a little bit about lung cancer.
     I'm not going to talk about pathology, I'm not
     going to talk about slides, I'm not going to
     talk about op notes, I'm not going to talk
     about any of that.  I'm going to ask you to use
     your common sense and repeat to you a few
5444 things that the evidence is unrebutted about,
     unchallenged about, maybe even agreed to about
     in this case.
          88 to 90 percent of lung cancer is caused
     by smoking.  No dispute.  Everybody agrees that
     Red Wilcox smoked long enough and hard enough
     to get lung cancer.  His doctors, at least some
     of them, thought he had lung cancer.
     Mr. Gustafson explained that.
          Importantly, the dominant lesion was in
     the lungs.  In this case we don't have to look
     very far to find other cancer because there was
     never any cancer found anywhere.  And whatever
     those path reports say, whatever it says about
     where the cancer spread, the only evidence that
     there was any disease in his body was in his
     lungs.  The only place that it spread, if it
     spread anywhere, was from the lung to the lung.
     And you know that the tests on every other part
     of his body were negative.
          And they tried to ding that by telling
     you, well, you know, in 1993, '94, technology
     really wasn't so good, and those CT scanners
     that they had down at Baptist Hospital, you
     ought to just forget about that.  But you've
5445 got to use your common sense.
          And by the way, Mr. Bayuk says on the one
     hand that we call too many witnesses, so many
     such that we've burdened you and wasted your
     time, but then he also says that we should have
     emptied the pathology department at Baptist
     Hospital to bring everybody down here to repeat
     to you what's in the records himself.
          THE CLERK:  Fifteen minutes, counsel.
          MR. SALES:  You know that it's lung
     cancer.  But we also have this, this.  We have
     somebody who has been heard from in this case
     through Mrs. Wilcox, and the defense did
     everything it could to bring this out to you,
     because they are so determined to suggest to
     you that Mr. Wilcox had all the warnings that
     he needed that he couldn't possibly have been
     affected by what they did.  And that was --
     this is a slide from Mr. Bayuk's closing.
          Mr. Wilcox's brother died of lung cancer
     in 1992.  Now, they're not saying it's cancer
     of the unknown primary.  They don't have any
     medical records for that.  He was a heavy
     smoker with a long smoking history.  And he
     died of lung cancer.
5446 And what do we know from the undisputed
     evidence in this case, it came from
     Dr. Bennett, and that is that, people can have
     in families, because of genetics, a similar
     response to similar stimuli.
          So we have a witness who didn't come and
     testify live.  We have a witness that
     apparently is unrebutted, raised only by the
     defense in this case that Mr. Wilcox's brother
     died of lung cancer.  And if it had ever been
     any suggestion that it was something else, you
     would have heard about that.  But you didn't.
     And it just makes sense.  Two boys, two men,
     same parents, same smoking, same disease, same
     death.
          Brooks.  Could be lung cancer -- that's
     their witness -- can't say.
          Bennett.  Can't be lung cancer, but I
     don't know what it is.
          That's their case.  And when you go to
     assess the greater weight of the evidence,
     consider those things.
          And consider the fact, as Mr. Gustafson
     testified, excuse me, argued to you just a
     little while ago, that Dr. Bennett himself,
5447 picked by the defense, until 1998, as of 1998,
     would still not acknowledge that cigarettes
     caused lung cancer.  That's bias.  It's bias
     because of the position and the special
     relationship that he occupies with this
     defendant and the other tobacco companies.  And
     you should consider that as well.
          Let's talk about comparative negligence.
          Can you show this?  Don't put it up, it's
     all right.
          The defense wants to suggest to you
     because there were other medical events
     involved, because the surgery resulted in
     complications, that it can't be a cause -- that
     the smoking and addiction can't be a cause of
     Mr. Wilcox's death.
          You know better.  Most respectfully, you
     know better.  You know that smoking leads to
     addiction, you know that Mr. Wilcox was
     addicted, you know that addicted smokers smoke,
     and you know now that he had lung cancer.  And
     everything, the cascade of events that occurred
     following his admission to the hospital, for
     treatment of that lung cancer, all of those
     things led in a direct and natural and
5448 continuous sequence to his death.
          Let's talk a little bit about comparative
     negligence.
          Mr. Wilcox did what everybody in his
     generation did.  He smoked.  He smoked a little
     earlier, but he smoked, as a child.  Not as a
     teenager, but like his generation, he smoked as
     a child.  A little bit older, teenager.
          We know that he tried to quit.  And they
     want to ding him because's on the downslope of
     that curve, when many in his generation were
     trying to quit cigarettes.
          You know, you've heard from the evidence
     the suggestion that these quit attempts weren't
     real.  That's just not a fair view of the
     evidence.  There were repeated efforts to quit
     smoking in this case, and the testimony
     suggests, fairly, when the age and the memories
     of the people involved who testified, fairly,
     when that evidence is considered, you know that
     Mr. Wilcox first made his first quit attempt in
     1974, and he quit for about two weeks.
          What else do you know?  You know that
     Mr. Wilcox did what everybody of his generation
     did.  But when you're asked to weigh the fault
5449 of one party versus another, Mr. Wilcox didn't
     do anything that was unreasonably dangerous.
     He used the products of this defendant and
     smoked them exactly the way that they wanted
     him to.  Those products, if you find that
     Mr. Wilcox was a class member, were
     unreasonably dangerous.
          So where is their evidence when you
     compare those two things, that Mr. Wilcox
     behaved in an unreasonably dangerous way?
     Unreasonably dangerous.  They wanted to get him
     as a kid.  They did.  They wanted him to smoke.
     He did.  They wanted him to switch to lights,
     and they can say it's not their fault, but what
     were they selling those cigarettes for?  He
     did.
          And he believed what was being said about
     those cigarettes, so much so, and this is
     extraordinary, he dissected the cigarettes in
     order to prove a point, that he was making a
     healthier choice for himself and his family.
          So when you consider those things, when
     you consider whether or not he acted
     reasonably, you have other information at your
     disposal.  You have the FTC reports from 1967
5450 and 1981.  Those are those ones that have been
     redacted in parts.  But they tell you the way
     that people responded to the warning labels.
     They tell you the way that people responded to
     advertising.  They tell you the incredible
     number of people in this country who were
     susceptible to the controversy, the controversy
     that never really was.  Millions of people in
     this country did exactly what Red Wilcox did.
          And that's why Mr. Barnhart and
     Mr. Gustafson say, and I agree, that he merits
     very little responsibility.  He never did
     anything that was unreasonably dangerous,
     never.  They did.  And think about that when
     you fill in those percentages.
          Let's talk a little bit about fraud by
     concealment.  I agree ...
          Can you show this?
          How much time do I have, please?
          THE CLERK:  You have nine minutes.
          MR. SALES:  I'm sorry?
          THE CLERK:  Nine minutes.
          MR. SALES:  Nine minutes.
          I'm not going to show you all the
     instructions on the fraud claims.  We've
5451 finished now dealing with the claims that
     require that you do those assessments of
     faults.
          This instruction is the one that applies
     to the claims for fraud by concealment and
     conspiracy to commit fraud by concealment.  And
     the question is whether or not there was
     concealment, whether there was concealment of
     material information which was relied upon.
     It's an awkward phrasing, but that's the
     phrasing that we have from the Engle decision.
          And I want to suggest to you that when you
     think about it this way and think about what
     would have been important to Red Wilcox, ask
     yourself this.
          And counsel says something quite strange.
     They say, he didn't rely on any of our secret
     documents.  Well, that's true, because they
     were secret.  But imagine if you would for a
     moment, turn the clock back and think about Red
     Wilcox, straight-laced, pilot, follow the
     rules, mechanic, raise them up right, decent,
     honest man, and ask yourselves whether or not
     in the life of that man, it would have made a
     difference to know, if it would have made a
5452 difference to know that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company, from its own secret files, withheld
     from him information that it was no more than
     the seller of a pharmaceutical, that's their
     words.
          Ask yourselves if it would have made any
     difference to him to know at the same time that
     they were denying publicly that nicotine was
     addictive and continued to do so even after his
     death in 1994, that they were experimenting on
     laboratory rats in order to make those
     cigarettes more addictive.  What kind of power
     would that provide to a straight-arrow decent
     man who is trying to figure out why he has
     trouble quitting cigarettes?
          What difference would it make to know, if
     they had told him and the public, which you now
     know they never did, that we are adding
     diammonium phosphate and ammonium hydroxide to
     our products for a very specific reason.
     Because we have seen in the sales trends of
     other brands of cigarettes that there is a
     correlation between the amount of ammonia and
     the kick of the nicotine and the sales.
          THE CLERK:  Five minutes, counsel.
