          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Ladies and gentlemen,
      you know my name is Jack Williams and I
2871 represent RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company along with
      my partner Dal Burton.  And I want to start off
      thanking you as well for your attention this
      week, for your time this week and you really
      paid attention to us with all the breaks and
      everything like that and we thank you.
          We know that serving as jurors can be
      inconvenient and it imposes an imposition on
      your time, and we thank you for that.  But
      that's the only way that our system of justice
      works.
          Now, we're getting close to the end of the
      case now, but your work is not quite done.
      Judge Eig has instructed you on the law.  And
      after we're all done speaking with you, Judge
      Eig will give you the verdict form.  And by
      answering the questions you will resolve this
      dispute between us.
          But before you go back to deliberate this is
      our time to summarize the evidence for you.  And
      as I get started, I want to remind you of a few
      things that Dal Burton told you during his
      opening statement.
          First he told you that Messrs. Kaiser and
      Finger would spend a great deal of time talking
2872 to you about document and statements of tobacco
      companies 40, 50, 60 years ago, and you just saw
      an example of that.
          And Mr. Burton told you during his opening
      statement that we would not try to defend all of
      those statements.  Many of those documents and
      some of the videos that you saw say things that
      express ideas that are abhorrent and that nobody
      would think today, and we told you that over a
      week ago.
          But Mr. Burton also told you if that's all
      that this case was about, just showing that a
      tobacco company executive or scientist said
      something inappropriate or bad or, frankly,
      stupid, then we would not have spent all this
      time together.
          And I need to disabuse something that
      Mr. Finger was talking about right away.  He
      made it seem like everyone in the '40s and '50s
      who grew up in the '40s and '50s turned into a
      smoker.  And that's simply not true, and that's
      based on the evidence that you heard in this
      courtroom.  Virginia Williams was born two years
      after Milton.  She was born in 1944.  She's not
      a smoker.  And if you remember the testimony
2873 when she was on the stand, Milton Williams had
      12 siblings and she could only remember one that
      was a smoker.  So let's disabuse ourselves of
      that.
          Let's also disabuse ourselves that President
      Kennedy didn't know anything about smoking.  He
      wanted to know more and to make it scientific
      and go public so that's what he did.
          And I am going to talk about internal
      company documents, but I just wanted to set
      those things aside as I proceed.
          Now, Mr. Burton told you during his opening
      statement, like I said, if all this case were
      about was bad statements in tobacco company
      files then we wouldn't have spent all this time
      together, but we have.  And that's because this
      case is not about all cigarette smokers, it's
      about one cigarette smoker and that cigarette
      smoker is Milton Williams.  It's about his life
      and his decisions.  And almost every question
      that you're going to see on that verdict form
      asks about Milton Williams.  It doesn't ask
      about the public.  It doesn't ask about some
      smokers.  It asks about one smoker, and that one
      smoker is Milton Williams.
2874 Now, Judge Eig talked about the findings and
      Mr. Finger talked about the findings a long time
      and you've seen them up there.  And Judge Eig
      told you that the findings don't make RJR liable
      in this case.  Those findings don't tell you how
      to answer the questions in this case.  You
      decide through your verdict whether those
      findings have any applicability to Milton
      Williams, Milton Williams' life and Milton
      Williams' decisions.  And that is because the
      focus here and the basis of your decision is
      Milton Williams' story, not smokers in general,
      not some smokers, not even Virginia Williams.
      It's Milton Williams specifically that you have
      to analyze the evidence about.
          And let me say a word about sympathy.  Many
      of you may feel sympathy for Virginia Williams
      for the loss of her husband 15 years ago at the
      age of 54.  That's normal, that's human and
      honestly we all do.  But Judge Eig has
      instructed you that those natural feelings of
      sympathy that we all have must be set aside for
      you and you must decide this case based on the
      evidence and the instruction that he gives you.
          And I know you all took an oath when you
2875 became jurors and that you will follow that oath
      sincerely.
          Now, Mr. Finger mimicked choice, control and
      responsibility because Mr. Burton told you
      during his opening statement that this case can
      be summed up in those words as to
      Milton Williams.  And Mr. Burton asked you to
      focus on some questions as you listen to the
      evidence in this case.
          Who was in control of Milton Williams'
      lifestyle choices?  Who was in control of Milton
      Williams' decision to begin smoking, to continue
      smoking?  Who was in control of his efforts to
      quit or lack thereof?  Who controlled his
      motivation to quit, if any?  And did he really
      want to quit?
          Now, we don't dispute that Milton Williams
      was addicted, but that is only the beginning of
      your inquiry here.  Was he someone whose
      addiction was so strong it overcame his will to
      quit?  It overcame any committed effort to quit?
      Or did the evidence show in this case, ladies
      and gentlemen, that he never really made a
      serious effort to quit smoking?
          Was he a tormented smoker who tried time and
2876 time again?  Did he wrestle with the bear, or
      didn't he?  Did he just smoke and not really try
      hard to quit?
          Did anything RJR said or failed to say about
      the health risks or addictiveness of smoking
      have a direct and substantial impact on Milton
      Williams' decisions?  Or does the evidence show
      that Milton Williams was not relying or looking
      to RJR for health information?  And the evidence
      shows that, that he wasn't looking to RJR for
      health information.  And I'm going to talk about
      that in more detail later.
          And we told you during opening statement
      that the answer to those questions -- when you
      answer those questions, you would know who was
      in control ultimately and who was responsible
      for the choices that Milton Williams made.  And
      the evidence shows that it was Milton Williams.
          And, frankly, you heard Mr. Finger talk
      about this from the very beginning that
      Mr. Williams accepts some responsibility.  The
      plaintiff admits some fault on the part of
      Milton Williams is the legal cause of his death.
      That means smoking, if it played a role, a
      substantial contributing role in his death that
2877 plaintiff agrees that the decisions Milton
      Williams made, the decisions he made every day
      for many years to smoke and not try to quit were
      a legal cause of his death.
          Now, we believe the evidence shows that if
      showing contributed to his pharyngeal cancer,
      then it was Milton Williams' choice to smoke and
      to continue smoking and the responsibility was
      his.  If alcohol contributed to his pharyngeal
      cancer, then it was Milton Williams' choice to
      drink and to continue drinking and the
      responsibility is his.
          If HPV contributed to his pharyngeal cancer
      and it arose out of Milton Williams' choices and
      the responsibility is his.
          If poor dental hygiene contributed to his
      pharyngeal cancer, then it arose out of his
      choices and the responsibility is his.
          And if there's not enough evidence to
      determine by greater weight of evidence that
      smoking contributed substantially to his
      pharyngeal cancer, then your verdict should be
      for RJR.  And Dr. Bennett talked to you about
      that evidence yesterday.  And Mr. Burton is
      going to talk to you about it further when I'm
2878 done.
          Now, both Mr. Burton and I are going to
      speak with you, have the pleasure of speaking
      with you.  And the verdict form is going to be
      kind of our road map.  Mr. Burton is going to
      address questions 1, 2, 3 and 8 --
          MR. FINGER:  Your Honor, may we approach the
      bench?  I apologize.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
          THE COURT:  I've stopped the clock.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Okay.
          MR. FINGER:  I was not apprised of the fact
      that the Court is going to allow them to break
      up one closing argument.  I've never heard of
      it.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  We said that yesterday.
          MR. FINGER:  Did you hear that?  I didn't
      hear it.  Did they bring that up yesterday?
          THE COURT:  I didn't hear it.  I don't know
      what's the slightest bit objectionable about it.
      It's a two-hour argument, doesn't matter the
      slightest who is speaking.
          MR. FINGER:  Here's my objection.  When
2879 there was a witness testifying and somebody did
      the direct, that person was responsible for any
      objections.  I assume that whoever does the
      closing is going to do the entire closing, you
      know, I mean.  I mean, why is the person who
      does the direct responsible for objections on
      cross?  Why couldn't anybody do it?
          THE COURT:  To keep things orderly.
          MR. FINGER:  Well, to keep things orderly
      shouldn't the same person make the closing
      argument?
          THE COURT:  I see no point whatsoever.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Your Honor, we have the
      right --
          THE COURT:  I don't see any problem with it
      whatsoever.
          (The sidebar discussion was concluded and
the following was held in open court:)
          THE COURT:  You may resume your argument.
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Burton and I are
      going to split RJR's closing argument.
      Mr. Burton is going to address questions 1, 2, 3
      and 8 of the verdict form.  And this is a kind
      of a summary.  You've seen the verdict form
2880 already, Mr. Finger talked about it.
          And I'm going to address questions 4, 5, 6
      and 7.  And we'll both briefly probably touch on
      question 9.  But I want to say something about
      questions 1, 2 and 3 and you know what that is,
      that deals with class membership.  And I want to
      emphasize to you that all three of the questions
      have to be answered before plaintiff becomes a
      member of the class.  And the findings do not
      count in your assessment of whether the
      plaintiff is a member of the class.  And the
      findings don't apply when you're thinking about
      questions 1, 2, 3 in deciding that, as the judge
      has told you.
          Now, we said that we don't dispute that
      Milton Williams was addicted to cigarettes
      containing nicotine, but ultimately that's your
      choice to decide.  That's still your decision
      even though we don't dispute it.
          We believe that based on the evidence your
      answer to question 2 in the verdict form should
      be no.  And Mr. Finger spent quite a bit of time
      talking about this and Mr. Burton will in
      detail.  And we believe that the evidence shows
      that the plaintiff has failed to prove that
2881 addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was
      a legal cause of Milton Williams' pharyngeal
      cancer.
          And the question is why?  And there are two
      reasons.  The first reason is because he never
      seriously tried to quit, the evidence will show
      that.  So if cigarettes played a role, if
      cigarettes played a role in his disease, it
      wasn't because of his addiction, it was because
      of his own desire to smoke and that's where the
      fault lies.
          And the second reason is, remember that
      Milton Williams exposed himself to three other
      independent risk factors for pharyngeal cancer,
      alcohol, HPV and poor dental hygiene.  And as I
      said, Mr. Burton is going to talk to you about
      that further.
          Now, we believe, as the verdict form says,
      if your answer to question 2 is no, then your
      verdict is for defendant RJR and you should
      proceed no further except to date and sign this
      verdict form and return it to courtroom.
          And that's what we believe the evidence
      shows, ladies and gentlemen, that you should
      stop at question 2.
2882 Now, if you do proceed to question 3, we
      also believe that your answer to that question
      should be no and that your work should be over
      in this case.  But if you decide otherwise, I'm
      going to talk to you about some of the other
      questions on the verdict form and the evidence
      relating to it.
          Now, I'm going to address damages first,
      that's question number 9.  If you decide RJR is
      liable to plaintiff in some degree, even a small
      amount, then I want to discuss some of the
      evidence that you should consider.
          This is question 9.
          "What is the total amount of damages
      sustained by Virginia Williams for the loss of
      her husband's companionship and protection and
      for her mental pain and suffering as a result of
      Mr. Williams' death?"
          Now, Ms. Williams' lawyers have asked you
      for a lot of money, over 5 million dollars to
      compensate her.  And this is the instruction
      that you're going to get in connection with --
      that Judge Eig read to you.
          "In determining any damages to be awarded to
      Mr. Williams' personal representative for the
2883 benefit of Mr. Williams' surviving spouse
      Virginia Williams you shall consider elements of
      damage for which there is no exact standard for
      fixing the compensation to be awarded and any
      such award should be fair and just in light of
      the evidence regarding the following elements:
          Virginia Williams' loss of Mr. Williams'
      companionship and protection and her mental pain
      and suffering as a result of his death."
          Now, Ms. Williams is a nice lady, none of us
      disputes that, but if you decide that some award
      of money is appropriate, then you need to assess
      the quality of her relationship with Milton
      Williams.  That's what the award is based on.
          In order to assess that relationship you
      need to take into consideration the evidence
      that has been presented to you.  Some of it is
      good, but there's also other evidence that
      you've been presented.  And it is appropriate
      for you to consider all of that evidence in
      determining an appropriate award if you get that
      far.  We believe the evidence shows you should
      stop at question 2, but if you get that far,
      these are some of the things you should think
      about.
2884 Virginia Williams told you that she loved
      Milton Williams, but over a long period of time
      there were a number of instances when he did not
      show love for her and her family.  And that
      evidence is relevant to your determination.
          Now, when someone is deceased, we tend to
      remember the good things and not the bad and the
      incentive to focus on the good things is even
      greater when you want money to be awarded.  But
      it's your job to look at all of the evidence if
      you decide to consider awarding Virginia
      Williams money.  And we trust that you'll do
      that evenhandedly.
          Now, we respect Virginia Williams and we're
      not here to sully or disparage her marriage to
      Milton Williams.  But justice requires that you
      look at the negative evidence just like you look
      at the good evidence and when you're making that
      decision to award money damages.
          You told me during jury selection, if you
      remember, that you could do justice to a big
      company like RJR just like you could to an
      individual.  And justice requires that if you
      decide to award damages to Virginia Williams
      that you look at all of the evidence.
2885 Now, I'm not going to go through the details
      of the evidence that we went over when Virginia
      Williams was on the stand.  I'm not going to go
      in detail about the problems between her
      relationship in her marriage with Milton
      Williams, because I did that when she was
      testifying.  But the divorce papers are in
      evidence, the TRO, the temporary restraining
      order is in evidence and the report is in
      evidence.  And we ask that if you decide to make
      a damage award in the privacy of the jury room,
      the privacy of your deliberations that you look
      at that evidence and discuss it and consider it
      just like you consider the evidence that she
      gave you.  And this evidence should factor
      strongly into any money award if you decide to
      make one.
          Now there's a lot of paper that's going to
      go back to the jury room with you, but I'm
      talking about maybe 6 or 7 pages of the
      documents that I just told you about.
          Now, I want to talk about questions 4 and 7
      of the jury form if you get that far.  And as I
      said again, we will repeat, question 2 is
      important, we believe your answer should be no
2886 as to question 2 and that you shouldn't proceed
      any further, but if you do, I want to talk about
      the evidence now to questions 4 and 7.
          Questions 4 and 7, which Mr. Finger talked
      to you about, deal with defect and negligence.
          "Question 4.  Were the defective and
      unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the
      market by RJR a legal cause of Milton Williams'
      death."
          And "Question number 7.  Was the negligence
      of RJR a legal cause of Milton Williams' death?"
          Now if you get to these questions, there's
      something important that Judge Eig told you and
      I want to go over that.  And he said, RJR's mere
      selling, advertising and manufacturing
      cigarettes can't be a basis for your vote for
      the plaintiff in this case.  Here's the
      instruction that he gave you.
          The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a
      lawful activity protected by federal law.
      Therefore, I instruct you that RJ Reynolds
      cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing,
      selling or advertising cigarettes.  I also
      instruct you that the warning labels placed on
      the cigarette packages by RJR complied with
2887 federal law and RJR had no obligation to place
      any additional warnings on its cigarette packs.
      I also instruct you that as long as the
      cigarette pack bears the federally mandated
      warnings cigarette advertisements from July 1,
      1969 forward cannot be the subject of any claim
      that the advertisement undermined or neutralized
      the warnings or made them less effective.
          And with that instruction in mind, ladies
      and gentlemen, here's why if you get to question
      4 your answer to question 4 should be no.  The
      only allegation made against cigarettes here was
      by Dr. Proctor.  He said ammonia added to
      Marlboro and perhaps some other brands made them
      more addictive, gave them more nicotine kick.
      You heard Mr. Finger talk about that and you
      heard me cross examine Dr. Proctor.  We talked
      about pH and protonated nicotine and words like
      that and my tongue got a little thick saying all
      those big words.  But Dr. Proctor admitted on
      cross-examine that he had no idea if nicotine
      was added to unfiltered Pall Malls and that's
      the only cigarette that Milton Williams smoked.
      Dr. Proctor talked about Marlboros.  Marlboros
      are irrelevant here.
2888 And a document read by Mr. Finger about a
      Philip Morris executive is also irrelevant here.
      And I'm not going to go off on that tangent, but
      we need to focus, as the judge told you during
      his instructions, on RJR.
          But more importantly, when Dr. Proctor was
      on the stand he admitted that there was no
      scientific evidence that ammonia makes
      cigarettes more addictive.
          Here's what he said, that's the question I
      asked him, "Now to close off this area, to move
      on to another topic, I want to ask you:  You're
      not aware of any scientific paper in any
      peer-reviewed literature that concludes it is
      more difficult to quit smoking a cigarette with
      ammonia compounds than it is to quit smoking one
      without ammonia compounds, correct?"
          And Dr. Proctor said that he thinks that's a
      fair statement.
          And that's the only allegation that
      cigarettes were defective here or that RJR was
      negligent.
          So if you get to questions 4 and 7 your
      answer to those questions, based on the evidence
      based on their expert witness should be no.
2889 I want to move to questions 5 and 6.  As
      I've discussed with you, we believe the
      evidence -- based on the evidence in this case
      that you should not reach these questions,
      questions 5 and 6.
          And I'm going to discuss the evidence
      showing why your answer should be no.  Now
      that's a mouthful right there.  "Did Milton
      Williams reasonably rely to his detriment on
      information known to RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company
      that intentionally concealed or omitted a
      material fact that was unknown to Mr. Williams
      and not otherwise obvious to him concerning the
      health effects and/or the addictive nature of
      smoking cigarettes such that but for his
      reliance, he would have acted differently and
      avoided his death?"
          That's question 5.  It goes with question 6,
      which is a similar question.  And I'm not going
      to read it to you because it is a mouthful, but
      I want to break it down.
          What does this really mean?  It means that
      plaintiff must prove to you that but for the
      wrongful concealment of material information by
      RJR that Milton Williams would not have smoked
2890 and died of pharyngeal cancer caused by smoking.
          Now, Mr. Finger argued to you and during the
      trial Mr. Kaiser put on evidence that RJR knew
      and hid information about the addictiveness and
      risks of smoking.  They said that internal
      company documents marked secret and in the files
      of RJR prevented Milton Williams from making an
      informed decision to smoke or not to smoke and
      that RJR kept him smoking by a campaign of
      denial.
          Now, the evidence in this case has shown you
      that no concealment by RJR prevented Milton
      Williams from making an informed decision about
      smoking.  Why?  And the reason is you can't
      conceal something that is already common
      knowledge and that someone knows.  The evidence
      shows that Milton Williams was fully aware of
      the dangers and addictiveness of smoking but he
      chose to smoke because he liked it.  And I'm
      going to go over that evidence.
          But let me say a word about internal company
      documents, because Mr. Finger brought out a lot
      of documents during his closing argument and
      during particularly when Dr. Proctor was on the
      stand they kept saying denialist campaign, open
2891 controversy and things like that, conspiracy.
      And I want to address that right now.
          He talked about Claude Teague, that's the
      name that came up a lot during this case and
      during Mr. Finger's closing argument.
          Now, Claude Teague authored a document
      entitled A Survey of Cancer Research With
      Emphasis Upon Possible Carcinogens From Tobacco.
      And this document was brought out on closing and
      it was talked about at length by Dr. Proctor if
      you remember.  And according to Dr. Proctor,
      this document was the beginning of the
      concealment.  The Teague document they call it.
      This was the core document of what they said RJR
      began concealing information about the dangers
      of smoking.
          Dr. Teague was a research scientist at RJR
      and he wrote this memo in 1953.  And it does
      indicate that there's a link between smoking and
      lung cancer, but what they didn't tell you and
      what came out on cross-examination was that
      Dr. Proctor said -- what Dr. Teague did was
      review publicly available information.  And then
      he created this memo from publicly available
      information.  And there's a bibliography at the
2892 end of the memo citing the 78 sources of
      information that Dr. Teague used.
          Dr. Proctor admitted on cross-examination
      that all of those sources of information were
      publicly available.
          Here was his testimony:
          "This is the Teague survey.  Are you
      familiar with it?
          "Yes.
          "If we go to the very end of the document,
      he lists his sources of information.
          "That's right.
          "And I'm not going to go page by page, but
      there are 78 of them in the bibliography,
      correct?
          "Yes.
          "And all of those sources of information
      were publicly available at the time that Teague
      did his survey, correct?
          "Yes.  They're published articles."
          That was the testimony and that didn't come
      out when Mr. Finger was talking to you during
      closing argument.  There was nothing concealed
      about this.  This was a memo created like if I
      went on the Internet, took Internet information
2893 that was publicly available, wrote a memo about
      it, that's not hidden, that's not concealed,
      that's public.
          Now, Dr. Proctor also admitted up through
      1964 there was no information inside RJR that
      was not otherwise known outside RJR in published
      scientific literature.
          Here's his testimony:
          "And let me ask you a question leading up to
      1964, okay?
          "Okay.
          "You can't identify any fact about smoking
      and health that was known internally to Reynolds
      that was not otherwise known in published
      scientific literature in 1964, isn't that true?"
          Look at his answer:
          "I can't think of an overlap because there
      is so much that is published."  That's published
      outside.  "So I would have to agree with you on
      that."
          There's no concealment, ladies and
      gentlemen, there's no concealment here.
          Now, you'll recall that 1964 was a big year,
      that's when the Surgeon General published the
      report and released the report identifying the
2894 many dangers associated with smoking including
      lung cancer and throat cancer and that sort of
      thing.  So if there's nothing hidden inside of
      Reynolds up to 1964 and you have the Surgeon
      General's Report, there's no concealment.  It
      was supposed to begin with Teague and lead up in
      the '50s and the '60s and the facts don't bear
      that out.
          Now, the evidence in this case shows that
      Milton Williams was not fooled or misled by
      RJR's statement or conduct, he was not tuned
      into what tobacco companies were saying or
      looking to them for advice.  He was not taken in
      by any campaign of doubt or denial.  There's
      absolutely no evidence of that here.
          And remember this case is about Milton
      Williams.  And this case is not a detached kind
      of abstract investigation, and I think
      Mr. Finger admitted this, about RJR.  This is
      one lawsuit about one smoker, Milton Williams.
          There's no question that you'll find some
      dumb statements in the files of RJR that
      executives made, but Mr. Finger didn't really
      care whether those statements had any connection
      to Milton Williams' smoking decisions or not,
2895 because they didn't.  And you'll recall that
      Dr. Proctor had no idea one way or the other of
      what Milton Williams knew, what he heard, what
      he relied on, what his motivations were.  He
      knew nothing about the man.
          But Virginia Williams repeatedly told you
      that Milton Williams didn't rely on anything
      from tobacco companies, but the plaintiffs don't
      care about what Milton Williams relied on.  They
      just want you to get mad.  It's their plan to
      make you mad by showing stupid statements and
      mis -- in poor taste, statements and conduct in
      poor taste by tobacco executives and that might
      encourage you to award more money.  But, ladies
      and gentlemen, we trust, we trust that you will
      base your verdict on the evidence and how that
      evidence relates to Milton Williams, not
      arguments about concealment, denial and that
      sort of thing and conspiracy that don't at all
      relate in any way to Milton Williams.
          Now, you'll recall that during Dr. Proctor's
      testimony and during Mr. Finger's closing
      argument he referred to a bunch of newspaper
      articles, press releases, white papers and
      statements by CEOs saying that the link between
2896 smoking and lung cancer hadn't been proved, it
      was an open controversy or denial and that sort
      of thing.  The question for you is whether
      Milton Williams was influenced or relied to his
      detriment on any of those statements.  And the
      evidence shows that he was not.  And your answer
      to questions 5 and 6 should be no.
          Now, Dr. Proctor was the only witness who
      talked about tobacco company statements and
      you're going to have to take a close look at who
      Dr. Proctor is.  He admittedly and unabashedly
      is an anti-tobacco advocate.  You remember he
      testified that he knows nothing about Milton
      Williams, but he readily admitted, he comes into
      the courtroom, he wants the plaintiffs to win.
      He wants the plaintiffs to win because he said
      testifying against tobacco companies drives up
      their cost and hopefully in the end that will
      limit the amount of cigarettes and eventually
      put an end to cigarettes.  That's who
      Dr. Proctor is and that's his personal
      animosity.  And you should keep that in mind
      when you evaluate his testimony and what he told
      you.  He's certainly not an objective historian
      and that's what you want to look at.  He's
2897 admittedly biased, he says that, he tells you
      that.
          And you should keep one of the things in
      mind that the judge told you and that is in
      evaluating -- this is one of your
      instructions -- in evaluating the believability
      of any witness and the weight you will give the
      testimony of that witness you may properly
      consider -- and I skipped a couple of things, I
      want to go to the bottom and focus on that
      bottom line -- any interest that witness may
      have in the outcome of the case.
          And let's think about that in the context of
      who Dr. Proctor is.  He makes a lot of money
      testifying.  He admitted to about $30,000 a pop
      and he pops a lot.  And he doesn't have to do a
      lot to pop.  Why?  Because he told you he tells
      the same old story over and over again.  The
      smoker's story doesn't matter, who the smoker is
      doesn't matter.  He goes into a courtroom, he
      talks about denial, he talks about conspiracy
      and he'll do things like came out here, he won't
      tell you that the Teague document is based on
      publicly available literature.  That has to
      always come out on cross-examination.  That's
2898 who Dr. Proctor is and you have to consider that
      when you think about how much you rely on his
      testimony.
          An expert is supposed to bring his or her
      specialized knowledge to the courtroom, an
      expert is supposed to be fairly objective.  And
      as you saw, Dr. Proctor is anything but
      objective.  Many times he wouldn't answer my
      question directly, he was evasive.  And he tried
      to paint a terrible picture of RJR without
      having a clue as to whether any of the
      information he was talking about, any of that
      picture he was painting related in any way to
      the only smoker that matters in this courtroom,
      Milton Williams.
          Now, let me switch subjects, meaning a
      witness who did know Milton Williams, what did
      she say?  Virginia Williams testified that he
      didn't rely on anything and he wasn't influenced
      by tobacco company information.  She testified
      that she never heard him mention white papers,
      Frank Statement, CTR, TIRC, Tobacco Institute.
      And she only recalled him talking about tobacco
      advertising one time.  You remember what she
      said, they were watching TV back in the '60s,
2899 because it was on television, a Pall Mall ad
      comes on and he says, that's my brand.  How
      insignificant is that?  How insignificant is
      that?  Yet you hear about millions of dollars of
      advertising and how much RJR and the other
      tobacco companies spent -- spend.  But that's
      not about Milton Williams, that's not about the
      only smoker that should matter when you
      deliberate on this case.
          The issue here, ladies and gentlemen, as it
      relates to Milton Williams is about information.
      It's not about whether Milton Williams saw a
      particular document in the files of RJR or heard
      some statement about RJR executives.  And I'm
      going to go off the track a little bit here
      because it was distracting some of the things
      that Mr. Finger said about RJR.
          The Waxman hearings.  He didn't tell you the
      last executive before the tape stopped was the
      RJR executive.  And what the RJR executive was
      trying to say and he got cut off, and you've
      seen that tape twice, is that under the 1964
      classic definition of addiction, cigarettes are
      not addictive because that required
      intoxication, like alcohol, like cocaine, like
2900 heroin.  The definition was changed in 1988 that
      didn't require that.  And he was trying to
      explain that.  And the Congressman just said,
      I'll take that as a no and moved on.  The story
      is more complicated than what they portrayed it.
      And they misportrayed it, because he was not
      saying the cigarettes were not addictive as per
      the new definition, it was the old definition
      that he was going under.
          But the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen,
      is this case is about information and the
      evidence shows that the dangers of smoking were
      common knowledge and that Milton Williams knew
      them and he accepted them and he smoked because
      he liked it.
          Now, I want to talk about the evidence of
      what smokers like Milton Williams knew at the
      time he was smoking.  And you'll recall that on
      cross-examination I discussed with Dr. Proctor
      the detailed survey and polling information
      contained in the 1989 Surgeon General's Report.
      And one of the surveys that we went over was
      this one.  And you'll note the question being
      asked is:  Is cigarette smoking harmful to your
      health?
2901 And the last column over here, all adults,
      and this includes smokers and nonsmokers.  And
      this is 1964, 1966, 1970 and 1975; 81 percent,
      85 percent, 87 percent and 90 percent knew that
      smoking was harmful.
          And there was another Gallup Poll that we
      looked at as to whether people believed smoking
      was putting their health at risk.  And if you
      notice, cigarette smoking is harmful to your
      health.  They're personalizing this.  And what
      are the numbers?  Look at the numbers on the end
      here.  This is 1977 through '87; 90 to 94
      percent were saying that they know, they believe
      that smoking is harmful to their health.
          They're not being deluded, they're not in
      the dark.  And, importantly, these numbers take
      into consideration all the bad stuff that they
      tried to lay on you, any information from RJR or
      other tobacco companies, any conduct that
      Dr. Proctor talked about about CEOs talking
      about denial and open controversy and all that,
      these numbers took that into consideration.  And
      you saw they went from 90 to 94 percent.
          So the bottom line, what does that tell you?
      It tells you that whatever they say the tobacco
2902 companies are doing, it's not blunting folks,
      normal people getting the word or knowing that
      smoking is dangerous.  That's what these high
      polling numbers tell you.
          Now, earlier I said you can't conceal
      something that's commonly known.  And you've
      seen a lot of information in this case about the
      common knowledge and information on the dangers
      and addictiveness of smoking.  I'm not going to
      go back into detail over all of the stuff that
      you've seen, all the evidence that you've seen,
      but you'll recall, and Mr. Finger talked about
      it, went back to Columbus and his experience
      with his sailors and the Native Americans.
          And why is this important?  It's important
      because this is in the fabric, this is common
      knowledge.  It's like fish in water.  It's not
      something that you would notice if you're in
      water.  Smoking is dangerous and people have
      known that for hundreds and hundreds of years.
      That's what Columbus wrote, that his sailors
      were having a hard time quitting.  He didn't use
      the word "addiction," he didn't say "habit," but
      it's the same concept, ladies and gentlemen.
      And that was over 500 years ago -- over 600
2903 years ago.
          Now, we move forward to King James.  And
      King James said -- this is the King James of
      King James Bible fame -- tobacco is bewitching.
      And he said this in 1604.  And he also said, "A
      custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the
      nose, harmful to the brain and dangerous to the
      lungs."
          And that's what I want to focus on.  And
      that was that long ago.
          And then we move forward and you heard about
      John Quincy Adams, our sixth president and how
      he said that in his early youth he was addicted
      to tobacco and two of its mysteries, smoking it
      and chewing it.  And this was 1845.  And at this
      time it was common knowledge that smoking was
      addictive.
          Then we move to the 20th century and you
      heard evidence on that and we talked about a
      Florida Health Note from the Florida Department
      of Health from June 1906.  And what does it say?
      It says, "Today the cigarette is looked upon by
      all smokers as the very worse form of
      addiction."
          And this is 35 years before Milton Williams
2904 was born.
          And then we talked about common knowledge
      and the abundance of public information on
      smoking's dangerousness.  And we talked about
      Reader's Digest, and you remember, I'm not going
      to go over all the articles, but this one from
      1941 is important because it's by a common
      person, Gene Tunney.  It's about Joe Louis and
      he talks about nicotine here.  You remember that
      Mr. Finger talked about a Teague document that
      talked about we're in the business of selling
      nicotine and nicotine is why people smoke in
      1972.  This is 1941 and this is a common person
      saying essentially the same thing.
          "The cause and most of the trouble is, of
      course, nicotine.  No one has ever denied that
      nicotine is poison."
          It's no secret, ladies and gentlemen, this
      is Reader's Digest.
          Then we move to the 1940s and '50s when
      Milton Williams was a young person and still a
      nonsmoker.  And we talked about some of the
      articles in common magazines.  This is common
      knowledge about smoking.  This is Reader's
      Digest from the 1920s through the '40s.  And we
2905 went into some of these, we talked about a few
      of these with Dr. Proctor and how there was an
      abundance of information that smoking was two
      things, it was dangerous and it was addictive.
      That wasn't a secret.  It wasn't a tobacco
      company secret.  It was common knowledge.
          This one speaks for itself Cancer By the
      Carton 1952.  We discussed this one also.  Once
      again in Reader's Digest, a commonly, widely
      spread magazine.  And you remember Dr. Proctor
      said at that time it was like the Internet
      today, a lot of folk had access to it.
          Then we looked at the 1950s when the more
      scientific information was coming out.
      Dr. Wynder, the mouse skin paintings.  And we
      talked about that and how it wasn't just the
      scientists debating this, this information was
      available to the public, it was on newsstands
      back then, you would see this.  So this wasn't
      hidden and folk knew that smoking was dangerous.
          And then we also talked about Leroy Burney
      and you recall I asked Dr. Proctor about Leroy
      Burney.  This is 1957.  And to make this
      personal, Milton Williams, if he was smoking
      then, he just began smoking.  He's about 15
2906 years old, he was born in 1942.  This is not an
      executive, not a scientist in private industry,
      this is the Surgeon General of the United
      States.  His main role is safeguarding the
      public health.  And he's telling folks that the
      position is, his position is that we have
      informed the public through the excellent
      coverage in the press, the radio and TV.  That's
      the Surgeon General talking.
          And then in 1964 the Surgeon General's
      Report comes out and it's widely spread news,
      it's in all the newspapers all over the country.
      It is a big deal.  And I'm not going to go back
      to the slide, but you remember the slides of the
      surveys that I showed you of whether people knew
      smoking was dangerous.  It was all in the 90
      percent.  Mr. Finger said folk didn't know, folk
      did know.  This was a big story and a big deal.
      And it was in the Miami Herald, the Jacksonville
      Journal and it was on all three of the news
      channels at that time, smoking is dangerous.
      And we looked at news clips.  And even
      Dr. Proctor admitted that this was a huge story.
      And you heard testimony in the case that Milton
      Williams was a big TV watcher, that he liked
2907 watching TV from back in the '60s, he liked
      watching the news and he liked keeping abreast
      of what was going on.  And anybody like that
      could not have missed this.  He was 22 years
      old.  He was intelligent.  He could read.  And
      this was the biggest story on the planet at that
      time.
          We saw the clip from Harry Reasoner.  And I
      want to play this one just so you see what was
      on the news January 11th, 1964.
          (Video clip was played.)
          VOICE:  This is the CBS news extra on
      smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon
      General's Committee.
          VOICE:  Almost from the moment that
      cigarettes were introduced they were attacked,
      but the attacks took a new turn 10 years ago and
      culminated in today's report by the Surgeon
      General's Committee.  This, in summary, is what
      the committee says.
          Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung
      cancer in men and data on women smokers points
      the same way.
          Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of
      cancer of the larynx and probably the most
2908 important cause of chronic bronchitis.
          Cigarette smoking may be related to other
      lung diseases.
          Male smokers have a much higher death rate
      from heart disease, although it's not proven
      that smoking is the cause.
          In short, the committee says if you smoke
      cigarettes you increase your chances of dying
      early.  The sooner you start, the more you
      smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your
      chances are.
          In this kind of a country it comes down to
      you whether you like it or not.  No one is going
      to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite
      clear that no one is going to tell him it's good
      for him either.  The decision is his, the
      decision and the health that may depend on it.
          This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. JACK WILLIAMS:  Mr. Finger said at one
      point that Milton Williams didn't live in a
      cave.  I think I heard that when I was sitting
      over there.  I agree with that, he was not
      living in a cave.  He was very likely hearing a
      news report like that in 1964.  And no one, no
2909 one could sincerely say they don't know anything
      or have a clue about smoking is dangerous when
      you hear a story like that.  You can't say that.
          And the jury charge -- and I read over it,
      but there's a certain language you need to pay
      attention to.  It talks about "not otherwise
      known to Milton Williams" when it talks about
      the reliance.  If you look at 5 and 6 it says
      "not otherwise known to Milton Williams."  This
      is information that is known to Milton Williams
      and some of the other information that I showed
      you too.  And that's why for 5 and 6 your answer
      should be no, that's one of the reasons if you
      get that far down.  But there's more.
          We talked, as we continued and not only with
      Dr. Proctor on the stand that millions of
      American smokers who quit and they quit in that
      period of time from 1966 to 1970, 13 million
      quit, in fact, right after the 1966 pack
      warnings went on.  And every pack of cigarettes
      had that warning, but that wasn't the only
      warning, that was a caution statement.  And
      Mr. Finger disparaged that a little bit, but in
      1970 it got stronger.  And in 1985 it got even
      stronger than that.  Smoking causes lung cancer,
2910 heart disease, emphysema and may complicate
      pregnancy.  And those were rotating warnings.
      And one of those was on every pack of
      cigarettes.
          You'll recall that Virginia Williams
      testified that Milton was intelligent, he could
      read and there's no reason she knows of that he
      didn't read and understand the warnings.
          And Dr. Proctor admitted on
      cross-examination that during the 1950s and '60s
      information on smoking and health was abundant.
      Here's what he said.
          I'm not going to read it all, I'll just
      focus on that bottom question and answer.
          "And throughout the 1950s and '60s
      scientists continued to study smoking and the
      news media continued to publish the results and
      talk about the results of scientific research?
          "That's correct.  It was still news."
          We also talked about public service
      announcements, that's when you have the
      celebrities go on TV like Ed Asner -- and don't
      worry, I'm not going to show his tape again --
      talking about they smoked, they quit, The Great
      Smoke Out, or I have a smoking-related disease
2911 and why you should quit.  Those were abundant in
      the 1970s and '80s.
          And you heard Dr. Goldman testify.  He was
      plaintiff's addiction expert.  He was the lung
      doctor.  He is another witness who testifies a
      lot against tobacco companies.  He had an edge
      to him.  You could tell that when he was sitting
      in the chair and I was asking him questions.
      He's testified against tobacco companies for 15
      years.  But he said, he admitted, and he's been
      practicing medicine sine the 1970s, that he
      never met a patient who didn't know smoking was
      dangerous.  That's what he said.  That's his
      testimony.
          And I'm not going to read it, but that's
      what he testified to, it goes back to 1977 and
      he's had thousands and thousands of patients and
      none of them didn't know that smoking was
      dangerous.  And that's the plaintiff's expert
      saying that.
          And he also said that Milton Williams, he's
      sure, new the dangers too and I think Mr. Finger
      admitted that.  But it wasn't just like when
      Milton started to get sick that he knew the
      dangers.  He knew the dangers when he started
2912 smoking through the '50s and the '60s based on a
      lot of the media coverage that you've seen.  And
      I'm just showing you the tip of the iceberg.
          Milton Williams in trying to quit, the
      testimony needs to be clear when you think about
      it, Dr. Goldman testified and Mrs. Williams
      testified that she bought him patches.  And it
      was unclear of when the date happened, when that
      happened.  Patches were not available
      over-the-counter until 1996.  And Ms. Williams
      said she got them.  No evidence of prescription
      there.  They were available by prescription in
      1992.  So 1996 is when Milton Williams finally
      tried the patches.  And you recall that the
      testimony was he only tried them for a week and
      he smoked while he tried them.  The bottom line
      is he never made a serious attempt to quit
      smoking at all.
          Now, I talked about common knowledge and I
      want to come more home here and about the
      messages that Milton Williams got about smoking
      being dangerous from family members, people who
      matter.  It makes a difference if you see
      something on TV, that's information and you get
      that, too.  But when somebody who loves you
2913 says, stop smoking, it's hurting you, you would
      listen.  You get the message hopefully.
          And Milton Williams got the message from a
      bunch of family members all the way up the line.
      You remember his sister-in-law Janice testified
      by deposition yesterday.  She told him smoking
      was bad for him and that he smoked too much in
      the 1980s.  And Janice said that he simply blew
      her off and said smoking is what he liked to do.
          This was the testimony:
          "What did you tell him in the 1980s?
          "Why does he do it all the time?  He just
      said, it's something I like to do, that's
      smoking.
          "Did you tell him that it was harmful to his
      health?
          "From what I had read and heard it was, yes,
      I mentioned it to him.
          "And what did he tell you?
          "He just laughed it off."
          That's not somebody who's trying to quit or
      doesn't know, ladies and gentlemen.
          "And every time you mentioned to him
      something about smoking were you telling him
      that it was bad for his health?
2914 "Yes.
          "And would he laugh it off every time you
      told him that?
          "He would say something like, sister-in-law,
      I'll be all right, you know, in that type of
      fashion, or basically getting away from that.
          "Blowing you off?
          "Yeah, blowing me off basically so I didn't
      keep elaborating on it."
          That's not someone who's been taken, been
      had, been fooled by the tobacco company.  That's
      somebody who knows smoking is dangerous and
      enjoys smoking.  And folk do that, the people
      now who smoke, Mr. Finger was talking about,
      it's out, the mystery's gone.  People still like
      to smoke.  And that's one of the rights we have
      in America is to smoke so people are allowed to
      do it.  So it's not like Milton Williams just
      because he smoked he didn't know.  He did know
      and he smoked because he liked it.
          Now, Milton Williams had a number of other
      personal warnings about the dangers of smoking.
      Virginia, his wife, told him over the years,
      quit smoking, cut back, you heard that
      testimony.
2915 And she testified that she had an uncle by
      the name of Charlie Weaver who died in the 1970s
      of what she believed to be smoking-related COPD.
      She had another uncle by the name of Ivory
      Wheeler who died in the 1980s from what she
      believed to be smoking-related COPD.
          She has family members dying of
      smoking-related disease, she believed it was
      smoking related in the 1970s and '80s.  It's not
      a secret to them that smoking can harm you.
          Now, during this period of time she tried to
      get Milton to quit smoking.  She said she did.
      She threw away the ashtrays, but the problem is
      she wanted him to quit.  He didn't want to quit.
      And he's the smoker.  And he's the one that
      counts.  You can't make somebody do something
      that they don't want to do.  He knew smoking was
      dangerous.  He enjoyed smoking.  He liked it.
      Janice testified to that.  So he did it.
          Then in 1988 Virginia's own brother Felton
      Williams died of lung cancer.  And she believed
      that that lung cancer was caused by smoking.
          And you heard Pamela Denson, her daughter,
      testify that she became very worried about her
      father and told him what happened to Uncle
2916 Felton is going to happen to you.  And Pam had
      told her father a long time ago when she was in
      the 8th grade, I believe the testimony was, back
      in the late '70s, early '80s, I learned in
      health class smoking is dangerous, daddy, you
      ought to quit.  And he didn't.
          She said he tried to cut back, but smokers
      always -- and Dr. Goldman testified to that --
      will say they're doing something and they don't
      do it, if they really don't want to quit.  And
      the evidence shows that he really did not want
      to quit.
          Then in 1990, you heard the testimony on
      this, the dentist story, serious mouth problems,
      nobody disputes that.  The dentist tells him,
      smoking is affecting your teeth and it's
      affecting your health.  And Virginia continues
      to warn him.  And still nothing.  He continues
      to smoke because he wants to.
          Then you heard testimony in the 1990s a
      family friend Jimmy Johnson says that he has
      smoking-related COPD.  He tells Milton and
      Virginia that smoking caused his COPD and still
      Milton continues to smoke because he wants to,
      ladies and gentlemen.  That's clear here.
2917 So not only was there common knowledge, but
      Milton had close family relations telling him
      for decades that smoking was dangerous.  I
      believe the first was his mom in the 1960s.  And
      he had a professional, a dentist telling him
      that as well.
          So the bottom line is that your answers to
      numbers 5 and 6, if you get that far, if you get
      that far, should be "no" based on the evidence.
      You can't conceal, you can't trick, you can't
      lie to somebody about something they already
      know.
          Now, there is no evidence what RJR did or
      did not do or said or did not say something that
      Milton Williams relied on to his detriment or
      that anything RJR did that affected his smoking
      decisions in any detrimental way.  Remember,
      simply making, selling and advertising
      cigarettes cannot make RJR liable here.  No
      matter how many ads they put on the screen, RJR
      can't be liable because it advertised its
      cigarettes.
          And there's no evidence that Milton Williams
      relied detrimentally on any ad anyway.
      Mr. Finger told you that.  He knew that smoking
2918 was dangerous and that it was addictive and it
      was obvious to him for many years.
          My mother used to tell me something when I
      wouldn't do the right thing when I was a little
      boy.  She used to say, you can take a horse to
      the well, but you can't make it drink.
      Mrs. Williams wanted Milton to stop smoking; his
      daughter wanted him to stop smoking; some other
      family members wanted him to stop smoking, but
      the problem is Milton did not want to stop
      smoking and he didn't.
          It's not about addiction, it's about the
      fact that he liked smoking and he did smoke.
          So ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for
      your attention and I hope you will give my
      partner Dal Burton the same wonderful attention
      you've given me.  Thank you.


          MR. BURTON:  Good morning, ladies and
      gentlemen.  We're in the home stretch.  We're in the home stretch.  I'm going to talk to you
      probably for a little bit less than an hour and
      then Mr. Kaiser or Mr. Finger will talk to you
      for a little bit.
          And what I wanted to do is remind you what I
      said in opening 10 days ago.  This case is about
      Milton Williams, it's about pharyngeal cancer
      and it's about choice, control and
      responsibility.
          Now, my partner Jack -- and I'm going to
      refer to him as Jack because we have so many
      Williams in this case.  My partner Jack talked
      to you yesterday about what Milton knew and when
      he knew it.  He demonstrated to you that Milton
      didn't see or rely on anything that Mr. -- that
      Reynolds said.  He demonstrated to you that
      Milton never changed his behavior based on
      anything that Reynolds said.
          And Mr. Finger made a very interesting, what
      I was startled by, he said in his argument
      yesterday, I can't say anything they did,
      meaning Reynolds, caused Milton to smoke.
          So I'm not going to talk about those issues
      anymore.  What I'm going to do is I'm going to
      talk about the second two; that is, pharyngeal cancer and choice, control and responsibility.
      And what I'm going to do is I'm going to try to
      avoid repeating things yesterday, because I know
      there's been a lot of repetition in this trial.
      But some of it is going to be unavoidable
      because in talking about those two issues I'm
      going to have to talk about addiction and I'm
      going to have to talk about some medical issues.
          But as you've heard, the first thing that
      you do when you return to the jury room is you
      have these three questions to decide class
      membership:  Was he addicted to cigarettes
      containing nicotine?  Was addiction to
      cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of
      his cancer?  And was pharyngeal cancer a legal
      cause of his death?
          Now, yesterday the first question, let's
      look at that.  Yesterday we heard a lot of
      discussion about that.  And as I told you when
      we started, we do not contest that Milton
      Williams was addicted as that term is used
      today.  But when you look in those instructions
      that the judge has given you, you're not going
      to find a definition of the word "addiction" or
      "addicted."  It's not a legal word.  It's a lay word.  It means different things to different
      people.
          And so when you decide how to answer that
      question, you should use your collective wisdom
      and collective judgment based upon what you've
      heard in this courtroom.  But remember, you as
      the jury, as the fact finder, are free to accept
      or reject expert testimony on that subject.
          So let's go to the second question.  Was
      addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a
      legal cause of Milton Williams' pharyngeal
      cancer?
          Ladies and gentlemen, this is really a
      two-step process.  The first step you have to
      prove is addiction to cigarettes containing
      nicotine was the legal cause of his smoking and
      then you have to prove that the smoking was the
      legal cause of the pharyngeal cancer.
          So what I want to do for a moment is I want
      to focus on that first question.  And what this
      question asks you to determine is whether Milton
      Williams' addiction to cigarettes was the legal
      cause of his smoking.  Now, what the plaintiffs
      want you to believe is that his addiction was so
      strong and so powerful that there wasn't anything he could do to stop, that he was
      deprived of his free will and that he was
      deprived of his free choice.  It's as if he got
      on a train, a nonstop train from Jacksonville,
      Florida in 1958 and that train didn't stop until
      1996 when he got to the veterans' hospital.
          But, ladies and gentlemen, you've heard the
      evidence, you know what it is.  You know that
      train stopped several times along the way.  It
      stopped in 1964 when the Surgeon General's
      Report came out and was published on TV.  You
      saw the Harry Reasoner description about it
      yesterday.
          The train stopped in 1966 when the warnings
      first went on the packs.  Now, remember, ladies
      and gentlemen, that warning is on every pack of
      cigarettes.  If he smoked a pack and a half of
      cigarettes a day, every time he picked up that
      pack there was a warning looking back at him.
      And I did some simple math, that would be about
      425,000 warnings when he picked up those
      cigarettes.
          The train stopped again in 1969 when his
      wife first told him to stop smoking.
          The train stopped yet again when the PSA warnings, the public service announcements
      started to air.  You remember the one we played.
      I'm going to play it for you again today.
          (Video clip was played.)
          VOICE:  We receive many warnings in our
      life, and sometimes they can save our lives.
          This message is brought to you by the
      American Cancer Society.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. BURTON:  Now, ladies and gentlemen,
      we've heard some discussion about how much
      Milton Williams watched TV.  I don't have the
      document with me, but I noticed last night in
      reviewing some records, there's a medical record
      in which he described his hobby as watching TV.
      So there's no doubt that Mr. Williams watched a
      lot of TV.
          The train stopped again in 1978 or '79 when
      Pam Williams warned her father of the risk after
      an 8th-grade science class.
          Stopped in 1980 or '81 when his
      sister-in-law warned him for the first time of
      the risks of smoking.
          It stopped in 1983 when Pam warned him a
      second time after her 10th-grade health class. It stopped in 1988 when Uncle Jack died.
      You remember, Pam went to her father and said,
      Look, you don't want to end up like Uncle Jack.
      You need to stop smoking.
          And the train stopped in 1990 when
      Mr. Williams was treated for dental problems.
          So as you think about whether he had the
      ability to quit, did he have the ability to get
      off that train.  Think about Dr. Goldman.  You
      remember Dr. Goldman.  He came from Tampa.  He
      was the guy that didn't really like to answer a
      question, particularly when my partner Jack was
      asking him questions.  He wouldn't even concede
      that the Surgeon General's Report or the
      National Cancer Institute were authoritative
      sources of information on smoking and health.
          But when he was pressed, he admitted two
      things.  He admitted, one, that being addicted
      to smoking does not mean you cannot quit.  And
      the other thing he admitted, and this is
      critical, is that the key is motivation.
          Now, what, if anything, does motivation have
      to do with being successful at quitting smoking
      for an addicted person?
          Again I'd say you have to try.  You have to make earnest attempts to try to discontinue
      whatever it is, whether it's smoking or cocaine
      or heroin.  You have to be motivated to quit.
          Ladies and gentlemen, what that means is
      nobody can force Milton Williams to quit
      smoking.  He had to decide that he wanted to
      quit and he had to decide to quit.
          Dr. Goldman agrees:  "And you would agree
      that no one could force Milton Williams to quit
      smoking, correct?
          "That had to be a decision that he came up
      with on his own."
          And remember what Dr. Goldman also said, If
      a person doesn't try to quit, they never will.
          And I'll submit to you, ladies and
      gentlemen, there's not a truer statement made in
      this courtroom in this trial.  If you don't try
      to do something, if you don't decide, you don't
      try, you're never going to do it.
          And what is the evidence here, what is the
      evidence here with respect to whether Milton
      Williams wanted to quit, decided to quit or
      tried to quit?  We don't have to look at the
      experts.  We can look at the testimony from his
      immediate family. Mrs. Williams, "But he never told you
      directly that he wanted to stop smoking and you
      never heard him tell anybody else that, did
      you?"
          And his daughter Pam, "He never said to you
      I've made the decision to quit, would you help
      me.
          "No, sir, that wasn't his statement.
          "And to your knowledge, he never made that
      statement to your mom.
          "I don't know."
          And, ladies and gentlemen, his actual
      behavior, his actual behavior, as best we can
      tell, because we didn't have a chance to talk to
      Milton, his actual behavior demonstrates that he
      didn't want to quit and he never tried to quit.
      He never threw away his cigarettes.  He never
      threw away the ashtrays.  Ms. Williams did one
      time, and what did he do?  He went out and got
      another one.  He never went to a stop smoking
      clinic.  He never --
          (There was a cell phone interruption in the
proceedings.)
          JUROR RUEDA:  Sorry.
          MR. BURTON:  That's all right. He never tried hypnosis.  He never sought
      medical help to quit.
          And, again, the one time Mrs. Williams got
      patches for him he disregarded the instructions
      and continued to smoke.
          So, ladies and gentlemen, the bottom line
      is, if he was on this train, he never got out of
      his seat.  He never stood up.  He never took a
      step toward the door of that train.  And you
      know why?  Because addiction isn't what was
      making him smoke.  He didn't want to quit.  He
      never tried to quit.
          And his daughter Janice told us exactly
      that.  "Did you ever hear Mr. Williams refer to
      himself as addicted?
          "I don't think he said that.  He just said,
      'This is what I like to do.'  Because I said
      something to him about it, and he said, 'That is
      what I like to do.'"
          And later on she said the same thing.
          "What did he tell you in the early '80s?
          "Why does he do it all the time?  He just
      said, 'It's something I like to do.'"
          And, ladies and gentlemen, we didn't get a
      chance to talk to Milton because he died prematurely 15 years ago.  But we don't have
      many conversations and many statements directly
      from him.  This provides you with an insight
      into the man, what makes him tick, and what this
      tells you is that he smoked because he wanted to
      and because he liked it.
          So why is this significant?  Well, it's
      significant for really two reasons.  The first
      comes from Dr. Goodwin.  "If Mr. Williams had
      quit smoking in 1966 when he would have had a
      much lower risk of contracting pharyngeal
      cancer, correct?
          "Yes.
          "In fact, it would have been almost being
      that of a never-smoker, wouldn't it?
          "Thirty years, yes."
          So what that's telling you, ladies and
      gentlemen, if he had quit in 1966 when the
      warnings first went on the pack we probably
      wouldn't be here today because he would never
      have gotten pharyngeal cancer.
          Now, I want to talk about Dr. Goodwin in a
      minute.
          Mr. Finger talked a lot about Dr. Goodwin,
      told you how clinical he was and how knowledgeable he was.
          You know what, I'm going to talk a lot about
      Dr. Goodwin.  When we get to the medical case,
      I'm going to show you testimony from
      Dr. Goodwin.  And I want you to pay careful
      attention to what Dr. Goodwin said and what he
      didn't say.  Because Dr. Goodwin's testimony is
      going to demonstrate to you why the plaintiffs
      can't prove that smoking was a legal cause of
      Milton Williams' cancer.
          So let's go -- secondly, secondly, what this
      evidence shows is that the plaintiffs cannot
      prove that the addiction was the legal cause of
      the smoking.  He didn't want to quit.  He never
      decided to quit, and he never tried to quit.
          Remember, the Surgeon General defines a
      serious quit attempt as 24 hours.  He didn't
      quit for a day.
          So let's move to the second question.  This
      is whether smoking causes pharyngeal cancer.
      Well, this is a medical causation question, it's
      a medical causation question.  And so you have
      to decide whether smoking was the legal cause of
      the pharyngeal cancer.
          As I said, I'm going to talk a lot about Dr. Goodwin, but as we do this, I want you to
      remember the hypothetical or the example I gave
      you in opening about texting and driving and
      having an accident.  Remember, I'm driving down
      the road and I'm texting, which is negligent, I
      come up, I look up and I see the stoplight and I
      put on my brakes and the brakes fail and I still
      have an accident.  In that case the texting is
      not the legal but-for cause of the accident
      because if you take it out of the equation, the
      brakes still would have failed and you still
      would have had the accident.
          Well, in this case, ladies and gentlemen,
      Milton's smoking is like the texting; the HPV,
      alcohol and poor dentition are like the brake
      failure, and the cancer is like the accident.
          So what they have to prove to you, what they
      have to prove to you is if you took smoking out
      of the equation that Milton Williams would never
      have gotten pharyngeal cancer.  You didn't hear
      anybody tell you that in this case.  And we're
      going to go over that.  Dr. Goodwin didn't tell
      you that.  With everything Dr. Goodwin came in
      here and said, he never said, you know, if you
      took smoking out of this question I don't think Mr. Williams would have gotten pharyngeal
      cancer.  He didn't tell you that.
          So let's go through this.  Four risk
      factors, independent risk factors:  Alcohol,
      HPV, poor dental care and tobacco.  Each one is
      an independent risk factor.  That means all by
      itself it can cause the disease.  That's what it
      means.
          And remember what Dr. Goodwin said.  I've
      gotten ahead of myself.
          Remember what Dr. Goodwin said, "Not
      everyone that smokes gets pharyngeal cancer.  In
      fact, it's only a very small percentage of
      smokers that get pharyngeal cancer."
          And remember what the other experts said, if
      you smoke and you get pharyngeal cancer, you
      know what, that doesn't necessarily mean the
      smoking caused the cancer.
          Now, Dr. Goodwin told you that he, in his
      view, tobacco and alcohol acted together to
      cause Mr. Williams', Milton Williams' pharyngeal
      cancer.
          But let's look what else he said.  "You are
      agreeing with me that there's nothing in the
      records other than what you saw in terms of history that would have determined whether
      alcohol or tobacco as the cause.
          "Yes, I'm agreeing with you."
          So there's nothing in the records that says
      alcohol or tobacco or poor dentition or HPV
      caused this disease.
          He went further.  He said, When you look at
      the cells, when you take a microscope and you
      look at the cells, you know what, there are not
      any features in the cells that you can identify
      with tobacco or alcohol or, for that matter,
      poor dentition.
          So, ladies and gentlemen, but what he did
      say, though, is, you know what, there are
      objective criteria for HPV.  When it starts on
      the tonsils, it's most likely to be HPV.  If
      it's poorly differentiated nonkeratinizing and
      basaloid features.  That's Dr. Goodwin.  Those
      are objective features that are in this
      particular cancer.
          Mr. Finger made a big deal out of these
      objective features and he asked a lot of
      questions of Dr. Bennett.  But he can't change
      the evidence.  He can't change the fact that
      those features right there are in this tissue. Dr. Goodwin tried to run from that.  He
      tried to run from that.  He said, oh, no, no,
      no, back in 1996 we didn't have the testing.
      People with HPV tumors don't recover better -- I
      mean, don't recover as well -- or recover
      better, things like that.  But Dr. Goodwin also
      admitted that there wasn't any testing available
      for HPV in 1996.  He told you as of 2002 HPV was
      not even a risk factor for the disease.  And we
      have an epidemic of that disease today.
          He acknowledged to you that the literature
      on pharyngeal cancer and its relationship to
      poor dental care is exactly the same today as it
      was in 2002 for HPV.
          And he also told you HPV tumors can be
      deeply invasive and HPV patients can have a poor
      diagnosis.
          And Dr. Bennett told you that the HPV virus
      occurs in smokers, people in their 50s and the
      African-American population.
          But most importantly, ladies and gentlemen,
      I want you to look at this.  These two experts
      that came in here -- and I asked
      Dr. Gomez-Fernandez the same thing.  Mr. Finger
      told you that Dr. Goodwin said yesterday that he didn't see anything to suggest HPV.  "So the
      bottom line, as a medical professional,
      Dr. Goodwin, is that you cannot rule out HPV as
      a cause of his cancer; is that right?
          "That's true.
          "And when you talked to your pathologist,
      the one that you sent the slides to.
          "Yes.
          "She told you that in her opinion it could
      be HPV or tobacco or alcohol, right?
          "The pathologist can't tell."
          So, ladies and gentlemen, the two experts
      that the plaintiffs brought you acknowledge that
      this tissue had objective features of HPV, and,
      in fact, can't rule it out as a cause of the
      disease.
          But there's more.  Dr. Goodwin told you that
      there are tests that you can run for alcohol or
      tobacco.  "Let's take HPV and put it off to the
      side, just looking at the cell, is there any
      test that you can run that would determine
      whether the pharyngeal cancer was caused by
      exposure to alcohol?
          "No.
          Is there any test you could run that would determine or tell you whether the pharyngeal
      cancer was caused by the exposure to tobacco?
          "I believe there are some studies that show
      mutation associations with tobacco and alcohol,
      but I couldn't quote you them in detail.
          "And certainly none of those were run in
      this case.
          "No."
          And at a later point he says, "If a person
      is exposed to more than one risk factor, looking
      at the cellular material, is there any way to
      tell which one it is?
          "No."
          So the medical records don't tell you.  The
      objective criteria, there's nothing for alcohol
      and tobacco, you can't test for alcohol or
      tobacco or poor dentition.  But you know we can
      test for HPV.
          What that means, ladies and gentlemen, is
      there's no scientific way that we can determine
      which of these risk factors actually caused his
      disease.  That's what Dr. Bennett told you and
      that is what Dr. Goodwin is telling you.  These
      scientific tests, which is what they do, they
      can't determine -- they certainly can't point to the two risk factors that he identifies.
      There's no reference in the medical records,
      there's no objective evidence and there's no
      test.
          Now, ladies and gentlemen, this is a
      significant case, as you know.  Ms. Williams, as
      we learned yesterday, is asking for a lot of
      money, asking for a lot of money.  And as a
      result, we've had to talk about some things that
      make us uncomfortable.  One of those things is
      HPV testing.  And we know today HPV testing is
      available.  But, ladies and gentlemen, we didn't
      inject that into this case.  Mr. Finger raised
      it with Dr. Bennett.  And what he said was:  "In
      those hours of depositions, Dr. Bennett, did you
      ever see where the defendants asked her whether
      she had been tested?"
          And then he went on a second time and he
      said, "Dr. Bennett, when you had a chance to
      talk to the lawyers, did you ever ask them to
      ask her whether she'd been tested?"
          And then yesterday Mr. Finger made a big
      deal of it again.
          Well, ladies and gentlemen, I'm compelled to
      respond to that.  Mr. Finger represents Ms. Williams.  Mr. Finger has had access to
      Ms. Williams for years.
          Mr. Finger and the plaintiffs have the
      burden of proof to prove all of these issues by
      the greater weight of the evidence.  If the
      greater weight of the evidence does not support
      plaintiff's position on these issues then your
      verdict should be for the defendant.
          Now, ladies and gentlemen, if this was such
      an important issue for Mr. Finger, why didn't he
      have the test done and then ask her the question
      at the deposition?  Why didn't he have the test
      done and ask her when she sat right there for
      two to three hours?
          Don't you think if the answer to that
      question was, yes, I've been tested but the test
      came back negative he would have asked?
          The only reasonable inference you can draw
      from that, ladies and gentlemen -- and
      Mr. Finger talked about drawing inferences --
          MR. FINGER:  Judge, I'm going to object and
      I'd like to go sidebar on this.
          THE COURT:  All right.
          (The following discussion was held at
sidebar:) MR. FINGER:  I'm objecting to this line of
      questioning.  The jury cannot draw any inference
      from my failure to ask any particular question.
      They can draw an inference from the evidence,
      but he's asking them to draw an inference from
      the fact that I didn't ask a question.  That's
      not evidence.
          And I will be moving for a mistrial when you
      suggest to them that the reason I didn't ask for
      it is because I know the answer.  That's where
      he's going.  And I will be moving for a
      mistrial, because what I ask and what I don't
      ask isn't any inference.
          MR. BURTON:   Your Honor, I have a case here
      that says a negative inference can be drawn from
      evidence not presented.
          MR. FINGER:  And I think additionally it's
      inflammatory.  It's completely out of line and
      it's suggesting that there's some sort of
      collusion or some wrongdoing on my part that I'm
      hiding the evidence.  The message that they want
      to get across is I'm hiding evidence that's
      harmful to my case.  And it's a direct personal
      attack on me and my integrity, suggesting to the
      jury that I'm doing this intentionally to keep the jury from getting the facts.
          THE COURT:  Did you want to see this case
      before I rule?
          MR. FINGER:  Sure.
          MR. BURTON:  Your Honor --
          (The sidebar discussion was concluded and
the following was held in open court:)
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, we're
      going to take a five-minute recess while we
      discuss a legal point.
          During the recess please don't discuss the
      case among yourselves or with anybody else, do
      not do any independent research and do not form
      a fixed conclusion until the conclusion of the
      argument and my final instruction before you all
      begin to deliberate.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
[#DELETED RECESS#]
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
          MR. BURTON:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Ladies and gentlemen, if you look at the
      instructions you have before you you have an instruction on the reasonable inferences you can
      draw.  And what I want to suggest to you is you
      can draw reasonable inferences from the
      evidence.
          So I'm going to move on now.  One of the
      things that plaintiff want you to believe is
      that you should accept without challenge what
      Dr. Goodwin says.  And I've showed you a lot of
      evidence about what he says that undercuts
      things.  What they really want you to do is
      ignore a lot of other testimony.
          Remember that doctors talked about a dose
      response relationship.  And what that means is
      the greater the risk -- the greater the
      activity, the greater the risk.  The more you
      drink the greater your risk is of getting
      pharyngeal from drinking.  The more you smoke
      the same thing.  The higher your exposure to HPV
      the same thing.
          Now, there's no doubt in this case that
      Milton Williams smoked, no doubt about it.  It
      is a risk factor, no doubt about that.
          But let's think about the alcohol.
      Mr. Williams drank alcohol.  He drank lots and
      lots of alcohol.  And yesterday during Dr. Bennett's examination there was an effort to
      minimize the alcohol.  You'll remember they
      flashed up the screen and said, aha, it was only
      one day he drank half a pint of vodka.  Oh,
      maybe the nurse got it down wrong because this
      is wrong, this is wrong, on daily beer and gin
      use.
          Well, ladies and gentlemen, you've heard the
      evidence on alcohol abuse and use, and let's
      look at what it really is, all of the evidence.
          Mr. Williams drank beer, gin, vodka and
      occasionally scotch.  He drank daily in the '70s
      and '80s.  Ms. Williams thought he was a heavy
      drinker and had a drinking problem.  How many of
      those days did he have half a pint of vodka?
      Said he drank heavily at times.  In '87 he got
      in the squabble with his daughter.  In the early
      '70s they had some troubling times because he
      was staying out drinking with his friends.
          On how many of those nights did he have two
      or three or four or five, which a half a pint of
      vodka is?
          So, ladies and gentlemen, if you consider
      the role of alcohol, remember, the higher the
      use the greater the risk. Let's talk about HPV, another risk factor.
      But remember, the risk increases with the number
      of sexual partners.  And the evidence is
      uncontradicted that Mr. Williams had two
      children with Mrs. Williams, he fathered a
      second child, Anethette, with a second woman, he
      fathered a fourth child with a third woman, and
      we know he had at least one extramarital affair.
          So if plaintiffs wanted to eliminate from
      this case -- I won't say that.
          What I want you to do on this is use your
      common sense, use your common sense on the role
      that HPV played.  You have this evidence, you
      have the objective criteria and you have
      Dr. Goodwin saying he can't rule it out.
          Let's go to poor dental care.  Now, this is
      a third risk factor.  And the plaintiffs tried
      to belittle this one as well.  Said there wasn't
      any literature on it and so forth.  But remember
      what Dr. Goodwin told you, the literature on
      this is just like it was on HPV in 2002.  And
      ask yourself, ladies and gentlemen, why didn't
      they ask Dr. Goodwin to look at the dental
      records?  Why?  They didn't give him the dental
      records. And what do we know about the dental care?
      Cavities, abscessed tooth, cutaneous fistulas,
      purulent fluid, osteomyelitis, bone necrosis.
      That's horrible dental hygiene.  And remember,
      ladies and gentlemen, the lymph nodes that were
      swollen when Mr. Williams went to the hospital
      were in the right submandibular area, that's
      exactly where the dental surgery was.  Those
      lymph nodes were necrotic, which means dead,
      just like the bone tissue in the same area was
      dead as a result of poor dental hygiene.
          Now, as I said, Dr. Goodwin is the only
      expert that's come in here and said
      unequivocally that in his view tobacco was a
      cause.  But remember what he said, it wasn't
      just tobacco, it was tobacco and alcohol and
      tobacco was a bit more responsible, a bit more
      responsible.
          Let's look at what Dr. Goodwin actually did
      in this case.
          He spent two to four hours, what that means,
      ladies and gentlemen, is he had a stack of about
      100 pages, he ran 100 pages of medical records,
      picked out two of them that he thought were
      important and then he picked up the phone and called Dr. Gomez.  And you remember what he said
      on his note, the very first thing he said to
      Dr. Gomez, got to review this for HPV, got to
      test this for HPV.
          So what did he not look at?  He only
      reviewed part of the medical records.  He didn't
      review any of the dental records.  He didn't
      review any depositions.  He didn't do any
      investigation.  And he didn't do any medical
      research.
          So what does he not know?  He doesn't know
      the true level of alcohol consumption.  He
      doesn't know the real risk of contracting HPV.
      He doesn't know how poor the condition of
      Mr. Williams' teeth is because he didn't look at
      it.  And remember, each one of these is a dose
      response relationship, the worse it is the
      higher the risk.  He didn't look at any of that.
          What did Dr. Bennett look at?  He looked at
      all the medical records.  He read all the
      depositions.  He did his own scientific and
      medical literature research.  And what did he
      tell you?
          "I want to focus on the last four, that
      there are four risk factors here, poor dentition, smoking, alcohol and HPV, and you
      know what, you can't say that any of them were a
      substantial contributing cause.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, that's the only
      logical conclusion that you can draw, the only
      logical conclusion.  Because remember,
      Dr. Goodwin was here, Dr. Goodwin was here, they
      didn't ask him, they didn't ask him whether
      Milton Williams would have gotten pharyngeal
      cancer if he never smoked.  They didn't ask.
      Draw your own conclusions.
          Fact of the matter is, ladies and gentlemen,
      what this shows is they cannot prove and they
      have not proved that smoking was a legal cause
      of his pharyngeal cancer.
          So let's move to the third question.  Was
      pharyngeal cancer the cause of his death?  What
      you have to look at here is you have to assess
      the role of the delay in seeking treatment.  We
      know that Mr. Williams was in dire condition
      when he went to the hospital, T4 N2b massive
      tumor, been there 6 months to a year, not a
      candidate for surgery, chances of survival less
      than 15 percent.
          And we also know, out of the mouth of Dr. Goodwin, what would have happened if he
      sought treatment earlier, more options, better
      prognosis, a survival rate for Stage I is
      greater than 80 percent.
          Dr. Goodwin again.  "Is it fair to say that
      Mr. Williams could have been cured if he had
      presented earlier?
          "We don't cure everyone who presents early,
      but he certainly would have had a much better
      chance.
          "If he had presented 6 months to a year
      earlier his chances of surviving this would have
      been substantially enhanced.
          "Yes."
          Now, ladies and gentlemen, in assessing the
      symptoms that Mr. Williams had you're going to
      have to use your common sense here.  You'll have
      to use your common sense.  You saw when I put
      right here the picture of the CT scan.  You saw
      how big the tumor was.  It was so big it
      completely closed his throat.  He could not
      swallow.  He could not eat solid food.
          Does it make sense, does it make common
      sense that those symptoms were there for two to
      three weeks?  I submit to you that it doesn't. And I submit to you that it's not -- no
      coincidence that Pam Williams saw problems a
      long time earlier.
          "When did his throat start bothering him?
      And the answer you gave me under oath was, 'I
      think about a year before we found out about the
      cancer.  It may not have been a year, I don't
      remember exactly, but somewhere before.'
          "Would it have been like '94 or '95?"
          And her answer was:  "Yes, '95.
          "And that's the answer you gave under oath
      in July of this year?
          "Right.
          "In your deposition?
          "Yes."
          Use your common sense on that one, ladies
      and gentlemen.
          The unfortunate truth, ladies and gentlemen,
      is that in all likelihood Mr. Williams would
      have been here with us today if he'd just gone
      to the doctor.  We know he had access to health
      care.  But the plaintiffs have failed utterly to
      demonstrate that the pharyngeal cancer was the
      legal cause of his death.
          Okay, I'm going to shift gears here now because I think we've established that the
      plaintiffs cannot prove class membership.  They
      can't prove addiction was the cause of the
      smoking or haven't proved.  They haven't proved
      smoking was the cause of the pharyngeal cancer
      and they certainly haven't proved that
      pharyngeal cancer was the legal cause of his
      death.
          So what I want to talk to you about now a
      little bit is comparative fault.  We don't
      believe he's a class member and that you should
      check one of those questions no.  Because if you
      check any of them no, you come back, hand your
      verdict to Judge Eig and you're free to go home.
          If you get past that and you get to damages
      we believe an appropriate number is in the
      thousands, not the millions.  But if you get
      there the other thing you're going to have to do
      is you're going to have to apportion fault.
      You're going to have to decide how much fault to
      attribute to Milton Williams and how much fault,
      if any, to Reynolds.
          Mr. Finger challenged me to come up here and
      tell you that Milton Williams was 100 percent
      responsible.  And, ladies and gentlemen, I believe that's what the evidence shows.  And to
      help us on this what I've done is I've prepared
      a chart.  This is the comparative fault
      instruction you'll get and you have to put the
      numbers there.  But I've prepared you a chart.
      And what I've done is I've gone back to the
      three words I said in opening, choice, control,
      responsibility, percentage.
          Let's talk about tobacco first.  Mr. Finger
      said -- or you heard in jury selection, you
      heard in jury selection, nobody made
      Mr. Williams start smoking.  And there's no
      evidence in this case of why he started smoking,
      you have no evidence of that.  Mr. Finger said
      in his closing statement, I can't say anything
      they did caused him to smoke.  Mr. Williams'
      choice.
          And let's talk about control for a minute.
      You heard the addiction experts, Dr. Goldman,
      their expert.  The fact that you're addicted
      doesn't mean you can't quit.
          What you have to do, though, what you have
      to do is you have to want to quit, you have to
      decide to quit and you have to try to quite.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, there is not one shred of evidence in this case that Mr. Williams
      ever wanted to quit, ever decided to quit or
      ever tried to quit.
          Mr. Williams smoked because he liked it.
      You heard that from Janice.  Milton Williams was
      in control.  And under those circumstances where
      he's made his choice and in his control, I
      submit to you Mr. Williams is responsible.  He
      knew what he was doing.  He smoked because he
      liked it.  He never tried to quit.  Mr. Williams
      is 100 percent responsible.
          Let's talk about alcohol.  Who made the
      choice to drink, whether it be two or three
      beers a day or half a pint of vodka?
      Mr. Williams.
          Who was in control of that decision?  Was it
      Reynolds?  We weren't there.
          And whose responsibility was it?
      Mr. Williams.  And certainly 100 percent.
          HPV, who made the choice to engage in the
      behaviors that put him at risk of HPV?  Is that
      something Reynolds did?  No.  It's Mr. Williams.
          Who was in control of that decision?
      Mr. Williams.
          And who was responsible for the consequences of that?  Mr. Williams.
          To what degree?  100 percent.
          Now let's talk about poor dentition.  Who
      was it that decided that he didn't want to go to
      the dentist for months?  You saw the record.
      Who was it that decided that after -- that when
      it got so bad that he was having fluid coming
      out of his cheek that he wouldn't go to the
      doctor, he'd go home and put aspirin and Orajel
      on it?  That was Mr. Williams.
          Who was in control at that time?
      Mr. Williams.
          Who's responsible for the consequences that
      flowed from that?  Mr. Williams.
          To what degree?  100 percent.
          Delay in treatment.  Who was it that decided
      that with this growth in his throat and a sore
      throat and all of the symptoms that he wouldn't
      go to the doctor?  It's Mr. Williams.
          Who was in control?  Mr. Williams.
          Who was responsible?  Mr. Williams.
          To what degree?  100 percent.
          Now, ladies and gentlemen, it's been a long,
      long trial, and I'm about to sit down.  And I'm
      not going to have an opportunity, me or my partner Jack, to talk to you again after
      Mr. Finger or Mr. Kaiser talk to you.  That's
      the way it works.  Plaintiff gets the last word.
      So when I sit down and they get up, I want you
      to keep a few things in mind.  Keep in mind what
      Jack told you, never saw or allowed anything,
      never changed his behavior, Mr. Finger told you
      in his own closing argument, I can't say that
      any particular thing they did caused him to
      smoke.
          I also want you to keep in mind that
      Mr. Williams, Milton Williams was an intelligent
      man.  He was a decisive man.  He lived life the
      way he wanted to.  He did what he wanted to when
      he did it.  He smoked when he wanted to and as
      much as he wanted to and he chose to never even
      try to quit.
          He drank when he wanted to and as much as he
      wanted to.
          He got involved with other women when he
      wanted to and as often as he wanted to.
          He ignored his teeth for so many months he
      had severe consequences.
          And he delayed seeking treatment for his
      pharyngeal cancer for so long it likely cost him his life.
          Ladies and gentlemen, those were deliberate,
      conscious, intentional choices that Mr. Williams
      made.  He made them over his entire life.  He
      made them repeatedly.  And unfortunately, it's
      those choices, those choices that caused his
      premature death.  And for that reason, ladies
      and gentlemen, we're asking that you return a
      verdict for RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          Thank you.
