CLOSING ARGUMENT BY THE PLAINTIFF
MR. PENDELL: Thank you.
Good morning, Your Honor.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. We’re almost
there.
Going back to when we were children, I think most of us, probably everybody here in this courtroom, we once thought that justice came into being on its own accord, that virtue was its own reward, and that good always triumphed over evil; in short, that justice just occurred automatically.
Later, when we found out that that wasn’t quite so, I think most of us probably at least hoped that justice still happens frequently enough on its own.
But today, I think we’d all agree that there is no machinery on this earth that makes justice just happen on
its own.
People like you have to make it happen.
Otherwise, it doesn’t come into being. And this isn’t always easy. And it’s not always easy. In fact, it’s always hard because justice presents a threat to power. So in order to make justice come into being, you often have to fight power.
But that’s why we have juries, and that’s why your job is so important. And it is out of respect for the job that you do that every lawyer in this courtroom stands when you enter and leave every time.
It’s been an absolute privilege for me and for my entire team to represent Mrs. Zamboni here in front of you guys, and we all extend our sincere gratitude for you for the time that you’ve put in here.
You’ve all been attentive, and you sacrificed your time for Mrs. Zamboni so she could have her day here; and we are grateful for that.
And we tried to present evidence to you as efficiently as possible so that we didn’t waste your time so that you could do your job and go back to your life.
And we do thank you for that.
It is choice, not chance, that determines our destiny. Now, at the outset of this trial, you heard both sides tell you that this was a case about choices. You
heard the other side tell you about that yesterday.
There was a choice made by a 12-year-old boy in 1930 to do what was culturally accepted and expected of him.
And there were also the choices of R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris to design, manufacture, and market a product, the modern cigarette, that was highly addictive and caused serious diseases like lung cancer.
There were also the choices of R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris to deny and dispute for over 50 years — well, for 50 years the addictive nature and the health risks of the product that they made.
Now, when Mr. Oliver and I have finished our summation, the Judge is going to instruct you on the law and she’s going to send you back to the jury room and you’re going to have to make a choice.
The choice that you make is going to determine the destiny of Robert Hoover’s family. Will you choose righteousness, or will you choose injustice?
Before you go back to that jury room to make that choice, I want to remind you about all the choices that were made that brought each and every one of you here to this courtroom to this very moment.
I want to talk to you about the choices that the cigarette lawyers didn’t want to talk to you about. And I
want to talk to you about what those choices had to do with Robert Hoover.
Now, the choices that were made in this case, they started being made back in time, back in the ’30s and the ’40s and the ’50s and the ’60s, back in a time when Robert Hoover was growing up and Robert Hoover started smoking.
It was back in a time when people trusted each other far more than they do today. It was a time when people actually trusted corporations.
There was a time when there was no Internet, there were no cell phones, there were no 24-hour news cycles. It was a time before television. And when television finally came into existence, there were three channels. And they didn’t play shows all night. They didn’t play around the clock.
It was the time when the biggest advertisers and the biggest mass marketers in this country were cigarette manufacturers. You saw that. You saw the TV shows. You saw the commercials. You saw all the sponsoring they did.
You heard all about those times and how back in those days smoking was a cultural norm in this country. People smoked everywhere.
In fact, if we were to put ourselves into a time machine and go back to those early days when Robert Hoover
was smoking all the way up to when he was an older man, people would be smoking in this very courtroom at this moment.
This was a time before warnings, before any widespread public knowledge about the dangers of smoking cigarettes.
But as you learned over the course of this trial, during that time, information was known by R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris and other companies that were designing, manufacturing, and marketing the modern cigarette, and they made a choice to keep that information from people like Robert Hoover.
And they made a choice to keep that information from people like Robert Hoover for one reason, to sell more cigarettes. Now, when Robert Hoover started smoking in the ’30s, everybody smoked.
Gina, first slide.
Doctors smoked; actors smoked. People from all walks of life smoked.
In those days, cigarette smoking was accepted and it was expected. People smoked in hospitals. People smoked in legislatures. People smoked on airplanes. Even in that closed environment, people smoked in airplanes.
And people smoked on airplanes in most of our lifetimes.
You heard Mrs. Zamboni, who grew up in the ’30s
and the ’40s, she told you she liked to go to the movies as a kid. And people smoked in that movie house.
She told you that people stood out in front of her school and handed out cigarettes when she was 12 years old. That is the world that Robert Hoover was born into, and that is the world that Robert Hoover grew up in.
On your screen is a chart of tobacco consumption in the United States. You’ve seen this throughout the course of this trial. And you see that tobacco consumption and you heard that tobacco consumption really started at the start of the 20th century, and it peaked between the 1960s and the 1980s.
And it really started to decline in the 1990s around the time that Robert Hoover was diagnosed and died of lung cancer.
Now, over the course of this trial, including in closing arguments yesterday, the cigarette lawyers wanted you to believe that Robert Hoover always knew that cigarettes were bad for his health. They never talked about the first 30 years of his life that he smoked.
They showed you some articles from a publication called the Florida Health Notes. They are in evidence.
You can look at them.
I believe the first one dates back to 1906 where they talk about tobacco being -- cigarettes being the worst
form of tobacco addiction and so on. And they used that and intimated that that was proof that everybody knew.
Well, ask yourselves, if everybody knew all the way back from that time that cigarettes were dangerous and can kill you, how do you explain what’s going on in this chart from the Surgeon General’s report where cigarette consumption starts to rise about 1920 and shoots up like a rocket into the 1960s and doesn’t start to decline until the 1980s?
Do you believe that all these people who chose to smoke at this time thought it was going to kill them? Millions and millions of people?
It is a fiction that everybody knew. How did this happen? How did this happen, what you see on that chart in front of you? How did this country go from a nation where cigarette smoking was a rarity to where it was sewn to our very fabric? How did that happen?
It didn’t happen overnight, and it didn’t happen by accident. And you saw over the course of this trial exactly how it happened.
It was a result of choices made by R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies to mass market, to mass advertise, to focus on the pleasures of smoking while ignoring, denying, and disputing that cigarettes are addictive and that they can kill you.
That’s how it happened.
It was the result of the choices of R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris to create an environment where smoking was the social norm, and they took full advantage of the environment that they created.
Next slide, Gina.
This is Exhibit 1693, and this was an article from 1941. And it says, talking about the rise of the cigarette, even in 1941, they recognized that cigarettes became popular in this country because of mass advertising.
It says, "The phenomenal growth of cigarette consumption in this country is indubitably interlinked with the development of nationwide and unprecedented advertising campaigns in promotion of this product."
That was in 1941.
Next slide, please.
You heard Dr. Kyriakoudes, the tobacco industry historian, who spoke to you a little bit yesterday and the day before that. And he showed you how R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies portrayed smoking in the 1930s and 19 -- 1920s and ’30s when Robert Hoover was growing up through the 1970s in this country.
They portrayed smoking as glamorous, grown-up, as sophisticated, as socially acceptable, as cool. They did it by using celebrities, by using sports figures, and other
beautiful people. They legitimatized smoking in a way that had never been done before.
Excuse me.
At the start of this trial and again yesterday in closing arguments, the cigarette lawyers asked you -- and they asked you several times -- what did all this have to do with Robert Hoover? What does the choice to create this environment where smoking was a social norm, where it was accepted and expected, what did that have to do with Robert Hoover?
Well, I’ll tell you what it had to do with Robert Hoover. Robert Hoover grew up in that environment where smoking was done in movie houses, in courtrooms, in legislatures, and on airplanes. Robert Hoover grew up in that environment where popular actors and athletes were used to sell cigarettes, where they were used to legitimize cigarettes, where they made them look glamorous, where they made them look cool.
How do we know? How do we know that Robert Hoover was influenced by that environment? Look at the facts. Robert Hoover’s first two brands of cigarettes were Camels and Lucky Strikes.
And Dr. Kyriakoudes told you those two brands were the most popular brands of cigarettes in this country in the 1930s and the 1940s when Robert Hoover was first
getting — started smoking and getting hooked on smoking.
That’s how you know that he was influenced, by what was going on around him. It was no accident that he ended up smoking the two most popular brands at the time.
How do we know that Robert Hoover was influenced by the environment in which he lived? Well, you also heard testimony that when he met Mrs. Zamboni in 1966, he was smoking a cigarette called Pall Mall.
Dr. Kyriakoudes told you in the 1960s that was one of the most popular brands of cigarette around.
It was no accident that Robert Hoover was smoking Pall Mall at the time it was the most popular brand of cigarette in this country.
How do we know that Robert Hoover was influenced by the advertising that was so pervasive and so persuasive in this country?
Well, Robert Hoover designed his business cards based on the pack of Virginia Slims that he smoked. That’s how we know that Robert Hoover was influenced by the things that he saw going on around him for 20, 30, 40, 50 years of his life.
Now, the rise of the modern cigarette in this country was also the result of choices made by R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris to intentionally and systematically target children to get them smoking as early
as possible.
They recognized that two-thirds of adult smokers were children who became regular daily smokers before the age of 18.
This is Exhibit 146.
Okay. These will all be back in evidence. You don’t have to take my word for it. Look at them. I implore you, look at these documents. They tell you a story.
And this one, less than one-third of smokers start after the age of 18. Only 31 percent start after that age.
And although it was illegal to market or sell cigarettes to children from as far back as the early 1900s, you saw evidence that they did just that.
They did youth marketing studies. Why youth marketing studies? You don’t conduct youth marketing studies unless you intend to market to youth. That’s common sense. There’s no explanation for why that happened other than that.
They advertised and designed advertisements to attract youth smokers. They knew that they needed youth smokers in order for their business to survive.
You saw an internal tobacco company document -and this is in evidence, too -- where those youth smokers were referred to coldly as replacement smokers, to replace
the ones that died.
You saw this, two R.J. Reynolds documents from 1927 and 1928, when Robert Hoover was still a boy, showing that they were going after kids when he was a boy. And you also saw records in evidence that they continued to do it right up through the ’60s and the ’70s and the ’80s.
I’m not going to show you every document that you already saw. There are too many for us to go through. And I know you were paying attention. You can read them yourself up close.
You’re going to get them in the jury room. Take as much time as you want to look at the documents and you decide for yourself what these guys were doing and what it had to do with Robert Hoover.
They wrote those documents. Those defendants wrote those documents. I didn’t write those documents.
I’m not making that up. At the time they wrote them, they didn’t think anybody was ever going to see them.
The substance of those documents were not challenged over the course of this trial. There’s not a single person who came here to explain to you what those documents meant or say that’s not what we meant. The substance of those documents have been unchallenged.
What does R.J. Reynolds’ and Philip Morris’ choices to attract and addict children to cigarettes, what
does it have to do with Robert Hoover? Well, Robert Hoover was one of the children that they attracted and addicted at 12 years old.
You heard testimony and you saw his medical records that he had his first cigarette at 12 years old, behind the garage with his buddies. And he told his wife that he smoked that cigarette because he thought it was cool.
He was one of the 80 percent born in his cohort that became regular daily smokers by the age of 17. That’s a real statistic. I didn’t make that up.
That is what these defendants’ choices had to do with Robert Hoover.
What other choices did R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris make that had to do with Robert Hoover that brought you all here today?
They chose to make a product that was highly addictive and they engineered that product to sustain addiction. And although they knew all about addiction and all about nicotine going way back to the 1950s, they chose publicly to deny and dispute that nicotine was addictive. For decades. Right up until the year 2000, they denied and disputed that.
This is Exhibit 96. This is another internal document that you have in evidence. Feel free to look at
it. What does it say, why do people smoke? Addiction.
Exhibit 86, here is what they were saying internally about cigarettes and addiction in the early 1950s. It’s fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they can’t break. That’s their words.
Brown & Williamson, who R.J. Reynolds is now responsible for, admits in this internal document, Exhibit 163, both that nicotine is an addictive drug and that it is in the business of selling that drug.
They said, we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms.
Or how about this one, Exhibit 76? Tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug. That is their words, not mine.
These two defendants knew all about nicotine and all about addiction. They not only appreciated that they were getting people hooked on a potent drug -- people like Mr. Hoover -- but in their design and in their advertising, they intentionally stressed the pleasure of the cigarette, the drug, and ignored the disease-causing components and ignored the fact that that cigarette would be hard to put down because of that potent drug.
This is taken from the Nordeen study, which is Exhibit 72. You’ll have this back there, too.
Let’s go to the next page, please, Gina.
This was written by a guy you heard a lot about, Mr. Claude Teague. This was from 1982. And he was a senior scientist at R.J. Reynolds.
And throughout the course of this trial, the cigarette lawyer tried to convince you that Claude Teague was a nobody at R.J. Reynolds. This was a man who spent his career at R.J. Reynolds and rose through the ranks and became very important at that company. And this is what he wrote about nicotine in 1982.
Most of those who had smoked for any significant time would like to stop. Many, but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. And here’s the important line. Most who want to stop are not able to quit .
That is R.J. Reynolds’ own senior scientist making that observation, that admission about nicotine and the nature and addictive nature of cigarettes.
Now, I think the Judge is going to tell you that a corporation acts and speaks through its employees. So the documents that you see, whether they were written by Claude Teague at R.J. Reynolds or Helmut Wakeham at Philip Morris, those are statements from these defendants. Those are acts of these defendants.
Can we go to Exhibit 94, please?
Now, in 1980, the Tobacco Institute, which you heard about was a trade organization that was founded by R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies as part of their plan to deny and dispute the health risks of cigarettes.
And they said in this internal document, the lawyers remind us, I’m told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We can’t defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
This is what R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris were saying privately about cigarettes in 1980: If addicted, choice for the smoker goes out the window.
But what did the cigarette lawyers tell you here in this courtroom? That smoking is a free choice and that Robert Hoover exercised his free choice to smoke.
1980, internally, privately. Today, in this courtroom.
You heard and saw evidence over the course of this trial that cigarette advertising was so pervasive in the ’30s and the ’40s and the ’50s and the ’60s especially, and you saw evidence that the Federal Trade Commission in 1967 did studies about the effects that cigarette messaging had on smoker s.
And the FTC concluded that cigarette advertising was so pervasive, it reached virtually every American of any age in this country.
And they also concluded that those advertisements completely ignored the fact that cigarettes were highly addictive.
Cigarette advertisements associate cigarette smoking with pleasurable activities but nowhere disclosed that few people can limit their smoking to such moments. There is no indication in any advertisement that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him but becomes a matter of need.
Once addicted, it is no longer an unconstrained and free choice for the smoker because of the physiological need for nicotine.
R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris knew that internally for a very, very long time. Their own documents attest to that. Look at those documents. We showed them to you.
They are evidence of the choices that they made.
And they never told the public, they never told people like Robert Hoover, not only in his lifetime, but for years after his lifetime, they never told them the truth about the addictive nature of the product that they were making.
They denied and disputed it right up to 2000.
They were hooking their customers on what they were calling internally a potent drug, and they disputed and denied that it was addictive until 2000.
Go to Exhibit -This is Exhibit 110, scare tactics. In the 1950s and ’60s, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris are internally referring to nicotine as a potent drug, but telling the public, people like Robert Hoover, in 1988, after the Surgeon General declared that nicotine was addictive, in 1998, they are telling the public that the Surgeon General is engaging in scare tactics by telling everybody that nicotine was an addictive substance. 1988.
And here, Exhibit 67, I’m not going to play the video for you, but you remember it. This was the Waxman hearing. This was in 1950s and ’60s, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris are internally referring to nicotine as a potent drug, that it’s highly addictive.
But in 1994, in my lifetime, going before Congress, raising their right hands, promising to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, and telling Congress that nicotine is not addictive.
Today, in this courtroom, we all agree that nicotine is addictive. R.J. Reynolds agrees. And Philip Morris agrees.
They secretly agreed way back in the 1950s. But today, in this courtroom, they publicly agree that nicotine i s addictive.
Next one, please.
In 1988, the United States Surgeon General concluded that cigarettes are addictive and that nicotine is the drug that causes addiction. It took the United States Surgeon General until 1988 to recognize what R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris knew 30 years before.
Now, to answer the question, what do Philip Morris’ and R.J. Reynolds’ choices to market a product that was highly addictive and not tell people, what does it have to do with Robert Hoover?
What does R.J. Reynolds’ choices to engineer cigarettes to sustain addiction have to do with Robert Hoover?
Well, Robert Hoover got addicted and Robert Hoover remained addicted for five decades. How do we know that Robert Hoover got addicted? Well, you know Robert Hoover was addicted because he was diagnosed with nicotine abuse by his treating physician in October 1992.
Can you show that? Do you have that?
Past history of nicotine abuse. You heard Dr. Burns tell you that in the medical field, nicotine abuse is another way of saying nicotine addiction. Folks,
this is in 1992, years before any litigation.
The doctor who diagnosed Robert Hoover with nicotine abuse had one job, and that was to treat a human being. Okay? So that’s what his motive was, to treat a human being when he wrote that.
And you know Robert Hoover was addicted because he started smoking at the age of 12, and smoked at least two packs of cigarettes a day for more than 50 years.
And here’s his medical records attesting to that. Age 12, two and a half packs. The cigarette lawyers tried to convince you in their closing arguments yesterday that there was no evidence that Robert Hoover was ever addicted. But you know better.
There was lots of testimony on this stand from people who knew Robert Hoover that proved that this man was addicted, hopelessly addicted to nicotine. You know that Robert Hoover was addicted because he had his first cigarette in the day as soon as his feet hit the floor in the morning.
You know that Robert Hoover was addicted because he smoked several cigarettes with his coffee in the morning and then smoked compulsively throughout the day.
We know that he was addicted because he had his last cigarette just before going to bed. And you know he was addicted because sometimes he woke up in the middle of
the night to smoke.
We know he was addicted because he got smoking-related illnesses and continued to smoke after he got those illnesses.
Next slide, please, Gina.
We know he was addicted because he tried to quit many times, using licorice and lemon drops and toothpicks, and a smoking aid called Smokenders, and plastic cigarettes, and chocolate. He tried throwing his cigarettes away, and eating cheese, and chewing gum, and chewing on straws.
He collected his cigarette butts in a glass jar to count how many he smoked in the course of a day. He marked his cigarettes with a felt-tipped pen so that he would only smoke it down to that mark to help try to control his smoking.
Robert Hoover used every method that was available to him at the time to try to quit smoking. This was before nicotine patches. This was before you were given things like Wellbutrin to try to quit smoking. This is how people tried to quit when Robert Hoover was trying to quit.
The cigarette lawyers never mentioned any of this testimony to you yesterday in their closing. There’s a reason for that.
You know Robert Hoover was addicted because when
he was trying to quit, his wife and his son both told you that he got irritable and frustrated and grouchy and short tempered and he had an increased appetite and he was anxious.
You also know that all of those things, all of those symptoms went away when Robert Hoover smoked a cigarette again. His wife told you, he’d smoke a cigarette and he’d be my Bobby all over again. That’s addiction, ladies and gentlemen.
And you heard Dr. Burns, who is the only medical expert who testified, the only person you saw over the course of this trial who’s actually qualified to diagnose nicotine addiction in a human being.
And he told you that all of those behaviors that we just went over are hallmarks of addiction. That is how he diagnoses his own patients with nicotine addiction.
This is a man who has been a doctor for many years.
What evidence did you see that Robert Hoover wasn’t addicted? Nothing. You heard statements made by lawyers in closing argument. That’s not evidence.
You heard Dr. Burns tell you that nicotine addiction was the principal reason that Robert Hoover wasn’t able to quit smoking. There was not a single witness that took that stand to refute Dr. Burns’ testimony. Not one.
During his testimony, Dr. Burns told you that nicotine addiction is a brain disease that actually changes the structure and the function of the smoker’s brain. You remember that.
Robert Hoover had no choice about nicotine crossing his blood-brain barrier. He had no choice about the effect that nicotine had on his acetylcholine receptor.
The public health authorities didn’t know about that stuff for a very long time. Robert Hoover didn’t know either. That’s not a choice that he made.
Dr. Burns, the only person to testify in this trial qualified to diagnose nicotine addiction, told you in his trial testimony that when someone is addicted to smoking, "It means that there’s a substantial barrier that prevents them from exercising their own choice to become a nonsmoker."
That’s the same thing that the tobacco lawyers were saying about once you’re addicted, free choice goes out the window. That’s what the tobacco companies were saying privately. That’s the exact same thing. They actually agreed.
He also told you that nicotine addicts have the choice to try to quit, but, unfortunately, they don’t have the ability to successfully implement that choice and stay off .
Ladies and gentlemen, nobody asked you to check your common sense and good judgment at the door when you came into this courtroom. Just the opposite. You were selected as jurors because we wanted you to bring your common sense and your good judgment into this courtroom over the course of this trial. And we want you to take it back with you to that jury room when you’re making a choice about what’s going to happen in this case.
Your common sense and good judgment tell you everything that you need to know about whether or not Robert Hoover was addicted to nicotine.
Now, Dr. Burns told you that there are people out there that smoke occasionally. I think he called them chippers. You learn something new every day. I never heard that term. He called them chippers.
These are people who maybe smoke one cigarette a day, maybe only smoke on the weekends. Maybe smoke a pack of cigarettes at a party.
They do not compulsively smoke. Those people are not addicted to nicotine. That was not Robert Hoover.
Robert Hoover smoked cigarette after cigarette after cigarette after cigarette 50 times a day, at least 50 times a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year for 50 years. Every day of his life.
And if you do the math on that — and I had
someone do it for me because I’m terrible at math — that’s a cigarette every 19.2 minutes of his life. He was up for a 16-hour day, he was smoking a cigarette every 19.2 minutes.
That is not an occasional smoker. That is not someone who makes a choice to continue smoking. That is a compulsive, addicted cigarette smoker.
And this doesn’t count the cigarettes he woke up and smoked in the middle of the night.
Next slide, please.
Your common sense and good judgment tell you that Robert Hoover was addicted, because addicted people don’t have to smoke while swimming in a pool. Occasional smokers don’t have to smoke in a swimming pool.
Your common sense and good judgment tell you that Robert Hoover was addicted to nicotine because people who aren’t addicted don’t continue to smoke after two surgeries for smoking-related illnesses.
Now, Mrs. Zamboni told you that this picture was taken in Minnesota after Robert Hoover had surgery in early 1988. Notice the cigarette in his hand, and the pack in his pocket. We blew it up so you could see it. Look at it back there.
What answer do the cigarette lawyers have for this
picture?
Speaking of pictures, I want to clear something up that happened yesterday. One of the cigarette lawyers showed you a picture of David Hoover’s daughter. Remember that? In her closing statement. It was Exhibit 6000E.
And she intimated that we were somehow trying to concoct some false timeline based on the age of the girl in the picture because the little girl in the picture was two years old. David Hoover testified that she was two years old, on the stand. I don’t dispute that at all.
You see, the cigarette lawyer was mistaken. Okay? Because the pieces of the testimony that she showed you were related to that picture. Okay? That testimony was not given in response to this picture.
I showed you, and David Hoover on the stand, two pictures. Do you remember these?
The one the cigarette lawyer showed you, no doubt she was two years old. David Hoover testified to that.
The one next to that, David Hoover testified that she was at least three years old. You look for yourself. She’s older in the picture on the right. That’s the picture that I showed David Hoover, and David Hoover testified -- and go to the testimony -- and testified she was at least three years old.
And you don’t have to take my word for it. The pictures stand, Exhibit 6000H. And the testimony shows
that it was, 6000H was the picture that he was testifying to that she was at least three years old.
Why didn’t the cigarette lawyer tell you that?
I’m trying to concoct a false timeline? Why didn’t the cigarette lawyer tell you that?
And what’s important about the fact that she was at least three years old in this picture? Because this girl was born in June of 1985. And yes, I made a mistake with my math. I’m terrible at math. And I apologize for that. I said she was born in 1986. I was wrong.
She was born in 1985. But if she was born in 1985, and we assume just for right here that this was her birthday, and she just turned three in June of 1988, Robert Hoover —
The picture, please.
—	had his two surgeries in January and February of 1988. And you don’t have to take my word for it.
Because it’s right here in the medical record that the cigarette lawyer showed you yesterday.
Put that up, please.
For five days, hospitalized for five days in Florida in January of ’88. And they show also an attempted surgery on February 9 of 1988.
What’s important about this picture that was taken after those surgeries? You take a look at that photograph
and you tell me why a man who is no longer smoking has a pack of cigarettes in his shirt pocket. People who quit smoking don’t carry cigarettes in their shirt pocket.
Cigarette lawyers have no explanation for that.
The cigarette lawyers showed you some inconsistencies in Robert Hoover’s medical records. I’ll admit that. There are inconsistencies in the medical records.
In fact, I’ll show you two more right now. Here’s a medical record from 1988 that says that Robert Hoover smoked for 50 years.
Do you have that?
It shows Robert Hoover smoked for 50 years.
Can we go to the next one for 1990? Or is it -what is it?
And then you’ll see the one from 1992 — or 1990.
I apologize. It says he smoked for 55 years. There’s a discrepancy in the record. I wish I had an explanation for you .
I wish I could bring Robert Hoover here and put him on the stand and let him explain what the discrepancy is. But I can’t because he’s dead. Because of a product they made.
Maybe Robert Hoover was embarrassed by the fact that he couldn’t stop smoking. Maybe that’s why he told his doctors he could, that he quit. I don’t know the
answer to that.
But that doesn’t change what you see in this photograph. That doesn’t change what you see in the photograph of Robert Hoover in the boat, in the summer of 1988, in Minnesota, with a lit cigarette in his hand and a pack of cigarettes in his pocket. What explanation can the cigarette lawyers have for that?
They don’t. There’s no explanation.
Well, there is an explanation. The man was still smoking. But they don’t want to talk to you about that because they don’t want you to have the whole story. They want to give you sound bites.
That’s what this has all been about.
Now, the cigarette lawyers also tried to tell you during their opening statements, and they did it again in closing arguments, that Mrs. Zamboni changed her story somehow about her husband’s smoking history and when he quit .
They tried to tell you that she changed her story after she met with us and after this lawsuit was filed.
I’m sure you all remember that. It came up a couple of times.
The lawyer for Reynolds, if you remember on cross-examination, showed you a snippet of her testimony. And I stood up. Remember, I stood up right here and I
objected. I said, Your Honor, rule of completeness. They should have to play the rest of that clip because that’s not what she says.
Do you remember that? And the Judge made them play it. And what did she say in that deposition testimony? She said the exact same thing to the cigarette lawyers that she said here in this courtroom. And that is her husband continued to smoke until he got lung cancer.
And later she found out that he was sneaking cigarettes after he got lung cancer.
That’s what she said in that seat. And that’s what she said on the testimony that they didn’t want you to hear the complete part of. Why? Why didn’t they want you to hear? Why are they running from that?
And what’s more, ladies and gentlemen, he did it again yesterday in closing argument. He showed you the same snippet that I stood up and objected to and said, Your Honor, play the whole thing. And he tried to pass it off as though that was her answer.
Why? Why did he do that? Right here in this courtroom, ladies and gentlemen, the cigarette lawyers tried to convince you that this 85-year-old woman, who lost the love of her life because of a product that they made, they tried to convince you that she was not telling the truth about her husband’s smoking.
A company that lied to the American people and to the public health authorities for 50 years, and they want you to believe that she’s a liar.
What’s ironic about that? I ask that you consider that when you go back into that jury room.
Now, we have the burden of proving to you that Robert Hoover more likely than not was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. And we’ve done that.
We’ve met that burden. And I submit to you we’ve surpassed that. We’ve proved that beyond a reasonable doubt.
So when you go back to the jury room and you look at that jury sheet that you saw yesterday and you’re faced with question number one, we, the jury, find that plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that Robert Hoover was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, you should put a big fat X next to yes.
One more point about addiction and then I’m going to move on to another point.
R.J. Reynolds’ and Philip Morris’ choices did not stop denying disputing the addictive nature of nicotine. They chose to focus on the design and the engineering of that cigarette to do two things, to sustain addiction and to make smokers think that they were getting a safer cigarette.
Remember, Dr. Burns came down from the stand and he went up to the thing we keep calling the ELMO. Not the Elmo from Sesame Street, but the machine. He tore open that cigarette and he showed you all the parts of the cigarette. And he ripped open the filter and he showed you the little, tiny things he called ventilation holes.
Remember that?
And he told you that those ventilation holes and those filters didn’t actually work.
People thought they were getting a safer cigarette, and it was a gimmick to keep people smoking.
And he also told you that those ventilation holes were important because they deliver a stronger dose of nicotine to the person who smoked that cigarette. It was a more addictive cigarette.
What did that have to do with Robert Hoover?
Well, the modern cigarettes that he smoked, the Silva Thins and the Virginia Slims, they had ventilation holes. He was smoking those cigarettes when he was trying to quit smoking.
He was smoking a more addictive cigarette when he was trying to quit -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. There is no evidence that ventilation holes make cigarettes more addictive. Not in the record.
THE COURT: The record will have to be studied by those who are finding the facts. I can’t pass on what was in the record or wasn’t.
I can’t sustain the objection.
MR. PENDELL: Let’s talk about the choice that R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris made not to disclose the health risks of the products that they were making, selling to people like Robert Hoover.
You heard that in the early 1950s there were studies in this country that caused great concern in the halls of R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris because those studies were linking smoking to cancer and other diseases.
You saw evidence that R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris were gathering their own studies on that and conducting studies. And they reached the same conclusion: Cigarettes cause lung cancer.
Once that link to lung cancer was made,
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris had three choices: Tell the public the truth about the dangers of smoking, say nothing, or deny and dispute.
What did they choose to do? You saw the evidence. In 1953, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies got together for a big meeting at the Plaza Hotel in New York City, and they hired a public relations firm called Hill & Knowlton.
The fact of that meeting -- it was public knowledge that they were meeting. In fact, the Government sent a letter saying, please confirm for us you are not violating the antitrust laws.
But nobody knew what went on behind those closed doors. It was kept secret for decades, decades, and decades.
At that meeting, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies made a secret agreement to do everything that they could do to create doubt and controversy about these emerging health risks to call them into question for one purpose, to keep people like Robert Hoover smoking.
And that campaign of doubt and controversy -- you saw the evidence -- that went on for almost 50 years, 50 years in this country.
Why did they want to keep people like Robert Hoover from learning about and understanding and appreciating the health risks of cigarette smoking?
Exhibit 86, please.
Suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. That would be maybe 40 billion a year. 40 billion a year, ladies and gentlemen, that’s why they did it. That’s why they did it.
So how did they do it? How did they create this
campaign of doubt and controversy to keep people like Robert Hoover from buying into the fears that cigarettes may cause diseases like lung cancer?
Well, one of the first things that they did after that meeting was make a promise to America. You saw it, Exhibit 3. We refer to it as the Frank Statement.
And in that Frank Statement — please, look at it yourself -- they promise people like Robert Hoover and the rest of America that their health was of paramount concern to these companies.
They said that their products were not harmful. They said that they’d cooperate with the public health authorities in getting to the bottom of the health scare, and they said they’d fund research.
They also told cigarette smokers in the Frank Statement that all the charges that were being made against smoking, they said there was no proof. Look for yourselves. Don’t take my word for it. It’s right there in that document. You can read it yourselves.
Now, as you learned over the course of this trial, they broke every single one of those promises more than once. They did it for 50 years.
What else did they do to further that campaign of doubt and controversy to direct people from smoking one less cigarette because it would cost them $40 billion a
year? What else did they do?
MS. YATES: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates the evidence. He inserted dollars.
THE COURT: All right. Objection sustained.
You should ignore that last statement.
MR. PENDELL: I’ll rephrase.
Why did they do it? To prevent people from smoking one less cigarette a day for 40 billion a year.
What else did they do? What else did they do to further this campaign of doubt and controversy?
Well, they created a trade association that you heard about called the Tobacco Institute and a research group called the TIRC, which later became the CTR.
Now, the public was told that the TIRC/CTR was designed to do independent and clear research on the health risks.
Let’s look at an internal, formerly secret document of Philip Morris that talks about what CTR actually was doing.
It’s been stated that the CTR is a program to find out "the truth about smoking and health." What is truth to one is false to another. CTR and the industry have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth.
Let’s face it. We are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegations that cigarette
smoking causes disease.
TIRC and the CTR was created by these defendants and the other tobacco companies to promote and protect cigarettes from attack. It was part of the strategy and the efforts by these two defendants to work as a cohesive unit to keep information about the dangers of smoking from people like Robert Hoover.
It was part of a strategy and effort that these two defendants employed for almost 50 years.
Now, we showed you R.J. Reynolds’ and Philip Morris’ internal documents proving that this campaign of doubt and controversy that they conceived, that they engineered, and that they implemented, that it was successful in maintaining the social acceptability of smoking in this country for 50 years.
What did their choice about what they were going to do about the health risks of smoking and the knowledge of lung cancer, what did they choose to do with that information?
83, Gina.
This is something called the Roper proposal from 1972. They chose repeatedly to deny and dispute that smoking caused disease, that smoking caused lung. They repeatedly claimed there was no scientific basis linking smoking to lung cancer. They did it to keep people like
Robert Hoover smoking.
Exhibit 9 2.
And even as they denied, even as they publicly disputed and denied the health risks internally, they knew there was no doubt, they knew there was no controversy about the health risks of smoking. And they knew they were making false or misleading statements when they said otherwise.
Here’s an internal document. This is Exhibit 92. It says, our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
That’s what they were saying privately. And those false and misleading statements continued through the 1970s and the 1980s and right up through until 1992 when Robert Hoover died.
Here’s a document from 1979, Exhibit 450. This is entitled Smoking and Health. This is a document from the Tobacco Institute from 1979. And as you remember, the Tobacco Institute was the organization that was founded by these defendants among other tobacco companies.
And in this document, they say, the claim that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer has not been scientifically proven.
This document was sent out to all media outlets in the country. Why? So they would report it to the public. Why? Because they wanted to keep people smoking.
In the 1980s, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris implored the public to engage in an open debate about smoking. This is Exhibit 2. It’s called Can We Have an Open Debate About Smoking?
And in it, they said that studies that scientifically conclude that smoking causes disease have regularly ignored significant evidence to the contrary.
These scientific findings come from research completely independent of the tobacco industry.
There were no such studies. There was no legitimate dispute that cigarettes caused disease.
The only dispute was the dispute that they manufactured to keep people like Robert Hoover smoking.
How do we know that it worked? How do we know that that campaign of doubt and controversy worked to keep people like Robert Hoover smoking?
In 1981, the FTC did another report. You saw that. It’s in evidence. Feel free to look at it.
This report was done 17 years after the Surgeon General released his first report in 1964 about smoking and health.
It was 15 years after mandatory caution labels and
then the warning labels appeared on every pack of cigarettes in this country. And it was almost ten years after those same warnings were put on every advertisement for cigarettes in this country.
Despite all those warnings, despite the public health authority’s best efforts to get the message out that smoking could kill you, the FTC concluded that there was a substantial portion of smokers in this country that were not getting the message.
They did not appreciate the risks of cigarette smoking. This was a direct result of the strategy that these defendants intentionally and systematically employed to keep people like Robert Hoover smoking.
This doubt and controversy was made so that there was a psychological crutch so that people like Robert Hoover would not really understand or appreciate the health risks of smoking.
And, ladies and gentlemen, my colleague,
Mr. Oliver, showed you an internal document from Philip Morris with Dr. Kyriakoudes where they analyzed this FTC report, and guess what Philip Morris concluded?
They concluded that that statistic that the FTC was reporting on was accurate. That was proof internally at Philip Morris that all those things that they had been doing had worked.
The cigarette lawyers never talked to you about that document. Why? What are those choices about the nine health risks of cigarette smoking? What did they have to do with Robert Hoover?
Robert Hoover smoked cigarettes compulsively for over five decades without full knowledge and without a full appreciation of the health risks of smoking. And he developed lung cancer and died from it.
This is Exhibit 6000H.
This is a medical record showing that Robert Hoover was diagnosed in December of 1991 with lung cancer. Robert Hoover had no other risk factors for lung cancer. There’s no evidence otherwise.
Dr. Burns told you that 90 percent of lung cancer in this country is caused by cigarette smoking. You learned over the course of this trial that before cigarettes became a common product lung cancer was unheard of .
There’s not been any evidence to dispute the fact that Robert Hoover’s lung cancer was caused by his cigarette smoking.
Robert Hoover subsequently died on October 26, 1992, of lung cancer. Here’s the death certificate, and the death certificate links his death to lung cancer.
Dr. Burns was the only medical expert to testify
in this case about Robert Hoover’s lung cancer. He told you that Robert Hoover’s smoking of R.J. Reynolds’ and Philip Morris’ cigarettes caused his lung cancer.
He told you that every single cigarette Robert Hoover smoked, every Lucky Strike, every Camel, every Pall Mall, every Silva Thin, every Virginia Slim, that each one of those cigarettes contributed to Robert Hoover’s lung cancer. Every one of those cigarettes counted.
He told you but for R.J. Reynolds’ and PM’s cigarettes, Robert Hoover would not have gotten lung cancer. Robert Hoover’s medical records and Dr. Burns’ testimony on that issue are uncontradicted.
What the lawyers say is not evidence.
We had the burden to prove to you that it was more likely than not that Robert Hoover’s addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his lung cancer and that it was more likely than not that smoking cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris was a legal cause of his lung cancer.
I want to talk to you for a minute about what legal cause is. And you don’t have to take my word for it. The Judge is going to instruct you at the end of this, and she’s going to tell you that legal cause means a substantial cause.
Sometimes another way to say that is a substantial
factor. What the cigarette lawyers didn’t tell you and don’t want you to know is that there can be more than one substantial cause.
Mr. Oliver is going to come up here and he’s going to talk to you about comparative fault. I’m not really going to talk to you about that.
For now, all you need to know is that if Robert Hoover himself was a substantial cause in the cause of his lung cancer, that doesn’t mean that his addiction to nicotine wasn’t also. They both were.
And it’s going to be for you to figure out exactly how much. But they can both be. So that chart you saw with Robert Hoover in the middle of it, that’s a red herring because Robert Hoover could have been a cause, but his addiction to nicotine also could have been a cause.
And I submit to you that it was.
And the Judge is going to tell you that. She’s going to tell you there’s going to be more than one substantial cause. You don’t have to take my word for it.
There is no doubt that Robert Hoover’s addiction was a substantial cause of his lung cancer. You heard specific evidence that nicotine addiction is what caused Robert Hoover to smoke repeatedly for over five decades and that it was the repeated exposure to the carcinogens in the cigarettes that he smoked that caused that lung cancer.
You heard that testimony from Dr. Burns, the only medical expert to testify in this case.
The 2010 Surgeon General’s report.
The Surgeon General of the United States in 2010 concluded, nicotine is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report.
And one of the diseases described in that report i s lung cancer .
Nicotine is the fundamental reason, the most important reason that Robert Hoover continued to smoke, and it was his continued use of cigarettes that caused his lung cancer .
I stand with the United States Attorney General.
Do you stand with the United States Attorney General? Do you think R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris stand with the United States Attorney General?
MS. YATES: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. PENDELL: You heard Mr. Jupe testify —
THE COURT: That’s inappropriate argument about standing with the Attorney General. Ignore that.
MR. PENDELL: Go to the next slide, please.
Dr. Burns testified that in the absence of nicotine, people don’t smoke cigarettes the way that Robert
Hoover did.
It was his medical conclusion that in the absence of addiction Robert Hoover would not have continued to smoke for the intensity and for the duration that was required to produce his lung cancer.
Dr. Burns has been involved in drafting or editing every single United States Attorney General’s report since 1975.
MR. ISASI: Your Honor, objection.
THE COURT: You keep saying Attorney General. Do you mean Surgeon General?
MR. PENDELL: I do. I’m sorry. Surgeon General.
THE COURT: All references to Attorney General are references to Surgeon General anyway.
MR. PENDELL: I apologize.
Was that the objection?
MR. ISASI: That was the objection.
MR. PENDELL: I apologize. I meant Surgeon General. I apologize.
And the Attorney General has nothing to do with
this .
Dr. Burns was involved in drafting every single one of those reports since 1975, including the 2010 report that concluded that nicotine is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products and this
persistent tobacco use causes lung cancer.
Dr. Burns told you that he applied all the expertise that he had to determine that Robert Hoover’s addiction to nicotine caused his lung cancer.
Once again, you can apply your own common sense and good judgment to the facts of this case. And your common sense and good judgment tells you that Robert Hoover smoked compulsively for over five decades because his body needed nicotine to feel normal.
Because he was addicted to it, your common sense and good judgment tells you that it was his addiction to nicotine that caused him to smoke one cigarette after another compulsively for 50 years, 50 or more times a day.
And it was that repeated exposure to the toxins in those cigarettes that he was smoking that caused his lung cancer.
Common sense and good judgment tells you that it was an addiction to cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris that caused it. He only smoked their cigarettes. Those are the only cigarettes he ever smoked.
One cigarette is not enough to cause lung cancer. Each one of those cigarettes manufactured by these defendants contributed to that lung cancer.
So when you go back to the jury room to
deliberate, you’re going to be asked on question two and question three, which we talked about yesterday.
Here’s question two: We, the jury, find that plaintiff has proved more likely than not Mr. Hoover’s addiction was the legal cause of his lung cancer.
That’s what the evidence proves.
And question number three: We, the jury, find that the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that smoking cigarettes manufactured by the following defendants was the legal cause of Mr. Hoover’s lung cancer and death.
Philip Morris USA, that’s what the evidence proves, and that’s the box that you should check.
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, you should check
that box.
Now, I’m almost done. And then you’re going to get to hear from Mr. Oliver who is going to talk to you about comparative fault on damages, but there’s just two more issues that I need to talk to you about.
I want to talk to you a little bit about the Engle
findings.
You heard about this during opening statements, and the Judge is going to instruct you on the Engle findings in her closing instructions.
Now, Engle was a class action that was brought on
behalf of Florida smokers who got certain diseases, and there was a jury trial that lasted a long time. It was many years ago. And they came to certain conclusions.
You don’t have to decide anything that they’ve already decided.
Those findings apply to all members of what they call the Engle class. If you determine that Robert Hoover is a member of that Engle class and you do that by answering yes to those first three questions, then the Engle findings apply to this case.
And what are the Engle findings?
That nicotine in cigarettes is addictive;
That smoking cigarettes cause lung cancer;
That R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous;
That R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris were negligent;
That R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris knowingly concealed or omitted material information;
And, finally, that R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris entered into an agreement with other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit material information.
Now, if you determine that Robert Hoover gets the benefit of those Engle findings, the Judge is going to tell
you that two of the findings that apply are that R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris concealed or knowingly omitted material information and that they entered into an agreement to conceal or omit material information.
And you’re going to have to decide whether or not those actions to conceal or omit material information, whether or not that was a substantial cause of Robert Hoover’s lung cancer. Okay?
Now, again, we’ve already discussed substantial cause. There could be more than one cause. Robert Hoover could be a cause. His addiction to nicotine could be a cause. And their acts could be a cause.
So let’s talk about R.J. Reynolds’ and Philip Morris’ omission of material information and their agreement to conceal or omit material information and what they have to do with Robert Hoover.
What was the material information that these defendants concealed or knowingly admitted that Robert Hoover relied upon?
That there was a legitimate controversy;
That scientists couldn’t agree about the health risks of smoking;
That it was okay to wait and see if cigarettes really were dangerous.
What was it that these defendants concealed from
Robert Hoover?
That the controversy was not legitimate;
That scientists did all agree that smoking was dangerous;
That it was not okay to wait and see.
In truth, a controversy was a lie single-handedly made up by the tobacco industry on purpose so people like Robert Hoover would rely to their detriment.
But for this conspiracy, there would have been no controversy. The death threat would have been concrete. Robert Hoover certainly would have considered that truth to be important in deciding to start smoking or in trying to stop smoking.
What else did Robert Hoover rely on?
That he could stop smoking anytime he wanted;
That it was a choice;
All he had to do was make up his mind and he could walk away;
That the only reason smoking was hard to give up was because it was so enjoyable, like any other pleasurable thing, like coffee or chocolate;
That there was no truly addictive drug involved.
What did these defendants conceal from Robert
Hoover?
That there was a real, highly addictive drug being
delivered in every puff of smoke that he inhaled, the grip of which was as powerful as other drugs, and you heard all about that over the course of this trial.
They also concealed that the odds were that if he got hooked and ended up smoking for a long time, long enough, he would get sick and possibly die in spite of any plan to stop before harm could come to him.
Robert Hoover certainly would have considered that information important.
Next slide.
You heard Mr. Heimann, who was the former CEO of a company that is now owned by R.J. Reynolds, testify. And he told you that the tobacco companies wanted their customers to rely on their statements. They wanted their customers to buy their cigarettes and smoke every single one of them and buy more.
Robert Hoover did what these tobacco companies wanted him to do.
Now, during their closing arguments, the cigarette lawyers told you, Robert Hoover was a smart man. Robert Hoover was a well-read man. Robert Hoover was a man who kept up with current events, and he watched the news.
And they tell you that because of those things he should have known, that cigarettes were dangerous to his health.
The United States Surgeon General report in 1964 was widely publicized. They told you that. They showed you a plethora of articles yesterday showing you that it was widely publicized.
They made the claim that he knew because of those things, even though there was no evidence that he ever read them or saw them or heard them.
On the other hand, these same cigarette lawyers want you to believe that Robert Hoover never heard, never believed, or never relied on any statement that they made, even though those statements were also widely publicized and sometimes in the same publications that were talking about the Surgeon General’s report.
And you have those articles. Go back and look.
My colleague and friend stood up here, went through some of those with Dr. Kyriakoudes, talking about the tobacco industry’s response in those articles.
They want you to believe there’s no way he ever could have relied on those but he relied on the others.
That doesn’t make sense. Because if he was a well-read man, a man who paid attention to current events, he was hearing those statements. He was hearing those statements.
Now, finally, during opening statement in this case, my colleague, Mr. Oliver, told you that you were going to learn at least one new thing about cigarettes that
you didn’t know before you walked into this courtroom.
Okay?
Now, if you learned at least one new thing about cigarettes — hold on one second.
If you learned at least one new thing about cigarettes that you didn’t know when you walked into this courtroom, then you should check yes to question number five: We, the jury, find that plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not the following defendant or defendants is or are liable for fraudulent concealment that was a legal cause of Mr. Hoover’s lung cancer.
MR. ISASI: Objection. Objection, Your Honor.
That is — he has mischaracterized the standard for checking that box. That is not the standard and not the basis.
THE COURT: It is certainly not the standard whether you learned one new thing. So you would have to rephrase that argument.
MR. PENDELL: I’m going to tie it back, Your
Honor.
THE COURT: Objection sustained for now.
MR. PENDELL: Ladies and gentlemen, if you learned one new thing about cigarettes when you walked into this courtroom on February 17, 2015, how was my client supposed to know those things in the 1930s and the 1940s and the
1950s and the 1960s and the 1970s and the 1980s and the 1990s all the way up to the day that he died?
You should check the box for question five on both defendants.
On question six, for each defendant who answered yes in question five, when did the fraudulent concealment on which Mr. Hoover relied, for Philip Morris, you should check before and after May 5, 1980, there was evidence of that in this case. You should check the same for R.J. Reynolds.
On question seven —
MR. ISASI: Your Honor, just to correct, counsel just said 19 8 0.
MR. PENDELL: I meant 1982.
MR. ISASI: That’s not correct.
MR. PENDELL: I meant 1982.
The verdict form says what it says. You can see for yourself.
We, the jury, find that the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that the following defendant or defendants is or are liable for conspiracy to commit fraudulent concealment which was a legal cause of Mr. Hoover’s lung cancer.
You should check yes for both defendants.
And, finally, question number eight, for each
defendant as to whom you answered yes in question seven, when did acts in furtherance of the conspiracy to fraudulent conceal on which Mr. Hoover relied occur?
For Philip Morris, you should check both before, and on or after May 5, 1982. And you should do the same for R.J. Reynolds.
I thank you for your time. My colleague,
Mr. Oliver, has a few comments.



CLOSING ARGUMENT BY THE PLAINTIFF
MR. OLIVER: May it please the Court, Counsel.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. I’m going to try very diligently to be brief. And I think I can get this done in about 15 minutes, and I am going to do my best.
I	want to thank my colleague and friend,
Mr. Pendell, and every single person at this table, and every single person in that room who helped us do this. We can’t do it without their help. And it’s just a privilege to work with people who work so hard and who are so passionate about their jobs.
Now, let’s go back to that painting that I began this discussion with by Mr. Seurat.
Gina, can we pull the painting?
You know, the lawyer for Philip Morris,
Miss Yates, compared this painting to connect the dots.
And she did that because it fit her purpose. But what she said doesn’t make sense. And just because she said it and because it fits her purpose, it isn’t true.
If you focus in on these dots in this painting, you’re going to see something. The dots aren’t separate
and distinct. They bleed into one another. And they don’t have perfectly defined borders. And that’s how choices in life work.
It’s true for a corporation. Just like it is for an individual. And the Judge is going to tell you that.
The instructions will say you don’t treat corporations and people differently.
If I make a choice, whether I like it or not, good and bad, it affects somebody next to me. And that is the same for defendants. And in this case, some of those dots represents the defendants’ choices, some of them represent Mr. Hoover and his choices, and some of those thousands of tiny dots represent the other 400,000 people a year that die from smoking-related diseases, and how the defendants’ same choices that affected Mr. Hoover affected all of those people. And they affect them every year.
So don’t be fooled. The only way to see the truth and see how those choices relate and those dots connect is if you look at that entire picture. If you look at all of the evidence. And what the lawyers say is not evidence. This painting is not evidence. Those documents, those tell the story. That’s the evidence.
What we say, what I say, it’s not evidence.
So let’s get down to it. The first question I have to talk to you about is the issue of comparative
fault. That’s the question that requires you to consider the fault of Reynolds and the fault of defendant Philip Morris and the fault of my client, Mr. Hoover. And you have to assign a percentage.
Now, there’s no magic number or formula on how you do this. Before we get to the number, I want to tell you something. Yesterday you didn’t hear about this. When you get your instructions, you’re going to hear that the burden -- remember, we bear the burden in this case on every single issue but one.
The burden of proving the extent of my client’s fault rests with defendant Reynolds and defendant Philip Morris. That’s going to be in the jury instructions. And you haven’t heard that yet. But that’s important.
Because I’m about to admit some fault on behalf of my client. And I think the amount of fault that I’m going to admit on behalf of my client might surprise you. But even if it does, remember, it’s their burden of proof.
So if whatever I say you think is too much, you can go lower than that. They have to approve that. They have to have shown that. And they didn’t bring any witnesses.
And I’m not saying they had to. They don’t have to bring witnesses. But they can. Nothing prevented them from bringing a doctor that said addiction doesn’t cause
disease. Well, that person never showed up in this courtroom.
Nobody prevented them from bringing an advertising expert who said all this money we spent on advertising it was a waste because it doesn’t work. They could have brought that professor. That professor wasn’t here in the courtroom or that advertising executive wasn’t here in the courtroom. That’s because their own documents show that it worked.
So how do you allocate fault? I suggest you look at the quantity of choices that the defendants made and that Mr. Hoover made, and the quality of the choices the defendants made and that Mr. Hoover made.
Now, I told you my client accepted some responsibility for her husband’s choices. That was true when I opened this case. And that is true now.
I’m going to suggest that you give my client,
Mr. Hoover, 25 percent of the fault. And here’s how I get there. I don’t start at 25 percent. I start higher than that.
Gina, can we go to the first.
This is the way I do it. Mr. Hoover smoked for approximately 60 years, roughly 1932, when he was 14. So if he started at 12, in 1930, you give him an extra two years. He was a regular smoker at 14. You go all the way
up to 1992. You’ve got 60 years. It could be between 55 and 60. The math is easier to do on 60, so that’s where I start.
So for 36 years, until 1966, defendants never put a warning on the products that they made. And he smoked without a warning. He didn’t know. They knew. And they didn’t tell him.
And interestingly, during closing, we didn’t hear any testimony about that time period. You know, if you want to think about what Miss Yates might say, she might say we don’t have anybody who knew him during that time period.
We did have the love of his life who told you what he had told her, which is that he started when he was a kid, and that he smoked Lucky Strikes and that he smoked Camels.
We know that. That testimony was not challenged.
So 36 years without a warning is 60 percent of Mr. Hoover’s 60-year smoking history. So I start out with the defendants at 60 percent.
And the remainder is the time that Mr. Hoover smoked with a warning on the package. And I give Mr. Hoover to start out with 40 percent.
Remember, I just told you, you have to look at the quality of those choices. So let’s start with the fact
that he started smoking as really a kid. I mean, he was 12. That’s not even a teenager.
And defendants, they targeted kids. They were out there going and drumming up the business and they got him. There’s no question they did that. I think that’s worth another 5 percent to the defendants.
Mr. Hoover didn’t have full information. He was subject to peer pressure. And you saw documents knowing that they knew it and they exploited it. They went in those letters and said let’s go get -- they didn’t say, hey, in that letter, go get the slouchy kid that nobody likes. No way. They said, go get the cool kids and get them to get everybody else smoking. That was their strategy, and it worked.
So I give another 5 percent to the defendants.
Now, here’s another thing. Mr. Hoover tried to quit. You heard evidence from Mrs. Zamboni that he tried to quit multiple times. At one point I think she said yearly or a lot, or something like that. But it was repeated attempts, and she named different types of things.
And here’s where I get an extra 5 percent on the defendants. The one quit attempt that you heard about that was really interesting to me was Smokenders, because Dr. Burns told us that during that time period Nicorette was not — Nicorette, the gum, it was not over the counter.
People weren’t taking Wellbutrin. They didn’t have the e-cigarette. And the patch, I’m not even sure the patch was available. I think the testimony was it was available in the late ’80s.
So he did what at the time was the best option he had, he went to a cessation clinic. And picked up cigarettes, and he put them in a jar. And he drew the little circles around the cigarettes to show that he had smoked them halfway. That’s a serious effort. So I think that is worth another 5 percent.
Can we go to the next slide, Gina?
So now we’re at — we’re at 65/35 — or excuse me,
70/30.
And I want to talk about the final things that tips the scales on this issue. I want you to look at the quality of the defendants’ conduct, and I want you to look at some of the things that I think were more insidious.
First of all, we talked about the fact that they targeted kids. That speaks for itself. They didn’t just target them, it was their business model.
Go back and look at those documents. There’s a document I showed you from PM where they waxed eloquent about the equilibrium -- and we’ve got to get replacement smokers. Actually, I’m sorry, I think that was Reynolds’ document, the replacement smokers document. It was the
bedrock of their business. So that’s one thing.
Then in the ’80s, when Mr. Hoover was trying to quit, what was Reynolds doing? That ’84 document, Can We Have an Open Debate About Smoking? So you’ve got a guy who is trying to quit smoking, and at the same time Reynolds is saying there’s no reason to quit smoking because there’s an open debate. We don’t know if it hurts you or doesn’t hurt you. We don’t know if it’s addictive or not addictive.
Philip Morris’ scientists said, maybe applesauce can kill you. So that’s what they were doing.
A couple more examples. Defendant Philip Morris and the Dow Chemical controversy, you remember that? I introduced three documents at the same time with Dr. Kyriakoudes. At that time — I wish I could remember the word that defense counsel used during their closing to describe that. But that was financial blackmail. That’s not the word he used, but that’s what was happening.
Philip Morris went to Dow Chemical, and they said, you need to get rid of this. We want you to tone it down. And here’s the great part. Okay. Okay. It’s okay if you give it to people, but only have doctors prescribe it to people who are sick.
It’s too late when you’re sick. It was too late for Robert Hoover when he’s having surgery. It was too late then. The gig was up.
So I think that’s going to be one of those things that gives us a little more on the defendant.
Remember that promise from George Weissman, the vice president at Philip Morris? He said if we figured out that this was injurious to health, we’d stop making cigarettes tomorrow. They’ve known for years and years and years. And last time I checked, they’re still in business.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. It’s improper argument. The sale of cigarettes is a legal product in this country.
THE COURT: That’s true.
MR. OLIVER: It is true that the sale of cigarettes is a legal — is legal in this country. That doesn’t make it right. And that doesn’t mean that Mr. Weissman kept his promise, because he didn’t.
And the final thing that I would say is, do you remember that Great American Smokers kit from Philip Morris, the one that they -- we didn’t actually show the kit. We showed the press release. And Dr. Kyriakoudes told us it was in red, white, and blue, and it was about freedom of choice.
They sent the message out to smokers that it was American to smoke. Hey, don’t try to quit. When these people start bothering you about trying to quit and trying to make your life better and increase your freedom by
increasing your life, don’t do that. Don’t listen to that. This is America. You’ve got a choice to smoke.
So I think at the end of the day, with all of those choices when you compare them, they’ve got 75 percent, and Robert Hoover has 25 percent.
So this is what I do. And we’re going to have to divide that 75 among these defendants. And I’m going to do my best to tell you how to do that.
And, again, there’s no mathematical formula. This is your decision. If you don’t think defendants have proved 25 percent, then don’t do that. If you think they’ve proved more than that, that’s okay, too. We trust you. That’s what the jury system is about.
So how do you split that 25 percent -- excuse me -- that 75 percent among the two defendants? Well, one way to do it would be to give the Reynolds Tobacco Company 50 percent and the Philip Morris tobacco company
2	5 percent.
Now, you could do that because he smoked more Reynolds cigarettes. They constituted the larger part of his smoking history. And that would be reasonable.
But that’s not what I would do. Here’s why. I would split it right down the middle. I would put 37.5 percent on Reynolds. And I would put 37.5 percent on Philip Morris.
And here’s why. This was a conspiracy. In 1953, way before that warning went on the cigarette package, they got together, they all sat in a room, and they made an agreement.
And the great thing about a conspiracy that’s different from some other individual wrongdoing is you’ve got two or three or four people. And at any time during that conspiracy, one person can stand up and say, you know what, I’ve had enough. This is too far. It’s wrong. I’m not going to do it anymore.
So 1954, Philip Morris could have said, you know what, guys? We’re not doing this. We’re going public. We’re going to tell people this is really bad for you. We really do think it causes cancer. By the way, it’s addictive. And that’s a problem, too. And we’re going to work to fix it. They didn’t do that.
So from 1953, until Robert Hoover died, they were all standing together and nobody broke the conspiracy. So for that reason, I think they are equally responsible and I would split it right down the middle.
Now, the other reason that that’s reasonable is because of that testimony that my colleague, Mr. Pendell, referenced from Dr. Burns. There’s no scientific way to separate out which cigarette or which pack of cigarettes or which brand of cigarettes caused Mr. Hoover’s cancer.
He said every cigarette counts. Every cigarette sustains addiction. Every package of cigarettes is one more step/brick in the road, towards that lung cancer.
And, you know, Philip Morris and Reynolds, they were free to bring a witness to you to explain from a medical standpoint, from a scientific standpoint, from an epidemiological standpoint how you separate out those cigarettes and say this one was worth X and this one was worth Y. And they didn’t do that.
And the reason they didn’t do that is because Dr. Burns has worked with the Surgeon General since 1975.
He knows his stuff. He understands the science. You can’t separate them out. Every single cigarette that sustained addiction, that was in the road to lung cancer for Mr . Hoover.
Now, remember, I just told you it’s defendants’ burden to prove this.
I want to talk about the blame game that has gone on in this courtroom. And I think it’s interesting.
First, we heard from Mr. Heimann, the CEO of American Tobacco Company. Now he’s with Reynolds. They bought that company.
And what did he tell you about blame and putting responsibility on somebody. You want them to buy your cigarettes, to smoke every cigarette in the pack, and buy
another pack; is that correct?
Yes.
Would you blame a person for smoking two packs a
day?
No.
You wouldn’t fault him for smoking one pack or two packs; is that correct?
I think so.
So before this lawsuit was ever filed in the early ’80s, didn’t know Mr. Hoover, CEO of American Tobacco Company, said I wouldn’t blame him. I wouldn’t put any blame on him.
But you know what? Here’s the funny thing. Then the cigarette lawyers got up and Mr. Isasi started out by saying, I’m not going to criticize Mr. Hoover for his choices.
And then yesterday I think he said something similar. And Mrs. Yates said, we’re not going to judge Mr. Hoover for his choices.
But they want you to write 100 percent. So not only are they judging him, not only have they spent the last five days trying to blame him, but it’s something worse. They want you to blame him for them. That’s what they want to do.
They want 100 percent on there for Mr. Hoover.
And they want a free pass. That’s what they want. They want to get away with this scot-free. I’m asking you not to let them do it. They’re not sorry. They’re sorry they got caught.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. That’s
improper.
MS. YATES: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. ISASI: It’s an all-cases order.
THE COURT: Which I am not familiar with. I’ll just take a chance and sustain it. And you just rephrase.
MR. OLIVER: I will move on.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MR. OLIVER: The next subject we have to talk about are compensatory and punitive damages. This is a difficult subject. I don’t have a mathematical formula for this. There is no magic way to do it.
Make sure I got the right board.
So, first compensatory, next punitive.
Compensatory damages are for Mrs. Zamboni’s loss of companionship and protection, and her mental pain and suffering as a result of her husband’s injury and death.
So how do you value that? Well, Mr. Hoover’s life with Mrs. Zamboni was like an unfinished book. They were living out their golden years together. You heard about the fact that they had been traveling together.
After he was diagnosed with cancer and treated, somewhat successfully, even though they knew it wouldn’t last, they moved to North Carolina, and they started to build the dream house they had always dreamed of building.
But you heard what happened. Mr. Hoover never made it into that house. Several days, a week before the house was finished, before Mrs. Zamboni could move in, her husband succumbed to lung cancer.
So you get to write the last chapter of this unfinished book.
Now, the legal system is the best system we have to resolve these types of things. There’s no value that you can put on human life in the real world in a philosophical sense. This is the best system we have.
So first, I want you to think about how Mrs. Zamboni talked about her husband. Well, Bob was the love of my life. But first love is first love. And that was my first love. Real love. Bobby.
Do you remember her calling him her Bobby? Do you remember seeing all of those pictures? Look at that smile on her face and that smile on his face.
That’s the first thing. You can see what’s that worth to her.
Now, I want you to think about this. What’s it worth to lose a spouse? So think about those moments. If
you’re married, you have loved ones -- it doesn’t have to be a spouse -- think about difficult moments that you have with somebody you love. Maybe they’re very sick and you’re sitting by their bedside. Maybe you’re in an argument with them, a disagreement. Maybe you’re spending a lot of time with their in-laws, and that can be difficult.
But even if we’re just talking about those difficult moments, we would all empty our bank account out to get those moments back.
MS. YATES: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
MS. YATES: Improper argument. Golden Rule.
THE COURT: I don’t agree. That’s fine. That’s an argument -- all the objection means is it’s not about you. It’s not about what you would do. That’s okay. I understand the objection.
It’s his argument. Go ahead.
MR. OLIVER: So think about the value of those bad moments, and now add in the good moments. And that’s what Mrs. Zamboni lost. She lost years and years of love and protection and companionship. She lost the good moments and the bad moments.
Now, Mr. Hoover was 74 years old. He wasn’t going to live forever. And I’m not going to tell you he was going to live forever.
What Dr. Burns told us was, based on life expectancy tables, if he had not had cancer and a smoking-related disease -- and you heard evidence, there was no evidence of any nonsmoking-related disease that he had that was serious -- he had another nine to twelve years left according to these tables. Nobody can know that. We don’t have a crystal ball.
So I think a reasonable number of years to consider is ten years. Those are years that Mrs. Zamboni lost. Those are years that are right in the middle of this life expectancy table. I think that’s fair.
Now, how do you value those years? How do you value a year of somebody’s life and the loss of that companionship?
Here’s what I’m going to suggest to you, and I’m going to tell you why. I would suggest that each one of those years, however many of those years you come up with, is worth at least seven figures.
Now, why do I say that?
THE COURT: Excuse me. I can’t see what you wrote. What did you do?
MR. OLIVER: I’m sorry, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I just want to take a look and see what you did.
MR. OLIVER: Absolutely. I’m knocking stuff over
here .
THE COURT: Okay. And the lawyers saw it?
Would you show the lawyers for one second?
Thank you. Okay.
MR. OLIVER: Now, that seems like a lot of money, and it is. And here’s why that’s important. The defendants’ own documents and their own conduct shows you how they valued life. And they placed life in terms of value; they based it on money. They’re a company. They look at that in terms of profit, and they undervalue life.
If you take a pack of cigarettes today -- and I’m just using basic math. I think it’s about $20 for two packs of cigarettes -- and if you multiply that times one year, if I did my math correctly, it’s $7,300.
If you go for 60 years, you get about $318,000 for every year.
And that’s before production costs and all of that. So that’s how little Mr. Hoover —
MR. ISASI: Objection. Objection, Your Honor.
This is not the evaluation of evidence. It’s improper argument.
THE COURT: I don’t know how he’s going to tie it back yet. So I have to hear it out.
MR. OLIVER: This is how little and how much the defendants undervalued Mr. Hoover’s life.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained. I don’t see the connection.
MR. ISASI: Your Honor, move for mistrial.
THE COURT: No, no. Denied.
You can strike all that math, which I couldn’t follow most of it anyway.
But please put it out of your mind because it was
improper.
Okay .
MR. OLIVER: Remember their documents, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, they called teenagers replacement smokers. That’s how they looked at life. That’s how they valued life.
So I’m simply asking you this, very basic proposition -- I don’t have to have these examples, but I like them. But it’s okay without them — don’t undervalue the loss of time that Mrs. Zamboni had with her husband. Just don’t undervalue.
They undervalued it. But I’m asking you not to undervalue -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. Again, undervaluing Mr. Hoover, there is no evidence of that.
That’s improper argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ISASI: Move for mistrial, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Denied.
Go ahead.
MR. OLIVER: Whatever number you decide, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you see my point.
The next subject we have to talk about is punitive damages. Now, punitive damages are for punishment. And we have talked over and over again about defendants’ conduct, so I’m not going to take your time to talk a lot about that again.
I am going to show you the standard. We have to prove by clear and convincing evidence — that is a higher burden — that they had actual knowledge that their conduct was wrong, that they had actual knowledge that there was a high probability that somebody in Mr. Hoover’s position would be injured, that they intentionally pursued their conduct despite that knowledge, and that the conduct constituted a serious public wrong.
I’m not going to go over the evidence again. I don’t think that there’s any reason to because I think it’s pretty clear that they knew what they were doing. I think it’s pretty clear they knew that they were placing all of their customers — and that would include Mr. Hoover — at risk and that they did it intentionally.
And I don’t think that anybody is confused about
the fact that the same conduct that harmed Mr. Hoover harmed -- we heard the statistics -- about 80 percent of his generation and countless others.
So that, to me, is a serious public wrong by clear and convincing evidence.
Now, I want you to remember something that counsel for, I believe it was Philip Morris, said yesterday -actually, it was Mr. Isasi for the Reynolds Tobacco Company.
They have this argument about, it’s all better now. We’re a different company.
And that came at the end of their argument. And you may have wondered, why are we talking about this?
What you’re going to hear in the instructions about punitive damages — this is very important. They will emphasize this point, and they have.
This case is about Mr. Hoover and what happened in Mr. Hoover’s lifetime.
So in 1994, when he had been dead for two years, they were still swearing before Congress that this was not addictive. So these things that they are talking about that happened now, that’s not what I’m asking you to punish them for.
I’m asking you to punish them and award punitive damages, say that we’re entitled to that for the conduct
that they did that harmed Mr. Hoover and those people that were like him, that were harmed by the conduct that harmed him.
Now, something else was said yesterday. There was a big piece of paper. So let me get my verdict form here.
I think you checked yes for both defendants. Yes
and yes.
There’s something else that was said. Right up here on this board, there was a diary in which it said,
Mr. Hoover said, I’m going to have to pay for my smoking now.
And the lawyer from Philip Morris made it -- you know, she pointed that out. But the interesting thing about that is she said that and then she said she didn’t say that Mr. Hoover’s paid. Mr. Hoover’s paid. He died. And Mrs. Zamboni, she paid for years. Those years she lost, that was her payment.
The only party that’s interested in this lawsuit that hasn’t paid anything are defendant Reynolds and defendant Philip Morris.
And then the lawyer from Philip Morris cigarette company said nobody deserves to be a millionaire for the choices they make, the bad choices. Do you remember that?
MS. YATES: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates what
I said.
THE COURT: What do you think you said?
MS. YATES: I didn’t say anything about that.
THE COURT: All right. The jury’s recollection of what you said will have to control. I can’t memorize your summation.
MS. YATES: That’s fine, Your Honor.
MR. OLIVER: When that happened -- and I believe she said that. I thought, what about their choices?
We saw documents from them that said, why are we doing this? We’re doing it for money. We’re doing it for corporate profits. That’s always been our goal.
I want to leave you with a final thought. We’ve heard a lot about freedom of choice, and defendants’ documents talk about freedom of choice, and the defendants’ lawyers have talked about freedom of choice.
And it’s a mistake to think about it that way because American liberty is not about our liberty at the expense of others. One citizen doesn’t exercise his or her rights to harm another person’s rights. That’s not what American freedom or liberty is about.
And the easiest way to look at that is look at the founding document of our country that we’re so proud of.
How does it start? It says, we the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union.
This country works because we all work together
and we respect the laws and we respect one another’s rights. And when one citizen, be it a corporation or an individual, does something wrong and takes away another person’s right to, for example, full and fair information about the product they put into their body, that it’s addictive, that it harms — lung cancer, that’s when a jury is necessary.
Now, Mr. Isasi quoted John Adams yesterday. He said, facts are stubborn things. That is a very important quote from one of the Founding Fathers of our country,
Mr. Adams.
But Mr. Adams said something else that I think is very important in this courtroom. Representative government and trial by jury are the heart and lungs of liberty. Without them, we have not fortification against being ridden like horses, policed like sheep, worked like cattle, and fed and clothed like swine and hounds.
Now, to me, that sounds a little bit like —
MR. ISASI: Objection.
MR. OLIVER: — what happened in this case.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. Improper argument, both in terms of personal opinion and the mischaracterization.
THE COURT: There’s no mischaracterization. Personal opinions should not be given, what he believes,
what he thinks.
But it’s perfectly okay to quote Adams. You did it first. He’s doing it second.
Go ahead and finish the argument about Mr. Adams.
MR. OLIVER: Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Adams is right. You’re the jury. You’re the heart and lungs of liberty. You’re the only thing that stands between defendant Philip Morris and defendant Reynolds getting away with it.
MS. YATES: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
You’ve already sustained that objection. It’s improper argument.
THE COURT: I don’t like the phrase, getting away with it. It’s not improper argument.
You are the only thing that stands between a verdict and not a verdict. You’re going to deliver a verdict one way or the other. That’s all he meant. It’s all rhetoric. It’s okay.
Go ahead.
MR. OLIVER: Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, don’t give them a free pass. I want to thank you for your t ime .
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled. That means he’s asked you
not to find in favor of the defendants.
I’m just translating for you. I think you understand that. You’re pretty sophisticated folks here.
Go ahead.
MR. OLIVER: I want to thank you for your time.
If it weren’t for this opportunity to try cases like this in a courtroom, I wouldn’t do this job. I would do something else. It’s very important to me.
It’s a pleasure to represent Mrs. Zamboni, and it’s a pleasure to have such a good team.
And I appreciate every moment that you have given us and every note that you have taken and every time that you have listened to everybody in this courtroom.
And I’ll look forward to your verdict. We’ll accept it, whatever it is.
Thank you.
