
                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good afternoon.
          Okay.  So if you can put the first slide
     up.
          And so again, you know, we thank you all
     for coming in here on a Saturday.  We
     appreciate your time, and we all know that you
     all have a lot to do in your own lives than to
     be here.  And hopefully, God willing, there are
     two questions on this verdict form, so
     hopefully everybody will be able to enjoy their
     Saturday night, Valentine's Day.
          But now we have to finish what we started.
     We've been here almost a month, and you guys
     have seen a lot, more than most people know,
     about what went on and what they did and what 5712
     they've done to people like Karl and Ina and
     Bryan and the suffering that they caused and
     the way they that have done it.
          So this is the verdict form that you all
     have filled out in the first phase of the
     trial, that we've proven to you all by clear
     and convincing evidence, not just the greater
     weight of the evidence, that punitive damages
     are warranted against both the Defendants,
     against R.J. Reynolds and against Philip
     Morris.
          And so Phase 1, as you guys -- you know,
     Phase 1, you know, they -- a lot of times
     Mr. Kaczynski and Ms. Arnold would say that
     phase was about Karl.  And it really was always
     about two parties.  It was about Karl, but it
     was also about what the industry, what they
     did.
          And now in Phase 2, the case is about Karl
     and Ina and Bryan and what they did to them.
     And that's why they have to be punished
     because -- you know, it's one thing to stand up
     here and they say -- you can put the next one.
          You know, stand up here and say, look,
     these people are no longer here, you know, part 5713
     of that is to say that, hey, we are a changed
     company and so we shouldn't be punished,
     because if you punish us, you're going to send
     a bad message, is what you're going to hear.
     And because if you punish people after they
     change, you're going to discourage change.  And
     by punishing them, it's going to be a bad
     message.
          And I submit to you, you have to again
     think of how ridiculous that is because they
     carried their conspiracy and their lies for
     50 years, 60 years, until they got caught.  And
     so if you don't punish them, nobody will be
     deterred from doing the same thing that they
     did, because people will say, Hey, look, we'll
     just do it as long as we can; we can lie and
     cheat and hurt people; we don't have to follow
     the rules that everybody else in society has to
     follow; and then when we get caught, if we get
     forced to change, we can get up here and say,
     Look at all these things that we are forced to
     do, you know, please, look how it's really
     tough on us.  We have to pay all this money to
     the MSA; we have to paid all this money to be
     regulated.  Please don't punish us, because 5714
     these other people are gone, they aren't here
     anymore.
          And I submit to you that would not be
     right.  So this is what they did.  This is a
     family, just one family, and you heard about
     all the families.  We aren't here for the other
     families who were hurt.  This is for Ina
     Ahrens.  And you got to see, you know, how hard
     it was for her and, you know, what happens when
     they do this to other human beings.
          And it's not like, you know, they can move
     on to another human being and do one thing and
     just get another one and roll them in like it's
     a factory.  These are real people, real lives,
     real situations, and people have been harmed
     and people have been hurt.
          So when you guys, jurors, people from the
     community, six fair-minded people, hear the
     evidence, hear the law, and say, you know what,
     we aren't going to tolerate this, this is not
     right, this is a society that we all live in
     and everybody's got to follow the rules.
          So, you know, punitive damages are to
     punish the corporation for what they've done.
     You know, it's not for compensation.  You've 5715
     already compensated Ina Ahrens and Bryan
     Ahrens, and believe me, they appreciate it.
     They truly, truly, truly appreciate it.
          But this is different because this is so
     that they will know, it's really for -- and
     you've heard, I've been upfront with you even
     during jury selection, the money does not go --
     the law, the law is that the money goes to the
     victims.  That's the law.  And that's how it's
     been written.  That's the law that's been
     passed.  That's the law that applies to
     everybody.
          So, you know, the money that they have to
     be punished by that you determine is fair and
     reasonable, that money goes from them to the
     victim.  That's the way the law is.  And then
     once that happens, hopefully, and I think they
     will know that they've been punished, and other
     corporations, other companies, other cigarette
     companies, whoever, will know that if they lie
     like that or they hurt people like that and
     they commit fraud and try to, you know, do the
     things that they've done and really hurt
     people, that society, members of our society
     don't like that, that, you know, if everybody 5716
     is going to live by the rules, then we should
     all do it.  And it's not fair, it's not right
     for a corporation, no matter how powerful they
     are, no matter how much money they have, that
     they can get away things like that.
          So, you know, this is -- you know, the one
     thing where Dr. Lipowicz was saying today, and
     I'm not positive if Dr. Garner said it
     yesterday, but they bring up a lot of these
     people that you see on the screen are no longer
     there, that they don't work for the company
     anymore.
          And the message that that's trying to tell
     you is, Hey, look, we are a changed
     corporation.  They are gone.  You know, you
     don't have to punish us because they are gone.
          But you heard, none of them were fired.
     Nobody was -- nobody didn't collect their
     pension.  Everybody was there for a long time,
     made a lot of money, and they grew their
     companies.  They are where they are today
     because of the things that these people have
     done.
          So if they weren't really happy with what
     was done in the past, it would be very easy to 5717
     change things for the future, it wouldn't be so
     hard to transform their companies, it wouldn't
     take that long to transform out of what they
     are doing, like they say.
          So they built their companies off these
     lies of these gentlemen, gentlemen, and they
     are where they are today because of that.  And
     not only because of that, but because of a lot
     of people that they hurt, including the Ahrens
     family.
          So I guess again the -- I submit to you
     the message would be wrong if you say to
     somebody, a corporation, because you carried on
     your fraud for so long, you were able to get
     away with it for five decades, for so long
     until you got caught, unless until you had to
     be sued by all the states, until you had to be
     sued and your documents had to be turned over,
     because you did it for so long and these people
     are now gone, we aren't going to punish.  We
     will give you a free pass now.
          And to me, I think the evidence is that
     the punishment should be more severe because it
     went on longer and the conduct over all those
     years is what resulted in Karl Ahrens' death. 5718
          So we know why they did it and we know
     that, you know -- you know, people have a right
     to be treated, you know, with respect by
     everybody, and not just your own families, but
     other people's families.  We should be
     considerate of one another.  And money isn't
     always a top priority.  But that's what they --
     this is not my words again -- they knew all
     along that it was about the money.  Who ain't
     for more money?  And this is what they are
     writing in their secret documents, their little
     memos that they are writing about that they
     didn't think anybody was going to see.  They
     never thought you would see this.  This guy who
     wrote this memo never thought that any of you
     would see this.  But now you know.  Now you
     know.  And you know all their little dirty
     secrets that nobody knew for decades and they
     got away with it.
          But people thought that, hey, you know,
     smoking is a choice.  It's really just a habit.
     These are good companies.
          And now you know from their own documents
     they knew all along that wasn't the case.  And
     they knew even back in 1968, which was almost 5719
     30-some-odd years before they got caught, that
     they knew they were going to get caught.  So it
     wasn't even a surprise to them.  They
     understood that this wasn't going to be able to
     go on forever, but all along they are making
     money, they are growing their company.  You
     know, everyone else is trying to grow their
     companies the right way; everybody else is
     following the rules that's instilled upon us
     wherever we are, wherever you are; and they are
     saying internally, hey, look, one day we may be
     subjected to the finding that we are making
     false statements and misleading statements to
     promote our cigarettes.  And now you guys know
     that that's what they did.  That's how we got
     here.
          So when we look back to 1900 and we say,
     how did we go from 140 deaths in the world from
     lung cancer to where we are now, to where it's
     going, because you see that the curve is going
     down, and they say that they are transforming
     out of the business, that they want to
     transform.  Well, the transformation, if it was
     really sincere, if it was a sincere
     transformation, it wouldn't take another 5720
     40 years to get to where we should be, but we
     will get there.
          And when people look back at this
     historically, they look back and they say, How
     did this happen?  They are going to say that
     there were these corporations with these people
     in the corporation who you all met, they were
     interested in money, profits over human lives,
     profits over Mr. Ahrens, and they knew all
     along that they were lying.  It wasn't even --
     they knew that these were lies.
          You know, we teach our children not to
     lie.  And these are grown men, and they don't
     know -- they don't know that they are not
     supposed to lie to make money when people are
     going to die?  So that's why they need to be
     punished.
          And, you know, so that's why we are here.
     I think that's why -- you all know why we are
     here.  So, yeah.
          And so again, this was one of the internal
     documents where they talked about it was a
     holding strategy.  And so when we get here in
     2016, and they talk about, well, we now have
     FDA regulation, you know; we now have, you 5721
     know, money that we have to pay back; we now
     have lawsuits that we have to account for; we
     now have, you know, people are thinking
     differently than us.  They always knew this was
     going to happen.  They knew, you know, there
     was a minority of the public who maybe thought
     they were good corporations or they were doing
     well, but it was what they call a holding
     strategy, it was a delay, a delay, and they
     knew sooner or later, and they call it
     brilliant.  I mean, think about that.  That the
     person who is writing this memo, who is writing
     it, they know that they are profiting.  They
     know people are dying.  They know that they are
     going to get caught sooner or later.
     Hopefully, the person who is writing it thinks
     they will get caught after he is out of the
     corporation, and he is calling it brilliant.
          And that's the sad thing, when somebody
     like that is not held accountable or
     corporations are not held accountable, when
     they are referring to things like this as
     brilliant.
          So they knew all along.
          And again, also, when they talked about 5722
     the CTR and the TI, you know, in Phase 1, we
     talked about all the fine -- not we -- the
     Defense talked about all the fine research the
     CTR had done and the TI had done.  And you now
     know that that was part of the holding
     strategy.
          They'd been disbanded, you know.  Even
     Dr. Lipowicz admitted it today, they are no
     longer around.  And that's it.  They knew what
     what was going on.  And it's -- I'm probably
     being too nice to them and too polite.
          But what they did was pretty much as bad
     as it could be in terms of what one individual,
     what one human or what somebody could do to
     other people and why they would do it and what
     motivated them and what choices they made.
          And so they talked about, you know, they
     are asking you now, as I said, hey, look, one
     of the things in the jury instructions are that
     you can consider mitigation when you're
     determining the amount to punish.  Okay?
          So, for example, sometimes corporations do
     bad things, they correct themselves, they try
     to make it right to the victims.  And that
     could possibly be something that somebody would 5723
     call mitigation to some degree.
          But that's not what happened here.  They
     got -- they did it for 60 years or 50 years.
     Then they get caught.  Then they get sued by
     all the state attorney general because they are
     like, hey, we are paying all this money in
     healthcare costs.  The attorney generals find
     out what's going on, they see all the medical
     expenses that they are being stuck with because
     of the fraud that they are committing, and the
     attorney generals are like, we want our money
     back.  You know, why should our taxpayers have
     to pay for Medicaid expenses for the products
     that you guys are profiting from?  You guys are
     making all this money, and you've lied to get
     to where you are.
          So they sue them, and they have to pay
     them back billions and billions of dollars, and
     not one penny went to a victim, and they are
     still profitable.  So how is that a mitigating
     factor?  It was -- nothing was voluntary,
     nothing was done by them to help a victim, and
     it was a thing that was forced upon them.
          And it has not -- it has not benefited one
     victim -- you know how many people died, it's 5724
     500,000 people a year in our country,
     30 million people.
          So when Dr. Lipowicz tells you that we
     have this new website and we've had, he said,
     oh, hundreds of thousands of people have
     visited our website since it's been up since
     1998 or '99, think about that.  Their website
     has been up for almost 20 years.  He's said a
     few hundred thousand people have visited part
     of their website over 20 years, but meanwhile
     there's 45 million smokers in our country, and
     a half million are dying every year, 90 percent
     are starting as teenagers, and they bring you
     this website of self-serving statements that
     they know nobody's looking at.  Nobody's
     looking at that.
          So they want people to know what's on
     their website.  With all the money they have,
     you don't think they could do a better job, or
     do you really think it's just for you?  Is it
     really what they want people to see or is it
     what they want juries to see?
          And these are every -- in fact, every
     statement that they make now for public is very
     different than the statements they made 5725
     privately.  So it's very easy to see the two
     different types of statements, the statements
     that they would make when they didn't think
     anybody was watching; and now, on their
     website, some letters to President Obama,
     there's a whole different tone.
          And so you have to decide:  Are these
     really factors that they should get credit for,
     or are they things that were just forced upon
     them, that they are trying to look good now?
     Because they know they're going to be held --
     the holding strategy is over, so they know they
     have to be held accountable to jurors who are
     their peers.
          MS. ARNOLD:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  And so the next slide was the
     FDA slide.  And again, you know, this was
     nothing voluntary.  It actually -- sometimes
     you say to somebody, it took an Act of Congress
     to get you to do something.  This literally
     took an Act of Congress to get -- every other
     drug company in our country is regulated.  And
     for years, they avoided regulation, for 5726
     50 years.  For 50 years they avoided FDA
     regulation.  And now they have to fund -- they
     have to police themselves because now they have
     to pay the FDA to come in and police them, and
     so they have to pay this money.  They have to
     pay money for oversight of themselves, and they
     have to -- how many companies do you think our
     country has -- the FDA to oversee them to make
     sure they don't do anything wrong.  So they
     have to pay money to have themselves overseen
     and to have FDA do research.
          And the reason that they have to pay that
     money to have people do research into their
     product and oversee them is because they can't
     be trusted.  They have proven that for
     50 years.
          And so now that they have proven they
     can't be trusted, how is that a mitigating
     factor that should even be considered?  It
     actually should be considered in giving more
     punitive damages, not less, because it doesn't
     say anything good about them, it only says bad
     things about them, is that the government has
     to get involved to get them to act like
     everybody else has to act. 5727
          And thank God they have.  And thank God
     they have.
          And then this letter to Obama, to the
     President, you know -- you know, they bring
     this in litigation.  And think of it -- so this
     legislative process that they supported --
     think about the letter.  They are telling you,
     we supported this process.  We supported FDA
     regulation.  We wanted FDA regulation.
          Do you think they wanted FDA regulation?
     You really think they wanted it?  It took eight
     years.  Eight years is a long time.  And think
     about what you were doing eight years ago.
          So it took them eight years, according to
     this letter, to even get the FDA regulation in
     place when they knew it was inevitable.  They
     knew that there was going to be to be an Act
     put in place.
          Obviously, they write this self-serving
     letter.  And in the letter they even admit that
     part of the reason for the Act is to help
     ensure that -- when they say tobacco companies,
     they mean themselves.  So part of the reason
     for legislation is to make sure that they,
     Philip Morris and R.J.R., don't market their 5728
     products to children anymore.
          So that type of legislation shouldn't take
     eight years; it should take probably eight days
     or eight weeks.  It shouldn't even take an Act
     of Congress.
          So it took eight years for them to get
     some sort of legislation intact.  And then at
     the end of it, when you read the letter, they
     talk about there's been a considerable amount
     of controversy over the years.  You all know
     there's been no controversy.  The only
     controversy is the one that they started.
          So it shouldn't have even gotten to this
     point.  The only reason we got here is because
     of a fake controversy based on fraud.  And then
     they say -- which says a lot -- that they are
     interested in this because it's a milestone
     that can help stakeholders, right?  Again,
     that's all they care about.  You read that
     letter.  There's not one word in there about
     any consumer, about any of the harm that they
     did to any people.  They are worried again
     about their shareholders and their
     stakeholders.
          So I submit to you, if it says anything 5729
     about them, it just shows how they are able to
     delay FDA regulation for a long time when it
     should have happened back in 1969, when they
     were talking about who ain't for more money,
     because that's what that whole document is
     about.  The who ain't for more money is talking
     about we don't want to be regulated by the FDA.
          And then the next thing they talk about,
     transforming, how they are transforming into
     all these other products.  And, you know, they
     start with on one side they have a cigarette
     that causes cancer, and we get all the way down
     to the Snus, which causes mouth cancer, is
     addictive.  They have the VUSE, which is a
     nicotine delivery device.
          And so they say to you, We don't want
     to -- because it's a contradiction to what they
     are saying.  Because they can sell what they
     want, you know, cigarettes are a legal product.
     But VUSE is a legal product.  Premier is a
     legal product.  Premier is a best-kept secret.
     Nobody even knows about Premier.  It's not even
     on their website.
          But they come in to court and they tell
     you about what a great job they are doing with 5730
     Premier, with Snus, with ZONNIC.
          And you know what?  You don't have to have
     50 million customers to be a profitable
     company.  There are a lot of companies in
     America that are happy to have 2 million
     customers, 3 million, 100,000 customers, okay.
          So they wanted to -- if they were really
     upset about what those gentlemen did who don't
     work there anymore and they really wanted to
     transform out of the business, which they told
     you under oath that that's what they wanted,
     then why not just sell the VUSE and the Snus
     and the ZONNIC?
          And then they say, well, cigarettes are a
     legal product.  Okay.  Well, then just sell
     cigarettes.  But they want it both ways.  They
     are trying to get credit for something that
     they are really not doing.  And VUSE, we don't
     even know if it's safe or not safe.  All it is
     is a reminder of what we went through with the
     filters and the lights.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          NARRATOR:  Have they been proven to be
     safe, Mr. Cullman? 5731
          MR. CULLMAN:  I believe they have not been
     proved to be unsafe.  No one knows.  It may, it
     may not.
          MR. CAMPBELL:  We may find out there is
     some relationship which has yet to be proven.
          (The video clip ended.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And that's the same thing they
     are telling you today about the VUSE.
          So all we know is that the VUSE is a
     nicotine delivery device.  It has harmful
     chemicals in it.  And instead of waiting until
     the research -- why would -- and it's not even
     FDA regulated.  So why -- what is the rush to
     get a product out that can kill people, that's
     an addictive drug, that's a highly addictive
     drug, what's the rush?
          You know, they could sell their Premier
     that they are so proud of.  They could, you
     know, they could sell their ZONNIC, which is a
     healthful product.  You know, they could do
     that if they wanted to.
          You know, would they lose a lot of
     customers?  Sure.  Would they save a lot of
     lives?  Of course.  Would they make less money?
     Okay. 5732
          Okay.  What's wrong with that?  You know,
     they have to make every nickel, every dime they
     can make any way they can do it.  They are
     entitled to do that, there's nothing wrong with
     it, but they have to be honest when they do it.
     They have to be forthright with their consumers
     and with the government and with teenagers and
     with everybody that they did not do that.  And
     they don't want to do it, and it's taken a lot
     to even get to where we are today with them.
          And then the next slide.
          And so this is really where they are
     transforming.  And I think this is from the
     R.J. Reynolds website.
          Just bring out the first part, Robert.
     You can't get it any bigger than that?
          Well, that's fine.
          I mean, so, you know, on their own website
     it says that, you know, as they come into court
     and they tell you, We are transforming, we are
     transforming into Eclipse, we are going to go
     into the ZONNIC, don't worry, we are going to
     transform, but then on their own website they
     are talking about Reynolds focuses its market
     to accelerate -- on Camel and Pall Mall to 5733
     accelerate their market growth share and to
     drive those brands for long-term growth and
     profit.
          So, okay.  So then when you go back in the
     jury room and you ask yourselves and you talk
     about it, you have to decide:  Do you really
     think that Dr. Garner was being honest and
     forthright when he was telling you that they
     are transforming and they are trying to get out
     of this business and that they want to do the
     right thing and they want to look out for the
     consumer's health?
          It says, right on the website, the exact
     opposite.  You know, they just purchased --
     they made a whole big thing about Lorillard.
     Well, we have to sell this cigarette and that
     cigarette.
          They bought Lorillard for a reason.
     Newport is the number-one-selling menthol
     cigarette in our country.  It gave them market
     share.  Those two are half the market.  And
     that's why they wanted Lorillard and they
     wanted Newport.  And they control, you know,
     they want to control that part of the market.
          That's transforming into the menthol 5734
     business; that's not transforming into the
     e-cigarette business.  They are transforming
     into the menthol cigarette business.
          And so, you know, so on and so forth.
          And so if we can go to the next one.
          So this is punitive damages.  And you have
     to decide, the instruction is you will
     determine -- and then this is it.  On the
     verdict form are two questions.
          You know, you have to decide, is there
     conduct, you know, to deceive, to be deceptive,
     to lie, to hurt people, to know what they did
     on purpose.
          When you gauge what is the proper amount
     to punish a corporation who is as profitable as
     we know they are, with all the money they are
     spending on the MSA and the FDA, and they come
     in here and they still say, we are extremely
     profitable still, it hasn't affected them at
     all.
          And they -- look, punitive damages cannot
     be to put them out of business.  You cannot do
     that.  We aren't going to ask you to do that.
     It has to be based upon the evidence and the
     law in this case, and that's what we are going 5735
     to ask you to do.  Nothing more.  And that
     would be wrong if it was more than that.
          But punitive damages are to serve as a
     punishment.  So what amount would be a proper
     punishment for lying and concealing for decades
     and causing the death of a human being, and
     what amount would serve as proper deterrent to
     other corporations who may read or hear about
     this and say, Hey, this is what's going to
     happen.  Maybe we should act correctly, and
     certainly we don't want to follow their lead,
     because if we do, look what would happen to us.
          So you have to consider the nature, the
     extent, the degree of the misconduct and the
     related circumstances.
          And I submit you to that, you know, all
     along, for the 50 years -- not 50, the 35 years
     that Karl Ahrens was using their product, the
     filters that were told to him it was safer,
     they said that the Micronite filters will take
     out all the ingredients, the lights that they
     now admit are not safer, you know, all along,
     when they knew these things, they should have
     been helping people, not hurting people.
          And they had every opportunity -- when you 5736
     talk about opportunities and choices, they had
     every single opportunity, every day -- you talk
     about every day, Karl Ahrens saw a warning
     every single day they woke up.  They had the
     opportunity to make the right choices, and they
     never did, and they didn't want to until they
     knew it was a holding strategy, brilliantly
     conceived until they were going to get caught.
          And so you are the jurors of their peers
     from the community that will let them know, you
     know, what is proper punishment in punitive
     damages.
          And so look, if I -- it would be wrong of
     me to come in here and suggest, again, just
     like in compensatories, I wouldn't ask for a
     number like -- even though I would want to --
     for what they did, I could come in here and say
     200 million or 100 million, because it would
     not be supported by the evidence in this case
     and the law, and I know that.  And that would
     be wrong and we would not ask that from you.
          But you all awarded $9 million for
     compensatory damages, and I would submit to you
     a fair amount for punitive damages, so that
     they will know, that they will know -- you 5737
     know, they know that you compensated the
     victim, but now they will know that they will
     be punished and they need to feel the
     punishment, to know they've been punished.  And
     I would submit to you that three times
     compensatory damages, which would be
     $27 million, $13 1/2 million per Defendant,
     would be a proper amount.  And I submit you to
     that if you punish them in that amount, that
     they will know that they've been punished, and
     I submit that that is -- would be consistent
     with the facts of what went on in this case.
          And I thank you all very much for your
     time.
     
     
                       CLOSING REBUTTAL
          MR. SALES:  I will show you a couple of
     jury instructions that we have here.
          Will you be able to see, sir?
          No, thank you.  We are just going to get
     right to work.  You know -- but you've heard it
     enough.
          Sometimes we'll get into one of these
     things, and I think you all have seen it, it
     just looks like the parties are in two
     different courtrooms and they are talking about
     two different sets of companies and they are 5775
     talking about, I don't know, some other lawsuit
     somewhere.
          And as you'll see in a few minutes, I
     think some of us on the Plaintiff's side just
     have sort of a different view about what the
     law and the facts are.
          Because one of things that you were told
     just a few moments ago was that we are a
     generation removed from the things that
     happened in this case and that you've heard
     about, and that that somehow excuses the
     Defense from facing the ultimate consequences.
          I want to urge you, before I go too much
     further, to just be reminded that the jury
     instruction in this case that was repeated in
     the first phase, and it's repeated again today,
     it talks about punishment, that's to these
     companies here, their acts and the acts of
     their predecessors and their co-conspirators,
     and deterrence to others.
          And what you've heard throughout the
     entire second phase and the evidence and the
     arguments today is that they are saying, We
     don't need to be deterred.  And I'm going to
     suggest to you in a few minutes there's a 5776
     question about that.  But that isn't what
     you're being asked to do by the instructions.
     They are about punishing them and deterring
     others.
          And on that concept of being a generation
     removed, I want you to think about this for a
     moment, if you would.  Because we are 50 years
     removed from when we know that Karl Ahrens was
     smoking Kent cigarettes.  And from what we
     know, according to Lorillard's own documents,
     it was trying to, to use its word, exploit the
     concerns of people who smoke about the health
     effects of cigarettes.
          We are 40 years removed from the 1970s,
     when in the evidence that you've seen, which
     has not been addressed by one thing that you've
     heard today and yesterday, there was a race
     among these Defendants, co-conspirators, yes,
     when they communicated with the public and what
     they were hiding.  But there was a race among
     them to figure out a way to make the cigarettes
     have the most kick, impact, satisfaction --
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Your Honor, improper
     rebuttal.  This was not covered by either of
     our closings. 5777
          MR. SALES:  A generation removed.
          THE COURT:  I'm looking at the transcript.
          MR. SALES:  What we did in the past.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. SALES:  We are 40 years removed from
     the race among these Defendants in the
     documents that you've seen to try and increase
     the pH, and through their own words, to try and
     make the cigarettes have a bigger kick or
     impact or more smoker satisfaction.
          We are 30 years removed from the very
     first time that the public health community in
     this country, even though Dr. Lipowicz, I would
     submit to you, as you heard and could see
     today, knew it before then, that cigarettes
     with nicotine were addictive.
          And we are just 20 years removed, just
     working forward in time, from the time when
     Karl Ahrens died.  It's going to be the
     20th anniversary this year of that event.
          And so to suggest that all of these things
     sort of don't matter and there's not a line
     that can be drawn from one to the other, we
     would submit to you is no the proper view of
     the evidence. 5778
          And you were told that -- you know, we
     don't make any apologies for the numbers that
     we suggested to you.  You've heard about
     enormous sums of money that are available and
     at the disposal of these parties, these
     Defendants, to do what they will with it for a
     variety of purposes.  And you've been told that
     it's a magnificent sum because when you stretch
     it out or divide it, you could work it a
     hundred different ways, it sounds like a big
     number.
          How big is it to them, really, is the
     question that we would ask you.  And we would
     submit, in light of the punishment that is
     warranted in this case and the compensatory
     damages which you have found to have had -- to
     have occurred to both Ina and Bryan, that those
     numbers are reasonable.
          You know, if they just stopped promoting
     for a couple of days, the amount of money that
     we are talking about, it would be well in hand
     and more than adequate to compensate -- excuse
     me, to punish them along the lines that you've
     heard about.
          They tell you that they've been punished 5779
     enough because they are regulated; that they've
     been punished enough because they have to pay
     for things that they have caused; that they
     have to pay for the harm caused to the states
     that have to take care of their own citizens.
     And they tell you that that's punishment.
          And they come in and they've told you in
     this closing argument today not only that
     they've been punished enough, but that if you
     punish them for things that they've done in the
     past, when all they have done so far is
     compensate, that you'll be sending the wrong
     message to others who might do likewise.
          And I would ask you, for companies that
     come in and say, We are now under the watchful
     eye of the government because of what we've
     done, that's punishment enough; whether in fact
     they get it and whether in fact it is a new
     day.
          Counsel told you that you can't punish
     them for manufacturing, selling, or advertising
     cigarettes.
          Actually, do you have that?
          What the instruction really says, take a
     look at it, because there's a word -- do we 5780
     have that?
          It says, "Defendants cannot be held liable
     merely" -- have you -- merely for doing those
     things.  Has anyone in this case suggested to
     you, has the Plaintiff in this case suggested
     to you even one time, whether in Phase 1 or
     Phase 2, that they should be compensated -- or
     the Defendant should be punished just for
     selling?  No.  If that was all that it was
     about, it wouldn't have taken the time it took
     to get to this point.
          Compensation and punishment are different,
     and His Honor has already explained that to
     you.
          Now, I wrote this down because the
     expressions were remarkably similar in both of
     the arguments of the Defense.
          Mr. Kaczynski listed a bunch of things
     which he said troubled you and explained your
     Phase 1 verdict.  Ms. Arnold just said that --
     listed some things about what caused you
     concern.
          The Plaintiff, Mrs. Ahrens, and her
     lawyers, we do not presume to know the things
     that have caused you concern or that have put 5781
     us in a position we are here in this room, we
     are here in this Phase 2, deciding how much to
     punish these Defendants.
          But I want to show you, as I talk about
     that just for a moment, what the instruction is
     that Ms. Arnold just went over, because I think
     that might be helpful in thinking about that
     because it's really what we are here to do.
          You remember she correctly and properly
     thanked you, added on that the punishment in
     this case must be based solely on harms caused
     to Karl, Ina, and Bryan Ahrens.  That's what
     you're here to do.
          And we would submit to you that during the
     period of time that mattered in this case, in
     that past that you're being urged effectively
     to forget, is that the things that were
     troubling Ina and Karl and Bryan Ahrens had
     nothing to do with the MSA, which didn't yet
     exist.  It had nothing to do with the FDA.  It
     had nothing to do with websites, which the
     Internet was just coming around in the 1990s.
     It had nothing to do with any of those things.
          And I want to tell you what, in fact, in
     light of that instruction -- if you can keep 5782
     that up, please -- some of the things that are
     in evidence that were of concern to three real
     people back in 1996.  Just a few examples.
          This is from the medical records that are
     in evidence, when you go to think about what
     happened to them and how that bears upon your
     punishment, the punishment that you find to be
     appropriate.
          On July 22nd -- it's in the Moffitt
     records -- 1996, this is from the records:
     "Chief complaint of sudden onset of shortness
     of breath.  Patient is presently undergoing
     chemo per protocol.  He was discharged on
     Tuesday last week.  He did well until he awoke
     on Thursday.  That a.m. he was unable even to
     shave without resting due to dyspnea."  That's
     shortness of breath.  "He is still limited by
     shortness of breath."  That's what was
     troubling the Ahrens.
          Just the next day, when he was at the Lee
     Moffitt -- excuse me -- Cancer Center, on
     July 23rd, 1996, what was troubling the Ahrens
     was this:  That Mr. Ahrens had anxiety,
     frustration, and was shaky with his
     hospitalization and the procedures.  Insomnia. 5783
     He wants to go home.  And they had to give him
     Ativan because he was so anxious.
          Those are the kinds of things that were
     concerning the Ahrens at that time.
          He had by September lost 14 pounds since
     his last assessment.  He had a headache.  And
     his eyes, according to the medical record of
     September 9th, 1996, all of these things being
     witnessed by the people you heard testify in
     this courtroom, the Ahrens, he had headaches
     and his eyes were cloudy.
          One or two more of these.
          On the same day they talked about him
     about -- and you heard about the same day, from
     Ina, he had an MRI of the head.  He had
     backaches.  He couldn't walk.  He was in bed
     all of the time.  You heard about that.
          And you heard about how Mr. and
     Mrs. Ahrens were told what the consequences
     were, and they decided together on
     September 10th, 1996, that he would not be
     resuscitated, because they knew he was going to
     die.
          That's what we are here for in this
     Phase 2, about asking for punishment and to 5784
     show these Defendants and their co-conspirators
     and the other people who have tremendous
     responsibility in our community and our economy
     to not put people through things like that.
          Can you put those pictures up?
          Think about that instruction.  They are
     not thinking here about the FDA and regulation.
          And if you decide that that makes all this
     okay, that the loss of this very good man under
     circumstances 20 years ago, forward, that have
     been very difficult for this family, that that
     made it all go away and that nothing further
     needs to be done by you, then we haven't done
     our jobs.
          I do want to suggest to you that maybe it
     isn't just those things that counsel identified
     that were bothering you, and maybe they don't
     still get it, because if you look on that
     website, it's true that if you were a consumer
     who wanted to find out the things that we've
     shown you in this courtroom, and you have some
     sophistication about how to search those
     14 million pages of documents that Dr. Proctor
     talked about, that you might gain an
     understanding about some of the things that you 5785
     saw in this courtroom.
          How you could, in 1976, '77, be looking
     for something better to do with your smoking
     and choose a cigarette like Merit, which was
     pitched as a wonder of science, and magically,
     if you look at the records -- and this is
     something that Reynolds figured out about
     Philip Morris' Merit cigarette, that magically
     it delivered 77 percent --
          MS. ARNOLD:  Objection, Your Honor.  Sorry
     to interrupt.  Beyond the scope.  It's not
     rebuttal.
          MR. SALES:  What the jurors were worried
     about.
          THE COURT:  I'll allow it.
          MR. SALES:  The cigarette that was pitched
     as a healthier alternative was delivering
     77 percent more free nicotine than a Winston, a
     regular filtered cigarette.
          And smokers didn't know those things.
     These folks weren't thinking about that back in
     the 1970s and '80s and '90s.  They didn't have
     any idea about it.  And that's why, as you
     heard from Dr. Hurt, today, when people are
     still struggling with an understanding about 5786
     their smoking, those kinds of things get
     explained, because it helps people understand
     the grip.  And remember, it's all about the
     nicotine.
          And why is it you would have to ask
     yourself, with all the things that the
     Defendants have pointed out to you in this case
     about what they are doing right today, why is
     it that they can point to voluntary and
     involuntary actions and never, even today,
     never, even today come completely clean about
     nicotine?  Where is it on the packages,
     voluntarily?
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Preemption.
          MR. SALES:  Not on the side where the
     label is required to be.
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  The objection is sustained.
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Thank you.
          MR. SALES:  You saw Dr. Lipowicz today
     acknowledge that the industry could put other
     labels in different locations, provide other
     voluntary information, and they have never, in
     conjunction with their own cigarettes, told 5787
     consumers that the product is addictive, not
     even once.  Not on the package.
          And when you go, if you're one of those
     people who does look to a consumer website, if
     that's what it is, to find out about Reynolds
     products today, what you'll read is -- and
     you've seen it several times -- is that
     nicotine is addictive, but it is not a threat
     to health.
          And you should ask yourselves, we would
     submit to you, whether or not they have come
     clean with that even today.
          Ina Ahrens doesn't want one penny of
     sympathy from any of you.  She didn't ask for
     it before.  She passes through this life with
     considerable grace and class under considerable
     difficulties.
          And when you think about the folks who are
     responsible, not for her own personal
     afflictions, they didn't have anything to do
     with that, but for the losses that she has
     experienced and her husband experienced,
     because now you get to think about that, her
     own losses over the last 20 years, in light of
     everything that they did.  And the obligation 5788
     that you have, if you find that punitive
     damages continue to be warranted, think about
     that, if you would, please.
          And they tell you, well, it's not going to
     go to Red Cross, American Cancer, whatever,
     the -- American Lung, and that's true.
          And we would ask you to consider:  Is the
     money, under the circumstances that you've been
     asked to award, any punitive damages that you
     might award, is it better placed with Ina
     Ahrens or with these Defendants?  Because one
     of the things that you're asked --
          MS. ARNOLD:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Argument.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. SALES:  You were told that it was
     suggested to you that if you just continue to
     let us work the way we've been working, we'll
     find a cure for Ebola, or we already have.  If
     that was front-page news that people have
     escaped, it has escaped the attention of other
     people, that's something that I ask you to
     consider.
          That, in fact, for these many years during
     the period of conspiracy, when however many 5789
     millions have passed, including Karl Ahrens,
     what they were really trying to do is find a
     cure for Alzheimer's, and ask if that is a
     credible reason not to punish the Defendants in
     this case.
          And, you know, on these alternative
     products, it's for you to decide because
     they've asked you to consider whether or not
     they are really in the business of trying to
     get people to smoke less while doing better and
     better and better over the years, and when the
     majority of their sales -- I don't think there
     was any question about it in Dr. Garner's
     testimony yesterday -- is still from
     cigarettes.
          And, you know, if Premier and Eclipse
     was -- if Eclipse was something that was really
     a matter of interest for them, Mr. Philipson
     says there's a ten-dollar solution, he is our
     technical man, put it on the website if you
     really believe that that's helping to educate
     consumers.
          And you saw the scientists from there
     yesterday said, well, it's in there somewhere.
     Look at all the pages you had to skip and 5790
     navigate to just find out where the ingredients
     are.  There is not a wick -- a lick, rather, of
     any consumer information about that.
          You were asked to think about some of the
     people and those other lawsuits.  And I will
     submit to you that you don't have any
     information about which you can decide that the
     punishment that's being sought in this case
     should be reduced or treated differently
     because of some hypothetical problem that they
     may have down the line.  There's no basis in
     the evidence for that.
          And you've been given an instruction on
     that in this phase.  It's the greater weight of
     the evidence.  And have the Defendants really
     carried their burden of persuading you that
     they should escape punishment?  Because they've
     hurt a lot of other people who may or may not
     be successful in claims down the road.  Even
     if --
          MS. ARNOLD:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Grounds.
          MS. ARNOLD:  Improper argument.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MS. ARNOLD:  Relevance. 5791
          MR. SALES:  Even if you credit -- even if
     you credit Dr. Garner's testimony that that's
     how many cases are actually out there.
          Finally, a couple more things on the MSA.
          They tell you that it's in perpetuity that
     they have to make those payments.  Those
     payments are related, as you heard, to the
     market share of cigarette sales.  Any one of
     these manufacturers --
          MS. ARNOLD:  Objection.  Not in evidence.
          MR. SALES:  Yesterday.
          THE COURT:  Uh --
          MR. SALES:  Dr. Garner.
          THE COURT:  Yeah.  Overruled.
          MR. SALES:  Any one of these manufacturers
     would have to participate in this.  If their
     market share were to dwindle for any reason --
     there's a growth, as you've heard, as a result
     of the acquisition of Lorillard.  But if they
     wanted for any reason to reduce the amount of
     cigarettes that they sold, even down to
     nothing, which would be their choice, they
     could make all of those payments vanish, just
     like the disease and death that flow from their
     products. 5792
          And finally, on the suggestion that
     punishment should be avoided in this case
     because some of the actors that you saw -- the
     Bowlings, the Wakehams, the Cullmans -- that
     they are all gone, the person that we said
     passed that you should focus on is gone.
          As you take your generation-ago walk
     through history that counsel for Philip Morris
     asked you to take, there's not anything in
     these instructions on the law about Wakeham or
     Osdene or any of these people.  It's about the
     people here in this courtroom, the people who
     have been here, and the man who also is gone,
     and gone from this good lady's life.
          And that's the reason that we want to ask
     you to punish them with an amount that's
     appropriate.  And the figure, you were not
     given one reason, one valid reason to conclude
     that the figures suggested by Mr. Paige were
     anything other than fair and reasonable, under
     the facts of this case.
          Thank you very much.