	CLOSING STATEMENT          
	MR. CARTER:  Good afternoon.
          You heard a story in this trial about a
     phone call.  Mr. Ahrens talking to an old
     friend on the other side of the country.  He
     received bad news.  The old friend had lung
     cancer and was given six months to live.
          After that call, Mr. Ahrens announced to
     his coworkers that he was quitting, gave away
     his cigarettes, went home at the end of the
     day, walked in the door, asked Mrs. Ahrens if 4899
     she noticed anything different about him, at
     first she didn't.  He told her, I've quit
     smoking.  From that point forward, for the rest
     of his life, he never smoked another cigarette.
          And that story tells you everything you
     need to know about the issues that I'm going to
     speak with you about this afternoon.  And it
     explains why the Defendants believe you should
     enter a verdict on their behalf.
          May it please the Court, Counsel,
     Mrs. Ahrens, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
          My name is Ed Carter.  You've heard me
     introduced over the course of the past three
     weeks.  I've had the opportunity to talk to
     some of the witnesses, but this is my first
     opportunity to speak with you.  I'm pleased to
     be here as part of the team representing
     R.J. Reynolds.  I'm pleased that my partner,
     Steve Kaczynski, has graciously given me some
     of his time so that I can have an opportunity
     to speak to you about some of the issues in
     this case.
          After I'm done, Mr. Kaczynski will talk to
     you about some of the other issues.
          Now, Mr. Kaczynski has said it to you 4900
     every time he addressed you, in jury selection
     and in opening, we cannot have a trial without
     jurors such as yourselves.
          The lawyers are here, we have to be here,
     we chose to be here.  This is what we want to
     do for a living.
          Mrs. Ahrens is here because she filed a
     lawsuit.
          But none of you chose this.  We chose you.
          There a lot of ways that people can
     contribute to making our country great.  These
     past three weeks you have all contributed by
     serving on this jury.  Everyone in this
     courtroom and in the system appreciates it, and
     I'd like to thank you on behalf of myself, my
     team, and my client for all that you've done.
          Now, when this case started Mr. Kaczynski
     told you that it was a case about Karl Ahrens
     and the decisions that he made when it came to
     smoking.  As this case draws to a close, that's
     what it's still about.
          This case was never about whether
     cigarettes can be addictive.  They can.  It's
     never about whether cigarettes cause lung
     cancer, they do.  It's not whether cigarettes 4901
     are legal, they are.  They are legal to sell
     and they are legal to advertise.
          Now, Dr. Hurt spent a lot of time telling
     you that smoking is addictive.  You heard that
     from Judge Day on the first day of the trial,
     it wasn't an issue then and it's not an issue
     now.
          Dr. Ruckdeschel spent a lot of time
     telling you that smoking causes lung cancer.
     You've heard that from Judge Day in the
     findings on the first day, it wasn't an issue
     then, it's not an issue now.
          And when we say that cigarettes are a
     legal product, that's not just me saying that,
     that's an instruction you've received from
     Judge Day.
          I'd like to pull up that instruction.
          The Defendants cannot be held liable
     merely for manufacturing, selling or
     advertising cigarettes, which are lawful
     activities.  That's the law in this case.
          Mr. Kaczynski also predicted the Plaintiff
     would spend a lot of time, and as it turned
     out, it was the better part of eight days,
     talking about statements and ideas from 4902
     Reynolds and other tobacco companies, some of
     which were made 30, 40, 50 years ago.  Some of
     them were even longer than that.
          But if that was all this case was about,
     whether cigarette manufacturers said things and
     did things, then none of us would say or think
     today, we wouldn't be here.  We would not have
     spent the last three weeks in this case.  But
     we did.
          This case is also not about sympathy.
     Judge Day instructed you this morning that you
     are not permitted to let sympathy influence
     your verdict.
          By now you understand that this is a case
     about Karl Ahrens and only Karl Ahrens.  It's
     not about the class action that you heard so
     much about, it's not about all smokers, and
     it's not about tobacco companies in general.
     This is not a referendum about smoking, this is
     not a town hall meeting about tobacco, this is
     a court of law.
          During the past several weeks you heard a
     lot of testimony about things that didn't have
     much to do with Mr. Ahrens.  Organizations that
     he had never heard of, documents that he never 4903
     saw, statements that he never heard.
          And you heard about things that people
     wrote that never reached Mr. Ahrens' ears.  Why
     did you hear that?  And why did you hear that
     again earlier today in Mr. Paige's closing?
          I submit you heard those things to make
     you angry, to get you mad, to distract you from
     the facts of Mr. Ahrens' case.  Mr. Paige, in
     his closing argument, at one point said keep
     your eye on the ball.  And I agree, you should
     keep your eye on the ball.  Don't get caught up
     with distractions but focus on the issues that
     you have to decide and Mr. Ahrens' life.
          Dr. Proctor talked to you for four days in
     the hopes of getting you so mad that you would
     decide the case based on emotion rather than on
     the facts of Mr. Ahrens life.
          Plaintiff started her case with
     Dr. Proctor reading you documents and she ended
     her case with a video of Kristy Leung reading
     more documents to you.  Again, hoping that you
     would forget the middle of the case, the part
     of the case about Mr. Ahrens.  Take your eye
     off the ball and turn your focus away from him.
          If you keep your eye on the ball, and 4904
     focus on Mr. Ahrens and the facts of his life,
     Mrs. Ahrens loses.
          Ladies and gentlemen, you are the only
     jury who gets to hear the case of Mr. Ahrens.
     And you're the only jury deciding the issues
     that bring us here today.
          This afternoon I'm going to walk you
     through the first half of the verdict form that
     you'll receive when the closing arguments are
     done.  Before I get into the verdict form, I
     want to spend just a moment to address the
     findings you've heard so much about.  Those are
     the findings that Judge Day instructed you were
     resolved in the prior case.  Things that
     Mr. Kaczynski told you in opening statements
     were not an issue here.
          There's no debate, none, that those
     findings from the class action do not tell you
     anything at all about Mr. Ahrens.  They do not
     tell you how to answer a single one of the
     questions that will be on the verdict form you
     receive.  That's because, as I've said, this is
     a case about Mr. Ahrens and you are Mr. Ahrens'
     only jury.
          I'd like to show you the jury 4905
     instruction -- summarize one of the jury
     instructions about the findings.
          You heard that you must not consider them
     in answering that first question.  The first
     question that deals with class membership.  The
     findings only come into play if you make it
     past that question.
          Judge Day also instructed you that the
     findings only establish what they expressly
     state.  Nothing more, nothing less.
          And you must not speculate or guess as to
     the basis.  You heard a lot of evidence in this
     case about pH, or youth marketing, or various
     other conduct allegations from Dr. Proctor,
     Dr. Hurt, you may not speculate as to whether
     those are the basis for the findings.  That's
     in the instruction from Judge Day.
          With that, I'd like to turn to the first
     question on the verdict form, a question of
     class membership.  You heard at the very
     beginning of this case, back in jury selection,
     that because Plaintiff is the one making the
     allegations and seeking money damages, she
     bears the burden of proof on every issue that
     you have to decide. 4906
          It's true then, and it's still true now.
     And that burden starts with the very first
     question on the verdict form.
          This is the first question on the verdict
     form:  Was Karl Ahrens addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine and, if so, was such
     addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and
     death?
          Now, there are a number of concepts that
     go into this question.  It's one question but
     it really has three parts.  For those of you
     who are visual, think of it this way:  Was Karl
     Ahrens addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine, that portion in orange is the first
     concept, addiction.  And if so, was such
     addiction a legal cause, the blue part is the
     second concept, addiction causation, of his
     lung cancer and death, in the green, the
     smoking causation, the medical causation.
     Those are the three concepts that are part of
     that class membership question.
          Each one of those three concepts presents
     a separate hurdle, a hurdle, a burden of proof
     that Mrs. Ahrens has to satisfy in order for
     you to check yes on that first question. 4907
          The addiction hurdle, Plaintiff must prove
     Mr. Ahrens was addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine.
          The addiction causation hurdle, she must
     prove that addiction was a legal cause of
     Mr. Ahrens' lung cancer and death.
          And, finally, Plaintiff must prove that
     Mr. Ahrens' lung cancer and death were caused
     by smoking.
          Three separate hurdles.  Three separate
     burdens.  We are going to go through each one
     of those in turn and show you why we believe
     the answer to the first question on the verdict
     form should be no.
          So with the first hurdle, addiction.  Here
     is the evidence that Mr. Ahrens was not
     addicted:  It starts with the medical records.
     These are materials that were created long
     before the idea of a lawsuit was conceived, and
     they were filled out by the doctors who treated
     Mr. Ahrens based on information that Mr. Ahrens
     himself provided them contemporaneous with that
     treatment.
          I showed Dr. Hurt a summary of all the
     medical records when I cross examined him, you 4908
     may remember that chart.  They were all pretty
     much the same on the question of his smoking
     history.  He smoked one pack a day, for 30
     years, and according to the records dated in
     1996 had quit seven, eight, nine years prior.
     So some point in the late 1980s.
          None of Mr. Ahrens' medical records ever
     revealed a diagnosis of addiction.  They never
     revealed a diagnosis of nicotine dependence, a
     Tobacco Use Disorder, a nicotine abuse.
     Nothing like that was in any of the medical
     records.
          Second, Mr. Kaczynski told you during his
     opening statement that you would hear some
     simple facts about nicotine and nicotine
     addiction throughout this trial, and you did.
     You heard a lot about nicotine and nicotinic
     receptors.
          With Dr. Hurt on the stand Plaintiff made
     a big deal with nicotine and how it impacts the
     brain.  Well, like many of the things you heard
     in this trial, you only heard half the story
     from Plaintiff.
          On cross examination Dr. Hurt admitted
     that after a smoker stops, the brain goes back 4909
     to normal.  Here is some of the facts.
          A half-life of nicotine is two hours.  As
     a result, it's all out of the body very
     quickly, within 24 hours.
          Everyone, all of us, have nicotine
     receptors.  The upregulation we heard about, of
     nicotine receptors, is not permanent in anyone.
          The upregulation does not make it
     impossible for a smoker to quit, and once a
     person stops smoking, the receptors go back to
     normal, they -- the concept of downregulation,
     they go back to normal and the brain of a
     smoker, former smoker, looks just like the
     brain of a nonsmoker.
          Remember that, the pictures of the brain?
     Dr. Hurt showed a slide that had some PET
     scans, that are the colored images that went in
     two rows across the top of the screen.  And he
     showed you how the brain of active smokers were
     different than the brains of nonsmokers.  And
     he made a big deal about how dramatic those
     differences were.
          On cross examination I showed him the same
     picture, but I showed them for a different
     reason.  It turned out that the smokers in that 4910
     study were all addicted.  And after two days of
     nonsmoking, the two images that were on the
     left side of the screen looked the same.  The
     smoker who hadn't smoked for two days, his
     brain looked just like the person who wasn't a
     smoker.
          And by the way, you may recall that the
     addicted smokers who were used in that study
     were defined as addicted using the DSM.  More
     on that later.
          You also heard about dopamine.  Dr. Hurt
     and Dr. Dorce both talked to you about the
     release of dopamine in the brain and how it's
     not something unique to nicotine.  All sorts of
     drugs, all sorts of behaviors, even Dr. Hurt,
     back in the day when he could dunk, that is
     something that would release dopamine.
          And the dopamine release from nicotine
     differed dramatically, as Dr. Dorce told you,
     from the dopamine release that occurs with
     methamphetamine, cocaine, some of the hard
     drugs you heard about.
          Dopamine did not prevent Mr. Ahrens from
     quitting.  It did not prevent the millions of
     former smokers from quitting.  And we know this 4911
     because Mr. Ahrens, in fact, quit.
          You also heard once a person starts
     smoking that nicotine is gone from the body.
     That nicotine does not interfere with a
     smoker's ability to understand the dangers of
     smoking, it doesn't interfere with an
     individual's ability to make the choice to
     quit, or the choice to continue smoking, and it
     does not cause debilitating or life-threatening
     withdrawal like some other substances do.
          Simply put, all the experts who came into
     this courtroom and testified before you
     testified that nicotine does not prevent a
     smoker from quitting permanently.
          Dr. Hurt and Dr. Dorce agree, quitting
     smoking is a very doable thing and any smoker
     can do it.  Millions of smokers have, and
     Mr. Ahrens did.
          Dr. Hurt testified that between 1966 and
     1979, roughly the time period that Mr. Ahrens
     was smoking Kent cigarettes, 30 million people
     quit smoking.  Dr. Hurt agreed many of those
     smokers were just like Mr. Ahrens, they were
     smoking a pack to a pack and a half a day.
     They were smoking cigarettes that had filters. 4912
     They were smoking lights.  They were smoking
     cigarettes that had additives and flavorants.
     Had Mr. Hurt -- excuse me, had Mr. Ahrens been
     motivated, he could have quit during this same
     time period, just like the other 30 million.
     For reasons only Mr. Ahrens knows he decided
     not to.
          You heard me talk a lot about 60 million
     former smokers during my examinations.  And
     that's because today there are 60 million
     former smokers living in America.  That breaks
     down to 1.3 million who quit per year.  Today
     in the United States, there are more former
     smokers alive than there are current smokers.
     And of those 60 million former smokers,
     millions of them were addicted.  Most of them
     quit cold turkey.  Millions of them started as
     teens.  Millions of them would have had
     upregulated receptors, they would have all
     experienced the pleasure from the release of
     dopamine, many of them smoked filters, smoked
     cigarettes with ammonia, and smoked a pack or
     more of cigarettes per day.
          And those -- you've heard again today
     about the teens and people not having fully 4913
     developed frontal lobes.  That didn't stop
     millions of Americans from quitting.
          Despite this, Plaintiff brought you
     Dr. Hurt and he told you that Mr. Ahrens was
     addicted.  I want to talk about Dr. Hurt for a
     moment.
          You heard that Dr. Hurt has made $75,000
     so far this year.  We are barely into February.
     $75,000, in the first month, and change, of
     this year.  He comes to court and he says
     100 percent of the time that the subject he's
     reviewing is addicted.  He told you that in
     this case, he reached his opinions after he saw
     some medical records but before he read a
     single page of deposition testimony.
          He told you that he attended a conference
     where plaintiffs' attorneys who were suing
     tobacco companies attended.
          And he talked to you -- or he told you
     that he teaches, one of the goals for
     testifying, is to avoid a yes-or-no answer on
     cross examination.  And I think you saw during
     the course of my cross examination that he
     practices what he teaches.
          Dr. Hurt applied a two-question test to 4914
     determine if Mr. Ahrens was addicted, that was
     called the Heaviness of Smoking Index.  It was
     a subset of the other test he used, the
     Fagerström Test, that's a six-question test.
          As I pointed out during cross examination,
     and as you heard from Dr. Dorce yesterday,
     neither the Heaviness of Smoking Index or the
     Fagerström Test are tests that a patient can
     fail.  Under the tests, everyone is addicted.
          You saw the scales, both of them have a
     level that's a 0 and on the Heaviness of
     Smoking Index, 0 is still low dependence.  On
     Fagerström, 0 is still very low dependence.
          So as Dr. Hurt admitted, even a score of 0
     equals some level of dependence.  So if you
     smoke one cigarette a day, you'll be considered
     dependent on nicotine.  It's no wonder Dr. Hurt
     can testify that everyone was addicted.
          Even though these tests are tests that a
     patient can't fail, you saw that I had to keep
     Dr. Hurt honest in the way that he applied them
     to Mr. Ahrens.  On the Heaviness of Smoking
     Index he said he was applying a conservative
     estimate, and he arrived at a score of 5, to
     make sure he could get him in the high 4915
     dependence category.  That was dependent on
     scoring him as 21 to 30 cigarettes per day.
     That was his conservative estimate.
          And you'll recall, I asked him, if you
     take the medical records, which all say a pack
     per day, how many cigarettes is that?  That's
     20.  That's a different score.
          If it was such an easy answer to the
     question, why does Dr. Hurt have to overreach
     and call it a conservative estimate?
          Dr. Hurt also testified that Mr. Ahrens
     found it difficult to remain -- or to refrain
     from smoking in places where it was prohibited.
     What was his evidence?  He gave you two stories
     from all the way back in the 1960s.
          So I asked him a series of questions to
     show that Mr. Ahrens had the ability to control
     his smoking when and where he wanted to.
          Here are some of those examples that we
     saw in the testimony.  You learned that
     Mr. Ahrens didn't smoke in the bedrooms, that
     when the family moved to Texas in the 1980s he
     started smoking outside.  He went to theaters
     and museums, even back in the dating days with
     Mrs. Ahrens, he didn't have to leave early to 4916
     go outside to smoke, he could make it through
     those events.  He never smoked anywhere on
     church grounds when they went to church in
     Texas.  He didn't have any problems from
     smoking, refraining from smoking at work.  He
     didn't smoke in front of friends and family who
     didn't like it.  Bottom line was you saw
     smoking did not interfere with any of his
     social obligations and it didn't interfere with
     any of his work responsibilities.
          Despite what Dr. Hurt tried to tell you,
     Mr. Ahrens was in control of his smoking.  He
     controlled when he smoked and where he smoked.
     And if the situation called for him to not
     smoke, he complied.
          Now, Plaintiff's counsel asked some
     questions yesterday about pumping gas and
     smoking at the same time to suggest to you that
     Mr. Ahrens was endangering himself to smoke.
     And the fact that Mr. Ahrens did that, from
     their position the suggestion was that was a
     sign he was addicted.
          Dr. Dorce, I submit, busted that myth.
     That wasn't a problematic pattern.  A few
     isolated antidotes is not the basis of a 4917
     diagnosis of addiction.
          The fact of the matter is Mr. Ahrens could
     control his smoking and he proved it
     repeatedly, including, most notably, when he
     quit for good.
          We called Dr. Dorce to the stand to
     describe to you the methodology and the reasons
     why Mr. Ahrens was not addicted.  She told you
     the approach that she took in answering that
     question and why her opinion was different than
     Dr. Hurt's.
          Unlike Dr. Hurt, whenever the attorneys
     called Dr. Dorce, we don't know what her
     answer's going to be.  She needs to study a
     case.  She needs to learn the facts and apply
     them, her methodology, before she reaches her
     conclusion.
          Here is some of the differences between
     Dr. Hurt and Dr. Dorce.  Dr. Dorce is the only
     one of the two who has testified in courtrooms
     like this that a smoker was addicted as well as
     not addicted.  She's not 100 percent on one
     side.
          Dr. Dorce was the only one in this case
     who read all the materials and considered all 4918
     the facts available about Mr. Ahrens' life
     before she rushed to judgment like Dr. Hurt.
     And she does not give the same opinion in every
     trial.  Dr. Hurt is the one who does that.
          During cross examination yesterday,
     Mr. Paige tried to make a big deal about how
     Dr. Dorce does not spend her time publishing
     and lecturing and that she doesn't treat
     patients who solely come to her for nicotine
     addiction.  I'd like to address those.
          Dr. Dorce is on the front lines currently
     treating real-life people with serious
     addiction.  On a daily basis, she treats people
     addicted to a wide spectrum of substances.
     Opiates, cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin,
     marijuana, alcohol and, yes, nicotine.
          She told you she doesn't deal with
     patients who are there exclusively for nicotine
     addiction because she works at an inpatient
     facility and nicotine users do not need detox.
     They don't ordinarily require inpatient
     admission.
          And you may be thinking, what about
     Dr. Hurt?  He had an inpatient program at the
     Mayo Clinic.  I want to talk about that for a 4919
     minute.  I want to point out some of the math
     related to his clinic.
          He was there for 23 years while that
     inpatient clinic was operating.  He told you
     that about 1600 patients came through that
     program.  That averages out to 70 a year.
          He said it was an eight-day program.
     Patients come in on a Friday, they are
     discharged the following Friday.
          He said that they had a 52 percent success
     rate.  So you run that math on a average of 35
     patients per year who have successfully quit
     smoking as a result of Dr. Hurt's program.
          During that same 23 years that Dr. Hurt
     was at that program, tens of millions of
     smokers quit in this country using other
     methods compared to the 800 patients who went
     through his program.
          Mr. Paige suggested through the
     examination of Dr. Hurt that a program such as
     his might have been something that would have
     been helpful to Mr. Ahrens.
          You've heard about 1-percenters in recent
     years.  Mr. Ahrens was a 99.998-percenter.  He
     was one of the tens of millions of smokers who 4920
     went -- who quit through the methods other than
     the 800 who went through Dr. Hurt's clinic.
          You heard Dr. Dorce testify that nicotine
     dependence does not require the same treatment
     as addiction to cocaine, heroin, alcohol and
     other drugs, and that's why Dr. Dorce doesn't
     make a living treating people for solely
     nicotine dependence.
          But Dr. Dorce has treated thousands of
     individual smokers and she's treated them for
     smoking as well as their other substance
     disorders.  And when she sees those patients in
     her daily practice, she uses the same
     methodology that she uses when she comes to
     courtrooms.  She uses the DSM.
          Now, Dr. Hurt took the stand and fought
     with me.  He refused to admit at first that the
     DSM was authoritative on the use of substance
     disorders as it pertains to tobacco.  And that
     was a change that I tried to point out during
     the cross examination.  I want to look at it,
     Dr. Hurt then versus Dr. Hurt in this
     courtroom.
          So he refused to admit to you that DSM was
     authoritative for tobacco even after he told 4921
     you that he taught it at the Mayo Clinic to
     other training clinicians who were going to use
     it.
          He told you that it wasn't authoritative
     even after he acknowledged that it was used by
     former colleagues at the Mayo Clinic and that
     he used it himself last month to find that a
     smoker was -- to assess a smoker in that case
     last month.
          He used it himself last month, and he
     tried to tell you that this month it's not
     reliable.  When you see that instruction about
     the credibility and weighing the testimony of
     experts, that's something I'd like you to
     consider when you evaluate Dr. Hurt and his
     time in front of you.
          Dr. Dorce, on the other hand, testified
     the DSM is the standard tool used by
     clinicians.  Applying those criteria to
     Mr. Ahrens, Dr. Dorce told you that she
     believes in her professional opinion Mr. Ahrens
     was not addicted.
          She told you that Mr. Ahrens did not
     experience that threshold requirement,
     clinically significant impaired or distressed. 4922
     Instead, smoking was a decision that he made.
          Choosing something you want to do is not a
     sign of significant impairment or distress.
     Doing what you want to do is not a disorder.
     It's a decision.
          And Mr. Ahrens had the choice and the
     ability to control that choice and make a
     different decision if he wanted to.
          That brings me to my last point on the
     addiction question.  Dr. Hurt came to the stand
     and Plaintiff's lawyers flashed some
     definitions of addiction on the screen.  Those
     were definitions that Dr. Hurt could not run
     away from.
          I showed you the definition from NIDA and
     the definition from Mayo Clinic.  "Addiction is
     defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease
     characterized by compulsive drug-seeking use
     despite harmful consequences."
          And then from the Mayo Clinic:  "Nicotine
     dependence, also called tobacco dependence, is
     an addiction to tobacco products caused by the
     drug nicotine.  Nicotine dependence means you
     can't stop using the substance even though it's
     causing you harm." 4923
          And you may remember, I asked Dr. Hurt
     about that definition from his facility and how
     that applies to Mr. Ahrens, who we know was
     able to stop using the substance.  Under the
     Mayo Clinic definition, Mr. Ahrens was not
     addicted.
          There was another definition that we saw
     yesterday, Mr. Paige used it, on the website
     from the American Psychiatric Association.  He
     used it with Dr. Dorce.  And this was the
     definition.  And I read some additional
     language, the long definition, so I won't read
     the entire thing, but I focused in on the
     language about how it would take over the
     addicted person's life.
          It's in the middle there.  "Take over
     their life."  And that if you have effective
     treatments, they can eventually get back to
     living a normal and productive life.
          You know that Mr. Ahrens was not someone
     whose smoking took over his life or that
     prevented him from leading a normal and
     productive life.  His life was always quite
     productive, as we heard.
          And under these definitions, Mr. Ahrens is 4924
     not addicted.
          When Mr. Ahrens wanted to make the
     decision to quit, he was able to successfully
     quit.  Because he never experienced a loss of
     control over that decision, because he never
     lost the ability to quit, and because he was
     able to quit when he was addicted -- or excuse
     me, because he was able to quit when he was
     motivated, he was not addicted.  He was never
     significantly impaired, never significantly
     distressed.  And that's why Mrs. Ahrens cannot
     clear that first hurdle of class membership.
          I want to talk about the second hurdle.
     If you find that Mr. Ahrens was addicted, the
     second hurdle you have to consider is whether
     the addiction was a legal cause of his death.
          Now, this is how the court defines legal
     cause in this context.  For his addiction to be
     a legal cause, it had to directly and in a
     natural and continuous sequence produce, or
     contribute substantially to producing, such
     lung cancer so that it can be said that but for
     the addiction to cigarettes containing
     nicotine, the lung cancer would not have
     occurred. 4925
          The evidence proves that addiction in this
     case is not a but for reason of Mr. Ahrens'
     smoking.  The but for cause of his smoking was
     his choice, his decision to smoke for as long
     as he did because it was what he wanted to do,
     it was what he enjoyed.
          Ask yourself this question:  If Mr. Ahrens
     was not addicted, would he have continued to
     smoke?  I think we know from the evidence we
     saw in this case that of course the answer is
     yes, he would have done so because he wanted
     to.
          It was not disputed in this case that
     smokers smoke for a number of reasons that have
     nothing to do with nicotine.  Dr. Dorce said it
     and even Dr. Hurt admitted it.
          Addiction cannot be the legal cause of
     Mr. Ahrens' death because it was never a
     substantial cause of his smoking.  If his
     smoking behavior would have been the same,
     whether he was addicted or not, that answers
     the question.  That tells you that addiction
     cannot be a substantial cause because it didn't
     make a difference.  When it says "but for,"
     what that means is if you change that fact and 4926
     you run the movie of his life, do you get to
     the same result?  If that's what happens, then
     it's not a but for cause.
          In this trial, it doesn't matter whether
     we think the choices Mr. Ahrens made to smoke
     were good choices or bad choices.  That's not
     what we are here for.  What matters is that
     they were his choices.  We are not here to
     second-guess them.
          Now, Mr. Paige took issue within his
     closing, and he may say something about it in
     rebuttal, he may mock me for saying that
     Mr. Ahrens chose to smoke.  But let's look at
     how he chose to respond when he was told over
     and over again by his wife, by his children, to
     quit smoking.  He did nothing in response.
          Mr. Paige pointed out that the word
     "choice" is not a word in the jury instructions
     and it's not a word you're going to see on the
     verdict form.  It is a word that's really a
     concept that's embedded in our common sense.
          One of the many strengths of the jury
     system is that we put ordinary citizens such as
     yourself in the box and we ask you to use your
     common sense.  You shouldn't check your common 4927
     sense at the metal detectors downstairs when
     you walk in the courtroom.
          One of the instructions that His Honor
     gave you is this one:  "Your job is to
     determine what the facts are.  You may use
     reason and common sense to reach those
     conclusions."
          So when we talk about Mr. Ahrens' choices,
     use your common sense and apply that ability to
     reason to this part of the class membership
     question.
          When we talk about his choices, we're not
     second guessing.  We're asking you to respect
     them.
          Mr. Ahrens had the right to make whatever
     decisions he wanted to make in his life, to
     live his life the way he saw fit.  With those
     rights come responsibilities.  Those decisions,
     those choices always stood in between
     Mr. Ahrens, always stood in between Mr. Ahrens,
     between his claimed addiction and his cancer.
          Once he started smoking, he was not on a
     neverending path to cancer.  There were lots of
     places, lots of opportunities along the way
     where he had to make decisions and choices to 4928
     continue smoking.
          He decided to take that first cigarette on
     the night watch when he was bored, he decided
     to continue smoking despite warnings from the
     most credible sources of all, his family, his
     loved ones.  Every single pack of cigarettes
     that anyone in this case who was around to see
     Mr. Ahrens smoke contained a warning label on
     it.  These are the various warning labels that
     would have been on the packs of cigarettes that
     Mr. Ahrens smoked.
          There's no evidence that Mr. Ahrens would
     have listened to his wife all those years she
     begged him to quit if he hadn't been addicted.
          Would he have ignored the begging from his
     wife and from the sons, or would he have done
     what he wanted to do whether he was addicted or
     not?  Of course he would have because we know
     what Mr. Ahrens chose to do.
          If Mr. Ahrens wanted to quit smoking and
     just was unable to do it, you might have
     expected to hear evidence that he would have
     ever asked his loved ones for support and help.
     He never did.  For decades Mr. Ahrens never
     told his family members that he wanted to quit 4929
     or that he was trying to quit.  You heard from
     almost every witness that Mr. Ahrens was an
     intelligent man, an educated man.
          Dr. Pach came in and told you that
     Mr. Ahrens attended an elite high school that
     had health classes.  He showed you that he took
     graduate courses in marketing.  Dr. Pach also
     explained to you that Mr. Ahrens worked for
     Xerox, which at the time was a progressive
     corporation that was encouraging every employee
     to make healthy lifestyle choices, including
     quitting smoking, all the way back in the
     1970s.
          You saw those materials from the Xerox
     Corporation, materials that included a
     lifestyle improvement newspaper called "Take
     Charge" that was mailed to the household of
     every Xerox employee.
          As you heard from Dr. Pach, very few
     corporations were doing that at the time, but
     Xerox was.  Mr. Ahrens worked there and he
     would have been a recipient.
          Mr. Ahrens knew the risks of smoking but
     was not motivated enough to stop.  You heard
     from both Dr. Dorce and Dr. Hurt that the key 4930
     factor in a person's successfully quitting is
     motivation and that it requires persistent
     motivation.
          Dr. Dorce told you that motivation has to
     come from the individual, and Dr. Hurt even
     agreed with that.
          These were Dr. Hurt's own words:
     "Motivation leads to trying to quit smoking.
     Trying to stop smoking does ultimately lead to
     most people quitting."
          That's Dr. Hurt.
          I also showed him a manual that he used
     with his patients at the Mayo Clinic.  It's
     called "Making the Decision."  And it says,
     "Only you can decide when to quit smoking."
          That advice from the Mayo Clinic rings
     particularly true in this case.  Only
     Mr. Ahrens was in a position to decide when he
     could quit smoking.  And the evidence we
     presented to you showed that Mr. Ahrens did not
     make that decision at any point between 1967
     and his final quit in 1991.
          Dr. Hurt was right about motivation, the
     Mayo Clinic was right about motivation, and
     Dr. Dorce was right about motivation. 4931
     Motivation does lead a person to stop smoking.
     And because of that, we can judge Mr. Ahrens'
     motivation by looking at what the people who
     knew him said about his efforts to quit
     smoking.
          Now, what do we know about Mr. Ahrens'
     efforts to quit smoking over the years?  How do
     they compare with the motivation we just saw
     was required to quit?
          You heard testimony from Plaintiff's
     witnesses that Mr. Ahrens tried to quit
     multiple times.  Mr. Paige told you this
     morning during his closing argument that he
     didn't try to quit before 1982.
          We've heard the phrase "quality over
     quantity," and in this case I also want you to
     consider the quality of Mr. Ahrens' quit
     attempts.  For the entire time that we know
     Mr. Ahrens smoked, you heard about two vague
     recollections providing examples beyond cold
     turkey that Mr. Ahrens used to try to quit.
          One came from Mrs. Ahrens.  She told you
     that he chewed gum.  She was the only witness
     that ever said this.  And she said that there
     was one time she recalled that happening during 4932
     the entire time she was married to Mr. Ahrens.
          The second came from Mr. Ahrens' son
     Bryan.  Bryan told you that his father tried
     the patch.  He was the only witness who said
     that.  And he recalled seeing it in 1991.  Even
     though you heard from Dr. Hurt that the patch
     wasn't available at that time, it wasn't
     available until 1992, according to Dr. Hurt.
          For both memories there's a laundry list
     of unknown details.  Plaintiff has the burden
     of proof.  The witnesses simply could not tell
     you how -- how long Mr. Ahrens used either
     product, how much of it Mr. Ahrens may have
     used, where he got it from, whether he had
     prescriptions for it, whether he stopped
     smoking for even an hour while using it, and
     the list goes on.
          In both instances, you have memories that
     Mr. Ahrens may have done something, but that's
     as much as you or anyone else knows.
          And that's really the theme of Mr. Ahrens'
     quit attempts over the years.  In this case,
     Mrs. Ahrens' attorneys have paid lip service to
     the idea that Mr. Ahrens wanted to quit, but
     they provided you very little evidence to 4933
     substantiate that claim that quitting smoking
     was important to him or that he made
     significant efforts to quit.
          Mr. Ahrens' attempts to quit were so
     infrequent and unremarkable that when I asked
     Dr. Hurt, the expert witness who has made
     $75,000 in 2016, when I asked him, he could not
     remember the first decade when Mr. Ahrens tried
     to quit smoking.  It may have been because
     Dr. Hurt didn't review the materials since June
     of last year, but more likely it's because
     there wasn't a lot of substance to remember.
          Mr. Ahrens, according to all the
     witnesses, there were a number of things that
     he never did to quit smoking prior to his final
     quit.  He never threw away his cigarettes, he
     never threw away his matches or his ashtrays.
     He never made a plan to quit smoking.  He never
     announced to his family that he was trying to
     quit.  He never asked them for help.  He never
     asked his friends for help.  He never attended
     a smoking cessation clinic.
          The fact of the matter is the evidence
     shows that quitting smoking was not a priority
     for Mr. Ahrens.  You heard all the witnesses 4934
     describe him as intelligent, someone who was
     capable of putting his mind to something and
     getting it done.
          When it came to smoking, he simply didn't
     put his mind to it.  Instead, you heard
     consistent testimony from both Mrs. Ahrens and
     Dr. Hurt, the idea of quitting was something
     that Mr. Ahrens brushed off and avoided on
     multiple occasions over the years.
          Let's think back on a few of the occasions
     when Mr. Ahrens was encouraged to quit but
     brushed it off.
          In the late 1960s and early '70s,
     Mrs. Ahrens began to continually encourage her
     husband to quit.  In the 1970s, Xerox
     implemented its company-wide health initiative
     that included advice to quit smoking.
          And you heard the moving story from Bryan
     about how he came home from school crying
     because of what he had learned and begging his
     father to quit.  He said that smoking was
     poisoning him.  He said that smoking would kill
     him.  Mr. Ahrens brushed it off, continued with
     dinner, never got rid of his cigarettes, and
     didn't try to quit smoking. 4935
          All of those times were instances when
     Mr. Ahrens could have made different decisions.
     He could have made a motivated effort to quit
     and he could have persisted in it.  Times when
     he could have reached out to his family and
     say, help me get this done.  That never
     happened.  He never asked for help, he never
     threw away his cigarettes, he never said, I'm
     going to stop smoking.
          Around 1991, you heard that things were
     different.  Mr. Ahrens received that call from
     his coworker in California, the coworker who
     said, I've got lung cancer and I only have six
     months to live.
          It wasn't anything different than the type
     of thing Mr. Ahrens had been warned about in
     the '70s.  It wasn't anything different than
     what his own son warned him about that time at
     the dinner table.  It wasn't different than the
     warnings on the packs of the cigarettes that he
     smoked every time he picked up a pack from 1967
     until he quit.
          The only thing that was different was
     Mr. Ahrens' response.  For the first time he
     really wanted to quit and for the first time he 4936
     made that committed effort.  The first thing he
     did was give away his cigarettes to his
     coworkers.  He had never done that before.
          The next thing he did, tell his family
     that he was going to stop smoking.  He had
     never done that before.
          After he quit, he chewed on coffee
     stirrers, an item that contained no nicotine.
     That item kept him distracted and he never
     smoked.  That was something he had never tried
     before.
          After taking all those steps, for the
     first time in his life, Mr. Ahrens quit for
     good in 1991, five years before his cancer
     diagnosis.  In other words, he decided he
     wanted to stop, he made a genuine attempt to
     stop, and he quit cold turkey on a dime.
          After that, he never smoked another
     cigarette, never took another dose of nicotine,
     he even got to the point where he thought it
     was disgusting to see others smoke.
          I want to address withdrawal briefly.  You
     heard about withdrawal in this case.  And you
     heard some testimony that Mr. Ahrens could have
     been grouchy or irritable on occasions that he 4937
     was trying to quit smoking.  Compare that to
     how he behaved when he was smoking and he was
     told by others that he should quit.  When he
     was told to do something that he didn't want to
     do, he would brush it off, avoid the
     conversation, and tell his family members to
     leave him alone.
          Some might describe that as grouchy and
     irritable, too, but just like the other, it has
     nothing to do with nicotine.  More importantly,
     remember that experiencing withdrawal is not
     the be-all end-all of Mr. Ahrens' story.
          Remember what I asked Dr. Hurt at the end
     of my examination.  I asked him:  Dr. Hurt,
     even though you believe Mr. Ahrens experienced
     cravings, feelings of withdrawal, and urges to
     smoke during his final quit, none of those --
     none of those cravings, feelings of withdrawal,
     urges to smoke, caused him to smoke another
     cigarette or have another dose of nicotine ever
     again.  And he agreed.
          You remember Mrs. Ahrens talking about
     what happened after he quit.  She was asked:
     "Did Karl ever express how hard it was to stop
     smoking?"  And her answer was:  "No." 4938
          Do you remember that pamphlet from the
     American Cancer Society that I showed Dr. Hurt?
     It was called Smart Move, and it had a
     three-part quiz.
          It says:  "Do you have what it takes to
     stop smoking?  There's no magic cure that can
     help you stop.  Take this short quiz to find
     out if you have what it takes."
          "Number one, do you want to stop smoking?
          "Two, Are you willing to make some changes
     in your daily routine?
          "Three, Are you willing to put up with
     some uneasy moments after stopping?
          "If you can answer yes to all three
     questions, you can stop smoking."
          Prior to his final quit, Mr. Ahrens never
     made it through this test.  He never wanted to
     stop and he never told anyone that he was
     willing to make some changes.
          When he was motivated to quit in the early
     1990s, after hearing that his friend had been
     diagnosed with lung cancer, after hearing that
     his friend has six months to live, Mr. Ahrens
     succeeded.  He quit that day, cold turkey, for
     good. 4939
          Nothing caused him to smoke.  The evidence
     doesn't support the conclusion that he was
     addicted.  But even if it did, the day he
     decided to quit, the day he committed himself
     to that process, you heard that nothing stood
     in his way.  Addiction did not interfere with
     his final decision to quit for even one minute,
     according to the evidence.  Mr. Ahrens made an
     immediate, decisive and lasting decision.
          We can take addiction out of the equation
     when we know that he quit for good, cold
     turkey, the first time he ever told his family
     he was going to.  And that answers the question
     of what would Mr. Ahrens had done but for an
     addiction.
          He would have decided to smoke.
          So even if you decide that Mr. Ahrens was
     addicted, that is why addiction cannot be a
     legal cause of his injury.
          Here is another way to look at what legal
     cause requires.  Now, this was something
     Mr. Kaczynski discussed in opening.  And these
     are words that come from the instruction His
     Honor gave you.
          The legal cause must be a direct cause. 4940
     It must be a natural cause.  It must be a
     continuous cause.  And it must be a substantial
     cause.
          You saw that the only direct, natural,
     continuous and substantial cause of Mr. Ahrens'
     smoking was Mr. Ahrens' decisions.
          When Mr. Ahrens made the choice to smoke,
     the choice to continue to smoke, despite the
     warnings, choices about controlling his
     smoking, choices to ignore the warnings, and
     ultimately the choice to stop smoking, those
     were choices that he made.  Not the nicotine in
     cigarettes, not choices made by Reynolds or
     Philip Morris.
          As a result, any disease or death from
     Mr. Ahrens' smoking was not legally caused by
     an addiction.
          That's why Mrs. Ahrens cannot clear that
     second hurdle.
          Turning to the final hurdle of class
     membership, smoking causation.
          Mrs. Ahrens must also prove that
     Mr. Ahrens' lung cancer and death was caused by
     smoking.  When Mr. Kaczynski previewed this in
     opening as well, that there would be facts 4941
     about the medical case that you might expect to
     hear in a case about lung cancer that you
     didn't hear in this courtroom.
          Dr. Ruckdeschel covered this issue.  He
     was Plaintiff's medical expert -- and make no
     mistake, he is a very qualified medical doctor.
     He was the CEO of the Moffitt Cancer Center and
     he participated and played an integral role in
     building that cancer center into a facility
     that everyone in this area is proud of.
          He told you that he was confident
     Mr. Ahrens suffered from cancer originating in
     the lung, and he told you that everyone else
     who treated Mr. Ahrens at Moffitt believed the
     same thing.
          But there were a number of things that he
     had to concede when Mr. Mayfield cross examined
     him, perhaps most importantly, Dr. Ruckdeschel
     told you that the doctors never, at any time in
     the course and care of their treatment,
     actually found cancer cells in Mr. Ahrens'
     lung.
          Dr. Ruckdeschel explained that when a
     primary cancer metastasize -- metastasizes it
     tends to spread from the lung to the hilar 4942
     nodes and then eventually to the mediastinal
     nodes.  But just as though they found -- they
     did not find cancer cells in Mr. Ahrens' lung,
     they never found cancer cells in the hilar
     nodes.
          The only place they actually found cancer
     was in the mediastinal nodes.  A place where
     Dr. Ruckdeschel told you cancers, other than
     lung cancer, can spread to.
          In fact, he told you that adenocarcinoma,
     the cell type Mr. Ahrens had, is the most
     common type of metastatic cancer that spreads
     to the lung area from other sites.
          Dr. Ruckdeschel confirmed several
     physicians described Mr. Ahrens' as
     asymptomatic prior to his diagnosis.
     Mrs. Ahrens testified that Mr. Ahrens had no
     symptoms and was well, up until his diagnosis
     as far as he knew.
          Dr. Ruckdeschel conceded that when he
     first saw Mr. Ahrens in June of 1996,
     Mr. Ahrens already had a Stage IV cancer.  And
     that his care of Mr. Ahrens, as you recall,
     from day one was only concerned with trying to
     make Mr. Ahrens as comfortable as possible 4943
     during his remaining days.
          The same applies to every doctor at
     Moffitt who saw Mr. Ahrens.  Those doctors also
     knew they were dealing with someone who,
     unfortunately, had zero chance for survival.
          While Dr. Ruckdeschel told you he believes
     this was a cancer that started in the lung, he
     also told you that conclusively determining the
     site of origin was an academic exercise by the
     time he saw Mr. Ahrens as a patient.
          He also told you it would have been
     considered malpractice to put Mr. Ahrens
     through additional testing given his condition
     because the tests would have been -- that could
     have been done that would have determined
     conclusively, they would have played no role in
     his care and making him comfortable in his
     remaining days, and that's why Dr. Ruckdeschel
     said it would have been malpractice to do them.
          He told you that there are stains that can
     be done on tissue of cancer cells to further
     answer those questions, and that those stains
     were not done here.
          At the end of the day, it's Plaintiff's
     burden of proof that Mr. Ahrens had a primary 4944
     lung cancer.  The fact that they found cancer
     in the mediastinal nodes and believed it to be
     a lung primary, we submit is not sufficient to
     meet that burden.
          What was insignificant to the care of
     Mr. Ahrens is now very significant to you in
     the question that you have to answer.  And the
     fact of the matter is, there are questions that
     remain unanswered.  And that's why this third
     hurdle has not been met.
          So that takes us to Verdict Form
     Question 1.  Based on the evidence in this
     case, following the Court's instructions and
     applying them to the evidence, we believe that
     the answer to this question should be no.
     Because Mr. Ahrens did not suffer from a loss
     of control or exhibit clinically significant
     impairment or distress, he was not addicted.
     He didn't meet any of the definitions that
     Plaintiff's counsel used with Dr. Hurt, doesn't
     meet the Mayo Clinic definition, the American
     Psychiatric Association definition, he doesn't
     meet DSM.
          His smoking decisions are not any
     addiction dictated his behavior.  No addiction 4945
     was a direct, substantial, continuous but for
     cause of Mr. Ahrens' smoking.
          Dr. Hurt could not have been more clear.
     It was one of the last questions I asked him.
     Even though Dr. Hurt thought that Mr. Ahrens
     was addicted, and remained addicted even after
     he had quit, Dr. Hurt admitted that Mr. Ahrens
     never smoked a cigarette.  So, even according
     to Dr. Hurt, the addiction that Mr. Ahrens had
     never caused him to smoke a cigarette for any
     of those final years.
          Plaintiff can't get around that fact.  How
     can an addiction be a direct, substantial,
     continuous cause of Mr. Ahrens' smoking even
     though we have clear evidence in this case that
     nothing caused him to smoke a single cigarette
     for the final years of his life?
          And, lastly, on class membership, when
     Mr. Ahrens came to his doctors in 1996, they
     weren't worried about making a record to
     satisfy a burden in a lawsuit 20 years later.
     They were dealing with a patient who had
     widespread terminal cancer and their concern
     was making him comfortable.
          That's what they should have done, that's 4946
     what we would all hope they would do under the
     circumstances.  But we are here today because
     of a lawsuit.
          Now, keep in mind that with these three
     hurdles and class membership, you do not have
     to agree on which hurdle Mrs. Ahrens fails to
     clear.  If some of you think that she failed to
     prove addiction, and others think, no, it was
     the addiction causation that wasn't satisfied,
     and someone else says, no, it was the medical
     hurdle, Plaintiff loses.
          If Plaintiff hasn't persuaded you, if she
     hasn't met her burden on all three of those
     hurdles, then the answer to this first question
     must be no.
          For her to win, you have to agree,
     unanimously, that she has cleared all three
     hurdles.  But you do not have to agree on the
     reason why she loses.
          If she fails to meet her burden on any one
     of the three, you must answer no.
          Plaintiff does not get a free pass on her
     burden of proof on these issues.  Please hold
     her to all of her burdens.  And if you do, I
     submit the answer to this first question is no. 4947
          Now, if you answer no to this question,
     that ends the case.  And I believe that's the
     result that the evidence requires.  But because
     this is my only opportunity to speak with you,
     I need to go ahead and talk about some of the
     other questions on the verdict form in case you
     disagree with what I'm saying.
          Mr. and Mrs. Ahrens met in 1967.  That's
     where the direct evidence in this case begins.
     Other than the story of how he got that first
     cigarette on the night watch at the Navy while
     he was bored, we don't know much about the
     first 30 some-odd years of Mr. Ahrens' life.
          Mrs. Ahrens testified that her husband was
     smoking Kent when they met in 1967.  But she
     admitted she does not have any idea what he
     smoked before they met.  Neither Glen, the
     oldest son, or Bryan, the youngest son, had any
     of that information either.
          When you look at the first ten years of
     his smoking, sometime '57, '58, until 1967, and
     ask yourself what the greater evidence --
     excuse me, what the greater weight of the
     evidence shows in regard to that first ten
     years, as it pertains to brand, it's not even a 4948
     question.  Plaintiff didn't bring you any
     evidence whatsoever on that.  There's nothing
     on their end of the scale for that first ten
     years.
          That first ten years is nothing more than
     a guess or an assumption, and that's not
     supported by the evidence, and it's not
     permitted by the law.
          You cannot find Reynolds liable for the
     first ten years of unknown smoking history.
     You cannot find Philip Morris liable for the
     first ten years of unknown smoking history.
          And I believe Mr. Paige took that off the
     table himself in his closing.  That takes us to
     1967.
          Bryan Ahrens wasn't born yet.  You will
     recall what he testified on the stand, he
     indicated he had no recollection of his father
     ever smoking Kent.  He was too young.  So that
     leaves us with Mrs. Ahrens.  She was the only
     witness who testified about Kent.
          She testified that he smoked Kent from the
     time that she met him, until sometime in the
     1980s.  And she was very confident about that
     Kent usage.  I'm not here to tell you that she 4949
     was misleading you.  I think we all saw her
     testimony and can judge that she was sincere.
     She was sincere in her testimony that she
     believes he smoked Kent.
          But Mr. Kaczynski asked her a question
     about what she remembered regarding the Kent
     filter.  He asked that question because he knew
     what she said in her deposition.  Her testimony
     was consistent here in this courtroom.  She
     remembered the Kent cigarettes having a brown
     filter.  This was the question:
          "Question:  Now, when you observed the
     cigarette he was smoking, I think you told us
     before it was white and brown at the end; is
     that right?
          "Answer:  Yeah.  It could be.  I remember
     something brown, but I don't know what the
     brown was.
          "Question:  The front was white and the
     back was brown?
          "Answer:  Okay.
          "Question:  Is that what you remember?
          "Answer:  Yeah."
          Well, what makes this curious, is Kent
     never had a brown filter.  Kent was always an 4950
     all-white cigarette.
          Plaintiff moved a collection of Kent ads
     into evidence.  You'll have them with you back
     in the jury room.  Take a look at them if you
     want to.  Take a look at the cigarettes in
     those ads.  You will see that the Kent
     cigarettes were all white.  At all times.
          You've seen these before.  These are some
     of those ads that are in evidence Plaintiff
     moved in.  It's an all-white cigarette.
          Now, again, to be clear, I'm not here
     saying Mr. Ahrens never smoked Kent.  I'm not
     here to tell you that Mrs. Ahrens doesn't have
     a sincere belief in what she testified to.  My
     only point is this:  If Mrs. Ahrens is correct
     in describing the cigarette that she remembers,
     a cigarette with a brown filter, then that
     could not have been a Kent cigarette.
          So if you get to this question on the
     verdict form, and, again, because of what I
     talked about with Question 1, I don't think
     that you should, but if you do, I simply ask
     you to consider the evidence that you heard
     regarding Mr. Ahrens' use of my client's
     cigarettes.  And when you do, I submit that the 4951
     answer to the second question is no.
          Ms. Arnold will talk about it as it
     pertains to Philip Morris, but I believe the
     evidence with respect to Philip Morris will be
     no as well.
          So that takes us to the final question on
     the verdict form that I'm going to discuss, and
     that's the third question.  Comparative fault.
          If you get to this point on the verdict
     form, that means you will have already decided
     Mr. Ahrens was addicted, that addiction was a
     legal cause of his death, that he died from
     adenocarcinoma caused by smoking.
          If you get this far, you will then be
     asked to allocate responsibility between the
     parties.
          Now, there are a couple of points that I
     want you to keep in mind.  And I think these
     are very important.
          Comparative fault is not a global
     comparison of conduct.  It is not what did Karl
     Ahrens do over the course of his life versus
     the global conduct of the tobacco companies.
          It is a comparison of actions that Karl
     Ahrens and R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris took 4952
     that were the legal cause of Mr. Ahrens' death.
     It is a very narrow inquiry.
          You may have seen things in this case that
     the tobacco companies said in public or wrote
     internally that you didn't like.  The issue in
     this case, on this question on the verdict
     form, is whether they affected Mr. Ahrens and
     caused his death.
          If you find in your view that Reynolds did
     something that was wrong and that you didn't
     like --
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I'm sorry.  Can we
     approach?
          MR. CARTER:  On the question of
     comparative fault, the Defendants cannot be
     assigned fault for things that were not a legal
     cause of Mr. Ahrens' death.
          Remember, Plaintiff has the burden of
     proof and Reynolds can only be responsible for
     conduct that was a legal cause in your
     determination of Mr. Ahrens' death.
          The only person on Plaintiff's side who
     you heard say that Mr. Ahrens was responsible
     was Mr. Paige.  He said it in opening
     statement.  He said, "So on two of the claims,
     for negligence and strict liability, we have
     admitted partial responsibility."
          When Bryan testified, he did not say that
     his father bore any responsibility, and
     Plaintiff didn't either.  In fact, she
     disavowed it.  Here is her testimony on this
     issue. 4961
 transcribed
     as follows:)
     Q.   Your husband is the kind of person who
would accept responsibility for his own decisions.
You agree with me on that?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And despite that, you don't believe your
husband was at all responsible for any of the
injuries that happened to him, right?
     A.   No.
     Q.   You were asked some questions about
whether you accept any responsibility for what Karl
did.  Do you remember that?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   Based on what you know and what you've
heard in this courtroom, do you think he had any
responsibility?
     A.   No.
     Q.   Mrs. Ahrens, Mr. Sales just asked you,
after what you've heard in this courtroom, you don't
believe your husband bears any responsibility.  But
that was your position way back in your deposition
before you were in this courtroom, right?
     A.   Yeah.
     Q.   Thank you. 4962
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. CARTER:  Plaintiff did not bring you
     any evidence that Mr. Ahrens ever said he
     thought the tobacco companies should be
     responsible.  They didn't try to suggest that
     that was ever a conversation that anyone had.
     Keep your eye on the ball.  Keep your eye on
     Mr. Ahrens.
          Mr. Paige telling you that they accept
     some responsibility is what in sports is called
     a ball fake to get you to take your eyes off
     the ball, to get you to take your eyes off
     Mr. Ahrens.
          You are told this to try to encourage you
     to split responsibility.  It's part of the
     negotiation.  Being told --
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I'm sorry, I
     object.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. SALES:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen,
     disregard the mention of your participating in
     a negotiation.
          MR. CARTER:  What you have here is counsel
     accepting a slight portion of responsibility on 4963
     behalf of Mr. Ahrens at the same time that
     Mrs. Ahrens denies it.
          Those are opposing positions.  How do you
     reconcile them?
          What percentage of responsibility should
     Mr. Ahrens receive for his own actions, his own
     decisions?  Was Mr. Ahrens the type of man who
     would only take a slight portion of
     responsibility for his decisions?  I submit to
     you that the evidence is no.
          Did he take full ownership of his
     decisions?  Yes.  Did he take full
     responsibility for his decisions?  Yes.  For
     his career, his family.  Smoking was no
     different.  He is responsible for his decision
     to choose to smoke and his decision to keep
     smoking despite knowledge of the risks.
          He is responsible for the decision to
     continue smoking and to not even try to quit in
     the face of begging and encouragement from his
     children and from his wife.
          He is responsible for the decision to keep
     smoking in the face of knowledge from school,
     work, and countless sources that it was harmful
     to his health.  As a result, he is responsible 4964
     for the injuries that he sustained after his
     choices.
          And as Mr. Paige told you, according to
     Mr. Paige, he started to quit in the 19 --
     around 1982.  As a result of that, no
     responsibility for his smoking for that first
     20-some-odd years can be shared.
          Mr. Paige said that Reynolds, in his
     suggestion, was 60 percent responsible because
     for the 15 years that -- well, the 20-some
     years that we know about his smoking, 15 of
     them were Reynolds and 10 of them were Philip
     Morris, and that's where he came up with that
     60/40.
          But think about that.  Reynolds smoking
     stopped in 1982, during the 15 years where
     Mr. Paige suggested you give 60 percent
     responsibility because that was Reynolds
     smoking.  Mr. Paige told you Mr. Ahrens wasn't
     trying to quit.
          How can Reynolds have 100 percent of the
     responsibility during a time period when
     Mr. Ahrens had a 0 percent effort to quit?
     When he was diagnosed with cancer, Mr. Ahrens
     never placed blame on Philip Morris or Reynolds 4965
     for his decision to smoke.
          Mr. Paige said don't look at the first ten
     years, the first ten years before 1967 where
     there wasn't any evidence, because Plaintiff
     hasn't proven what he smoked.  That's another
     ball fake.  Those ten years are part of his
     story and those ten years are 100 percent
     Mr. Ahrens.
          MR. SALES:  Same objection and move to
     strike.  Ball fake again.
          THE COURT:  Ball what?  What did he say?
          MR. CARTER:  Ball fake.
          THE COURT:  Ball fake.
          MR. SALES:  That's the negotiation.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. CARTER:  Ask yourselves, if Mr. Ahrens
     had to assign responsibility based on the
     evidence that you saw, would he accept it?  And
     I submit the answer is of course.
          Nobody made Mr. Ahrens' decisions for him,
     nobody could decide for him to choose to smoke,
     and nobody but him, as the experts told you,
     could make the decision for him to quit.
          Only Mr. Ahrens could make those choices.
     He was the only one in position to control 4966
     those decisions and he is the only person who
     bears responsibility for them.
          You heard what was on Dr. Koop's website,
     the website of the famous Surgeon General who
     declared nicotine addictive.  On Dr. Koop's
     website it says, and I'm going to skip down to
     the middle of that:  No matter how much you
     smoke or have smoked or how much you like to
     smoke, the choice to light is always yours.
          Choice.  Not my words, not Reynolds,
     Lorillard, Philip Morris, here these are the
     words on Dr. Koop's website.  And it's not
     qualifying.  It doesn't say the choice is
     10 percent yours or 20 percent yours or
     50 percent yours, it says it's yours.  That's
     100 percent.
          It was Mr. Ahrens who made the choice to
     continue smoking despite his family warnings
     and his family asking him to stop.  It was
     Mr. Ahrens and no one else who made the choice
     for him to quit when he had that call from his
     friend in California.
          We are not asking you to find that his
     decisions were right or wrong, just asking you
     to recognize that they were only Mr. Ahrens' 4967
     decisions to make.
          I'm going to conclude the same way that I
     started.  The story of that last cigarette, the
     phone call, the bad news, and a motivated,
     lasting decision in response.
          When Mr. Ahrens decided that he was done
     smoking, when he was finally and truly
     motivated to do something about, it he took
     responsibility with his actions, he publicly
     declared his decision, and nothing stood in his
     way, not for one minute.  At that moment in
     time, he exercised 100 percent control over his
     smoking.
          So if you get to this point on the verdict
     form, you have to give him some percentage of
     responsibility, and I ask that you give him
     100 percent responsibility for his conduct.
          I very much enjoyed the opportunity to
     speak with you, and I hope you understand why
     we are asking you to enter a verdict on behalf
     of Defendants.  But whatever your verdict, know
     that I appreciate your service and commitment
     to the process.
          We can't do what we do without you.
     You've been extraordinarily attentive to me 4968
     this afternoon, just as you have been attentive
     to everyone over the three weeks.  I thank you
     for that, and I know that you will give
     Mr. Kaczynski and Ms. Arnold the same
     attention.
                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  May it please the Court,
     Mrs. Ahrens, counsel.
          Good afternoon.  We've come a long way
     since January 20th, and one thing you've
     noticed since January 20th, I have been telling
     you a couple of times, I don't think people can
     be thanked enough.
          So once again, let me join the others in
     thanking you for your service.  You answered
     the call of Pinellas County, you listened to
     the evidence, you asked decisive questions, you
     did calisthenics during our sidebars, and we
     appreciate it.
          You know, one of the first things Judge
     Day said to you, I think it was way back on
     January 20th, was jury service is second only
     maybe to military service in fulfilling your 4969
     role as a citizen.  And I think that analogy is
     pretty good -- and I know we've got fellow
     veterans on the jury -- that's pretty good, and
     here is why.
          The military, they take people from North
     Dakota and Brooklyn and Georgia and California,
     and they subject them to a common experience
     whether it's, you know, boot camp, basic
     training, OCS, ROTC, and it's a bonding,
     there's a bonding in that process.  And out of
     that bonding process comes the greatest force
     to defend freedom on God's green Earth.
          Well, jury service isn't like that.  None
     of you knew each other before you came into the
     jury room on January 20th, but you spent a lot
     of time, your common experience has been this
     trial, and shortly you're going to have the
     opportunity to render a verdict in this case.
          And we appreciate your having served.  And
     whatever you decide, whatever the verdict, go
     back to your family, to your friends, to your
     coworkers, and tell them that you helped make
     the system work because you did.  And we all
     appreciate it.
          I'm going to talk to you about that part 4970
     of the verdict form that we don't think you
     should ever get to.  This part deals with
     whether Mr. Ahrens reasonably relied on
     anything Lorillard/Reynolds, and I will use
     those interchangeably, ever said or didn't say,
     meaning what anything -- was anything Lorillard
     or Reynolds ever said or did, was it a legal
     cause of his injuries.
          I will deal with the part that deals with
     compensatory damages, the type of damages to
     make Mrs. Ahrens and Bryan Ahrens whole, and
     the part that deals with whether punitive
     damages are warranted in this case to punish my
     client or to deter others.
          And the reason we don't think you get that
     far is what Mr. Carter just told you, and that
     is, we hope, we think you will find that
     Mr. Ahrens is not an Engle class member.
          But if you do get that far, the first
     thing we need to talk about is whether
     Mr. Ahrens reasonably relied to his detriment
     on anything that Reynolds/Lorillard did or
     didn't do, whether any smoking decision he ever
     made was based on Reynolds' or Lorillard's
     conduct.  Was anything that Lorillard did or 4971
     didn't do a legal cause of his injury?
          And as I start talking about this part of
     the verdict form, let me start with what I
     think is a noncontroversial fact:  Between
     St. Pete and Tampa lies Tampa Bay, not
     controversial.  And until January 1960 when the
     Howard Franklin Bridge was opened, Tampa Bay
     was an obstacle in getting from St. Pete to
     Tampa.  To overcome that obstacle, they had to
     build a bridge.
          And for this half of the verdict form,
     Plaintiff has to build a bridge.  On one shore,
     as you see, is Karl Ahrens, and on the other
     shore is Lorillard/Reynolds.
          For this half of the verdict form,
     Plaintiff has the burden to show some
     connection, some nexus, whether it's called
     reasonable reliance or legal cause, between
     something that Lorillard or Reynolds said or
     did and Karl Ahrens.  They had to build a
     bridge, and they didn't.
          You say, well, wait a minute, whoa, whoa,
     whoa.  Didn't Lorillard manufacture the
     cigarettes, Kent brand, that Mr. Ahrens smoked
     for around 1967 to '81?  The answer to that is 4972
     yes.  But you've already seen the instruction
     that says that the Defendant cannot be held
     liable merely for manufacturing, selling or
     advertising cigarettes.  That doesn't build a
     bridge.
          Well, how else can they build a bridge?
     Maybe it was something Lorillard said or did
     that caused Mr. Ahrens to smoke his first
     cigarette.  But as we know, that didn't happen.
     He was a high school graduate, an adult, over
     the age of 18, and in the Navy.  He was on
     night watch.  He was bored.  Another sailor
     offered him a cigarette and he took it.
          No ads were involved.  No sampling was
     involved.  Dick Van Dyke didn't jump out of one
     of those cigarette ads and offer him a
     cigarette.
          How he started smoking doesn't build that
     bridge.  We don't know what that brand was.  In
     fact, we don't know what any brand was, as you
     heard, until roughly 1967 when he met
     Mrs. Ahrens, the cigarette with the brown
     filter she thinks was Kent.
          We do know they never discussed cigarette
     advertising.  We do know Mr. Ahrens never said 4973
     Kent was safer.  We don't know why he picked
     Kent.  We don't know when he picked Kent.
          And when you first walked into the jury
     room on the first floor on January 20th, you
     didn't know any of this.  Now three weeks
     later, you're about to head into another jury
     room to deliberate and render a verdict, and
     you still don't.  You still don't.
          None of that builds that bridge.  These
     are huge gaps in proof, and to fill those gaps
     you're essentially being asked to guess.  Guess
     why he chose Kent, guess when he chose Kent,
     guess whether he thought Kent was safer, and if
     he thought it was safer, guess why he thought
     that.
          But you can't build a bridge with guesses.
     Guesses are like, you know, pixie dust, and you
     can't build a bridge with pixie dust.  You
     build a bridge with iron and steel and mortar
     and brick.  That's called proof.
          And here for that period of time, those
     decisions, there is none.
          Well, you say, okay, wait a minute.  Now,
     Dr. Proctor, he was here.  He spent a week
     talking about The Tobacco Institute, the 4974
     Council for Tobacco Research, the Tobacco
     Industry Research Committee.  What about those?
     Don't they build a bridge?  What about those
     white papers?  What about that photo bomb
     commercial you saw again this morning?  What
     about the guy with the big hair doing the press
     conference for The Tobacco Institute?  Do they
     build a bridge?
          Well, only two people who knew Mr. Ahrens
     testified in this courtroom, Mrs. Ahrens and
     their son Bryan.  Both of them never said
     Mr. Ahrens discussed any of those organizations
     with them.
          Mrs. Ahrens, the person closest in the
     world to Mr. Ahrens, said:
          "Question:  You were never told, heard of,
     or relied on anything from, for example,
     The Tobacco Institute?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  The Tobacco Industry Research
     Committee?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  The Council for Tobacco
     Research?
          "Answer:  No." 4975
          That doesn't build a bridge.
          All that stuff that Dr. Proctor talked
     about, pixie dust, not proof.
          Then there are all those irrelevancies you
     were treated to in Dr. Proctor's testimony.
     Cigarettes to soldiers in World War I and II.
     Cigarettes for VA hospitals.  Ads before Karl
     Ahrens was born.  Ads for brands that he never
     smoked.  You saw some of those again this
     morning.
          An hour of that video that was played by
     the Lorillard marketing person, the first hour
     had to do with Old Gold cigarettes.  What did
     that have to do with anything?
          You saw internal marketing plans from
     R.J. Reynolds during the period of time it was
     a separate company and Mr. Ahrens was smoking a
     Lorillard brand.  You saw Kent ads from before
     there was proof that he smoked Kent.
          More pixie dust.  None of that builds a
     bridge.
          In fact, ladies and gentlemen, this would
     be a pretty difficult bridge to build.  Did
     Mr. Ahrens make his choices based on what a
     cigarette company said or didn't say?  Well, 4976
     what do we know about Mr. Ahrens?
          We know he was an intelligent man, right?
     He went to a select high school, Brooklyn Tech,
     a school with high standards, required an
     entrance exam.  Almost an engineer prep school.
          We know that he got a BS degree from
     Fairleigh Dickinson University and he took
     graduate courses in marketing.  And, yeah,
     there are his grades.
          We know he worked with computers.  And
     this was a time when computers were new and
     mysterious things, where one computer filled a
     room, for a period of time from the 1960s
     forward.
          Computers have changed the way we lived
     our lives and ran our businesses.
          We know that he read the paper and watched
     the evening news, national and local.  And we
     know that he was growing up -- he grew up in
     the media capital of the world, New York City,
     where there were multiple sources of
     information about many, many events linking
     smoking with disease.
          These articles were in Reader's Digest.
     And some of them had titles like "Nicotine 4977
     Knockout," 1941.  Or "Cancer by the Carton,"
     1952.
          Now, you saw the slide that the Plaintiffs
     used with Dr. Proctor that tried to minimized
     Reader's Digest, saying, well, there were only
     a relatively small number of articles compared
     to all they ran.
          But let's take a look at a few sources
     about the impact that those articles have.
     Let's go to, oh, I don't know, how about
     Senator John F. Kennedy, who said:  "Digest
     stories figured heavily in committee hearings,
     such as those on postal administration, the
     cigarette-cancer relationship, the foreign aid
     program, and many other subjects of national
     importance."
          Let's see what the American Cancer Society
     said about Reader's Digest.  "The American
     Cancer Society has termed them," articles in
     Reader's Digest, "a 'profound influence' in
     creating public awareness of the risks involved
     in smoking."
          There was coverage of the stories in
     places like TIME and Newsweek, and, by the way,
     as Judge Day told you this morning, all these 4978
     are in evidence.  You're going to have them
     back in the jury room, I'm going to encourage
     you to read them, or at least some of them.
          Because the suggestion's been made there
     was confusion.  That the tobacco industry
     somehow polluted the information environment
     and there was a mixed message out there.  Read
     them.  Read them.  And I am confident you won't
     find a mixed message at all.
          There was coverage in New York City
     newspapers.  There was coverage on television.
     Both in the news and in Public Service
     Announcements.  And we played you some of
     those.
          Did the message get out?  So all this was
     being sent out there.  Was anybody listening?
     Let's see what Dr. Hammond said on See It Now.
 transcribed
     as follows:)
          DR. HAMMOND:  It is now established in my
     opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that
     cigarette smoking greatly increases the
     probability of developing lung cancer.
          In my opinion, people should be warned of
     the dangers and they are being warned.  What 4979
     they then want to do, whether they wish to
     smoke or not, is their own business.
          (The video clip ended.)
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  People should be warned
     and they are being warned, this is 1955.  Go a
     couple of years later and let's see what the
     Surgeon General and the head of the National
     Cancer Institute said in 1957.  "Our position
     is we have informed the public through the
     excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV."
          Dr. Heller, director of National Cancer
     Institute:  "Newspapers, radios, TV and other
     media have done an excellent job covering this
     problem, and a very objective job.  This is an
     exceedingly valuable way of informing the
     public."
          The head of the -- the top doctor of the
     United States and the director of the National
     Cancer Institute, 1957.
          Let's listen to Dr. Daniel Horn, who is
     the head of the National Clearinghouse on
     Smoking and Health in 1968.  "You could stand
     on a rooftop and shout, 'smoking is dangerous'
     at the top of your lungs, and you would not be
     telling anyone anything they did not already 4980
     know."
          The message got out to the public.  The
     message worked its way into the Ahrens'
     household.
          You heard, from the time they were dating
     and throughout their marriage, Mrs. Ahrens was
     asking her husband to quit.  You heard from
     Bryan, who was a youngster in tears begged his
     father to quit.  And Bryan had weekly and even
     daily discussions with his father about
     quitting.
          Mr. Ahrens' long time employer, Xerox,
     wanted him to quit.  They set up that
     system-wide health management program.  Those
     are the materials for the participants, but we
     also heard that even if you didn't participate,
     you got a newspaper called Take Charge, sent to
     the home of all Xerox employees.
          Now, Bryan Ahrens said he didn't remember
     this program, and that's fair, it was 20 years
     ago.  But the news -- but being sent to every
     home suggests that the Xerox program worked its
     way into the Ahrens' household.
          The public got the message.  Mr. Ahrens
     got the message.  And let's not forget that 4981
     every package of cigarettes that you heard
     testimony about, every Kent and every Merit
     Ultra Light had one of these warning labels.
     Kent would have had the 1966 original warning
     label, they both would have had the 1970
     warning label, and they both have the 1985
     current rotating labels.
          This label was staring Mr. Ahrens in the
     face every time he reached into his shirt
     pocket to light another cigarette.
          But as I said before, what about this
     campaign of doubt that Dr. Proctor was talking
     about?  Didn't that counteract all this
     coverage?  Not hardly.  Again, read the
     articles.
          Look what Reader's Digest said as early as
     1962 about the tobacco industry's credibility.
     "The statement sounded weaker and more pathetic
     than ever."
          Let's take a look at what it said in 1964.
     It referred to the tobacco industry's view as
     "propaganda, aimed at confusing or beguiling
     the public."
          This is the most circulated periodical in
     the United States, not for doctors, but for 4982
     every man.
          Remember our source credibility polls?  We
     had three of them.  Way back in 1959.  Anybody
     believe the tobacco industry back then, well
     3 percent.
          The next one, Katie.
          1968, they blew to 5 percent, but, the
     next one, 1970, back down to 3 percent.
          And having heard everything that you heard
     about Karl Ahrens, does anybody here really
     think that he was in that 3 percent or the
     5 percent?  Not hardly.
          And then let's remember that Mrs. Ahrens
     said Mr. Ahrens never talked about any
     statement from any tobacco company, not
     Reynolds, not Lorillard, not anybody.
          Okay.  What about cigarette advertising?
     It's everywhere.  Does that build a bridge?
     Not in this case.
          Here Mrs. Ahrens testified:
          "Question:  He never discussed cigarette
     advertising with you?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  Or that he relied on a
     statement from the tobacco company? 4983
          "Answer:  No."
          Ladies and gentlemen, they have not built
     that bridge.  They have not built that bridge.
          There are going to be two questions on the
     verdict form as to my client, in which they
     needed to build a bridge by proof, by iron and
     steel and brick and mortar, not by guesswork
     and pixie dust.  And they are Question 4 and
     Question 6.  You have seen these already, I
     won't read them over again.
          But I suggest to you, because they have
     not met their burden of proof, because they
     have not built that bridge, we are asking you
     to check no as to each of these boxes.
          And there's just one thing you should know
     about the consequences of checking yes to these
     boxes.
          If you check, yes, then any division of
     responsibility that you've done earlier on the
     verdict form will be nullified.  And that is,
     if you check yes to either of these boxes, the
     Plaintiff will get the entire dollar award that
     you determine appropriate.  No division of
     responsibility.
          I'm telling you, you should follow the 4984
     law, follow the Judge's instruction, but that
     is a consequence you should know about, if you
     were to check yes to either of these questions.
          And if you do get to where you're going to
     award damages, we are going to ask you to be
     reasonable, to compensate Mrs. Ahrens and Bryan
     Ahrens for their loss of companionship and
     protection and mental pain and suffering.
     Nothing can replace a lost parent or a lost
     spouse.  I would be a fool to stand up here and
     suggest that you could.
          However, you can't decide the case based
     on sympathy, but if you get this far on the
     verdict form, you're going to have to place a
     dollar amount on a line on the verdict form.
          And if you're looking for a yardstick, I
     would suggest using the analogy of a life
     insurance policy.  Think about this case as a
     life insurance policy for Mrs. Ahrens and
     Bryan.
          The last question on the verdict form
     deals with entitlement to punitive damages.  If
     you check, no, the case is over.  If you get to
     that point in the verdict form.  If you check, 4993
     yes, there will be additional proof for you in
     our next session.
          You're going to have to decide this case
     whether punitive damages are appropriate.  And
     I want to be clear and echo Mr. Paige from this
     morning about what punitive damages are.
          Punitive damages are more money for the
     Plaintiffs.  More money for the Plaintiffs.
     They don't go to the cancer society.  They
     don't go to stop smoking programs.  They don't
     go to the State of Florida.  They go to the
     Plaintiffs.
          And they go to the Plaintiffs on top of
     any dollar amount you already have awarded them
     to make them whole for their loss.
          Punitive damages, as you heard in the
     instruction, are designed to punish the
     Defendants and deter others.
          And for punitive damages to be awarded,
     you have to find extraordinary misconduct of
     the nature that you saw in Mr. Paige's slide
     earlier.  Such as reckless disregard for human
     life, or wanton and reckless conduct.
          And you have to find it by a higher burden
     of proof.  It's called clear and convincing 4994
     evidence.  And let's take a look at what that
     is.  "Clear and convincing evidence is evidence
     that is precise, explicit, lacking in
     confusion, and of such weight that it produces
     a firm belief or conviction, without
     hesitation, about the matter in issue."
          And I stress, without hesitation.
          Plaintiff tried to make the case for
     punitive damages through two witnesses,
     Dr. Hurt and Dr. Proctor.  And Mr. Carter
     talked about Dr. Hurt, I will talk about
     Dr. Proctor.
          And I will suggest to you that there are
     many things he said that should cause you great
     hesitation on the issue of punitive damages.
          Now, you remember Dr. Proctor was on the
     witness stand for almost a week.  And in that
     week he said absolutely nothing about Karl
     Ahrens.  His sole reason for being here was to
     build a case for punitive damages.
          But let me suggest to you that he is a
     fraud messenger.
          Dr. Proctor clearly believes that money
     corrupts.  According to Dr. Proctor, corrupted
     by money, mentioned at one point or other in 4995
     his testimony, the CTR grantees, the Green
     Monsters, the American Medical Association, the
     authors who reviewed the Premier monograph,
     Dr. Ernst Wynder, Dr. Dietrich Hoffmann, and
     the American Health Foundation, all bought off
     by the tobacco industry.
          These organizations are people who are
     corrupted by money but not Dr. Proctor.  But
     let's take a look at Dr. Proctor.
          In just January of 19 -- of, excuse me,
     2016, just this year, he testified in the
     Howles case, and with travel time --
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I'm sorry,
     objection.  Can we approach?
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, my objection --
          THE COURT:  State it.
          MR. PAIGE:  I have an objection to the
     board.  Of the median household income in
     Florida, I don't think there's any --
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Dr. Proctor.  I asked him
     about Dr. Proctor, and I think he testified to
     that.
          MR. PAIGE:  No. 4996
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Okay.  I don't have it
     up.  So -- but --
          COURT REPORTER:  I can't hear you, I'm
     sorry.
          THE COURT:  Mr. -- Mr. Sales, will you ask
     Robert to put it up on my --
          MR. PAIGE:  Do you see -- this is what it
     is, and Dr. Proctor said, well, if you say so,
     or is this not something that Dr. Proctor knew
     on his own?
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  He has been asked about
     that before.  I think he knew on his own.  It's
     in the record.
          MR. PAIGE:  It's irrelevant anyway,
     Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  I think I remember a question
     about it, although it may be a question that
     was objected to.  I just don't see it's worth
     holding things up with the jury.
          You know, I think it is irrelevant, I
     think if -- you know, can you --
          MR. SALES:  In one month almost double --
     average --
          THE COURT:  I mean, they know what they
     make.  They may be surprised that they aren't 4997
     making up to what the median income is, you
     know.  I don't know.  It's irrelevant in the
     sense that I don't think it helps you or hurts
     you significantly anyway.
          Can you take it -- can you show the thing
     without it?  Without -- without going back to
     the drawing board or something?
          Is this in the transcript, Mr. Carter?
          For the record, Mr. Carter is handing me a
     portion of the transcript at page 1973, which I
     presume is cross of Proctor.  Proctor, which he
     is asked:
          "Question:  Do you know the median income
     of a home in Florida -- of a family in Florida?
          "Answer:  I'm often reminded of it, and
     when I testify I think it's around
     50-some-thousand.
          "Question:  Around $50,000?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          No objection made.
          MR. CARTER:  Your Honor, I had that at the
     lunch --
          THE COURT:  Based on that, your objection
     is overruled.
          (Sidebar concluded.) 4998
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Put it up.
          Okay.  Where we left off.  Dr. Proctor
     traveled to the Howles case and testified there
     in January of last month, $30,000.  Same deal
     in the Ewing case, last month, $24,000.  This
     case, this last month -- this month, I'm sorry,
     $30,000.
          January total, $84,000.
          The median -- annual, annual income in
     Florida, $50,000.
          So Dr. Proctor earned almost double the
     median family income in Florida -- median
     annual income in Florida, almost double, in
     just one month.
          And that's on top of his day job at
     Stanford.  And as you saw, as we saw, he
     repeatedly skipped class, that day job in
     Stanford that is taught on Mondays and
     Wednesdays to testify in court.  I counted six
     classes in January, and he has missed three of
     them.  He has missed half.
          Now, I'm not suggesting that money has
     caused Dr. Proctor to make stuff up.  I am
     suggesting as you saw repeatedly, during his
     testimony, he told half a story on direct that 4999
     had to be filled out on cross examination.
          Any of one of these half truths should be
     enough to cause you hesitation in deciding to
     award punitive damages.
          I just want to go through a handful with
     you.
          On direct examination, Dr. Proctor showed
     you a 1963 telegram that said the results of
     certain experiments at Battelle labs should not
     be shared with the Surgeon General's Committee.
     He suggested it was because they were
     unfavorable and should be kept secret.
          On cross examination we showed you the
     real reason, and there it is.  The work wasn't
     ready yet.  It's too early.  And Dr. Proctor
     told you the work nonetheless went on, patents
     were obtained.  And as we've heard, patents are
     publicly available filings with the Federal
     Government.  Anybody who wanted to know what
     went on with the Battelle work can find it in
     the patents.
          Another example.  On Dr. Proctor's direct,
     he showed you a document about a meeting at The
     Plaza Hotel in 1953.  You heard about it this
     morning. 5000
          Very secret, very sinister, the formation
     of the conspiracy.  You had to wait until cross
     examination to learn that the meeting was
     reported in The New York Times, that the
     Assistant Attorney General of the United States
     was informed about the meeting, and most
     importantly, you learned on cross examination
     about a memo where the cigarette companies
     said -- the executives said they sincerely
     believed that the National Cancer Institute,
     the leading U.S. Government agency funding
     cancer research, has rebutted the charges
     against cigarettes.  Specifically in a study I
     showed him, the Journal of the National Cancer
     Institute in June of 1953.  You had to wait
     until cross to hear that.
          Dr. Proctor ridiculed the Green Monster.
     The Green Monster.  He called it, and I think I
     got this right, a denialist treatise.
          On cross examination, you learned that the
     1964 Surgeon General's Committee found it
     useful to them.  They called it a basic
     reference source for their putting together the
     historic 1964 report that found smoking caused
     lung cancer in men. 5001
          On direct examination, Dr. Proctor showed
     you a 1938, remember the year, 1938 Three
     Stooges episode, and he said it demonstrated
     that the term "coffin nails" was a joke by that
     year.
          On cross examination you saw this.  You
     saw an article in TIME Magazine about a Johns
     Hopkins researcher finding that smokers died
     sooner than nonsmokers, entitled "Coffin
     Nails."  Smokers dying sooner than nonsmokers.
     That's not a joke.  That's not a joke.
          And then there was the Tobacco Working
     Group.  It was a ten-year cooperative effort
     between the United States Government, the
     public health community, and the cigarette
     companies to try to find a less hazardous
     cigarette.  Dr. Proctor called it, and I quote,
     "the penetration of the conspiracy into the
     Federal Government."  That sounds like it's
     from a spy novel.
          On cross examination, you learned that the
     president of R.J. Reynolds didn't quite see it
     that way.
          "In cooperation with others, you should
     push the work concerning tobacco and health. 5002
     You should prepare a plan to foster any
     relationship with government personnel in the
     quest for mutual understanding of facts to
     ultimately gain their cooperation and proper
     research of the subject.  If there's a safer
     cigarette, let's continue and increase our
     efforts in this program.  Please prepare a plan
     to carry it out."
          This is the president of Reynolds writing
     his top scientists at the time the Tobacco
     Working Group is being formed.  It doesn't
     sound like much of an infiltration, does it?
          He also said that the cigarette companies
     forced the United States Government to take the
     word "hazardous" out of the name of the group.
          "Hazard" was kept out of the name of the
     collaboration, really?
          "Toward less hazardous cigarettes."  This
     is one of the five reports from the Tobacco
     Working Group.  The other four are titled the
     same thing.
          You saw some of this from Dr. Hurt as
     well.  On direct examination, he showed you a
     1972 R.J. Reynolds memo that said that nicotine
     was the sin qua non of smoking.  He made it out 5003
     like it's a big secret.  Expect that on cross
     examination, you learned that Reader's Digest
     said pretty much the same thing, only in
     English, in 1950, to the public 22 years
     earlier.
          Now, Dr. Proctor said that it's a job of a
     historian to get you to walk in the shoes of
     the past.  That's the phrase he used.
          Now, you take away from Dr. Proctor's
     testimony easily, it could be that the
     companies confused the public about smoking and
     health while concocting ways to keep smokers
     smoking.  Monkeying with nicotine or coming up
     with gimmicks like filters.  That was the
     import of the testimony that he wanted to pass
     along.
          But if that was the takeaway, that would
     not be walking in the shoes of the past.  It
     would be following a false prophet.  So let's
     go back and walk in the shoes of the past.
          As Dr. Proctor told you, after World War
     II, the United States emerged as the only
     superpower in the world and it had a deep trust
     in science.
          Dr. Proctor told you this confidence led 5004
     to something he called the single factor
     theory.  And this was an optimistic belief that
     science could solve everything.  This
     confidence infected the scientific community
     inside and outside the cigarette industry.
          When the study started coming out linking
     smoking to disease, the belief was, well, let's
     find out what's wrong, maybe it's one, maybe
     it's two, maybe it's three things, and let's
     take it out.  And if you strip away the slant
     that Drs. Proctor and Hurt put on events, let's
     look at what the companies really did.
          The first thing, for example,
     R.J. Reynolds did was to find out the state of
     the science regarding smoking and tobacco.  So
     as you heard, they assigned a relative new
     chemist, Claude Teague, to go to the library
     and do just that.  And you saw his report.
          And in his report, he cited 78 sources,
     all in the published literature, none buried in
     the archives or file cabinets of R.J. Reynolds.
          And once they did this, they needed to
     find out what was in tobacco smoke.  If you're
     going to pursue this single factor theory, then
     you've got to see what's bad in tobacco smoke 5005
     that may be taken out.
          So they hired a scientist named Alan
     Rodgman, and the other companies did likewise.
     Dr. Rodgman did an eight-year study of what was
     in cigarette smoke.  And he used state of the
     art technology.  He used chromatography.  Mass
     spectroscopy.  He identified compounds of
     cigarette smoke including carcinogenic ones,
     and he published on the subject.
          And he gave speeches on the subject.  And
     you saw one in this trial.  This is a speech
     that Dr. Rodgman gave.  It even had pictures in
     that speech of what some of the compounds in
     cigarette smoke looked like.
          And you learned that R.J. Reynolds by
     itself identified about half of all the
     compounds in cigarette smoke, and they
     presented that list to the Surgeon General's
     Advisory Committee in 1963 as it was working on
     the landmark 1964 report.
          Okay.  So now you know what's in smoke.
     This is when the single factor theory kicks in.
     If you think you identify a culprit, let's get
     rid of it.  And you saw some of those efforts
     by both Reynolds and Lorillard.  Reynolds went 5006
     after something called polycyclic hydrocarbons.
     That's a big deal.  That's a big name.
     Benzo[a]pyrene is one of them.  These are the
     compounds that are produced by burning, and in
     certain concentrations they can be
     carcinogenic.
          So what did Reynolds do?  You saw one of
     these documents.  The first thing they did was
     they confirmed the early work on polycyclic
     hydrocarbons, and then they started a lengthy
     research program to try to lessen the amounts
     of these potentially dangerous components in
     cigarette smoke.  And in this same document,
     they listed five ways that they've tried to do
     that.
          And then they recounted that these
     experiments were such that over 120 separate
     experiments were conducted using almost a half
     a million cigarettes.  This is through the
     1950s.
          Now, as it turns out, they couldn't
     eliminate them, you can't eliminate the
     products of burning if you're going to have a
     tobacco -- a cigarette that's lit.  And any
     scientist also concluded that there wasn't 5007
     enough concentration to account for all the
     lung cancer.
          So enormous effort, single factor theory
     failed as to this compound.
          Lorillard, on the other hand, went after a
     subject called phenols.  You heard in this
     trial that phenols are a compound that
     paralyzes the cilia.  The cilia, you remember,
     are the tiny hairlike structures in your
     throat, in your respiratory system that's
     designed to push the bad stuff out.  Phenols it
     was thought paralyzed these such that the bad
     stuff was not pushed out.
          Is this a big deal to try to get rid of
     those compounds?  It sure is.  Remember
     Dr. Ruckdeschel, this is the chart
     Dr. Ruckdeschel used when he was trying to
     explain how cancer develops.  Where it says
     "normal cells," you see the cilia, we got it
     circled in red, those are the structures that
     push the bad stuff out.
          That's the first step, he said, in a
     theory of cancer causation.  Carcinogenesis.
          So the cilia are very important, and
     making sure the cilia function is very 5008
     important.
          So if you eliminate the things that are
     causing that paralysis, that's a good thing.
     That's a good deed.
          Dr. Alex Spears at Lorillard worked on
     that.  He worked on that with Dr. Ernst Wynder,
     the mouse skin-painting.  In fact, as an aside,
     you've learned also that Lorillard provided
     Dr. Wynder with the cigarettes that he used to
     produce the tar that he used for his mouse
     skin-painting experiments.
          Lorillard worked with Dr. Wynder.
     Lorillard worked with Dr. Dietrich Hoffmann who
     had been at Sloan Kettering and then the
     American Health Foundation.  Lorillard provided
     funding for work on reducing or eliminating
     phenols from cigarette smoke.
          And Dr. Spears did that work in-house at
     Lorillard, too, and he published on it for the
     world to see.  You saw these two articles.  He
     got patents on filters that removed phenols
     from cigarette smoke.  And he talked about that
     work at the National Cancer Institute.
          And in 1963, Lorillard made two
     submissions to the Surgeon General's Advisory 5009
     Committee, working on that '64 report, about
     the work they had done on the subject.
          So they worked with the public health
     community, they succeeded in coming up with a
     product, they published their research, and
     they told the Surgeon General's Advisory
     Committee about it.
          Lorillard also invented an inhalation
     machine to do inhalation experiments.  And even
     Dr. Proctor agreed that that was the most
     sophisticated machine available.  And Lorillard
     made it available to researchers, and
     Dr. Spears gave a presentation on it at the
     National Cancer Institute.
          The internal documents show this work was
     sincere, with a worthy objective, finding out
     what the bad stuff was, taking it out if
     possible, and reducing it if not.  This is
     walking in the shoes of the past.  This alone
     should give you hesitation in awarding punitive
     damages.
          So let's talk about filters.  The filter
     cigarette at issue in this case from my client
     is Kent.  And let's cut to the bottom line.
     Dr. Proctor testified about the companies. 5010
     They knew from the beginning that filters
     didn't reduce anything.  You heard something
     similar from Mr. Paige this morning.
          Four times, four times I challenged
     Dr. Proctor to put his money where his mouth
     was.  Four times I asked Dr. Proctor --
     remember, he's the guy that's reviewed a
     gazillion documents.  He's the guy who has made
     $3.5 million testifying about them.  I asked
     him whether he was aware of any evidence that
     Lorillard thought that filters didn't work or
     that Kent did not filter effectively.
          Surely if such a document, a letter, a
     report, a memo existed, surely he of all people
     would know about it.  And his repeated answer,
     his reluctant answer, four times to these
     questions was no.
          Let's go through them.
          "Question:  You're not aware of any
     documents from Lorillard that stated that
     Lorillard did not believe that filters actually
     reduced the tar and nicotine of cigarettes?
          "Answer:  It's a complicated question.  I
     can't think of something with those exact words
     in it. 5011
          "Question:  Okay.  You're not aware of any
     Lorillard document where they thought filters
     were a gimmick?
          "Answer:  I don't recall them using that
     word exactly."
          Next.
          "Question:  And you can't think of an
     example from Lorillard's files where someone
     from Lorillard said they did not believe that
     filters reduced tar and nicotine levels?
          "Answer:  I don't recall them saying those
     exact words."
          Next.
          "Question:  You showed the jury" -- it's a
     marketing plan for Kent, marketing Kent about
     the time of the Surgeon General's Report.
          "Question:  Nowhere in this document does
     Lorillard say, we don't believe that Kent is an
     effective filter?
          "Answer:  That's right."
          And the last one.
          "Question:  The question is this:  Can you
     show us a document where Lorillard thought to
     itself that cigarettes with filters were not --
     not -- did not provide more protection than 5012
     cigarettes without filters?
          "Answer:  Off the top of my head, I can't
     think of one exactly like that."
          It killed him to give that answer, but he
     gave it four times.  And you and I know if such
     a document existed, it would have been up on
     the screen, it would have been highlighted,
     rehighlighted, it would have been a big deal.
     But instead nothing.
          And there's several reasons, particularly
     during Mr. Ahrens' lifetime, for Lorillard to
     believe that filters lowered the risk of lung
     cancer.
          Over the years filters were encouraged by
     prominent researchers like Drs. Wynder,
     Hoffmann and Russell, the National Cancer
     Institute, the National Cancer Society, the
     Federal Trade Commission, the Surgeon General.
          And you saw this quote from Dr. Russell,
     who both Plaintiff's experts acknowledged was
     an authority on, a respected cancer researcher.
          "It is unlikely that any single measure
     has saved more lives than filters."
          People like Dr. Russell and the others
     believed this because there were decades, 5013
     decades of epidemiological studies that said
     that smokers of filtered cigarettes had lower
     death rates from lung cancer than the smokers
     of nonfilters.  Dr. Proctor said these decades
     of studies were wrong, but they were considered
     good science during Karl Ahrens' lifetime.
          Dr. Proctor also said the release of the
     company documents in 1998 changed the belief
     about the effectiveness of filters.  And I
     guess there's two answers to that.
          First, again, he could point to no
     Lorillard document that says Lorillard didn't
     believe what it said.
          And second, as late as 2012, 14 years
     after the documents are released, 14 years
     after they could read them the same as you saw
     them in this trial, the World Health
     Organization still thought that filters
     provided a benefit in reducing the risk of lung
     cancer.
          And yes, Kent marketed Lorillard as having
     an effective filter, and yes, Lorillard bragged
     that Kent had been judged the most effective
     filter on the market by Reader's Digest.  But
     does this surprise you?  If Car and Driver gave 5014
     a safety award to Volvo, don't you think you
     would see that in Volvo ads?  But most
     importantly, there is no evidence that
     Lorillard did not believe what it was saying
     about Kent.  None.
          The fact that Lorillard was being
     encouraged to manufacture filters by the public
     health community and that it responded with a
     filter that was judged the most effective,
     these facts, too, should give you a hesitation
     in awarding punitive damages.
          You heard in this trial that the FTC
     smoking machine, Dr. Proctor called it a
     smoking robot, is used -- that's used to
     generate those tar and nicotine numbers did not
     mimic human smoking behavior and that the
     resulting numbers were too low and the
     companies knew it.
          Well, as to the first, the companies told
     the FTC in 1966, 1966, that the machine did not
     mimic human smoking behavior.  This was their
     submission to the Federal Trade Commission on
     the subject, all the major companies, and this
     is what they said:  The Ogg Method, the
     machine, does not measure the volume of smoke 5015
     or other that any human being will draw in from
     smoking in any particular cigarette.
          They told this to the FTC before they ever
     adopted the machine.
          But the government being the government,
     they went ahead and adopted it anyway, and then
     double-down on that by later requiring that
     those numbers be placed in every cigarette ad.
          Well, what about the numbers being too
     low?  Well, Lorillard thought so, too, and it
     asked the FTC if it could list higher numbers
     instead of the ones generated by the machine.
     And the FTC said, no, no higher numbers.
          If there's somebody to blame for the
     inaccurate numbers in Lorillard ads, it isn't
     Lorillard.
          Filters pose a problem.  When you lower
     tar, you lower nicotine, too.  And some smokers
     might smoke more cigarettes, some might inhale
     more deeply, some might hold their smoke longer
     to make up for the lower level of nicotine.
     Some smokers might do that, but you heard no
     evidence that Karl Ahrens did that when he
     switched from Kent to Merit Ultra Lights.
          This is called compensation.  And the 5016
     suggestion has been made that this was a
     phenomenon known only to the tobacco industry.
          Not hardly.  You saw what Dr. Proctor
     called the single best disseminated description
     of true compensation in that decade.  And that
     decade was 40 years ago, and it was Consumer
     Reports.  Consumer Reports laid out the various
     methods of compensation for the ordinary
     reader.  And this was in 1976.
          Now, during this period, scientists from
     inside and outside the industry were actively
     looking at ways to avoid compensation.
          Dr. Russell, who we heard a lot about,
     stated the problem:  People smoke for nicotine
     but they die from the tar.  And thought the
     risk of lung cancer might be reduced if you had
     a low-tar cigarette, but as he said here, a
     medium nicotine yield.
          Next up.
          He said besides having low-tar, the least
     harmful cigarettes for heavy smokers may be
     those with a high, rather than a low, nicotine
     yield.
          Dr. Sir Richard Doll, who you remember was
     knighted by the Queen for smoking and health 5017
     work, thought the same.  He suggested a low-tar
     cigarette with an artificially high content of
     nicotine.
          This was in the public domain, and the
     companies knew it, and they answered the call.
     So, yes, they experimented with different
     levels of nicotine.  Yes, they experimented
     with higher and lower pH levels.  Yes, they
     experimented with ammonia.  Yes, they worked
     with reconstituted tobacco.  And yes, they
     worked with levulinic acid.  Those were the
     documents you saw in this case.
          They were trying to find the lowest level
     of nicotine and a less hazardous cigarette
     where the smoker didn't compensate, where the
     smoker would smoke the cigarette thought to be
     less hazardous.
          Those documents with the "how low can we
     go," that's what it's all about.  Lorillard's
     program was called, and you saw some documents
     this morning, the Nicotine Augmentation
     Project.  And it was done in conjunction with
     the National Cancer Institute's Tobacco Working
     Group.  You saw this Lorillard document about
     the Nicotine Augmentation Project.  And I would 5018
     ask you to check the date.  And the date is
     May 4th, 1976.  And it talks about
     recommendations from public health agencies for
     a low-tar, higher-nicotine cigarette.
          Now, look at these meeting minutes from
     the Tobacco Working Group.  Check the title.
     "Smoking and Health Program, High-nicotine/tar,
     low-tar cigarettes."
          Check the date.  May 5th, 1976.  The day
     after the Nicotine Augmentation Project.
     Coincidence?  I think not.
          Let's take -- before we leave the cover,
     do you remember you heard that the company
     people could participate, but in a private
     capacity?  Murray Senkus, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company.  Dr. A.W. Spears, Lorillard.  They are
     listed as being affiliated with tobacco
     companies.
          Now look at the subjects that are
     discussed in the offices of the National Cancer
     Institute.  This isn't in a Reynolds' lab, this
     is not a Lorillard lab.  They are looking at
     freebase form of nicotine.
          Next one.
          They are looking at whether it's a good 5019
     idea to increase or decrease the pH.
          Now, as you heard, you don't check your
     common sense at the metal detector.
          Does anybody believe that the National
     Cancer Institute was working with cigarette
     companies and private health officials to make
     a more addictive cigarette?  Of course not.
     The point of this research, of these
     investigations, was to try to development a
     less hazardous cigarette.  Not a more addictive
     one.
          Those facts, and the fact that those
     nicotine documents were -- that you were shown
     were produced -- were in pursuit of a less
     hazardous cigarette.  That alone ought to give
     you hesitation to award punitive damages.
          The effort to develop less hazardous
     smoking products was neither a sham nor a
     fraud.  You heard about two Reynolds products
     called Premier and Eclipse.  They used
     technology that heated rather than burn
     tobacco.  Do you remember you couldn't
     eliminate benzo[a]pyrene if you burned
     anything.  Well, they tried to avoid that by
     heating rather than burning.  And all the bad 5020
     actors in burning were virtually gone.
          To create Premier, Reynolds spent a
     billion dollars.  They built a new factory,
     they got dozens of patents.  They did
     inhalation testing.  They did skin-painting.
     They did Ames, bioassay, and a Petri dish.
     They published a 700-page peer-reviewed book on
     the results of their testing and presented it
     to the public.
          You heard from Dr. Proctor, benzo[a]pyrene
     a carcinogen, was virtually gone.  Arsenic,
     virtually gone.  Premier went out into test
     markets and consumers hated it.  It flunked.
          Now, you might have thought that at least
     the public health officials might have liked it
     because it eliminated all those carcinogens.
          They didn't.  As you heard, the Surgeon
     General, the National Institute of Drug Abuse
     and the states where it was being test marketed
     took steps to get it pulled from the market.
          For both reasons, Reynolds did pull it
     from the market.  But Reynolds didn't give up.
     And they were encouraged not to give up.
          As you heard, Dr. Michael Russell, who
     we've been hearing about, wrote a letter to 5021
     Reynolds and said:  "I've had a longstanding
     interest in your Premier cigarette.  Basically,
     I think the Premier has tremendous potential
     for low-risk, long-term nicotine use, and that
     the response to it in your country was
     political and irrational.
          "My motives in writing to you are that as
     a scientist and as someone with a concern for
     health.  I would be very disappointed if a
     product with this potential were to be
     abandoned."
          And it wasn't abandoned.  1996 Reynolds
     introduced Eclipse.  Also heat-but-not-burn
     technology, a little bit better tasting, and
     it's sold here in Florida today, but it has a
     very small market share.
          And even Dr. Proctor, again, grudgingly,
     grudgingly, acknowledged that Premier and
     Eclipse are safer than conventional cigarettes,
     or, as he had to put it in his own words, less
     deadly.
          The fact that Reynolds made this
     billion-dollar effort to develop a safer
     cigarette alone ought to give you hesitation
     about awarding punitive damages. 5022
          There are some odds and ends that I have
     come up during the trial that should also give
     you some hesitation about the need to punish.
          You heard the cigarette companies have
     reported all their ingredients to the Federal
     Government, the Department of Health of Human
     Services since 1986.  So for 30 years the
     government's known what ingredients go in.
          You've heard that Reynolds and the other
     companies have websites where a smoker can find
     the ingredients of their particular brand.
          You heard that the companies are now
     regulated by the Food and Drug Administration,
     the FDA.  Ingredients are also reported to the
     FDA.  And the FDA can order that any ingredient
     be taken out of cigarettes.
          You heard about pH.  Well, pH -- about pH
     a Reynolds scientist invented a machine to
     measure it in cigarette smoke.  He patented it
     and he published about it.
          And speaking of publications, in addition
     to specific folks you heard about like
     Dr. Rodgman and Dr. Spears, you've heard that
     many Reynolds scientists have been cited in
     Surgeon General's Reports. 5023
          There have been no ads on TV or radio
     since 1971, cigarette ads.  There have been no
     cigarette billboards since 1998.  There has
     been no sampling since 1998.  You heard about
     product placement in movies, also very --
     Lorillard has not done product placement for
     over 40 years.  Lorillard has been preclearing
     its ads with the FTC since 1958.  All companies
     have searchable document websites.
          Dr. Proctor told us, together, there are
     about 14 million documents online.  The Tobacco
     Institute is gone.  CTR is gone.  You heard a
     lot about nicotine research and you heard
     during the cross examination of Dr. Hurt that
     Reynolds published a book about the effect of
     nicotine on the brain.  The biology of
     nicotine.  This was published in 1992 based on
     a conference in 1990.
          Eleven contributing authors to this book
     are Reynolds scientists, including an article
     in this book, it's in evidence, on how nicotine
     might be used to treat Alzheimer's disease.
          These are additional reasons that you
     should have hesitation in awarding punitive
     damages. 5024
          I'm not going to suggest, as I wrap up,
     that over the last 70 years the industry as a
     whole or my client in particular has not
     written or done something stupid.  I have and
     will continue to argue, though, that nothing
     that Lorillard or Reynolds has written or said
     or done was a legal cause of any injury to
     Mr. Ahrens.
          And I will also argue to you that whatever
     was written or said or done was against the
     backdrop of the largest health information
     campaign in the history of this country.
          Don't take it from me, take it from
     Dr. Ruckdeschel.  He said:  "I think for many,
     many decades now, people have understood a
     relationship between smoking and cancer."
          On addiction.  Do you remember the Florida
     Health Notes from 1906.  "Today, 1906, the
     cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the
     very worst form of tobacco addiction.  It is so
     cheap, and it is so generally inhaled."
          Dr. Proctor made a point about inhalable
     cigarettes goes back to 1906.
          In 1915, we heard the Surgeon General
     called cigarette smoking an addiction, way 5025
     before the 1988 report.
          And don't forget this article from 1942,
     that was shown to Dr. Hurt, that likened
     nicotine and smoking to opium and morphine.
          Folks, the precise definition of
     "addiction" or "dependence" or "habit" may have
     changed over the years, but the concept of
     cigarette smoking could be hard to quit is not.
          In determining whether punitive damages
     are warranted, consider that backdrop and
     consider the dedicated work in research and
     development by Reynolds and Lorillard over the
     years.
          To sum it up, to identify smoke
     constituents.  To reduce or eliminate smoke
     constituents.  Lower tar and nicotine.
     Investigate low-tar medium nicotine.  Premier
     and Eclipse.  Cooperating with Dr. Wynder.
     Cooperating with Dr. Hoffmann.  Publications
     and speeches.  The biology of nicotine.  And
     the ingredients list on the website.
          This is not evidence of reckless and
     wanton conduct.  This is evidence that should
     give you hesitation, great hesitation, within
     the meaning of Judge Day's instruction, such 5026
     that you should not award punitive damages in
     this case.
          We started on January 20th, this is the
     only chance that I get to talk to you in this
     part of the trial.  Ms. Arnold follows me, and
     she's done, too.
          As the Plaintiff has the burden of proof,
     Mr. Paige gets a rebuttal.  He's presented his
     arguments well.  I'm sure will do it again.
          We don't know what will be said, we don't
     get to respond, he may say something we could
     have responded to, or something we could have
     raised -- he could have raised in the first
     part of the closing, that we could have
     responded to.
          If any of that happens, just think about
     how we would respond if we had the chance.
          I thank you again for your service and
     your attention, and I'd ask you to give
     Ms. Arnold the same courteous attention you've
     given me.  Thank you very much.
          THE COURT:  Ms. Arnold.
                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MS. ARNOLD:  All right.  So good
     afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  I find myself 5027
     again in the lucky 4:24 p.m. time slot, so I'll
     ask you to bear with me.  We are getting
     towards the homestretch for real now.
          And I want to start by reiterating what
     all the lawyers have said to you throughout the
     course of the day by thanking you for your time
     and attention throughout this trial.
          We've had some long days, and we've had
     some long sidebars, and we've been together for
     a long time, three weeks, really, and we
     recognize that three weeks is a long period of
     time for all of you to be missing out on your
     lives; and I really do appreciate your time and
     attention throughout the trial.
          So as you've seen throughout the trial,
     I'm going third, or actually even fourth today,
     but I'm not going to be the last lawyer to
     speak with you, as Mr. Kaczynski just
     mentioned, Mr. Paige is going to get a chance
     to speak with you one more time before we end
     for the day, but this is my last chance to
     speak with you during this part of the trial.
          So let's go ahead and get started.
     Plaintiff's counsel has spent a lot of time
     today, and throughout the trial, showing you 5028
     various statements and ideas from tobacco
     companies, including Philip Morris, that have
     occurred over a long period of time and long
     ago, sometimes 60 and 70 years ago.  And long
     before Mr. Ahrens ever picked up a Merit Ultra
     Lights cigarette.
          And as I predicted for you in opening, you
     saw some statements that were inappropriate and
     that none of us would think or even think of
     saying today.
          But you also know now that this is
     Mr. Ahrens' case.  And when you get the verdict
     form, when you start deliberating in the case,
     you're going to see that every one of those
     questions asks you about Mr. Ahrens.
          And it's Plaintiff's burden to prove that
     there is some connection between all of that
     conduct and something that Philip Morris says
     or didn't say, and Mr. Ahrens, himself.
          They have to prove that something the
     tobacco companies did, not that they harmed the
     general public, or smokers in general, but that
     something they did affected Mr. Ahrens.
          Now, Mr. Carter and Mr. Kaczynski have
     already covered a lot of the reasons that we 5029
     believe Plaintiff has failed to prove her case
     against R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris and my
     goal today, as it has been throughout the
     trial, is to not repeat what they've covered
     but to really focus on the facts that are
     important to Philip Morris in this case.  So
     that's where I want to start today.
          And I want to start, actually, with five
     key facts that we believe demonstrate shows
     that nothing that Philip Morris said or did had
     any impact on Mr. Ahrens.
          So, Katie, if you could pull up the first
     slide.
          Number 1, Mr. Ahrens was a responsible
     adult when he switched to Merit Ultra Lights.
          As you now know, Mr. Ahrens didn't start
     smoking a brand manufactured by Philip Morris
     until 1981, at the earliest.  And you know
     that's the year that Merit Ultra Lights were
     first introduced to the national market.
          And at that time, Mr. Ahrens was in his
     40s, right.  He was a grown adult, he was
     married, he was raising two sons, he was
     working as a systems analyst at Xerox.  He
     wasn't a child.  He wasn't a teenager.  He 5030
     wasn't even in his 20s or his 30s.  He was in
     his 40s.
          And Dr. Hurt told you that one of the last
     things to develop in the brain is judgment.
     Well, there's no question in this case that by
     the time Mr. Ahrens got to cigarettes that were
     manufactured by Philip Morris, he had all the
     judgment that he needed to make an informed and
     rational choice about his behavior and about
     his health.
          Okay.  Number 2, Mr. Ahrens was warned and
     was receiving warnings about the health risks
     of smoking for 15 years before he switched to
     Merit Ultra Lights.
          You heard Mrs. Ahrens tell you that from
     the time they started dating, in 1967, she was
     encouraging him to quit smoking.  And you know
     that the warnings on those packages of
     cigarettes that Mr. Ahrens was smoking had been
     on there for 15 years before he switched to
     Merit Ultra Lights.
          Now, Plaintiff's counsel in this case has
     spent a good deal of time during their
     presentations trying to downplay the importance
     of those warnings.  But you heard Dr. Proctor 5031
     tell you that in the second half of the 1960s,
     during that time period, after the first
     warnings came out, that was the greatest
     period, the highest rate of quitting this
     country has ever seen.
          And why is that so important in this case?
     You've heard hours and hours of testimony from
     both sides about advertisements for cigarettes
     and statements by tobacco companies and
     statements by the public health community about
     smoking and health and addiction.
          But you haven't heard one witness come in
     here and tell you Mr. Ahrens ever saw or read
     or heard any one of those statements.
          The only statement we know Mr. Ahrens saw
     was that warning on the pack of his cigarettes.
     And not only did he see them, but you heard
     Mrs. Ahrens, she said he carried them around in
     his front shirt pocket, he carried that warning
     around in his front shirt pocket and held it in
     his hand every time he went to smoke.
          You know what the warnings are, we do have
     some slides.  This is the '66 warning on every
     package of Kent that he smoked from '66 to
     1970.  Here is the next one, 1970 warnings, 5032
     you've seen this a few times.  And this is the
     warning that was not only on the packs of Kents
     he smoked from 1970 to 1981, but the warning
     was exactly the same, you know that now when he
     switched to Merit Ultra Lights, there was no
     exceptions, no different language, just because
     Merit Ultra Lights was a light cigarette, the
     warning was the same and it was on every pack
     he smoked until 1985 when the warnings changed
     again.
          And then every pack of Merit Ultra Lights
     he smoked had one of these four rotating
     warnings until he quit in 1991.
          So Plaintiff's counsel's asking you to do
     a lot of guessing and a lot of inferring in
     this case, but there's one thing that doesn't
     require any guesswork or speculation on your
     part.  And that is, that Mr. Ahrens held a
     warning from the Surgeon General in his hand
     over 160,000 times before he started buying and
     smoking a product manufactured by
     Philip Morris.
          Okay.  Number 3, Mr. Ahrens switched to
     Merit Ultra Lights, not just 15 years after the
     warnings came out, but 10 years after cigarette 5033
     advertisements had been banned from TV and
     radio.  And 10 years after the Federal
     Government had required that all print
     advertisements contain that same Surgeon
     General warning on the ad that was on his pack
     of cigarettes.
          You heard a lot of testimony and a lot of
     evidence in this case with advertisements from
     Julie London singing about Marlboro, Johnny
     Junior, The Flintstones, Babe Ruth, Santa
     Claus.  By the time Mr. Ahrens got to Merit
     Ultra Lights cigarettes, that was long gone.
          Number 4, Mr. Ahrens had been smoking for
     20 years before he switched to Merit Ultra
     Lights.  And we are going to talk about this in
     a little bit detail in a bit.  But
     Dr. Ruckdeschel, that was Plaintiff's expert
     and also Mr. Ahrens' treating doctor, testified
     that if Mr. Ahrens had quit smoking in 1981,
     instead of switching to Merit Ultra Lights, he
     probably still would have gotten his lung
     cancer.
          So if you believe that Mr. Ahrens' lung
     cancer was caused by smoking, his own doctor
     believed that he had it before he ever got to a 5034
     product manufactured by Philip Morris.  We are
     going to talk about that a little bit more in a
     minute, as I said.
          And then Number 5, of course, Mr. Ahrens
     quit smoking immediately, successfully, and for
     good once he was motivated to do so.
          And you know that story by now.  You know
     he was able to quit smoking without the
     nicotine gum or the nicotine patch.  And he was
     able to quit smoking without the benefit of any
     of the information that you've seen in the
     tobacco company documents over the past few
     weeks.  Dr. Hurt admitted that when I was cross
     examining him on Thursday.
          The fact is that Mr. Ahrens, once he was
     motivated to quit, was able to do so instantly
     and for good.
          Okay.  Katie, you can take that down for a
     few minutes.
          So I want to now walk through the verdict
     form, as the other lawyers have done, and
     focus -- and offer you some additional thoughts
     and some additional evidence that you might
     want to consider as you work through the
     verdict form yourself. 5035
          And the first question that, as you know
     by now, that you're going to be asked about is
     this class membership question, and it does
     have a number of parts, but the first part
     you're going to be asked is whether Mr. Ahrens
     was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
          And Mr. Carter covered that, but I want to
     add one additional point to this argument, and
     it relates to this idea of compensation.
          And you've heard a lot about compensation
     during the trial.  You heard it from
     Dr. Proctor, and you heard it from Dr. Hurt,
     and now you know what that means, right?  So if
     someone is smoking a high-tar, high-nicotine
     cigarette and then they switch to a cigarette
     that's lower in tar and nicotine, what they can
     do is change the way they smoke by increasing
     the number of cigarettes they smoke in a day,
     or holding their breath in longer, or taking
     deeper breaths to try to maintain that higher
     level of nicotine that they had with the higher
     level of cigarette.
          So let's look what Dr. Proctor said about
     that.
          "Question:  So do you know from" -- 5036
          This is from his direct examination.
          "Question:  So do you know from your
     review of the documents as a historian why it
     is that a smoker would wind up smoking more
     units?"
          And they were talking about switching from
     full flavor to light cigarettes.
          And he said:
          "Answer:  Yes.  Yes.  Because the smokers,
     if they are addicted, will be nicotine seeking,
     and they will seek a constant amount of
     nicotine."
          And the key phrase here is, "if they are
     addicted."  Addiction is the key to
     compensation.  And if someone's not addicted,
     they don't need to compensate.  Because they
     don't need to take in more -- smoke more
     cigarettes or change the way they smoke to
     maintain that higher level.
          So, what about Mr. Ahrens?  Is there any
     evidence that he compensated when he switched
     from Kent cigarettes to Merit Ultra Lights.
     No.
          Mrs. Ahrens and Bryan both confirmed that
     Mr. Ahrens smoked the same amount of cigarettes 5037
     per day throughout the time that they knew him
     and he was smoking, and there's not a shred of
     evidence in this case that Mr. Ahrens ever
     changed the way he smoked by taking in deeper
     breaths or holding the smoke in longer.
          The fact is he was able to go from a
     high-tar high-nicotine cigarette to a low-tar
     low-nicotine cigarette without compensating at
     all.  Just as he was able to go from smoking
     Merit Ultra Lights to quitting all together
     just by using stirrer straws, which plainly do
     not contain nicotine.
          This is another reason that we believe you
     should check no to that question, that first
     class membership question on the first issue of
     addiction.
          Okay.  Another aspect of this, as you know
     by now, is this question of addiction
     causation, and the question is whether
     Mr. Ahrens' addiction, if any, was a legal
     cause of his lung cancer and death.
          And you've heard a lot about this already,
     but let me offer you a different way to think
     about legal cause.
          Was an addiction for Mr. Ahrens -- did it 5038
     stand in the way of a motivated and committed
     effort on his part to quit smoking?
          And the answer is no.
          Before Mr. Ahrens' final quit, he never
     threw his cigarettes away, he never gave his
     cigarettes away, he never threw away his
     ashtrays or his lighters or his matches.  But
     when he was motivated to quit, not after
     surviving a heart attack or a medical
     catastrophe, which is what Dr. Hurt said it
     usually takes, but by a call from a friend
     telling him he was sick.  He was able to give
     his cigarettes away, and never smoked again in
     his life.
          Now, Dr. Hurt, Plaintiff's expert, told
     you on direct examination, he said, choice is
     something that just goes out the window when a
     person becomes addicted.  But that just doesn't
     make sense.  Because even Dr. Hurt told you
     that addicted smokers decide to quit smoking
     every single day in this country, 60 million of
     them have done so.
          Dr. Hurt himself decided to quit smoking
     in 1975 and was successful in doing so.  And
     when Dr. Hurt is treating patients in his 5039
     clinic and not testifying in front of juries
     for $700 an hour, what does he tell his
     patients?  Well, we know because we saw the
     pamphlet that he gives then.
          Dr. Hurt tells his own patients, "You have
     many options to help you stop smoking.  The
     decision to quit is yours, and only you can
     decide when to quit smoking."
          And he tells his patients that because he
     believes they can be successful in doing so,
     just like Mr. Ahrens.
          So even if you believe Dr. Hurt that
     Mr. Ahrens was addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine, the evidence has shown
     that that addiction was not a legal cause of
     his injuries.  And thus, we'd ask you to check
     "no" on that class membership question.
          Okay.  Let's say you disagree and you move
     on to the next question.  The next one relates
     to product use.  If we can pull that question
     up.
          "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by
     each Defendant a legal cause of Karl Ahrens'
     lung cancer and death?"
          You'll seen a line for R.J. Reynolds and 5040
     you'll see a line for Philip Morris.
          Okay.  And I want to show you the
     instruction that you've heard from Judge Day
     already, you'll get this back in the jury room
     on this question in particular.  And it's long,
     but bear with me:  "Smoking a Defendant's
     cigarettes was a legal cause of injury if
     smoking that Defendant's cigarettes" -- in this
     case Merit Ultra Lights -- "directly and in
     natural and continuous sequence produced or
     contributed substantially to producing such
     injury so that it can be reasonably said that
     but for smoking that Defendant's cigarettes" --
     here Merit Ultra Lights -- "the injury would
     not have occurred."
          And I want to focus on that last clause.
     It's called "but for causation," and in law
     school we spent two months on that very
     concept.
          So ask yourself this question.  It's easy
     to understand.  If Mr. Ahrens had quit smoking
     in 1981 altogether instead of switching to
     Merit Ultra Lights, would he have avoided his
     lung cancer and death?
          And to figure that out, you only need to 5041
     look at the answer to one question from one
     witness.  And that's Dr. Ruckdeschel.
          "Question:  Am I correct that your opinion
     is that if he had quit smoking in 1981,
     Mr. Ahrens still probably would have developed
     his lung cancer?  Is that correct?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          And you may remember that when
     Dr. Ruckdeschel got on the stand, I got up and
     I only asked him one question.  At the time you
     probably sighed a big sigh of relief, but you
     may have also been wondering why I was asking
     it.
          Well, now you know, because it provides
     all the information that you need to answer
     this product use question in favor of
     Philip Morris on that verdict form.
          Now, Mr. Paige suggested in his opening
     statement, well, that's all speculation and
     Dr. Ruckdeschel was just speculating.
          Well, if you remember, I wasn't the only
     one who asked him about that.  Mr. Mayfield,
     when he was cross examining Dr. Ruckdeschel, he
     asked the same question.  He said:
          "Question:  If Mr. Ahrens had quit smoking 5042
     in 1981, do you believe that he would have gone
     on -- or do you believe that he would have
     avoided getting his cancer?"
          And Dr. Ruckdeschel wasn't speculating at
     all.  He said:
          "Answer:  Absolutely yes.  Even if he had
     quit in 1981, he still would have gotten his
     cancer."
          That's not speculation at all.
          And when Mr. Mayfield asked him,
     Dr. Ruckdeschel, explain why that is, he talked
     about if you're smoking and you quit smoking
     and you don't have lung cancer, your risk of
     getting it in the future goes down, right?  But
     if you quit smoking and you already have
     cancer, sometimes that cancer has already
     gotten to the point where it's going to grow
     and grow and grow, and there's nothing you can
     do about it.  And to use Dr. Proctor's words,
     game over.
          Unfortunately, according to the
     Plaintiff's expert who they brought to prove
     their burden on this question, this was the
     case for Mr. Ahrens by 1981, before he ever got
     to our product. 5043
          Now, in redirect, Plaintiff's counsel had
     Dr. Ruckdeschel confirm.  He said:
          "Question:  Were Merit Ultra Lights a
     substantial contributing cause to the injury?"
          And he said:
          "Answer:  Yes, every cigarette counts."
          And he asked a similar question of
     Dr. Hurt.  He asked:
          "Question:  Was Merit Ultra Lights a
     substantial cause of the injury?"
          And Dr. Hurt said:
          "Answer:  Yes."
          But Dr. Hurt is an expert on addiction.
     Dr. Hurt doesn't treat patients for lung
     cancer.  Dr. Ruckdeschel does.  And
     Dr. Ruckdeschel treated Mr. Ahrens for his lung
     cancer.
          And in Dr. Ruckdeschel's view, Mr. Ahrens
     had it before he got to smoking Merit Ultra
     Lights.
          Now, as you know, Judge Day has provided
     the instructions on this question and the
     instructions that you're going to follow in
     this case, and no matter how many people say
     that Merit Ultra Lights substantially 5044
     contributed to Mr. Ahrens' lung cancer, the law
     requires Plaintiff to prove that but for the
     use of those cigarettes, his lung cancer and
     death would not have occurred.
          As Dr. Ruckdeschel's testimony
     demonstrates, the exact opposite is true.  So
     for these reasons we would ask, when you get to
     that question on the product use, the question
     if you get that far, that you check "no" for
     Philip Morris.
          If you check "yes," you will skip down to
     another question relating to the conspiracy,
     which I will get to in a moment.
          Okay.  Next question on the verdict form
     is comparative fault.  You've heard a little
     bit about this.  You have three lines for
     Reynolds, one line for -- excuse me, one line
     for Reynolds, one line for Philip Morris, and
     one line for Mr. Ahrens.
          And we agree -- I agree with what
     Mr. Carter said on this question, that in this
     case, the evidence shows that Mr. Ahrens bears
     100 percent of the fault.
          And as I said to you in opening
     statements, nothing I have said in this 5045
     courtroom and nothing I say today is meant to
     be a criticism of Mr. Ahrens or the decisions
     he made, but fact is that he did not make a
     committed and serious effort to quit until 1991
     when he did, and when he did that, he quit for
     good, instantly.
          There's no reason that he could not have
     done so sooner and in time to avoid his
     injuries.  And that's why we believe that we
     should -- that you should put a 100 percent
     next to Mr. Ahrens' name.
          But if you do not agree and you believe
     that Philip Morris bears any responsibility in
     this case, I'd ask you to keep in mind a couple
     of points.
          One, Merit Ultra Lights did not cause
     Mr. Ahrens' lung cancer.  We just talked about
     it.  Dr. Ruckdeschel told us he believes he had
     it before he ever got to our product.
          Number two, Mr. Ahrens' use of Merit Ultra
     Lights did not cause him to become addicted.
     If you've gotten this far in the verdict form,
     you believe -- you believe Dr. Hurt that
     Mr. Ahrens was addicted.  And Dr. Hurt said
     that Mr. Ahrens was addicted within a couple of 5046
     years of him becoming a regular smoker and
     years before he ever got to Merit Ultra Lights.
          And Dr. Hurt also told you that once you
     quit smoking, you're still addicted.  He still
     considers himself to be addicted, and he said
     Mr. Ahrens was addicted even after he quit and
     until the day he died.
          So there's nothing about Merit Ultra
     Lights cigarettes that caused Mr. Ahrens to
     become addicted.  But for his use of Merit
     Ultra Lights cigarettes, he still would have
     been addicted.  So we had no impact in that
     way.
          You've heard a lot of evidence in this
     case.  And I want you to bear in mind about
     ammonia and pH and free nicotine.  And despite
     all of that effort and all of that time on that
     question throughout this trial with Dr. Hurt,
     Dr. Hurt admitted that Merit Ultra Lights are
     not any more addictive than any other brand of
     cigarettes, despite the amount of ammonia it
     might have contained, and that was the brand
     that Mr. Ahrens was smoking when he quit for
     good.
          By the time Mr. Ahrens got to Merit Ultra 5047
     Lights, as I said, Mr. Ahrens knew that those
     cigarettes were dangerous.  And as Plaintiff's
     counsel has pointed out repeatedly in opening
     and throughout the trial, Mr. Ahrens was trying
     to quit even after he switched to Merit Ultra
     Lights.  Why would he have been trying to quit
     if he didn't know and understand that that
     product was dangerous and could cause serious
     diseases like lung cancer?  In fact, even
     today, I believe Mr. Paige said, you know what,
     by 1982 Mr. Ahrens probably knew that smoking
     could be dangerous to his health.
          So for these reasons, if you do believe
     that Philip Morris bears some percentage of
     responsibility, we would ask you to put a very
     small number on that line of the verdict form.
          Okay.  I want now to discuss Plaintiff's
     claim for fraudulent concealment.  Pull up the
     next slide.  And you've seen this question
     before, I'm not going to read it to you again,
     but I do want to look at the instruction on
     this one.
          Again, this has a lot of words, but I want
     to focus on what's underlined here.
          Plaintiff has to prove that Mr. Ahrens 5048
     reasonably relied to his detriment on something
     that Philip Morris said or did not say.  There
     has to be reliance, and as I said in opening,
     it has to be reasonable, and it has to be
     detrimental.  And I want to address all three
     aspects of that.
          Plaintiffs tried to meet their burden of
     proof on this question with two kinds of
     evidence.  One, were statements, public
     statements by the tobacco companies through
     advertising or other broadcasts or other videos
     about the health risks of smoking; and two,
     internal company documents.  Internal company
     documents from Philip Morris.
          But they've done so without focusing at
     all on whether Mr. Ahrens ever saw or read or
     heard any of those statements, or whether even
     if he had seen or read or heard those
     statements, they would have made any difference
     to his decision to smoke Merit Ultra Lights in
     1981.
          So let's go through some examples because
     there's got to be a connection.
          You saw a bunch of ads from the '50s and
     '60s when Dr. Proctor came to talk with us. 5049
     You saw Julie London singing about Marlboro.
     You saw the I Love Lucy show.  You saw Johnny
     Junior with the Philip Morris brand cigarettes.
          There's no evidence that Mr. Ahrens saw or
     read or heard any of those advertisements, and
     there's no evidence that he smoked any of those
     brands.  And I want to put a flag there because
     I'm going to come back to Merit Ultra Lights.
          You saw statements throughout the trial
     and during opening statement this morning from
     Mr. Cullman on Face the Nation in 1964.  You
     saw the statements from that 1976 British
     documentary that remember Dr. Proctor admitted
     was never shown Florida at a time that
     Mr. Ahrens could have ever seen that.
          And there's no evidence that Mr. Ahrens
     saw or heard those video clips, or even if he
     had, that they would have had some impact on
     his decision to smoke Merit Ultra Lights in
     1981 when he already knew that smoking was
     dangerous.
          Plaintiff's counsel suggested that Philip
     Morris was hiding its ingredients and hiding
     its list of cigarettes.  But you remember on
     cross examination, I asked Dr. Proctor, and we 5050
     went through a 50-page document that Philip
     Morris sent to the Surgeon General in 1963
     before the report came out with all of those
     compounds in smoke.  And Dr. Proctor agreed,
     that was the most complete list and a complete
     list of compounds in cigarette smoke that
     Philip Morris sent to the Surgeon General.
          And remember there are little stars by
     each of those -- each of those compounds, and
     they cited to journals like Cancer and the
     British Journal of Cancer.  And Dr. Proctor
     said, yep, folks on the Surgeon General's
     Committee -- those products were or those
     elements were carcinogens.
          So it was no secret that cigarette smoke
     contained carcinogens, and the fact that
     smoking could cause cancer was no secret to
     Mr. Ahrens when he smoked Merit Ultra Lights
     starting in 1981.
          Plaintiff's counsel suggests that Philip
     Morris was doing internal secret research on
     nicotine.  But remember, Philip Morris
     sponsored two conferences that were open to
     government researchers and academic researchers
     and also attended by tobacco company scientists 5051
     where they discussed the pharmacology of
     nicotine and the psychology of smoking.
          And Mr. Paige showed you a picture in his
     closing of a front page, a front encryption of
     this book Motives and Incentives that we talked
     about where Dr. Dunn said it's the nicotine, as
     if that was some big secret.  But this book was
     in libraries throughout the country, starting
     in 1973, and in this book there's chapters,
     each one of them is about nicotine and the
     pharmacology of nicotine, including one written
     by the guy who went on to invent the nicotine
     patch.
          The fact that nicotine was in cigarette
     smoke and could be addictive was not a secret,
     and it was not a secret to Mr. Ahrens when he
     switched to Merit Ultra Lights in 1981.
          And then there's that 1975 memo by Barbro
     Goodman, who if anything in this trial, we
     figured out was a woman and not a man, and
     Dr. Hurt said, well, this is a big study that
     nobody knew about.
          And when I asked Dr. Hurt on cross about
     that study, he didn't know much about it
     either.  But now you know.  It was a study of 5052
     nine smokers, five of whom switched from
     Marlboros to Marlboro Lights, a brand that
     Mr. Ahrens never smoked on a regular basis, and
     followed them for a period of two weeks with
     nine cigarettes each.
          Ladies and gentlemen, the public health
     community knew about compensation for decades
     before Barbro Goodman did her nine-person
     study.
          And just months after she did that study,
     that article that Mr. Kaczynski showed you from
     Consumer Reports, we have a slide of it here,
     this is from Consumer Reports in the spring of
     1976 that, again, Dr. Proctor said provided the
     most complete statement of compensation of the
     decade.  Compensation was no secret, and it was
     no secret when Mr. Ahrens switched to Merit
     Ultra Lights in 1981.
          Okay.  I want to focus on Merit Ultra
     Lights.  Plaintiff's counsel has suggested that
     Mr. Ahrens was somehow fooled or tricked by
     Philip Morris into believing that Merit Ultra
     Lights were safer or would help him quit.  And
     I want to spend some time talking about that.
     And I first want to look at what we know and 5053
     what we don't know about why Mr. Ahrens
     switched to Merit Ultra Lights.
          Now, it's a long time ago, but if you
     think back to opening statements, Mr. Paige
     told you for the first time that story about
     Bryan coming home and crying and telling his
     dad that smoking could kill him.
          And in the opening statements, Mr. Paige
     said that the first thing Mr. Ahrens did was
     switch to Merit Ultra Lights.  There's been no
     evidence of that in this case.
          Mrs. Ahrens testified that her husband
     started smoking Merit Ultra Lights between '79
     and '82 when the family was living in
     Connecticut.  And now you know that when Bryan
     came home crying, that was when they were
     living in Texas, after he had already switched
     to Merit Ultra Lights.
          And I asked Mrs. Ahrens, I said, you know,
     did he -- what did he do in response to Bryan
     coming home crying?  And she confirmed that the
     only thing he did was try to cut down on
     smoking for a few weeks maybe.
          Now, Bryan came in and had a slightly
     different story.  And he testified that his 5054
     father switched to Merit Ultra Lights one year
     after he had come home crying.  Not in response
     to his message to his dad or not immediately
     after he came home crying to his dad.  But even
     so, his suggestion that his father switch to
     Merit Ultra Lights a year after he came home
     crying doesn't make any sense because Bryan
     also told you that's the only brand he could
     ever remember his dad smoking.
          So Mr. Paige is now suggesting that, well,
     Mr. Ahrens switched to Merit Ultra Lights
     because of some strategy that Philip Morris had
     to make the public think that lights would help
     you quit or would somehow intercept you from
     quitting.
          Well, there's no evidence that that
     applies here either.  Because when Mr. Sales
     asked Bryan, when he asked him that question,
     whether Mr. Ahrens switched to Merit Ultra
     Lights to try and quit, Bryan said no, that
     wasn't the reason.
          And I asked Mrs. Ahrens, I said, have you
     ever -- has your husband ever told you that he
     switched to Merit Ultra Lights in an effort to
     help him quit?  Did he ever do that?  He never 5055
     told you that, correct?
          And Mr. Ahrens said -- or excuse me,
     Mrs. Ahrens said, no.
          The bottom line is that neither
     Mrs. Ahrens nor Bryan knew why Mr. Ahrens ever
     switched to Merit Ultra Lights or smoked Merit
     Ultra Lights as opposed to any other brand of
     cigarettes.
          Now, you did hear from Bryan, you heard
     from one witness testify that his father told
     him a single time that he could remember in a
     conversation, 30 years ago when he was about
     10 years old, that his father told him he
     smoked light cigarettes because he believed
     they were safer for him because they were lower
     in tar and nicotine.
          Now, Bryan also said he didn't know where
     his father had gotten that information.  And
     Plaintiffs are going to ask you to infer or
     guess that he got it from the tobacco company
     somehow.  Judge Day's instructed you, you are
     not permitted to guess under the law, but I
     want to go ahead and talk about some of the
     options.
          One, as Dr. Proctor conceded, Philip 5056
     Morris never said that Merit or Merit Ultra
     Light cigarettes were safe or safer than any
     other brand.  Never said it in a public
     statement, never said it in an advertisement.
          And, in fact, when I asked Dr. Proctor
     about the Merit Ultra Lights advertising that
     was around in 1981, which is when Mr. Ahrens
     switched, Dr. Proctor described it as being on
     the candid end of the spectrum and
     straightforward and fact-based.  Those were
     Dr. Proctor words.
          And he told us that that advertising was
     not based on the glamour or the sexuality or
     the athleticism of all those old ads back in
     the '50s and '60s.  And, of course, every pack
     of Merit Ultra Light contained a Surgeon
     General's warning.
          Now, that being said, were there some
     people who believed that light cigarettes were
     safer because they contain less tar and
     nicotine?  Yes.  Was it a secret, absolutely
     not.  Did the tobacco companies know that, yes,
     they did, but did the public also know it?
     Yes, they did.  Why?  Because that's what the
     public health community was recommending to 5057
     people.
          Dr. Proctor told you that in the '60s and
     the '70s and '80s and even in the '90s, the
     public health community was saying, look, you
     shouldn't smoke at all, but if you are going to
     smoke, you should choose a low-nicotine and a
     low-tar cigarette.
          And that wasn't just in obscure medical
     journals.  It was in pamphlets.  It was in news
     broadcasts.  And we saw one of them during my
     cross examination of Dr. Ruckdeschel, which I
     want to pull up right now.
 transcribed
     as follows:)
          NARRATOR:  Cancer experts said today that
     the new low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes are
     safer than regular cigarettes, although people
     who smoke these cigarettes still have far
     higher death rates than people who don't smoke
     at all.
          This news comes at time when Americans are
     smoking more cigarettes, more than 600 billion
     of them last year.  Brian Ross has more on the
     story.
          BRIAN ROSS:  Low-tar and nicotine 5058
     cigarettes now account for 11 percent of all
     the cigarettes smoked in the country, and sales
     have grown in the belief such brands are less
     likely to cause lung cancer and heart disease.
     The American Cancer Society says today's report
     is the first solid proof that low-tar and
     nicotine cigarettes are safer.
          MR. HAMMOND:  Tar and nicotine is being
     further reduced, and it is far better that
     people don't smoke, but if they are going to
     smoke, as many people are just plainly going to
     do, then they are better off smoking cigarettes
     with low tar and nicotine than with high tar
     and nicotine.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MS. ARNOLD:  That was 1976.  And can I sit
     here and tell you that this is where Mr. Ahrens
     got his information?  Candidly, as with all of
     the other evidence that you've seen from
     Mr. Paige, no.
          But it's undisputed that Philip Morris
     never said Ultra Lights were safe or safer, and
     the public health community didn't.
          Now, Dr. Hurt -- Dr. Proctor and Dr. Hurt
     tried to tell you, well, wait a minute, not so 5059
     fast, all of the tobacco companies were fooled
     because they didn't know about compensation.
     Well, as we've discussed, that was public
     knowledge.  And that was published in articles
     and Consumer Reports and in medical journals
     for decades before Mr. Ahrens smoked Merit
     Ultra Lights.
          And despite having that information, the
     public health community was still telling
     people, if you must smoke, smoke a cigarette
     with less tar and less nicotine.
          Now, Plaintiff is right that at some point
     the public health community did change its
     position on low-tar cigarettes and decided that
     the best thing to do was to just tell people to
     quit smoking, and not suggest to them that they
     smoke light cigarettes.
          But despite that change in position, in
     the public health community in the early 2000s,
     some people, some members of the public health
     community, including Dr. Proctor, still believe
     that Ultra Light cigarettes, which is what
     Mr. Ahrens smoked, were safer.
          So let's look at what Dr. Proctor said.
     This is on my cross of him. 5060
          "Question:  So, therefore, it is believed
     by some scientists, even today in the public
     health community, that smoking ultra low-tar
     cigarettes reduces the risk of smoking,
     correct?"
          And Dr. Proctor said:
          "Answer:  Yes.  Some scholars believe
     that, and they don't think it's a huge
     difference, but they do think it's..." -- and
     there he used that term again -- "less deadly."
          "Question:  Okay.  And you agree with that
     notion, right?"
          Dr. Proctor says:
          "Answer:  I agree that it's probably true.
     There are some confounders in that and the
     difference is small, but it's possible that it
     is true."
          So let's see what else he said about that.
     "Question" -- again, this is Dr. Proctor on my
     cross.
          "Question:  So smokers who switch from a
     traditional light cigarette to an ultra light
     cigarette generally do get less tar and
     nicotine, correct?
          "Answer:  Generally, yes, that's often the 5061
     case.
          "Question:  And, of course, the same would
     go for someone who switched from a
     full-flavored cigarette like Kent to an ultra
     light cigarette like Merit Ultra Light?"
          And Dr. Proctor said:
          "Answer:  Yes."
          Now, I'm not going to stand here and tell
     you that Merit Ultra Lights or any other brand
     of cigarettes is safe or safer than any other
     brand.  Philip Morris, on its website, you've
     seen has said there is no safe cigarette.  It
     says that on Philip Morris' website today.
          But, given that in 2016 there are still
     members of the public health community,
     including Dr. Proctor, Plaintiff's own expert,
     who believe that ultra light cigarettes reduce
     the risk of cancer and gives smokers less tar
     and nicotine, which, according to Bryan, is
     exactly what his father believed, there's no
     basis in this case to conclude that Philip
     Morris fooled or tricked Mr. Ahrens into
     believing anything about the Ultra Lights that
     he smoked 30 years ago.
          All right.  We talked about reliance.  As 5062
     I mentioned before, it has to be reasonable.
     And when you're thinking about the
     reasonableness of any reliance that Mr. Ahrens
     may have done on something that Philip Morris
     said or did not say, I'd like you to think
     about the information that he had available to
     him in 1981 when he switched to Merit Ultra
     Lights.
          At that point he had known for years that
     smoking was dangerous and would be difficult to
     quit.  It is not reasonable for Mr. Ahrens to
     have relied on a false statement that he knew
     was false, or to rely on the omission of
     information he already had.
          The reliance also has to be detrimental.
     And, again, I talked about this in opening.  It
     has to make a difference.  It has to make a
     difference to the outcome.  And Plaintiff has
     to show that if Mr. Ahrens had not relied on
     something Philip Morris said about Merit Ultra
     Lights and switched to Merit Ultra Lights, he
     would have avoided getting his cancer.
          But as we've discussed, there was nothing
     about Merit Ultra Lights that somehow prevented
     him from quitting, and there's no evidence that 5063
     he even wanted to quit when he switched to
     Merit Ultra Lights.  We've talked about that.
          And remember, once again, you heard from
     Dr. Ruckdeschel.  Even if he had quit in 1981,
     he probably was still going to get his cancer.
          For these reasons Philip Morris --
     Plaintiff has not met her burden of proof on
     her fraud claim against Philip Morris and you
     should check no to that question.
          Okay.  The next question you're going to
     get to on the verdict form is the conspiracy
     question.  And to prove her claim on
     conspiracy, Plaintiff still has to show that
     any reliance was reasonable and detrimental and
     many of the same arguments and many of the same
     facts and much of the same evidence that we've
     been discussing and that Mr. Kaczynski has
     discussed show that Plaintiff has not met her
     burden of proof on this question either.
          The evidence is clear, Mr. Ahrens made his
     own decisions about smoking and wasn't waiting
     for the tobacco companies to tell him anything
     to quit.  He quit when he made up his own mind
     to do so and when he was ready to do it.
          If you get to the question of damages on 5064
     the verdict form, and I would respectfully
     suggest that you shouldn't even get that far, I
     want to just touch on that briefly.
          Compensatory damages are meant to
     compensate Mrs. Ahrens and Bryan for the loss
     of their husband and their father, not to
     punish Defendants.  And I agree with
     Mr. Kaczynski's comments about Mr. Paige's
     request for compensatory damages.
          That request, that amount of money, does
     not square with Judge Day's instructions that
     the number should be just and reasonable and
     based on the evidence.
          Under the law that request cannot be based
     on sympathy.  And with every other question on
     this verdict form, Plaintiff has the burden to
     prove damages by a preponderance of the
     evidence, and Plaintiff has the burden to prove
     every dollar of damages that they are seeking
     in this case by a preponderance of the
     evidence.
          If you get this far on the verdict form, I
     trust that, as with all of the other ones, you
     will base your award on the evidence and the
     law that Judge Day instructs you on. 5065
          And then the final question, of course, is
     on punitive damages.  And for all the reasons
     that we've discussed already, I don't believe
     that this is a case where punitive damages are
     warranted.  But I want to point to just a
     couple of instructions for you to keep in mind
     if you get this far on the verdict form.
          Mr. Kaczynski talked about this, I'm not
     going to spend a lot of time on it, but this
     instruction, punitive damages it's a higher
     burden of proof, the evidence has to be clear
     and convincing, and you have to be able to
     warrant them without hesitation.  That applies
     to R.J. Reynolds and that instruction applies
     to Philip Morris as well.
          You're also going to be instructed that
     you cannot award punitive damages against
     Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds for harm to
     other parties.  This is from the instructions.
     You may not punish Defendants directly on
     account of harms caused to those other parties.
          And Mr. Paige has mentioned, I don't know
     how many times during trial, how many thousands
     of people die from smoking-related diseases,
     and he is probably going to do it again in 5066
     rebuttal.  But the law is that you cannot
     punish the Defendants in this case for harm to
     those individuals.
          If those people believe that they've been
     harmed by the conduct of the Defendants they
     can bring their own lawsuits and this is not
     the one for you to award them damages.
          All that being said, in a case like this,
     where the smoker, Mr. Ahrens, was able to quit
     instantly, and for good, after getting a phone
     call from a friend, this is not a case where
     punitive damages are warranted against either
     one of the Defendants.
          Now, I'm going to sit down in a moment,
     and Mr. Paige is going to have another
     opportunity to speak with you, as you know,
     because Plaintiff bears the burden of proof on
     each of the claims.
          And when you listen to what he is saying,
     ask yourself, where is the connection?  Where
     is that bridge between the evidence and
     Mr. Ahrens?  There is no connection.  Because
     as you now know, Mr. Ahrens was a man who made
     his own decision and he was private about his
     smoking.  He didn't want to listen to what 5067
     anyone else had to say about his smoking,
     including his wife and his son and the Surgeon
     General and his employer.  He didn't want to
     hear what any of them had to say.  But when he
     was ready, he made up his own mind to quit.
          There's simply no evidence in this case
     that Philip Morris or Reynolds had anything to
     do with Mr. Ahrens' smoking decisions.
          For all of these reasons, and for all of
     the evidence that you've heard during this
     case, I believe that a verdict -- that you --
     excuse me, I believe that the evidence supports
     a verdict in favor of Philip Morris and that's
     what I would ask you to do when you go back to
     deliberate.
          I want to thank you all again for your
     time and attention throughout the trial and
     today.  I know that it's been a very long day,
     so I really do appreciate it.
