         MR. AVERA:  Folks, we're all pretty tired.
    It's been a long couple weeks, and I am not going
    back through all the evidence again.  That's the
    last thing you want me to do.  I couldn't say
    anything more than what has already been said about
    the conduct over the last half of the 20th century
    that led to the death of anywhere to 3 to 450,000
    Americans a year, depending on the year.
         The first thing that Mr. Smith told you last
    week in opening statements began with everything
    that happens in the dark will one day come to light.
    And it has.  And as I told you before, you now know
    things that almost all Americans do not know, and
    that is the degree to which, or lengths to which
    R.J. Reynolds Company would go and did go in the
    1950's until the end of the 20th century to ensure
    that debate, that controversy continued, all the
    while knowing that Americans died and adolescents
    were picking up cigarettes and smoking.
         You have a decision to make in a couple minutes
    after you hear from R.J. Reynolds and from me for a
    moment or two, and that is do you want to issue a
    punitive damage verdict that will ensure that this
    never happens again, not with just R.J. Reynolds, 3172
    but any other corporation that would be so inclined.
         In terms of considering the reprehensibility of
    what they did you can consider all of those
    Americans who died over the years from
    smoking-related diseases, but when you return your
    verdict you can only award punitive damages with
    respect to the harm caused to Earline Alexander as a
    result of the death of her husband.  To be clear,
    you cannot award damages for all those millions of
    other Americans.  Punitive damages.
         The stipulation says a net worth of 7.7 -- 7
    thousand -- 772 million dollars.  That's 7.7, almost
    7.8 billion, with a B, dollars, is what that number
    is, ladies and gentlemen.
         Each one of the dollar signs there in front of
    you, and there are 400 of them in that box that's on
    in the screen right now, represents $20 million.  It
    says at the top .25 percent.
         If someone makes $100,000 a year and they get a
    $250 traffic ticket that's one quarter of one
    percent.  $125 for somebody who makes $50,000 a
    year, and so forth.
         The question is do you want to issue a traffic
    ticket or do you want to issue a verdict that will
    make it clear to them your feelings on the 3173
    reprehensibility of their conduct.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to suggest to
    you that $20 million will make them stand up and pay
    attention, make them understand your evaluation of
    the reprehensibility of their conduct.  It will send
    a message to their corporate boardroom that this can
    never happen again, and a message to corporate
    boardrooms all across America who might be so
    inclined to act in such a manner.  That act is not
    telling Americans the truth about the harms that a
    corporation's product can cause American families.
         That's a just verdict.  That's a verdict that
    sends a message.  That would be your verdict as the
    conscience of this community.  Thank you.


         MR. AVERA:  At some point, ladies and
    gentlemen, the lights were turned on in the dark.
    Now we have a website that provides some
    information.  A little solace to all those Americans
    who have died over all those decades, little solace
    to Earline Alexander who lost her husband watching
    him suffocate from COPD.  Those lights, ladies and
    gentlemen, should have been turned on long ago by
    somebody with half the courage of Earline Alexander,
    the courage she's displayed to step in this
    courtroom to take on a major corporation and hold 3180
    them accountable when they refused to be
    accountable.  Anyone, a captain of industry, anyone
    with a Ph.D. behind their name, or CEO, or CEO,
    anyone can step forward and say we can't do this,
    we're killing Americans, we have got to step forward
    and say, long ago, we want you to use our product,
    but there are a couple things you need to know.  And
    you remember what those couple things were.
         There is little incentive to the R.J.
    Reynoldses of the world to not do what they did when
    there's no punishment, no accountability.  We asked
    you in voir dire if there's a lot of incentive for a
    wrongdoer to stop doing what they're doing wrong if
    there is no punishment, if there's no financial
    incentive here for them to stop it it, for others
    who may be so inclined to not start it.  $500,000
    sends a message that getting away with these kinds
    of things is okay.
         To the R.J. Reynolds of old or new, whichever,
    to the Enrons, Toyotas, BP's, any corporation you
    want to talk about who may be so inclined, $500,000
    does that send that message.
         They don't get it, ladies and gentlemen.  They
    now come before you and ask for that which they
    would not give Earline Alexander, and that is 3181
    justice.  Send them that message.