CLOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. MITNIK:  It's been a long road, sorry I'm
losing my voice.  Thank you, thank you, I know
every one's thanked you and for one last time,
thank you for your time.  This is an important
endeavor, can't do it without you.
I think the last witness up here is -- told a
lot for why we need you.  The purpose for the last
  4869 witness for being called by the defense is to quote
mitigate punitive damages.  Saying, look we've done
all this stuff and we really either don't need
punitive damages, or if we do we sure don't need
much of them.  
We really do things much differently now.  And
all of these people in the past that you read all
these documents from of all the things they were up
to, they're all dead and gone, or retired and gone
and it's a whole new world.
It's not.  You see with your own eyes.
There's an impression of a new world.  But the
fundamental basis of what we're here to try and
change hasn't changed a bit.  You didn't hear one
bit of testimony denying the testimony that we had
presented.  And you're able to consider the
testimony from the first phase, that they're still
targeting teenagers today.
You didn't hear that.  You heard all about
chewing gum and e-cigarettes and -- still targeting
teenagers.  In a few minutes I'm going to put up
some statistics with teenagers and you can see how
big the problem is.
You see the talk about all these other
products that we're doing.  Look over here, we've
  4870 changed positions.  But, you know, folks to -- to
truly move, as opposed to need to be shoved, and
we're going to ask them to shove, within the
boundaries of the law and the evidence, in this
case in the direction that needs to be shoved
towards.
You can't say, I don't need to be shoved
because I'm moving, when your feet on the things
that matter are still firmly planted.  And all
you're doing is tossing rocks over the bushes to
sound like you moved somewhere else.  They put
this -- 
Is this thing turned on?  
They put this -- and we've written all over it
now, but -- and before I cross examined on it it
looks like, you know, they've really moved away
from these highly addictive products that's
killing.  And we're really moving towards these low
risk all the way to -- we're moving people to
cessation, meaning done with our product.
And it looked good.  And it sounded good.  But
then when you cross-examine the truth comes up.
And I want you to keep in mind something that you
saw throughout this case.  You saw the documents
where they talked about how they were going to
  4871 deceive the public with a wink.  You saw how they
were going to use that TIRC and TI as fronts and
shams.
I can go on and on of the documents how they
were going to use -- try to get authors,
ghostwriters to make it look independent.  How they
were going to solicit people to look independent to
do funny little comic things called the light
touch.  These companies are masterful at giving one
impression and doing something else.
And now we're at this phase and the impression
they're trying to give is that, totally different
situation.  See all those people that are gone,
they fired, were demoted, they're gone.  No,
everybody just moved right on through their
careers.  Happy, as a lark.  We're moving in this
direction.  
And then the questions come -- and all of the
money's directed right here at the one they labeled
high risk.  One of these wasn't even made by them,
it was some subsidiary, some spinoff, who's in the
a defendant in this courtroom.  This one is not by
them, this one is not by them.
Guess what this one still has in it?
Addiction.  It's just nicotine addition in liquid
  4872 form.  What's this to deal with?  Nicotine
addiction.  So when someone does try to get off
they can make a profit at that end.  And they get
them coming and going.  
When they relapse they're back over here with
the big money, when they're over here we're not
losing profit all the way.  We get a little over
here.  We got competitors out there, don't we?
Might as well give them business.  And then try to
make it look like it was some wonderful gesture to
get people off of their products.  
SNUS.  SNUS still kills.  It's just nicotine
in your stick in here to be used, oftentimes for
people to just get by when they're at work and
can't smoke.  And then we come all the way back.
They've got one on here that they have not --
they've been losing for money for ten years but
they keep doing it.  And the gentleman keeps coming
and saying, Look what we're doing here.
One of them that was marketed in two cities in
Arizona and St. Louis and then pulled.  We heard
about De-Nic.  Not much here, but you heard it in
the first phase about De-Nic.  And how, Oh, it just
tastes horrible, no one would buy it, so we pulled
it from the shoves.  Now, De-Nic -- was headed in
  4873 the -- that ought to be on here -- in the right
direction.  They didn't do that one for long.
And they say it just tasted horrible.  Except
you heard Dr. Henningfield say, No, it worked good
as a placebo in his lab, they were using it and
people liked it.  You heard Dr. Cummings say, No,
they were starting to capture a meaningful, albeit
small, but meaningful for such a small marketing
effort, market.  And they pulled it.
This isn't a time when the FDA's regulation's
are coming down the tracks, they hadn't gone there
yet.  And I want to be clear, De-Nic cigarette
wasn't even R.J. Reynolds, that was Philip Morris.
But, you've got FDA coming, and these people's
entire business is in -- we are therefore in the
business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug.  
You've seen the document enough times, I'm not
going to take time to pull it back up.  And very
few of our customers know nicotine is an addictive
drug.  There is their business model, that hasn't
changed.
And De-Nic.  FDA coming down the track.  We're
not going to let loose of this nicotine, so let's
do a product, limit it, market it, spend a bunch of
money on it, and then it failed.  And now you can
  4874 say well, we tried it and it didn't work.  Well,
let's look at that.  
You got a bunch of addicted customers who are
nicotine seeking, and you put something up that
doesn't deliver nicotine.  Wonder how many are
going to buy that, as long as right next to it is
all these nicotine cigarettes.
Didn't taste good, with all new ingredients I
suspect they could make it taste good if they
wanted to.  But now you get to hear, we tried that
route without the nicotine.  Well, what we know is,
they grow tobacco with no nicotine.  They've been
able to do it for a long time.
We know they can take it down to the De-Nic
level, where there may be traces of it, but it's
not at the level to sustain addiction or to addict
teenagers.  How many of those are on the market?
You see those on this sheet?  Everything on this
sheet is nicotine, nicotine, nicotine, nicotine,
nicotine replacement.
I want to make something clear, they try to
get credit from this perspective of mitigation of
damages.  They try to take credit for trying to get
the cancer out of their product.  Now, let's think
about that.  Of course they're trying to get cancer
  4875 out of their product.  It's the biggest obstacle to
their sales.
Nobody hates -- the cancer caused in lung
disease more than they do.  So of course they spend
a lot of time, money and energy to get it out.
They can't.  But you know what they can take out
and won't?  The nicotine.
Now, let's compare and contrast those two.
Take the cancer causing stuff out if you could and
you make more money, they work hard at that.  Take
the nicotine drug out that drives frequency, all
day, every day, from the minute your feet hit the
floor, all day when you can til your feet hit the
ground, and you get up and do it the next day.
Pack after pack, cigarette after cigarette.
Extraordinary usage, running-wild frequency that
just happens to run sales wild, too.
They can take that out but they won't, not
voluntarily.  And they want to hide behind De-Nic,
which was Philip Morris for a short period.  You
don't see anything like that being done now.  But
it can be done.  And you know what would happen if
it was done, we would have something that would
have to be called a choice cigarette instead of a
need cigarette.
  4876 And what would that do to protect the next
generation?  The ones who are starting up in the
first place that weren't already addicted, they
were going to turn their back on De-Nic because
they needed nicotine.  Now, if they put them across
the board, and now that we have the FDA structure
there, where we have the two largest in the
industry, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris.  
If they were encouraged enough to go to the
FDA and say let's all take the nicotine out so no
one has an advantage, so customers would pick from
De-Nic brands only.  There would be a lot of people
struggling with it.  But after a struggle with
withdrawal and no other options and choices, before
long we would have a different picture.
They can still sell their product.  There are
cigar stores on every corner in every city, maybe
not every corner, but they're all over making a
good living.  It's just not that frantic, runaway
frequency.  The sales would come back.
And the start, at the very least get this
stuff out there.  If a kid is going to pick it up
he can pick up something and doesn't already need
the nicotine.  And truly those children who think
in three to five years I'm going to put it down, no
  4877 problem.  Because today there's no question this
stuff will kill you.
So you say -- but these kids pick it up today.
You saw the evidence.  They -- the addiction has
been so sugarcoated and trivialized, there's been
so much advantage taken and exploitation taken of
the fact that it does not have a life-wrecking
high.  And those kids don't think if it doesn't get
you high it can't be a real fish.  It may be like
what was there in the sample, potato chips.
Anything that's so pleasurable may be hard to
give up.  And you may not want to give up, and you
may struggle to give it up because it's
pleasurable, that's the model.  From denying it
outright to sugarcoating it and trivializing it to
where it doesn't have a fear factor to the
children.
And the Surgeon General's trying to say, it's
like heroin because it scares kids away.  If you
start, you may be hooked for the rest of your life,
you may in struggle to do it far longer than you
intended.  And you may be that old man carrying
around the oxygen tank you never thought was going
to happen you.  Do something else to express your
independence.
  4878 Instead tamp it down.  And the tamp-down means
the kids are picking it up at alarming rates today.
Because they don't think they're going to get hurt.
It's not dangerous, because you're not going to
smoke long enough to get hurt.  Because of the
trivializing, get the nicotine out.  Leave the
lungs alone.  
All of these additives and engineering to get
them inhalable as possible, to speed the delivery,
to increase the likelihood of addition.  And, yes,
you can get addicted without all that.  But the
likelihood goes through the ceiling.
Lungs, lungs, lungs, that's the only one that
involve the lungs.  They need to be encouraged to
get the nicotine out, to give options to children
that are truly choice cigarettes and leave the
lungs alone.  You don't need them for tobacco.  All
the cigar smokers understand you don't need the
lungs for tobacco.  
You don't need to make it in such a way to get
it deep into the lungs, even altering the molecules
of smoke so it gets to the brain faster through the
lungs.  That is not necessary, but it sure helps
sales.
And now we hear about money has already been
  4879 paid in judgments or to the Master Settlement
Agreement to the states.  Here's what's important
folks -- 
Do you have that sheet there?  
The numbers that Dr. Raffa gave you showed:
Daily net profit for Philip Morris $10 million,
$3.6 million for R.J. Reynolds.  And he explained,
all of that was what he called pure profit.  All of
the money paid out, all this Master Settlement
money, whatever has been paid in judgments,
whatever has been paid for taxes, whatever has been
paid for overhead, whatever has been paid for
anything you can pay, has been paid.  And that is
what addiction will get you at the end of every
day.
So all of those numbers add up to not enough.
The work is not done.  And one thing is for sure,
in any pursuit that is worthwhile one never knows
when the last step is going to be the step that
truly brings you to the destination you were
working towards.  You're part of a process, every
link in that chain has to be strong to bring about
the types of change that we're talking about here.
It don't come easy, but every step's got to be
right and got to count.  And it's a rare
  4880 opportunity brought under this case by an
individual who fit the criteria and qualifications
under the law.  Punishment for what was done to
Mrs. Allen and deterrence to these defendants and
others similarly situated, to protect others who
are in that same circumstances as Mrs. Allen.  
Which is starting as a kid with a highly
addictive drug that has either been concealed or
now sugarcoated when the product can be changed and
the children need to know.  And at least, for
goodness sake, keep the prices up on the brands
that the kids use.
And I'm going to show you some Surgeon General
reports here.  One of the things they do is drive
down the prices on these brands that kids do.
Because the price, it doesn't affect the adult
smoker who's addicted.  You heard, it's inelastic.
That's the power of addiction.  They get them
on and people in hard economic times, that's the
one thing they're not giving up.  Because it's a
need cigarette, not a choice cigarette.  But the
people -- one of the last questions we asked
Mr. Raffa was, that inelasticity, does that apply
to the start-up kids on an allowance?  He said no.
So the price matters to them.
  4881 And you heard even from Dr. Figlar, RJR's
witness, that the lawsuits do not.  Those were his
words.  And you want to make it count.  
Do you -- are you ready with those?
VIDEO TECHNICIAN:  Yes.
MR. MITNIK:  I just need you to put this in
perspective.  Because one of the things you have to
do is look at their financial resources.  I'm going
talk to you about what that means and put that in
context.  But just to put that in a bit of
meaningful concept, that's $300 million during the
time of the trial.
Okay, this is the Surgeon General report --
What year?  
VIDEO TECHNICIAN:  2012.  
MR. MITNIK:  2012.  So this isn't old news,
this is 2012.  Tobacco use by teens and young
adults remain shockingly high in the United States
today.  More than 3.6 million middle and high
school students smoke cigarettes.  In fact, for
every person who dies due to smoking, more than
1200 each day, at least two youth or young adults
become regular smokers.  Regular, not dabbling.
Nearly 90 percent of these replacement smokers
try their first cigarette by age 18.  Certainly we
  4882 have not solved the problem.  It is not just a big
coincidence that kids are the replacement smokers.
The statistics tell you once they reach 26 it's
very unlikely they'll become regular smokers.  And
they're targeting these teenagers, and we presented
the proof and they presented nothing to contradict
it.
The problem:  Today's teens.  Remember 1990,
the document that was sent by -- 
Was it R.J. Reynolds?  I think it was.  
VIDEO TECHNICIAN:  Yes.  R.J. Reynolds.
MR. MITNIK:  Directly to the principal of the
school wanting them to share it with the kids,
pitching how nobody really knows whether or not
these things hurt you.  Teens today and young
adults can access information on millions of
subjects instantly.  And you can read it, it's
about cool and edgy.
It's one reason nearly 4,000 kids under age 18
try their first cigarette.  That's almost 1.5
million youth a year.  Nearly 9 out of the 10
smokers start smoking by 18, 99 percent start by
26.  Any given day, more than 2500 youth and young
adults who have been occasional smokers will become
regular smokers.  At least a third of these
  4883 replacement smokers die early of smoking.
They don't understand the power of nicotine
addiction.  And we need to get that message to them
through the proper channels of this case.  Fewer
adults are smoking today because both -- excuse me,
both because many have quit and because about half
of the long-term smokers die from disease caused by
their tobacco use.
So cigarette companies look to young people as
replacement smokers.  They use a variety of
marketing strategies to encourage new consumers to
try their products and to continue using them.
Can I get that magazine that I put in?
This is in a Glamour magazine from July of
this year.  That was the inspired -- inspiration is
breathing in to your lungs, passionate, original.
Now there may be an argument that that's an adult
magazine.  Remember how they can't get in any kind
of magazine unless there's some independent check
that 80 percent is adult usage.
Well, this entire page, page 31, you might
recognize this one.  The whole page is about Taylor
Swift.  I had it tabbed and I pulled the tabs off
but there's somewhere back here, acne medicine.
I'm not suggesting grown ups don't look at Glamour,
  4884 I'm suggesting kids do, too.
The Surgeon General -- 
VIDEO TECHNICIAN:  2012 still.
MR. MITNIK:  Still 2012.  Keeping prices down.
This was what I was talking about.  Because tobacco
companies lower prices through coupons and other
promotions so that consumers can afford to buy
their products.  Teens are especially sensitive to
the pricing.  In 2008 cigarette makers spent nearly
10 billion to market their products.  Much of their
spending, $6 out of 7 was used to pay for price
cuts through coupons, sales and give-aways.  That's
how they're getting to the kids and they need to be
told, stop it.
Any more?  2014 Surgeon General.  5.6 million
children alive today will ultimately die early from
smoking if we do not do more to reduce current
smokers rates.  We are trying to do a significant
part in that work, here, with you, at this level.
In a courtroom in Jacksonville, Florida with six
people who have given of their time.
This is the statement that you've seen so much
of I'm almost embarrassed to bring it up, but
nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that
individuals persist in using tobacco products, and
  4885 this persistent tobacco use contributes to many
diseases described in this report.
That's what's missing with the children.
They -- the same break that Dr. Figlar insisted on
making, when I kept saying can we get it on the
record.  That break -- that gap.  Yeah, it can be
addictive, meaning it can be hard to stop, it's so
much fun, and you can get sick, are left as apples
and oranges.
That's the break in the kid's mind.  And I say
will you just -- can I get you on the record
agreeing?  No way.  We're not going to make that
connection.  They are two different concepts.  No
they're not.  Addiction causes people to smoke
longer than they intended, like three to five years
and more than they ever dreamed they would, like a
pack to two packs or whatever it is a day.  And it
is the amount they smoked for the length they
smoked that gets them sick.
And until the children are honestly talked to
about -- it isn't apples and oranges.  Nicotine
doesn't cause you to like, if you drank that bottle
up and keel over.  It's a one, two, three step,
that step in the middle is essential to tell them.
Mr. Figlar couldn't do it.
  4886 Do we have anymore of those?
I want -- kind of 30 minutes and I've got a
total of an hour, and I want to save a little time
for things in context at the tail end.  So I want
to get down to the efforts to how to handle this.
We can't have you order things, do this,
don't.  It's just not within the power of the
system.  What we can do is to try to use punitive
damages to punish and importantly to deter.  For
what you did in the past, to recognize that that is
wrong.  And punishment for what is done wrong, when
it's at this level, is an essential ingredient to
it.  
And then the deterrence through motivation,
through the currency they understand.  That's
what's available.  But something has got to be
done.  And if not now, when?  If not you, who?
So let me make a suggestion to you.  And
there's some limitations here.  One of the
instructions the judge is going to tell you is that
the punitive damages -- I don't want the exact
words, I don't have it here in front of me.  But
words to the effect that they have to have a
reasonable relationship to the total compensatory
damages.
  4887 There's no set what that means, but it can't
just be pick any number out of the air, and I don't
want you to.  Because if you're -- because let me
tell you, what I would like to do and I'm not going
to do is, to suggest a number that truly fits these
kind numbers a day.  We talked about the length of
the trial and how much money was there, to truly do
as maximum in one setting here.  
But you can't.  Because if you do that then
all this can be for naught, because the law has to
have something reasonable relationship between the
two.  And I'm going to make some suggestions to you
that I ask you to please consider following to a T.
I'm not going high hoping you go low, or that
you're going to go low and we'll get there.
Because if I did that, I would risk going too far
and it would all be for nothing.  I'm going to put
it right where we suggest to you will maximize the
ability to make our part in this process of
difference-making not wasted by going under or not
wasted by going too far.
And I came up with something to try to come up
with some commonsense way to look at it.  And that
is, if you were to take a speeding ticket and give
somebody a speeding ticket who had an annual income
  4888 of 50,000 a year.  And the speeding ticket was a
serious infraction, say running through a school
zone.  And you got a -- that person got a $250
ticket.  And you do the math off of that annual
income, it comes out to .5 percent of their annual
income, point -- a half a percent.
Now, what does that mean to that person?  It
doesn't bankrupt them, doesn't ruin them, which
we're not supposed to do here.  But it's enough
that it hurts.  It's the idea of it that was to get
your attention so you don't come through the school
zone speeding again.
Now, if you took somebody who was some rich
movie star the 250 may not mean anything.  So it
has to be relationship to that financial resources
or the purpose is lost.
And if you take that same percentage, that
.005 or it's .5 percent, and apply it and take what
R.J. Reynolds would make in a year.  And those
numbers were with Dr. Raffa, R.J. Reynolds and
Philip Morris of pure profit in a year and apply
that, it's $25 million.
It is a lot of money, but this is why.
Because if I come in and say gosh I don't want to
offend the jury talk like a big old number.  I can
  4889 do that and that would be safe.  But I wouldn't be
doing what I promised -- what I told you we were
here to try to accomplish, which was to make a
difference.
So I'm taking the chance that you will accept
that these numbers are not meant to offend or swing
for the fence, but they're trying to do the maximum
we can do under the law without going too far.
Because I got to tell you, in all honesty, if there
weren't limitations I would try to get more
accomplished in one sitting.  But we can't.
But I don't want to waste the maximum amount
to accomplish all that we can.  But I'd ask you not
anymore, for the reasons in the instruction -- and
the judge won't be specific.  
But I'm telling you, we start going beyond
that we're heading for trouble.  And I ask you,
don't do that.  But I would ask you, likewise, to
serious consider don't go any less.  Because this
is serious business, and this really matters.
And the last thing, before I sit down to save
some time.  I just want to make a point to try and
show you what I would suggest to you the
reasonableness of using an approach like this.
This is the gross income that we use of the
  4890 hypothetical person.  This is the pure profit,
after taxes, every single thing paid out.  So the
truth is these numbers are skewed in their favor on
here.  But I don't want to raise that number.
Thank you.


REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
MR. MITNIK:  The defense had about an hour for
their argument.  That's what they made in an hour.
Profit.  After all these we've been getting it from
and getting it from getting it from and getting it
from, while we were talking.  Net pure profit.
That's what they tell you would be adequate to
deter and punish.  All this work is done.  They --
basically saying, there's nothing left to do.
Well, Surgeon General 2014, this year:  For decades
the tobacco industry, not excluding Philip Morris
-- for decades the tobacco industry has been
  4945 encouraging children to start smoking.  Images make
smoking appealing to children are still highly
visible in our society.  They are found in movies
and on TV and video games and in retail
advertising, including convenient stores and
online.
As a result the tobacco industry marketing and
other influences more than 3,200 children younger
than age of 18 make their first cigarette -- smoke
their first cigarette every day.  Another 2,100
youth and young adults who are occasional smokers
became daily smokers.  Nearly nine out of ten
smokers start before age 18, and 98 percent start
smoking by age 26.
Every adult who dies early because of smoking
is replaced by two new young smokers.  If current
risk hold, one of the two also will do early from
smoking.
You saw the internal documents.  You heard the
testimony.  They're doing it today.  Nobody from
their side denied it.  But, gee, the FDA isn't in
the picture.  Let's just all go home.  Let's just
give an hour's worth of our time.
I've sat and listened, and what kept going
through my mind is, Did they hear you?  Did they
  4946 hear the verdict that I heard?  That was rendered
by y'all.  It's a rehash.  Warning labels were on.
It was just a confusion over the -- the definition
of addiction.  We couldn't get it straight.  We
were listening to the Surgeon General.  
Figlar -- not only did the lawyer argue it,
Figlar did.  It's the same stuff.  But they don't
need punishment.  They don't need their attention
gotten.  They get it.  It's the same stuff they
argued to you that was rejected.
Punishment.  I want to set some of this
straight.  The judge is going give you the law.
Couple things.
There's an instruction in that there is not
supposed to be any prejudice or sympathy.  I ask
you to keep that in mind because the zealous
argument of RJR is "She's at fault so don't hold us
responsible for our misconduct.  You found she was
70 percent -- but please, that wouldn't be fair to
hold us responsible.  Don't forget you found her
70 percent at fault.  And none of that is going
apply so don't hold us responsible.  Oh, you found
you her 70 percent -- don't hold us responsible for
all these things we did."
Except it's not the law.  When these
  4947 instructions are -- see if it says you found her
70 percent, don't find them responsible.  We
wouldn't be here if that was the law in this phase.
What the law says is that percentage has
nothing to do with this part.  Zero.  Why?  Because
you don't compare apples and oranges.  You don't
take intentional misconduct done on purpose for
money and compare it to human frailty we call
negligence or the failure to use reasonable care.  
It isn't the law.  It ought not be the law.
And that whole argument was suggesting to the
contrary, any way you package it.  We worked too
hard handpicking people that were law abiding and
follow the law than get derailed at this last
moment by those kind of arguments.
The argument that he's going to get
25 million, you already gave him some money.  Well,
once again, that isn't the law at all.  And I'm
going to put these up here in a minute.  Last time
I said I was going to and I got sidetracked and I
didn't.  Promise you:  Don't let me sit down
without putting these up.
That isn't the law at all.  And we worked,
once again, all of y'all took an oath and we trust
it.  But what was their argument to the contrary of
  4948 those promises, which was -- remember one of the
reasons questions I asked during jury selection:  A
or B?  Some people would be bothered to the point
of distraction where the money went.  That was A.
None of them are sitting on this jury.  Or B, I may
wish it was otherwise, but if that's the law and
you proved that punitive damages are warranted to
punish and deter, I will not be detracted because
this phase is about what they did wrong and it has
to pass through Mrs. Allen.  
It has to be similarly situated conduct.  It
has to pass through her.  It isn't about other
people, all the other 480,000 a year that have
already died.  It isn't about the people who have
already died.  It's about deterrence to protect the
ones that haven't.  It has to be similar conduct
for those people.  And, yes, it has to do with
those intentional misconducts.
Well, let's talk about the intentional
misconduct that we're talking about exactly today.
Targeting teenagers and concealing.  Remember Ann
Broward, "We don't -- we don't make movies.  Why
would we have Superman Marlboro?"
She also said, "We don't market to underaged
people.  We wouldn't do that."  You saw the
  4949 documents.  That isn't similar to everything I
talked about?  Still going after the kids; nobody
owning up to it.  It's the same cover-up.
They also covered up the true nature of
addiction.  Targeting the teenagers who set the
hook when they didn't understand the nature of
addiction.  That's the similar conduct we're
talking about today that I was in my closing
argument that all we heard is it had nothing to do
with it.  It couldn't be more the same.  They're
not just targeting kids and giving them a candy
bar.  They're giving them a highly addictive drug,
and they won't come clean about it.  They are
trivializing it, downplaying it, and they want to
skip that step.
They want to say, yeah, it can be addictive,
and, yes, they can get you sick.  Not that you will
get addicted and that's going to keep you smoking,
kids.  This one is really, really got hooked, like
heroin.  They will not admit that thing.  They
concealed.  They are still concealing the truth
about nicotine addiction.
That's what they did to my client.  That is
what they're doing today, and that is what we're
deterring.  And as I'm going to show you, it's
  4950 similarly situated.
Why do we talk about the nicotine?  Because
that was part of the fraud and the cover-up and the
conspiracy.  And they're still covering up the
power of nicotine addiction.  They're still
targeting to kids.  They won't come clean.
They say, "Don't punish all these people all
over the company."  Why do we want to punish them?
Do you hear an individual defendant's name in the
case, like Mr. So-and-so, Mr. T?  This is against
the corporations.  And they're here today in this
courtroom.
And they want to say, because the people that
have started the ball rolling, that they're still
shoving and loading with money every day with the
kids and addiction and running back with it.  Well,
the people that wrote the memos we showed you
aren't with the company, so forget the company.
You'd be punishing the wrong thing.
They want to make it sound like that's on
ancient history, which they are still fighting
about.  Remember they put Figlar on the stand.  He
was still making excuses about the difference in
the definitions.  Well, they were playing games
about it wasn't causing intoxication.  And they
  4951 want to say, Well, say some of the public health
officials said that too in '64.  They did.
The difference is these defendants knew
exactly what their product was doing.  Remember way
back in '53, isn't it great that our customer --
it's something our customers can't give up.  Can't
quit.
We're in the business of selling nicotine
addictive drug.  Our customers, very few of them,
know it.  And all the document after document that
says addiction, addiction, addiction, in private,
in top secret they celebrated addiction as the
center of their business model.  In public they
lied.
What's that got to do with Pattie Allen?
She's a kid who didn't have a clue what she was
getting into.  The kids today don't.
I don't what the Surgeon General said in '64.
Because these people knew.  You don't have to take
my word for it.  It's in black and white.  But in a
punishment, the beginning of changing of ways is to
say, "I understand what I did wrong."
But when the representative that comes to
court says, "Well, there was a confusion over the
definitions," sound like he's got it, as if y'all
  4952 didn't it and already decide this stuff.
Sitting here looking you in the eye in the
courtroom today, but they got it.  What's this
got -- this is all ancient history.
And then the Waxman hearing, 1994, every
single head of the -- including these defendants,
swore to tell the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, so help me God, "I, too,
don't believe nicotine is addictive."  
When you seen for decades the way they bragged
about in their documents, they were not confused
about some definition.  But today they're still
acting confused.  "Well, yes, it can be addictive,
but just not in the way that it would actually
cause somebody to get hurt.  It's not that kind of
addiction because everyone has a choice."  Figlar
said it today.  "But we don't need a punishment.
We've got -- or if you're going to do it, just make
it an hour's worth."
Let me put this up one more time.
I've got scribbles on it and everything, my
own notes.
"In determining the amount of punitive
damages, if any, against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company and/or Philip Morris USA, you should
  4953 consider the following:  The nature, extent, and
degree of" -- and here's the word that matters,
"misconduct."  That's got nothing to do with
Mrs. Allen.  You found that she shared in fault on
negligence.  This is about intentional actions,
frauds and conspiracy, misconduct.  Not negligence.
"The nature, extent, and degree of misconduct
and the related circumstances."  This thing -- the
extent of it couldn't have been any more broad.
Fifty years.  And they're still up to.
The nature of it, it was the most horrendous
thing someone could do.  You're going to
intentionally confuse and conceal the truth that
you knew to be true that your product was killing
and had an addictive hook in if and outright
conceal and lie about that.  Knowing teenagers were
going to get hooked and they were all going to die
and you did it for money, and you got together as
an industry and all agreed to do it and continued
to do it for 50 years.  The extent couldn't be any
bigger.  The degree of misconduct couldn't be
anymore offensive.
The financial circumstances you've heard
those.  And any mitigating evidence, you've seen
that's window dressing.
  4954 "In deciding the amount of punitive damages to
be awarded, if any, you should -- the award should
be no greater than the amount you find necessary to
punish R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris for the harm
caused to Pattie Allen."  That's punishment past
tense for harms, past tense, and -- and they just
skipped this entire part of the law.  Skipped it.
"And to deter, deter R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
and Philip Morris and others similarly situated,"
so not just them but others in the industry to
deter, "from engaging in such misconduct in the,"
what, "future."
And they have made everything sound past
tense.  But the judge is telling you the law, not
them.  The future.  How could that be protecting
Mrs. Allen?  She's not alive.  And goodness knows
if we haven't proven there's a need to protect
against the misconduct of what they're doing with
addiction and what they're doing to the youth in
the future, I don't know what else to present.
And is that unrelated to Mrs. Allen?  It's
exactly what hooked her and ended up landing us in
this courtroom, which brings the opportunity to you
folks under the law.  If it wasn't so, we couldn't
be here.  And you've already found it.  Warranted
  4955 punitive damages.  The fraud and the conspiracy
were a legal cause of her death.  You found all of
that.
And you found she had a significant
responsibility on that phase.  We hear you.  But
they're now trying to hide behind it when it
doesn't belong in that phase at all.  I'm going to
show you that next.
"The amount of punitive damages award will not
be reduced by the amount we have found Pattie Dawn
Allen to be comparatively at fault."  We have dealt
with that issue.  That is not in this case.  Not
this part.  This part isn't about the mistakes and
things that she could have done better to protect
herself.  We heard you loud and clear.
And it was fair game in that part of case.
But we're now talking about the fraud and the
conspiracy on purpose for profits over safety that
has caused and contributed, under you, her death.
And now that opens the door to say, "Can we deter
for others who are in a similar situation?"  That's
the law.
And they're hoping that percentage -- they're
playing up that percentage will make you say, "You
know what, I just don't want them to get the money.
  4956 I'm going to get hung up on where the money is
going.  It's a lot of money.  They already got some
money, and I don't want them to get it because they
have a percentage at fault."
And, you know, there are a lot of people who
would feel that way.  That's why we went through
three days of jury selection, because if we had
people that felt that way, this day was coming and
we might as well have packed our tent and gone home
because there would be no justice in Jacksonville
if people felt that way.
They have a right to.  But for goodness' sake,
it wouldn't make this trial fair.  We would have
been doomed for the ultimate purpose before we got
here.  But I talked and laid it on the table.  I
didn't hide any of it from you in voir dire.  And
everybody here said, "I ain't falling pray to
that."  And we trust you.
Dr. Figlar -- I'm about done.  You are tired
of hearing me; I'm tired of hearing my own voice.
We can pursue justice, but only you can do it.
And it is hard to sit down and hush at this point.
But you've led us this far.  You're going to leave
it in your hands and pass the baton one more time.
Dr. Figlar told you that these lawsuits do
  4957 matter.  He told you.  I'm asking you to make it
matter now.  The truth matters.  They got to learn
to tell it.  Consequences matter.  They got to face
them.
Thank you.