MS. CHUANG: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURY: Good afternoon.
MS. CHUANG: On behalf of my client, Philip Morris USA, I also want to start where everyone has started, and that's to thank you for your jury
service. Its a very important function in our society. And -- and we all have noted that you have been very attentive and very interactive in this trial, and we appreciate that.
Unfortunately, Mr. Stern couldn't be here
today even though he wanted to. I wanted to introduce you all to -- the judge has already done that -- to my co-counsel, Mr. McCarter, who's assisting me in Mr. Stern's absence.
This case, ladies and gentlemen, is about Herman Allen. It's about the decisions he made, it's about what he knew, and it's about what he did with that information.
The evidence showed you that Mr. Allen made fully informed decisions about his choices to smoke and his choices to quit smoking. You've heard that Mr. Allen got very personal warnings from those closest to him, his daughter, his wife, his son. But Mr. Allen was a man who made his own decisions about smoking and his own decisions about quitting. Nothing they said and nothing Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds said had any impact on those decisions.
Now, plaintiff's counsel want you to believe that Mr. Allen was somehow tricked or somehow fooled by the tobacco companies in their efforts to create a controversy or to create a doubt. And the evidence, I submit to you, does not prove that.
You need to ask yourself in this case was
there any confusion in the Allen household that smoking was dangerous? Was there any controversy in the Allen household that smoking could kill you? And I submit to you that the answer is no. There was no doubt, no controversy, and no uncertainty.
And how do we know that? How do we know the answer to that question, that Mr. Allen knew that smoking could kill him, and that Mr. Allen knew that he could potentially develop lung cancer if he continued smoking? And what I want to do is walk you through some of that evidence that you've seen in this trial in order to help you answer that question.
As you know, Mr. Allen was born in 1930. You heard -- you heard from Mr. Allen's sister, Louise Sheffield, about their upbringing. Mr. Allen was raised in the Holiness church. That church taught him to abstain from alcohol and tobacco. His local school, Pinecrest, taught students there of the health risks of smoking.
You heard from Ms. Sheffield that the family rule in their household was that the children were not allowed to smoke. In fact, Ms. Sheffield told you that the parents very clearly stated to all of
the kids, don't smoke. And Ms. Sheffield also told you Mr. Allen knew, as Mrs. -- as Ms. Sheffield did, that inhaling smoke into your lungs was not a good thing, it was bad for your health.
And as you know, you ve heard Mr. Allen went into the Navy in 1948. He gets discharged, he meets Mrs. Allen. Before -- even before they were married, very shortly after they met, you heard that Mrs. Allen told Mr. Allen that he had to quit smoking because of health concerns. And she told him that smoking almost killed her father, and she didn't want smoking to kill him. Those were her words, not mine.
And she also relayed to him at that time that -- of the story of her father's spot on his lung. When he went to see the doctor about the spot on his lung, they were afraid he had lung cancer. And she told him about -- that her father's doctor told him at that time that if you don't quit smoking, you're at a risk for dying.
And she related tnat message to Mr. Allen.
And those were her words, not mine. And she made it clear to Mr. Allen in 1952 that she was very, very concerned about his health, and wanted
him to stop smoking.
And you already heard, ladies and gentlemen, what his response was to Mrs. Allen. If I feel like it hurts me, I'll quit. We've heard that throughout the trial.
And these conversations with Mr. and Mrs. Allen continued on throughout their marriage. She told you she didn't want to badger him early on during -- when they were newlyweds, but those conversations continued shortly after they were married.
Mr. Allen also heard of the dangers of smoking from his younger brother, Hubert Allen. Hubert Allen in the late 1950s quit smoking, and it made -- he made it his goal to tell Mr. Allen that he needed to stop smoking as well.
We learned from Patricia Allen, Mr. Allen's daughter, and Mrs. Allen that beginning in the 1960s Mr. Allen called cigarettes cancer sticks. And by now we all know that cigarettes can cause cancer. And he used that term from the 1960s on.
And Patricia Allen, you heard from her, she came on the stand. And she told you that she knew from the age of seven or eight -- and that was 1961 or '62, that she knew that smoking was bad
for her health. And she told her dad that information, and she asked him or encouraged him to quit smoking, but he didn't act on that encouragement. You remember her telling us that?
She also told you that her brother, Paul, warned her dad of the dangers of smoking. And she also said as far back as she can remember,
Mrs. Allen continued to warn Mr. Allen about the dangers of smoking. And she expressed concerns about -- that he should quit smoking, and she told us Mr. Allen didn't act on those concerns.
She also told us, Mrs. Patricia Allen, that she thought and she believed that Mr. Allen knew that the -- that smoking could kill him and was dangerous to his health because he had heard it often enough from his wife, from his brother, and
from -- Im sorry, his wife, his son, and his daughter.
We heard that Mrs. Allen was a school teacher here in Hillsborough County in the late '50s, early 1960s. In the 1960s, Mrs. Allen taught a program at her school which educated the school children about the dangers of smoking. And she told you about this program where they had materials and they had films that demonstrated to
the schoolchildren that smoking could kill them.
And, of course, she went home and she taught -- she told Mr. Allen what she was teaching her students about the health dangers of smoking. And she told Mr. Allen not because -- it wasn't something new to him, but it was part of her efforts to encourage him to stop smoking.
1964, you've heard the landmark Surgeon General's report on smoking and health comes out. It concludes that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer in men. It was front page news in every newspaper in the country, including here in Tampa.
And Mrs. Allen told you that she discussed this news report and news story and news coverage on the Surgeon General's report with her husband. It wasn't new news in the Allen household that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer in men.
In 1966 -- you've also heard this -- Congress passed a law mandating warning labels to go on each and every package of cigarettes that were sold in the United States. This first warning label said, "Caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
Mrs. Allen promptly discussed these warning labels with Mr. Allen. She showed the package to
Mr. Allen and said, look at these warning labels. And because of these warning labels Mrs. Allen said, you know what, I'm not going to buy you cigarettes anymore. They're bad.
And Mr. Allen told her, because she was the shopper in the house, you need to continue to buy me cigarettes. And Mrs. Allen did, for -- for at least a while.
In 1970 the warning changed on each and every cigarette package that Mr. Allen smoked. This is what the warning said, "Warning, the Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." That's what Mr. Allen saw each and every time he picked up a cigarette package.
In 1970 -- we've -- we've talked about this -- Mr. Allen began experiencing shortness of breath, and he began coughing. And up until this time, from 1952, when he met Mrs. Allen, until 1970, he hadn't tried to quit once. The evidence is pretty clear on that.
So he experiences the shortness of breath, he experiences some coughing. He remembers this promise that he made to his wife in 1952. It was starting to hurt him, so he put down the
cigarettes. He quit smoking then.
It was also at this time that Mrs. Allen was really afraid Mr. Allen would get lung cancer.
And so she begged Mr. Allen to go get an x-ray, and Mr. Allen refused to do that. And I -- I -- I won't discuss it further. But, as Mr. Beach said, he was successful in putting down those cigarettes and quitting smoking for two months, until February of 1971.
Mrs. Allen, 1970s, we've heard Mr. -- Ms. -Mrs. Allen was continuing her persistent efforts to get Mr. Allen to try and quit smoking because of the dangers to him.
In 1985 the warning labels again changed. There were four rotating warnings that were placed on each and every one of Mr. Allen's cigarette packages, and these are the warnings that are actually in place today. And one of the warnings said, "Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy."
In the 1980s Mrs. Allen, Patricia Allen, the family continued to tell Mr. Allen about that smoking could kill him, that he needed to quit.
And even -- you heard evidence Mr. Allen's granddaughter, Kelly Ware, asked her grandfather
to stop smoking. And it continues through the 1990s.
And whether it was Mrs. Allen or Hubert Allen or Patricia Allen or Paul Allen or Kelly Ware who asked -- or who told Mr. -- Mr. Allen to -- that cigarette smoking could kill him, what was his response to those people? Did he say, no, I don't believe you? No, prove it? No, that's not true? Did he say I dispute it? Did he say, I disagree with what you're saying, I don't believe cigarette smoking is dangerous? No, he didn't. Did he say that tobacco companies said something to the effect of that's not true? No, he didn't.
This evidence, ladies and gentlemen, is clear that there was no controversy in the Allen household that he knew cigarette smoking could kill him, could cause him lung cancer, and was dangerous.
Was this a man who couldn't quit in the face of all of these warnings? Was this a man that tried to quit? And you have to look at the evidence in this case. In the -- in the face of all these warnings, we didn't see Mr. Allen trying to quit multiple times. We didn't see someone who told others that he couldn't -- I'm sorry, I can't
quit smoking or, I'm sorry, I'm addicted to smoking.
We didn't see someone who couldn't quit when he tried to quit, because, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is when Mr. Allen wanted to quit smoking, he put those cigarettes down.
And if Mr. Allen had made that decision in 1952 when his wife told him that smoking could kill him or if he made the decision to quit in 1964 when the Surgeon General told him he could get lung cancer or in 1966 when the warnings told him that cigarette smoking may be hazardous to
your health or if he stayed quit smoking in 1971 -- February 1971, you've heard Dr. Burns tell you that more likely than not -- more likely than not, Herman Allen would not have developed lung cancer in 1994.
Ladies and gentlemen, your answer to verdict form question one should be no.
I want to talk to you a little bit about all of the other questions on the verdict form. I know Mr. Beach has covered it already, but this is my only chance to talk with you, so I do need to cover some issues with you.
And one of the issues I want to cover with
you now is in greater detail the medical defense and what caused Mr. Allen's lung cancer.
This is the question two. You've seen it before. You've heard it before, plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case. We don't. We didn't have to say anything. Plaintiffs have the burden of proof to prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence that cigarette smoking was a legal cause of Mr. Allen Herman's death -Herman Allen's death, excuse me.
First -- I want to make two points about that. First, Mr. Allen's brand history in this case is unclear. Mrs. Allen testified and told you that Mr. Allen smoked various different brands throughout his life. What she didn't tell you is exactly when he smoked those brands, how many of those brands, how many of those cigarettes from those brands that he smoked, and for how long he smoked each of those brands. I don't think you'll find that very clearly in your notes. What we do know about Philip Morris cigarettes is that Mr. Allen did not pick up a Philip Morris manufactured-brand cigarette until sometime when he was in his 30s, and sometime in the 1960s.
The second point I want to discuss with you
is the medical case. And I want to start that discussion by looking at the medical facts that aren't in dispute in this case. And this is a little long, but each of these points are really important.
Number one, Mr. Allen was exposed to asbestos and it caused damage to his lungs. There's no dispute about that, it's in the medical records. The pleural plaques, pleural calcifications and pleural thickening in Mr. Allen's lungs were caused by asbestos and not by smoking. Those are hallmark signs of asbestos damage in the lungs.
Number three, Mr. Allen's cancer started in the periphery of the lung in the area of pleural calcification and plaquing caused by asbestos. So it started in the periphery, and Dr. Andrews told you the periphery of the lung is the edge of the lung, on the outside.
Number four, asbestos is a cause of all cell types of lung cancer including small cell, which is what Mr. Allen had in this case.
Number five, asbestos-caused lung cancers are most commonly located in the periphery of the lung
near the pleura.
Number six, smoking-caused lung cancers are
most commonly located in the center or the middle of the chest.
And number seven, Mr. Allen's lung cancer was located in the periphery of the lung and not in the center of the lung or the chest.
I want you to keep these facts in mind as we walk through the medical case. Before we get into the cause of Mr. Allen's lung cancer, I want to talk a little bit about the asbestos exposure of Mr. Allen. And all the doctors agree in this case -- Dr. Burns, Auerbach, Six, and Dr.
Andrews -- that Mr. Allen was exposed to asbestos, and number two, that that asbestos exposure was significant enough to cause damage into his lungs on the right and left lobes along the pleura, the lining of the lung.
And Dr. Andrews, the board-certified pulmonologist, or lung doctor, from Tampa, came in and he described to you what the pleura was. And he said it was the Saran like -- Saran Wrap-like covering that covered the chest cavity in the lungs.
He described for us when asbestos fibers are inhaled in your system, they travel into the lungs, and then they spread out into both sides of
the lungs and in the periphery of the lungs, the outside of the lungs, the edges of the lungs which can then damage your lungs. And that takes on the form of what we just talked about, the pleural calcifications, the pleural thickening and the pleural plaquing.
And the medical records that you'll have in the jury room all demonstrate to you that Mr. Allen had all three forms of lung damage in his lungs -- in both lungs. And what that tells us is that Mr. Allen did, in fact, inhale a lot of asbestos fibers, enough to cause this damage.
And how was Mr. Allen exposed to asbestos?
You already heard he served his country on the USS Bole, in the Navy, from '48 to '52. You heard on videotaped deposition from two of Mr. Allen's shipmates, Reid Moore and George Whapham. And these men served aboard the USS Bole with Mr. Allen.
And one of them actually, Mr. Moore, actually worked in the same position as Mr. Allen as a boiler man or fireman. And they both told us that asbestos was everywhere on the USS Bole. They told us it insulated all of the steam pipes that traveled throughout the ship, including the living
quarters of the sailors. They told us that it insulated the boilers in the boiler room, and they told us that it was used as a fire protectant or a retardant throughout the ship as well.
And I think Mr. Whapham said there was asbestos covering and there was asbestos blankets that were also aboard the USS Bole.
And Mr. Moore described for us the job that
he and Mr. Allen did on the USS Bole as firemen or the boiler tenders. And they worked in the boiler room and maintained the boiler throughout the -and all of the steam pipes that were throughout the ship.
And the steam pipes that travelled throughout the ship, actually, this is a -- I'll show you what they look like. This is a certified copy of the piping in the USS John A. Bole. And this was from March 1st, 1945. This is aft fire room. So you see the steam pipes were covered in insulation. And the insulation was obviously because the steam pipes were hot, and to protect the soldiers and the sailors there, they wrapped it in insulation so if they touched it, it wouldn't burn them.
So when they had to do repairs to the boiler
room or the piping on these ships, they had to cut or rip open these asbestos insulations. And they had to get to the pipe, and then once they were done fixing the pipe or the boiler or whatever it was, they had to recover all of these pipes with asbestos insulation again. And Mr. Moore told you that when they were doing that, when they were cutting into the asbestos, when they were re-insulating these pipes that they didn't wear any protective gearing or any mask to prevent inhalation of the asbestos fibers.
And Dr. Andrews described for us how someone inhales asbestos fibers. He told us that when you cut into asbestos insulation or you rip it open, as Mr. Allen did on the USS Bole, the asbestos fibers are released into the air. And he told us that these airborne asbestos fibers can remain in the air for two hours or they can cling to your clothing.
And he said that studies have shown that when you take in every breath and you inhale these asbestos fibers, it releases up to -- well, when you disrupt asbestos or you remove it and then you inhale it, when you disrupt it, it releases tens of thousands of asbestos fibers per cubic foot of
air -- tens of thousands.
So he said if Mr. Allen was on board the USS Bole for four years, he would have likely inhaled thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, of asbestos fibers into his lungs. And he told us the hundreds of thousands of asbestos fibers in his lungs, each and every one was carcinogenic or potentially cancer causing.
And plaintiff has suggested to you that Mr. Allen's four years of asbestos exposure pales in comparison to his 40-plus years of smoking.
But the reality is, and the evidence showed you, that the asbestos that Mr. Allen inhaled and the asbestos that Mr. Allen ingested was enough to cause significant damage to his lungs. And that's in the medical records.
So let's turn to the issue of causation. You know, plaintiff put a lot of general statistics up on the board, of lung cancer and what causes lung
cancer, and smoking was the most prevalent cause. But I would submit to you that this is Mr. Allen's case and we cannot look at general statistics. We need to look at the specifics of Mr. Allen in this case.
Plaintiff brought to you Dr. Burns who we've
talked about already, and Dr. Auerbach,
Mr. Allen's treating oncologist in 1994. And I want to start with Dr. Burns.
Dr. Burns admitted to you that he hasn't seen a patient in a medical doctor capacity since 2007. Ten years prior to 2007, he told you that he treated patients for about 5 percent of his time. And what did Dr. Burns tell us what caused Mr. Allen's cancer? You already heard it. He told us that he knew with absolute 100 percent certainty that smoking was the cause of Mr. Allen's lung cancer.
And he was on the stand for about two and a half days. And the evidence that he brought to you to show you that he knew with 100 percent certainty that Mr. Allen's lung cancer was caused by smoking was the fact that he was a smoker in general statistics. And he actually spent very little time in the two and a half days talking about anything specific to Mr. Allen.
Now, you've heard Dr. Auerbach, Dr. Andrews, they both said nothing in medicine is a certainty. Very little. And especially with lung cancer and cancers in general. No one can tell you with 100 percent certainty what caused a specific
individual's lung cancer.
And so I want you to view Dr. Burns' testimony and give it as much weight as you want to give it for a doctor that could -- came in here and told you that he knew 100 percent certainty what caused any one person's specific cancer, including Mr. Allen's. And, of course,
Dr. Andrews did say he couldn't tell you with 100 percent certainty what caused Mr. Allen's lung cancer, but he did tell you more likely than not to a degree of medical probability, which is the standard, that the cause of Mr. Allen's cancer was asbestos.
And I want to talk about Dr. Auerbach.
Dr. Auerbach was the treating oncologist. Plaintiffs told you that Dr. Auerbach's opinion -they put up the slide that cigarette smoking was the cause of Mr. Allen's lung cancer. And I don't want you to be confused. I don't want you to be confused that this was an opinion that he developed when he was treating Mr. Allen in 1994. This wasn't.
When he saw -- by the time he saw Mr. Allen, he told us in his deposition that he didn't know how much he smoked and he didn't know how long he
smoked. He didn't know about his Navy time, he didn't know about his asbestos exposure. He told us that at that time his only concern -- and rightly so -- was treating Mr. Allen's cancer and
administering chemotherapy. And he told us that the cause of someone's cancer -- whether it's smoking, whether it's asbestos, whether it's anything else -- was irrelevant to him at that time because the treatment would have been the same.
Mr. -- if you recall, Dr. Auerbach's opinion that smoking was the most likely cause of Mr. Allen's lung cancer was in response to a question by plaintiff's counsel at the end of the deposition. And he was asked to assume that if Mr. Allen had an 88-pack year history and was -and that's the only fact he was given. He was asked to assume an 88-pack year history. He was given no other facts about Mr. Allen's asbestos exposure. And so his opinion was based on incomplete, inaccurate, and insufficient evidence. And it was 17 years after he treated Mr. Allen.
You also heard testimony from Dr. Six, from his deposition. And Dr. Six actually didn't offer an opinion as to the most likely cause of
Mr. Allen's lung cancer. So we're down to Dr. Andrews.
And Dr. Andrews was the last witness who testified about this issue. He -- you've heard is the pulmonology doctor, a critical care doctor.
He practices at the VA hospital at USF here and at the Moffitt Cancer Center. In contrast to Dr. Burns, he takes care of patients the majority of the time. I think he said over 75 percent of his time was spent taking care of patients with lung diseases.
He told you that the majority of his patients were war veterans and that he has seen and treated many vets from the Korean war, that he had seen and treated many vets who have worked on Navy ships, and he's seen and treated vets who have been boiler men or boiler men or firemen, as Mr. Allen was, on the USS Bole. And he said 15 to 20 percent of his patients have suffered or are suffering from asbestos-related lung diseases, including lung cancer.
And Dr. Andrews was the only doctor who evaluated all the information available in this case. And he was the one who came in here and walked you through those medical records and
walked you through the evidence and told you the bases for his opinion that he rendered in this courtroom.
And so let's look at the specific facts surrounding Mr. Allen's lung cancer. And I want to use the board that -- I think you'll recognize this. It's the board that Dr. Andrews used as he was walking you through his opinion. And what he told you from his view of the medical records -and this actually isn't in dispute by any of the doctors -- is that Mr. Allen had a small cell tumor that originated in the pleura -- actually in the outer -- I should say outer edges of the lung near the periphery. That's what he told you.
Dr. Auerbach and Dr. Andrews told you that
this tumor originated in the pleura. And this is where you heard the testimony of Dr. Six. He didn't think this tumor started in the pleura area. And Mr. Beach already told you that at the time Dr. Six said that he didn't think that this tumor started in the pleura, he hadn't seen all of the -- he hadn't seen all of the evidence. He hadn't seen the medical record.
And this is the medical record that you've seen from Mr. Beach 's presentation. It's the
March 8, 1994 chest X-ray which states the large pleural-based mass. This was a doctor by the name of Dr. Brooker. He also stated large lateral pleural-based right-upper lung mass. This document wasn't something that Dr. Six had seen when he gave his opinion at his deposition, 17 years later, in 1994.
And really, whether it was in the pleura or whether it was touching the pleura or whether it was near the pleura really doesn't matter because -- and I'll tell you why. It was because all of the experts agree that this particular tumor arose in the area of the lung damage caused by asbestos that I told you about earlier. It arose in the area where there was pleural calcification. It arose in the area where there was pleural thickening and pleural plaquing and the scarring you've heard of. That's where the tumor grew out of, in this case.
And Dr. Auerbach and Dr. Andrews, Dr. Six, they all agree -- and this was an undisputed fact that I showed you earlier, that tumors or cancers that are most -- that are caused by asbestos, more likely than not, the majority of them start out here in the edges of the lung. They don't start
centrally, they start out there in the edges of the lung. And in contrast, all of the doctors agree that smoking-caused lung cancer -- small cell lung cancers start centrally. And that's where the blue markings are. Dr. Andrews drew that for you.
And so why did Dr. Andrews conclude that this was an asbestos-caused lung cancer? We've already been through this evidence. The evidence of the asbestos damage in the lung, the pleural plaques and everything I won't repeat that, that evidenced significant asbestos exposure in Mr. Allen's lungs.
This was a peripheral or pleural-based cancer, as we've seen here on the outer edges of the lung. And it arose in an area of asbestos damage. It arose out of the scarring in the pleural plaques, and it wasn't centrally located, as the majority of small cell lung cancers caused by smoking are.
And we know and we've heard, and it's an undisputed fact that lung cancers that originate on the periphery of the lung that arise out of lung damage are more likely than not caused by asbestos.
Now, Mr. Denney told you that Dr. Andrews' opinion can't possibly be correct because -- and I want to get it right -- all of his small cell cancer patients, it was caused by cigarette smoking. And that means very little in this case because the small cell lung cancers that Dr. Andrews have seen have all been centrally located. They haven't been out in the periphery.
But more importantly it's their burden in this case. And I want you to know what you didn't hear. I want you to know that you didn't hear any evidence from their doctor, Dr. Burns, or from the treating doctors of Mr. Allen, that they have ever seen a smoking-caused small cell lung cancer that started in the periphery that arose out of the damage -- asbestos-caused damage in the lungs.
They told you they haven't seen that.
And Mr. -- plaintiff's counsel also told you that there may -- smoking played a -- played a role, asbestos played a role, and they may have acted synergistically. But that may be true and it could be true in these types of case, the cases where the small cell lung cancers caused by smoking arise centrally. That wasn't the case. That wasn't Mr. Allen's case.
Here's a jury instruction that you will have in the back. You've already seen this before. Plaintiff's counsel said that smoking doesn't have to be the only cause.
But the smoking, ladies and gentlemen, if you read this jury instruction closely, smoking still needs to be -- still needs to -- this is the last sentence -- contribute substantially to producing such injury. This was the but for causation that Mr. Beach spent some time walking you through.
And this means, ladies and gentlemen -- this means that plaintiff needs to prove to you that if Mr. Allen had never smoked cigarettes, that he wouldn't have gotten this lung cancer. And I'm going to say it again because it's -- it's a double negative.
Plaintiffs have the burden to prove to you that if Mr. Allen had never smoked, that he never would have gotten this peripherally located lung cancer.
The Court -- I would submit to you that plaintiffs can't carry this burden because -- for all the reasons that we've just discussed, that Mr. Allen was exposed to significant asbestos, which caused all of the damage to his lungs, and
the tumor started right in the asbestos damage in his lungs on the periphery of the lung.
And the Court will instruct to you that plaintiff has to prove to you that Mr. Allen's lung cancer was caused by smoking by the greater weight of the evidence, and plaintiff needs to meet that burden.
And to be clear, I want -- I want to tell you what they need to do. If plaintiff cannot prove to you that if Mr. Allen had never smoked, never picked up a cigarette, and he wouldn't have gotten
this lung cancer, then plaintiffs can t prevail.
If plaintiff -- if -- if you conclude back there in the jury room that no one knows the answer of what caused Mr. Allen's lung cancer, then plaintiffs can't prevail. And if you conclude that asbestos more likely than not caused Mr. Allen's lung cancer, then plaintiffs can't prevail.
I'm going to move on. Questions four and five, you've already seen these questions as well. And you've already heard there's absolutely no evidence in this case that Mr. Allen saw, heard, read, relied on any statement made by Philip Morris or any statement made by R.J. Reynolds.
Plaintiff's counsel didn't even try -- I -- I was listening, and they didn't even try to link up a Philip Morris statement that they showed you or an R.J. Reynolds statement that they showed you or an ad they showed you to Mr. Allen. They didn't try to do that. And it's, I would submit to you, because they can't do that.
You've heard Mrs. Allen's testimony on this, and you've heard Patricia Allen's testimony on this. There's simply no evidence that Mr. Allen saw any of these things that you've seen.
And you heard plaintiff's counsel talk a lot about Dr. Burns and -- and all of the information that was supposedly hidden from Mr. Allen. And you and I have now just walked through his personal history, and you know what Mr. Allen knew. You know what information he had, and you know when he had the information.
And I'm not here to tell you that everyone knew, like Mr. Denney suggested. I'm here to tell you in this case, Mr. Allen knew. Mr. Allen is the plaintiff in this case -- his -- his wife, and it's Mr. Allen's case. So that's what you have to focus on, ladies and gentlemen.
And I want you to consider this as you're
answering this question. The evidence is clear that Mr. Allen never picked up a Philip Morris cigarette until he was in his thirties and he was -- he was an adult. And the evidence is clear that he never smoked a Philip Morris product until eight years after he had uncontroverted evidence in the record that he knew smoking could kill him. And the record is also clear and the evidence is also clear that he didn't pick up a Philip Morris cigarette until after Mrs. Allen unequivocally and repeatedly again and again and again told him that smoking could kill him.
I want to talk about this. This -- it's busy, but this is the timeline of all of the warnings and all that Mr. Allen received through the years.
These were personal warnings from his brother, his wife, his daughter, his son. These were crystal clear warnings. Mrs. Allen's words, smoking will kill you. And these are the messages that Mr. Allen received time and time and time again from each of these people that he knows.
That he loves, that he trusts.
And it's inconceivable that if Mr. Allen didn't listen to his wife or didn't listen to his
son or his granddaughter, that he would change his smoking behavior because of something Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds said.
Was he waiting -- was he waiting around to hear the message that he already knew, that smoking could kill him, from Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds? I would submit to you the answer is no.
And -- and really, would -- would Mr. -- ask yourself this. Would Mr. Allen -- we've heard about what kind of man he is. Would he have acted differently with a message from the tobacco companies? You'll have to ask yourself that.
Here's question eight. It's -- you've seen this one before, too. It's the question related to punitive damages. And I want to point out first that what you're being asked in this particular question is whether you should award punitive damages, not the amount, but whether you should award punitive damages.
And if you check this box yes, you're going to hear further evidence on this issue and you're going to deliberate further on this issue. And -and so this -- this particular question does not ask you to give an amount.
And second, in answering this question eight,
you can only consider the conduct that resulted in harm to Herman Allen. Because after all, this is Herman Allen's case. This is a case -- this isn't a class action, this isn't a class involving multiple plaintiffs, this isn't a case about a referendum against cigarette smoking or -- or tobacco companies. This is a case in which you need to consider that the conduct that you found harmed Mr. Allen -- actually, you need to consider -- I messed that up.
You need to consider in -- in your analysis to this question and focus on the conduct that you found actually harmed Mr. Allen. So you have to find that link, what's the conduct that harmed Mr. Allen in order for you to make that decision.
And if you get to this issue, I want you to look closely at the evidence. And you've heard this before. There's simply no evidence that anything Dr. Burns said or any of the documents had any impact on Mr. Allen. And not one of these witnesses that came in to talk to you about Mr. Allen told you that Mr. Allen relied on anything or anyone but himself to make the decisions that he made in his lifetime.
And remember what Dr. Burns also said in
response to a juror question at the end of his testimony, and Mr. Beach already talked to you about this. It was the question of whether commercial cigarettes were safer than roll your own cigarettes in the 1940s or present day.
And Dr. Burns answered that they were about the same danger level, although factually you
heard that wasn t quite correct. But the point is, he didn't say cigarettes made by these two manufacturers were more deadly than those cigarettes that you go out and roll your own.
It wasn't -- the process of burning organic tobacco or any kind of organic substance is what causes the carcinogens to come out. It wasn't something Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds did to their cigarettes. It wasn't something that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds added to their cigarettes.
And it's the same with the nicotine.
Nicotine is a naturally-occurring substance in the tobacco plant as well. And you heard Dr. Burns, he said that Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds did not add nicotine to their commercial cigarettes.
And the Court's instructions tell us -- and you've seen this before -- and it just -- I -- I need to -- it's worth repeating because this is a
higher standard than any of the other questions.
It s clear and convincing. It's more compelling and more persuasive.
And hypothetically, ladies and gentlemen, if you were to conclude that Mr. -- or that punitive damages were warranted against Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds by the greater weight of the evidence, if you were to conclude that, you have to answer no to question number eight because plaintiffs have not fulfilled their burden. It's a clear and convincing standard.
And let me say just one more thing about punitive damages. And -- and you heard this a little bit from Mr. Beach. They are not to compensate Mrs. -- Mrs. Allen for Herman Allen's decisions. They are above and beyond making a person whole. They are for punishment and deterrence. And I ask you to consider that as you're weighing the evidence in this particular case.
And I'm going to sit down now. Mr. Denney or Mr. Bass gets to get back up because they have the burden of proof in this case, so this is my last word with you. But what I want you to keep in mind -- I don't -- I don't know what they're going
to say. But what I want you to keep in mind is, whatever document they put before you, whatever they say, you need to ask yourself what does this have to do with Herman Allen. How does this impact Herman Allen? How did it impact his smoking decisions in this case?
Ladies and gentlemen, because Mr. Allen was in control of his smoking, because he knew the dangers and risks of smoking, and chose to smoke despite knowing those risks, and because he could quit and it was demonstrated that he did quit, we submit that the only fair and just verdict in this case is a verdict for Philip Morris USA and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
And thank you again for your time and -- and your service as jurors.



MR. BEACH: Thank you very much, Your Honor.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
Let me begin, also, by offering my thanks for your service and for your attention -- we've been together all the way back to April 6th, now -- and for your commitment to your oath and your responsibilities as jurors, not only all the way up to this point in time, right, but carrying all the way through the deliberations that you'll be retiring to shortly. On behalf of the men and women who work at Reynolds and Philip Morris, let me begin by saying I'm very proud to be here to address you before you retire.
Now, at the beginning of this case in opening statement I indicated that there were going to be fundamentally four questions that you would have
to address. Let me roughly paraphrase what the Court instructed you about this morning
Was Mr. Allen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And if so, was that addiction a legal cause of his cancer? Were smoking cigarettes made by Reynolds or Philip Morris a legal cause of Mr. Allen's cancer? Was a concealment of information not otherwise known or available a legal cause of his cancer, and ultimately is Mrs. Allen entitled to money because, contrary to her wishes, Mr. Allen chose to smoke cigarettes?
During the plaintiff's closing argument you heard an awful lot of information about things that have absolutely nothing to do with Mr. Allen.
But you re not going to be asked to answer questions that don't have anything to do with Mr. Allen. You're not going to be asked on that verdict form that you saw little bits of, in the plaintiff's closing, and I'm going to show you more in just a minute, any question about smokers in general. This isn't a case about smokers in general. This isn't a case about statistics in general. This is a case about Mr. Allen.
You're not going to be asked to resolve any
large issue of public policy about smoking, is it good, is it bad, is there too much advertising, is there too little advertising, should people have a right of free speech or not? Those are not questions that you have to answer on the verdict form in this case.
And most importantly, you're not going to be asked to decide whether or not cigarettes shouldn't be sold, whether cigarettes shouldn't be sold because they're addictive and they're dangerous.
That judgment, ladies and gentlemen, we've already made as a society, because cigarettes are a legal product. That's a judgment tnat we've made.
In fact, though, the questions that you have to answer about Mr. Allen, and in particular, ladies and gentlemen, notwithstanding all the discussion about addiction -- let's bear -- focus on four principals -- four principals that the plaintiff's own witnesses agreed to in this case.
The Surgeon General has concluded that smoking is a personal choice health behavior. Do you remember that was the first question that I asked of Dr. Burns. So isn't it true the Surgeon
General says smoking is a personal choice health behavior? And he said, yes. And I said, In fact, the Surgeon General has said that on numerous occasions. Yes. And you agree with that, don't you Dr. Burns? Yes. Those are the first three questions I asked to Dr. Burns.
Nicotine doesn't prevent anyone from trying to quit. Dr. Burns, Dr. Werner, they both agreed with that proposition as well. And what does that mean? It's up to each smoker to decide to quit -if to quit, when to quit. That's a personal decision that each smoker has to make for themselves. And because smokers have the choice to quit, they bear responsibility for that decision.
And would we want it any other way in this country, ladies and gentlemen? Of course not.
This country is about freedom. But with freedom comes responsibility. And personal responsibility is a bedrock principal of this country.
Nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco, there's no dispute about that. Nicotine is an important reason why people smoke cigarettes, there's no dispute about that. But those two facts don't alter these four key principals. The fact is that
nicotine doesn t relieve anyone of responsibility in making a choice whether or not to quit.
Now, you heard also about the Engle jury.
But bear in mind the Engle jury heard no evidence about Mr. Allen. The Engle findings don't mention Mr. Allen. Those have been read to you and shown to you. They don't establish that Mr. Allen had a smoking-related disease, nor do they establish that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his death.
If the Engle case answered questions specific to Mr. Allen, then there would have been no need for us to be here these past two weeks. It didn't. The questions that you must answer are, in fact, different. So let's look at those questions right now.
This is the first question on the verdict form. Was Herman Allen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?
Do you remember counsel for plaintiff said, yes, there are actually two parts to that question. So at least there's one thing that apparently we will agree on in this case, addiction and addiction causation. And I agree.
Dr. Nace said, Look, I'm not going to quibble about addiction. He may well have been dependent at certain points in time when he was a smoker -not technically under the DSM, but he wasn't going to quibble with it. And it's not necessary to quibble with it because the important question is whether or not addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Allen's death, legal cause.
Well, what does legal cause mean? This is a key concept that you're going to see throughout the instructions. So that's why I'm going to spend a little bit of time on it right now.
An addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause if -- that it requires directly and in natural and continuous sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can be reasonably be said that but for addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the injury would not have been suffered.
So highlighting here -- let me move around here. In yellow you can see the same phraseology is in the second part, which says there can be more than one legal cause. But what does this mean? This is defined by this, "that it's reasonably said but for the addiction." In other
words, think about it this way: Except or without the addiction, the injury would not have occurred.
There are two reasons why addiction was not the legal cause of Mr. Allen's cancer. First, he could quit. We know that addiction didn't trump his ability to quit. He did in 1970, he did in 1994. He was able to, in fact, quit.
Second of all, what of -- the other reason why addiction is not the legal cause, the without cause of his injury, is because the other times he wasn't interested in quitting. He didn't try to
quit. Mr. Allen, right, is a gentleman who tried to quit smoking twice. No other time did he try to quit. That s the evidence in this case.
And so this is not -- if you consider people on a spectrum, some people who struggle mightily to quit; others who you've heard don't have any trouble at all. Mr. Allen is not in this spectrum of struggling mightily to quit, trying repeatedly to quit, and being unable to do so. That's not the evidence as it pertains to Mr. Allen.
And, obviously, if a person doesn't want to change their behavior, right, you don't want to change, you're not going to. That's a simple synonym of life. But that doesn't mean that
addiction is causing it. That's a decision, a choice, I'm not going to change my behavior. Addiction never trumped Mr. Allen's choices about his smoking.
You know, the plaintiff really fails to address this in their closing. Did you hear this? It was all about, Well, he's addicted, he's addicted. And Mr. Denney even said, Well, the question has two parts. And he skipped right over the second part, was addiction the legal cause of his injury? That's the standard that you have to judge that question by.
The evidence in this case is quite conclusive. Everybody who knew Mr. Allen agreed he was a strong-willed man. If he put his mind to something, he could quit. Mr. Allen did what he wanted to do no matter what. Who said that? Mrs. Allen said that.
Mr. Allen made his own decisions about how he would live his life. Who said that? Russell Allen said that. Now, you didn't hear his deposition read in this case. Russell was his nephew. But I asked Dr. Werner, didn't Russell Allen -- she had read Russell's Allen's deposition. And I said, didn't he say that Mr.
Allen was the kind of person who made his own decisions about how he would live his life? And she said, that's true.
He was decisive. If he made a plan, he followed through. Who said that? Mrs. Allen said that. That's the evidence in this case, that Mr. Allen was always in control of his fate.
You also know that he was in control of his choices, right? He made the decision to ignore advice to quit from Mrs. Allen and others.
Make no mistake about it with respect to this first point, ladies and gentlemen. It's not as if Mr. Allen was ignorant of the risks of smoking, right? Nobody can say that with a straight face about Mr. Allen. Mrs. Allen, from the get-go, told him, It's going to kill you.
No one else -- he quit drinking alcohol in the mid-1950s despite the severe withdraw effects. Nobody could do that for Mr. Allen. That was a choice he made for himself.
He quit smoking both times. In the records he decided to and didn't struggle at other points
in time. Those were choices that only he could make for himself. And, obviously, like we said, he never tried other than those two times.
You know, there's an interesting episode you heard about. You may be thinking yourself, Well, you're not talking about the nicotine patch.
Nobody else could make the decision for Mr. Allen to quit. Whose idea was it to get the nicotine patch? Mrs. Allen. Who called the doctor to get the prescription? Mrs. Allen. Who went to the store to pick it up? Mrs. Allen.
You know, was that -- was that Mr. Allen's idea? I don't think so. And, in fact, she says to him when he lights up a cigarette after he's put it on, Hey, you can't smoke. She says that to him twice, and he takes the patch off. Dr. Burns said, Hey, by the way, that doesn't count as a quit attempt. And that's why we say two times.
But that's what I mean. Nobody could make the decision to stop for Mr. Allen but Mr. Allen.
And so in addition to all of this evidence about who Mr. Allen was -- or perhaps because of it, the plaintiff has admitted that the acts of Mr. Allen related to his efforts to stop smoking was a legal cause of his cancer.
But for -- remember, we learned legal cause means "but for." But for his actions, Mr. Allen wouldn't have gotten lung cancer. That's what the
plaintiff is admitting in this case. This is an extremely important admission. He could have quit sooner, he should have quit sooner. That's what the plaintiffs have conceded in this case.
And if you go back again just to the -- I won't belabor this too much, but the definition of legal cause, it -- the legal -- something that's a legal cause is -- contributes substantially to producing the injury such that without the thing at issue, the outcome wouldn't have happened. So that's why they're admitting, and the significance of admitting, that his own actions were a legal cause of his own cancer.
And it's not only the plaintiffs who admitted it. And the Judge instructed you that this is the law in this case. The plaintiff's own experts,
Dr. Burns and Dr. Werner, agreed with all three of these points. Both of them were asked and agreed to each of these two -- three points. He had the ability to quit. He had the responsibility to quit, and he did quit.
And, of course, we have concrete evidence of his ability to quit, right? In 1957 he quits alcohol cold turkey. The testimony was that he experienced severe withdrawal for about two weeks,
including the shakes or tremors.
This is -- Mr. Allen made a decision right here. I'm going to stop. And this red line, it was reflected a life long commitment to that decision. No issue of relapse here. That's a decision. And he obviously demonstrated his ability to stick with it if he wanted to.
What about quitting smoking in 1970 to 71?
We know he quit for two months.
By the way, plaintiffs have -- are telling you, Sure, he's addicted at this point. Well, the fact that he was addicted didn't prevent him from making a decision to stop, right?
The information in these blue boxes, this is -- I showed you this in opening. I'm sure you recall it. Dr. Werner confirmed both of -- all of that information in those blue boxes when she testified that within approximately three days of quitting, the nicotine is out of your body.
And the withdrawal symptoms, to the extent a person experiences them, will set in after a couple of days, but then generally taper down and will have -- really be gone within a couple of weeks.
Dr. Nace said for some people it could last
longer than that. But what about this decision to resume two months later? There's no nicotine in his system at this point. He's overcome whatever the effects of nicotine are. He's an adult. He's 40 years old at this point in time -- 41.
And he knew what his own quitting experience had been like, right? He said, I'm going to return to smoking. Whether it was hard for him or easy for him, he made the decision, I'm going to go back to smoking.
And was -- what was the testimony about that? Well, he was at a fair. It was cold. This is what Mrs. Allen told you. Other people were smoking. There was absolutely nothing that Reynolds or Philip Morris did that was in any way involved in that decision to resume after he had quit for two months. And, of course, any point in time thereafter he knew he could quit. He knew he could quit, because he had.
You know, why do persons smoke? And what evidence do you have as to whether or not he wanted to quit permanently before 1994? When he was asked to quit, did he respond? No. When his wife encouraged him to quit, did he say, Okay, I'm going to try to do something about it? Did he
even respond at all? No. Did he ask for help from friends or family members?
You know the answers to these questions before I check off these boxes, right?
Did he seek help from friends or family members? No. Did he seek medical assistance?
No. Did he use nicotine replacement products? We've already talked about that. That didn't count. Pulling off the patch when you're told you can't smoke with it on is not a use of a nicotine replacement therapy. And Dr. Burns agreed with us on that.
Did he throw away cigarettes or ashtrays?
No. Smoking cessation clinics? No. Persistently tried to quit? No.
What do you conclude from all of that? Is this a record of somebody who wants to change their behavior? No. What about the millions of
people who have quit, who did make that decision, by the way, like he made with respect to his alcohol use?
Were the cigarettes that Mr. Allen was smoking any more addictive than anybody else's cigarettes? Has there been any evidence about that in this case? Of course not.
Did the cigarettes that Mr. Allen smoke affect his brain chemistry differently? Any evidence he had unique brain chemistry? No.
How about quitting -- trying to quit over and over with success? Is this a person who was tormented by his smoking, who struggled? No.
Was he a weak person? Zero evidence that that's the case.
Are smokers who smoke just as much or more than him unable to quit? Absolutely not.
Did he choose to continue smoking? Again, you have to look at the record of evidence and decide whether or not addiction trumped his will, essentially. That's the essence of legal causation. He was the one who chose to continue to smoke until he finally quit. Nobody else.
Remember J.E. Allen. You saw his video. He was Mr. Allen's cousin and a close contemporary. And he told you what I think you already knew before he ever opened his mouth. He said Mr. Allen never expressed a desire to quit.
Dr. Werner, just briefly, you remember, I asked her, You would agree you're a professional witness? And she said, Okay, I am. And, in fact, she was a professional witness on everything -sanity cases, personal injury cases, contested will cases. But until she sent out that letter that she couldn't read because she didn't bring her glasses to come testify, she hadn't done any tobacco cases.
In any event, she acknowledged that her review in this record wasn't complete. The plaintiffs' lawyers didn't send her all the depositions, all the medical records. She didn't opine that Mr. Allen was addicted as a youth, neither did Dr. Burns.
She agreed that he could quit, that it was his decision, that nicotine didn't prevent anything like that. She agreed that -- well, excuse me.
With respect to the withdrawal symptoms, plaintiff's counsel showed you a chart about withdrawal symptoms in his closing. But remember, she said, I can't tell you whether or not he actually ever experienced nicotine withdrawal.
Dr. Burns said the same thing.
And then, lastly, what about the addiction cycle? Remember this chart telling you -- trying to tell you that somehow there's a last free choice here before you're on this hopeless cycle
of addiction? Well, 17-and-a-half million people broke that cycle by 1965, another 30 million between 1965 and 179, 60 million by today, and, of
course Mr. Allen, too.
So this whole notion of a last free choice is simply ridiculous. It's counter to the experience of not only millions of Americans, but to the plaintiff, the person who matters in this case,
Mr. Allen.
Mr. Allen was actually much more like the millions of Americans who have quit. You heard there are more former smokers alive today than current smokers. And Burns -- Dr. Burns agreed that the vast majority of those people would qualify as addicted. Addiction doesn't prevent people from quitting. In fact, addiction doesn't prevent 90 percent of smokers from quitting without any form of assistance whatsoever after one or two attempts.
Remember, Dr. Werner said, Well, seven or eight attempts. Well, I showed her the data or asked her about the data from the time when Mr. Allen was smoking. And she agreed, Okay, yeah, one to two attempts was what was average at that point in time.
What do we know about Mr. Allen? Both times he decided to quit he actually quit. So he was really no different than all these other millions of people except for one thing, right? And that one thing is that he set the term as to when he would stop. Nobody else did that. Mr. Allen did that, remember? He said, When it hurts me, I'll stop. Nobody put those words in his mouth.
Nobody put that idea in his head. Those were his terms, and then he lived by them. That's a choice, and that's a decision.
You heard a lot about nicotine affecting brain receptors. I suggest, ladies and gentlemen, that's a side show. Not only is it irrelevant to Mr. Allen's experience, but Dr. Werner agreed the whole receptor theory of addiction -- I asked her, Isn't it true it's overly simplistic? Yes. So 60 million people all have the same brain receptors, isn't that right, Doctor? Yes.
Everything -- you know, it's made to sound as if it's sinister that smoking is pleasurable. But the fact of the matter is, is everything that is pleasurable in life stimulates dopamine release.
We went through, you'll recall, that whole list of activities that I went through with her. She
agreed that the changes are gone in 10 to 14 days. She quibbled with me about it a little bit but, ultimately, yes, she said, you're right, 10 to
14	days those receptors change back. And that's why people are over the symptoms of nicotine withdrawal within that couple-week period. Are they going to have a memory of missing something that they enjoyed? Sure.
No doubt, throughout Mr. Allen's life after he quit his alcohol use, he had a memory of missing something that he enjoyed. But that memory didn't force him to relapse, he was able to control it. And I think it's a good way to analogize his ability to control his tobacco use,
too, if he wanted to.
In any event, on brain receptors, there's nothing about brain receptors stimulating dopamine -- nicotine stimulating the release of dopamine that prevents people from quitting. Sixty million Americans and Mr. Allen's experience demonstrates that.
And lastly, remember the slide you were shown from the Surgeon General Koop during the plaintiff's closing comparing smoking to cocaine and heroin? Remember, I asked Dr. Werner, Isn't
it true, ma'am, the amount of dopamine released from smoking a cigarette is much more comparable to caffeine, having a cup of coffee? And she said yes. That's the context of understanding the power, if you will, about the release of dopamine. It's comparable to that release from caffeine.
The truth is -- okay, the truth is that people report lots of reasons for smoking, and certainly nicotine isn't the only reason. And I won't repeat this list. Everyone would agree that they know people who would express these as reasons why they smoke. Do we have a good listing of the reasons for Mr. Allen why he chose to smoke? No, we don't. There was testimony from his sister, Louise Sheffield, that he enjoyed the social aspect of it, he enjoyed it after meals, that he enjoyed it with coffee.
But flip it around, okay? Let's take the plaintiffs at their word. Let's assume he hated smoking. He hated it. The only reason he did it was to get that dose of nicotine that you heard -the word "dose" used repeatedly throughout plaintiff's closing argument. So he literally despised the fact that he was a smoker.
Think back to that instance where, as a young
man, his daughter says, Look, Daddy's drunk. He hated that, right? So what did he do? He acted on it immediately. That's who Mr. Allen was. If he hated something, he could deal with. We do know that he had reasons why he enjoyed smoking. And anybody to suggest that he had none is ignoring the evidence in this case.
Dr. Werner agreed -- I asked her all three of these questions, and she agreed with me with every single one of them. People report different reasons for smoking. People evaluate the risks and benefits differently. Remember, I said, So, for example, Mrs. Allen's evaluation of those risks and benefits was "smoking is not for me."
And that's fine. That's her choice and her decision just as it was Mr. Allen's choice and decision to evaluate those risks and benefits differently for himself.
And third, I said to her, Isn't it true there are adults who smoke and have no desire to quit smoking even though they know it's dangerous? She said, Yes, of course, that's true.
Mr. Allen chose to smoke for reasons that were good and sufficient for him, and that's not a choice that we need to second-guess for the
purposes of this case. Ultimately, the question is, did addiction to nicotine control Herman Allen and leave him no choice but to continue smoking until 1994? There's simply no evidence that supports that conclusion.
Indeed, the plaintiff has ducked this issue. He skipped over the second part of the question when he was telling you about it during his closing arguments. They haven't confronted the burden of legal causation that the Court is instructing you must adhere to when you perform your analysis of the evidence and apply the evidence to the law.
You saw it throughout the testimony and evidence in this case. Mr. Allen's smoking was not a negotiable event. He disregarded what people told him. He set his own standard in 1952. He's the only person who could apply that standard. After that, he never responded.
Remember, Mrs. Allen was on the stand,
Mr. Stern was asking her some questions. And he said, So how did he respond when people asked him to quit? And she said, Well, you know, he wouldn't really respond at all. And then he said, Well, would he repeat I'll stop when it's hurting
me? And she said, From time to time, yes, he would say that. And that was his choice, how to respond. That was his choice to come up with his own standard. That was his decision about how to live his own life.
For all these reasons, ladies and gentlemen,
I submit that the only answer to question number one that's consistent with the evidence is no. Addiction didn't cause Mr. Allen's lung cancer by compelling him to smoke. He quit. He always could quit; thus, that trumps any addiction. An addiction is not a legal cause of his cancer if he wanted to smoke. And how do you know he wanted to smoke? Because he wasn't trying to quit.
Now, the second question on the verdict form relates to the medical causation of Mr. Allen's lung cancer. As to each defendant, was smoking cigarettes made by that defendant a legal cause -again, that term -- of his death? Let's start with some basics about lung cancer in smokers.
Dr. Burns told that you 85 to 90 percent of smokers do not get lung cancer. Okay? So we're talking about a range of somewhere between 10 to
15	percent who do. Now, Mr. Denney, in his closings, said that small cell lung cancer is the
most prevalent type. I would suggest you'll have to refer to your own notes or your own memory of the testimony as to whether or not the evidence is consistent with that.
Dr. Andrews testified that there's a roughly equivalent distribution of lung cancer among the four cell types, which the Judge instructed you, if you find Mr. Allen to be a class member, you should conclude that smoking causes four cell types. So if you have, I said 10 to 15 percent of
smokers get lung cancer. Let s divide that by four. That's 3 percent.
So approximately 3 percent of smokers are going to end up with small cell lung cancer who smoke just as much as Mr. Allen.
Ninety-seven percent, thus, don't.
Again, you have to establish legal cause with respect to cigarettes having cause, right? It says here "cigarettes." Without the cigarettes, the injury would not have been suffered. So what is the evidence with respect to the medical case?
By the way, you heard reference to Dr. Auerbach, Dr. Six, those individuals, and you'll recall in the questioning they're always asked to assume certain amounts of smoking. And
you were told -- how many times did you hear "88 pack years" during this case? Well, in fact, we don't know. There's not evidence before you as to when Mr. Allen actually started, and no evidence as to when -- from the period between when he started in 1951 or so -- let's just split it -'51 to '52, to keep things even. There's no evidence about the amount. So what do we know about 1952 to 1994?
Dr. Burns said the most common description of the amount he smoked was one-and-a-half.
Forty-two times one-and-a-half is 63, not 88;
30 percent less than 88. Even if you gave him some additional smoking for that period prior to it, we're not anywhere close to 88 pack years.
Yet, that was the prerequisite. That was the evidence that they asked the doctors to assume when making judgments about the role of smoking.
So I would suggest that plaintiff has a fundamental problem, because he gave their own witnesses the wrong information in making judgments or assumptions about the role of smoking in causing Mr. Allen's cancer.
Let's go -- there we go.
What about asbestos exposure? Again, let's
just -- to recap there, 97 percent of smokers don't get small cell lung cancer. What do we know about asbestos? The undisputed evidence is that it causes all cell types of lung cancer, including small cell lung cancer; that 80 percent of smoking-caused lung cancer is where? It's right here in the center. Remember those diagrams? Not disputed. What about asbestos related to lung cancer? It's not here, it's here. There are two different locations.
How do we know if somebody -- put Mr. Allen aside. But what do we look for to determine whether or not somebody has been exposed to asbestos? Even if we don't know anything about them, their prior life -- put the Navy service aside -- we can look for a bilateral, which means both lungs, presentation of pleural calcification, pleural plaquing, scarring, which is also sometimes referred to as fibrosis. So there's objective evidence that one can look for in the medical records with respect to was there
significant asbestos exposure. And it s important to note that these same symptoms or signs -- let's call them signs -- in a significant asbestos smoker are not caused by cigarette smoking. This
is all undisputed.
So is there a test? Is there a test that enables us to determine with definitiveness what caused Mr. Allen's lung cancer? The answer is no. And Dr. Auerbach, Mr. Allen's oncologist agreed.
But who's the primary witness, frankly, the only witness who had access to all of the evidence with respect to asbestos exposure in this case?
It was Dr. Burns. And Dr. Burns told you his lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking, right?
And then he was asked in that -- is that opinion within a reasonable degree of medical probability? Yes, it is. And then he's asked beyond that, how sure are you? Remember? He said -- he sat on that chair and said, I'm absolutely certain.
Ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Burns at that moment was not being candid with you. Why?
Because Mr. Allen's oncologist told you there's no way to be absolutely certain. What does that mean? That means it needs to be a matter of judgment -- medical judgment. You have to look at the facts. You have to look at the signs.
So let's review what the evidence was, because this requires a matter of judgment based upon the evidence.
Was Mr. Allen exposed to significant asbestos? Yes. Even Dr. Burns agreed that serving in the Navy, he would have been exposed. You saw the shipmates, you heard the description of the boiler rooms, you saw all that, you heard all that information. And so, then, we know that he was exposed, but was it significant? Right?
Do we actually even see evidence of it? Because it could have been, Well, maybe he was in the part of the ship that didn't -- it didn't get into his system. No. The records -- the medical records are undisputed. They showed bilateral pleural plaquing, calcification, and lung scarring; the same objective criteria that we were just talking about being undisputedly associated with asbestos exposure; exactly the things that one would look for, if you're a doctor, that are present in Mr. Allen.
What about, is the evidence that his lung cancer was caused by asbestos? Absolutely. Location. Overwhelming, more likely than not if it was a smoking cause -- if smoking played any role or if it was a smoking -- entirely smoking-caused cancer it would be right here, over 80 percent, way beyond the 50 percent threshold
the plaintiffs talked about. Eighty percent are here.
Well, where is it if it's not caused by smoking, if it's caused by asbestos? It's here. And it's not -- it's in the periphery of the lung. That's the medical evidence in this case. Okay.
So has the plaintiff provided the scientific basis to counter this evidence? Absolutely not. But let's just go back and look at this.
This is Dr. Six's own medical record. He's talking about the location. I'm telling you, it's in the upper-right lobe, not central. It's in the periphery. And he specifically says "located in the lung periphery." He specifically notes pleural calcification and plaquing adjacent to the mass.
Now, the plaintiffs told you how -- do you remember Dr. Six said, Well, it was probably caused by smoking. But they didn't in the deposition, ladies and gentlemen, show him, Okay, he didn't have the complete record. They didn't show him an X-ray report taken the same exact day of his CT scan. And it's confirmed it was a pleural-based mass in the right-upper lobe. It absolutely corroborates that this was not a
smoking-caused cancer based upon the fact it was a pleural-based mass. That's exactly what Dr. Alexander testified to.
Dr. Andrews -- by the way, how many times was he criticized in the plaintiff's closing remarks for not having reviewed the radiology? Well, he would have if it were available. You heard it was destroyed years ago. It wasn't destroyed due to anything that Reynolds or Philip Morris did. Hospitals only maintain records for a certain period of time. So we have to go based upon the records. And the records show that it was a large pleural-based mass in the upper-right lobe.
Dr. Andrews is, in fact, unlike Dr. Burns, and certainly unlike Dr. Auerbach and Dr. Six, the only witness who actually looked at all of the evidence. Right? He looked at the records relating to asbestos exposure. He looked at the medical records. He looked at the issues relating to the location of the cancer. He was the only witness in this case who looked at all that information. And this record -- this record confirms his judgment that it was a large pleural-based mass.
What's the plaintiff's response? Look, they
knew -- the plaintiff knew we were bringing Dr. Andrews. When he got on that witness stand it wasn't a shock or surprise. So they easily could have had Dr. Burns say, Let me address the scientific evidence that says, well, maybe it's asbestos-caused or maybe it's smoking-caused.
They didn't do that, right? They never had Dr. Burns try to refute the evidence that Dr. Andrews presented to you.
Dr. Auerbach, he didn't have the -- he doesn't have this entire record of evidence. He had never reviewed the radiology. And in fact, you know, he said -- his job is to help try to treat cancer, not to figure out what caused it.
So he's not even in the realm of the right specialty at least for the purposes of the exercise that we're engaged in right now.
And Dr. Six, he said -- he said, Look, this is presenting as a classic case of asbestos exposure. His only question -- Dr. Six, the only question in Dr. Six's mind was, was it arising out of the pleural -- the pleura or not? Because he sees in the medical record "adjacent." So he is trying to think back on a record what he wrote -what he meant in a record he wrote 17 years
earlier, And he's not sure. But the plaintiffs don't show him that contemporaneous record that confirms that, in fact, it was pleural-based.
Ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiffs bear the burden of proof of proving by the greater weight of the evidence that Mr. Allen's lung cancer was caused by smoking as opposed to asbestos. It's their burden, not mine. They have to start at the zero-yard line and get past the 50 to persuade you that this was a smoking-caused lung cancer.
And what do you have to base that conclusion on? Dr. Burns' say-so opinion, Just trust me because I said it was so. That, frankly, I would suggest, displays the stunning lack of candor in talking to you when he didn't say, Look, you can't just say so, you've got to evaluate different pieces of evidence.
Question three, allocation of fault. This is -- again, I've put here the verdict form that you'll be filling out what fault as a legal cause of the Herman -- of the death of Herman Allen you charge to Mr. Allen, to Philip Morris or to R.J. Reynolds.
Let me ask you, ladies and gentlemen, who was 100 percent -- 100 percent responsible for the
decisions that Mr. Allen made? Not ten percent or, I think as plaintiff's counsel suggested, 20 percent. Was Herman Allen only responsible for 20 percent of the decisions that he made?
Only Mr. Allen could have prevented his injuries, ladies and gentlemen, if he chose to quit. He adopted the standard, I'll stop when it hurts me. That was his own thing. He came up with it, he lived by it, he stuck with it. Only he could have prevented his own injuries, not Reynolds, not Philip Morris, not even Mrs. Allen, right?
In all of the pleading that she -- she gave him about, Look, it's going to kill you, please stop, the only person who could influence this was Mr. Allen.
What did Reynolds and Philip Morris do? Yes, we sold a legal product. But Mr. Allen is the person who chose to use that product, despite his lifelong knowledge of the risks.
And you also know in this context that the plaintiff admitted, again, fault. He admitted that his acts relating to the duration and frequency of efforts to stop were a legal cause of his injuries. He knew smoking was addictive, he
knew it was dangerous, and he smoked anyway. This is an admission, that he should have tried to
quit, that he had the ability to quit, and his own choices were a response of cause -- were responsible for causing his death.
His choices, ladies and gentlemen, was to quit twice. Nobody -- nobody at Reynolds or Philip Morris controlled these choices.
Think about a person who gets on a highway, you know. Were there only two exits on that highway? Did he take the only two exits that he could have, one in 1970 and one in 1994? Were there exits all along the years, all along the months, exits that J.E. Allen took, and exits that his brother took, and exits that his father took?
He watched people getting off the highway. I respectfully suggest Mr. Allen never even slowed down. He never each pulled over to think about it. But to suggest that he was somehow unable to get off, unlike everyone else, it defies common sense.
He's 100 percent responsible for the choices that he made, not 20 percent. You know, did you listen for a single fact during that closing argument -- we've now heard all the evidence.
This -- this case is done.
Did you hear a single fact of anything that Reynolds did or Philip Morris did that impacted Mr. Allen, the choice that he made to start, the choice he made to continue? I didn't hear a single thing from plaintiffs. This is their opportunity. All the evidence is in.
Only Mr. Allen had the ability to prevent his own death, and certainly there's nothing that Reynolds or Philip Morris could have done to -- to change that course.
Ladies and gentlemen, we have no reason to conclude that Mr. Allen was ever a victim in life. Okay? No reason to conclude he was ever a victim. Let's not turn him into a victim in death in a lawsuit seeking money.
Question number four, reliance. You'll see there will be a question as it pertains both to my client, Reynolds, and to Ms. Chuang and Mr. McCarter's client, Philip Morris. Did Mr. Allen reasonably rely to his detriment on the concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available or its failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes?
To answer yes, you need to look at the legal instructions that, by the way, what the Judge told will go back to the jury room, so you have a chance to reread them. But the reliance has to be a legal cause -- again, there's that concept of legal cause -- a legal cause of the loss, injury or damage.
What does that mean in this context? That's also explained in the instructions. And it's a very high standard. But for the concealment or omission that death would not have occurred. But for his reliance on the statement that concealed
or omitted a material fact he would have acted differently and avoided his death.
There's not, ladies and gentlemen, a shred of evidence in this case to support those -- that standard, not a shred of evidence. In fact, as I'm going to show you, the evidence is actually absolutely to the contrary.
But fundamentally this reliance question boils down to the bear -- the plaintiff bearing the burden of proof to establish that Mr. Allen would have made different choices, right? Would have made different choices, would have quit if he
somehow had some additional piece of information. That doesn't fly for at least three reasons.
First of all, there's no evidence whatsoever that he ever cared, saw, relied on anything that was said by Reynolds or Philip Morris. That's number one.
Number two, we know that he was fully informed about the risks. He was informed as a child, and most particularly from 1952 he was fully informed by his wife, who in a very direct, stark, and personal way, right, reinforced the dangers of smoking to him.
Third, you have to presume, right? You have to presume that, again, he had this magic piece of information that he -- he wasn't lacking because his wife fully informed him. But putting that aside, you'd have to assume that he would have actually acted on it.
Well, did he -- Mr. Allen ever -- is there any evidence in this case that Mr. Allen ever acted on information concerning smoking and health? For example, when the warnings came out, right? Did that cause -- was that on our list of -- of times when he tried to quit? Was that there? No.
The '64 Surgeon General's report. Was that on -- did that prompt him to try to quit? No.
Did the plaintiffs ever show you a single instance in his entire life when he acted on information, right, about smoking and health, the dangers of smoking? No.
So why is it and how is it that you can somehow now infer that there's some unknown piece of information that he would have acted upon when that wasn't his -- the way he lived his life as it pertained to smoking?
And indeed -- I won't go through all these things. I believe Ms. Chuang will talk more about this. I showed you this in opening. I submit to you every one of these points has been proven in the facts of the case. Mr. Allen was absolutely fully informed on the risks of smoking throughout his life.
Now, you know all the way back to his decision to start the message in his family was don't smoke. He didn't pick a brand -- he picked a brand his -- apparently that his father chose. You heard a little bit about Prince Albert.
Nothing about Philip Morris, nothing about
Reynolds in his conjunction with his decision to
start.
And how about in 1952 when his wife tells him, look, smoking almost killed my father from lung cancer, and I don't want it to kill you. Did he blink? Did he act surprised? Did he say, whoa, I can't even believe that's possible? No. There's no evidence of that. What does that tell you? He wasn't learning anything from Mrs. Allen that he didn't already know.
And this information, as I showed through Dr. Burns, actually long predated Mr. Allen, right? It's probably hard to appreciate in 2011 that 105 years ago the State of Florida in a publication is talking about cigarettes as the worst form of tobacco addiction. There's no secret about addiction. Plaintiff's counsel is trying to tell you that there's some sort of a secret about whether or not smoking is addictive.
This is 24 years before Mr. Allen is born.
18 years before he is -- they're referring to cigarettes as coffin nails, which, by the way, you heard is an expression that Mrs. Allen used in conversations with Mr. Allen to talk about his cigarettes, and you learned from his daughter, Patricia, she remembers Mr. Allen himself using
when she was a child. And she was born in the mid 1950s.
And, again, plaintiff's counsel tries to just, well, you know, here's that -- one of the first documents they showed you was that 1972 memo from Dr. Teague about the role of nicotine in cigarette smoking. That wasn't a secret. I went over this with Dr. Burns.
In the 1988 Surgeon General's report they talk about research in the 1920s, the 1930s, the 1940s, about the role of nicotine, and that it's important for the compulsive use of tobacco products. This is not a secret that was waiting to escape in the late 1990s, as plaintiff's counsel would have you believe.
You remember also that you saw and heard various versions of this song, Smoke, Smoke, Smoke that Cigarette by -- that's Tex Williams talking about smoking yourself to death, talking about nicotine slaves. This is 1947, the same year that he's joining the Navy.
But, of course, Tex Williams didn't have anything on one -- one of the -- one person in this courtroom, Mrs. Allen. As Dr. Burns told you, based upon carefully reviewing the
depositions, there was no question in his mind -no question in his mind that Mrs. Allen forcefully, directly, and repetitively told Mr. Allen it was bad for him to smoke, and that it would place him at a risk for dying.
Now, you heard some discussion about psychological crutches and from Dr. Werner about rationalization and denial. Do you remember that? You can't speculate. We don't know that --
there s no evidence that Mr. Allen ever engaged in rationalization or denial or had a psychological crush.
In fact, the evidence is to the opposite.
Mrs. Allen told him, it's going to kill you. And, by the way, you remember Ms. Sheffield,
Mr. Allen's sister, also said she was around when that message it will kill you was delivered to Mr. Allen
Any evidence that he disputed that? No. Is there any evidence he said, it's not going to happen to me? No. In fact, what he said was, when it hurts me, I'll stop. That's an acknowledgement of the risk. That's not a denial. That's an acknowledgement of the risk. It means he accepted the risk.
You saw a lot of ads, you just saw press releases, you saw public statements. Is there any evidence that anything from Reynolds or Philip Morris, ads, press releases, public statements, anything at all matter?
In fact, is there any evidence -- this is a point I was making a minute ago -- that Mr. Allen ever took any action based upon information from any source? Forget us being defendants in this case. He -- the answer to all of this is no, no, no.
Remember the question I put to the plaintiffs in my opening? I said, I've got a very simple question for them, very simple question. What does this have to do with the choices that Mr. Allen made in his life regarding his smoking, his decision whether to -- whether to smoke, his decision when to quit? I put this on the table from the get-go on this case.
Instead, they called Dr. Burns, a lifelong, obviously, anti-tobacco crusader. And I don't begrudge him his personal views about tobacco use. But that doesn't relieve him of an obligation of the candor as to what he testified.
And he acknowledged he's got a pretty -- he's
got a pretty good gig going. Seven days on this case, ladies and gentlemen, and he's taking home $35,000. Because -- by the way, the day he travels, he's sitting on that plane all day, $4,800. He's traveling to get here, $4,800.
But why call Dr. Burns? Why call Dr. Burns? Why do they need the ultimate hired gun in this case? If they have a legitimate case, why do they need Dr. Burns, the person who can always help you out, who can always give you the opinion that you need?
Why not ask -- or bring in a local treater or local expert? What about all those documents -MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. This was the subject of a motion filed by the defendants of why people do and don't call people as witnesses in the case, and the Court granted their motion pretrial.
MR. BEACH: I'll move on, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Move on.
MR. BEACH: What about all the documents? I mean I already talked about the fact that -- fine. I already talked about the fact that Dr. Burns didn't even try -- didn't even try to tie up the evidence on asbestos. Put that aside.
What about all those documents? We sat here for a full day never hearing a word about Mr. Allen and enjoying a slide show, little snippets from documents. Why would they show those things when they know -- when they know who was coming after him, Mrs. Allen testifying herself, right?
She confirmed, sitting in that chair, that nothing the tobacco company did impacted Mr. Allen. She confirmed that there was no discussion of cigarette ads. She confirmed that there was no discussion of company statements.
What did they talk about if they didn't talk about company statements or cigarette ads? They talked about the warning on the packs. They talked about the '64 Surgeon General's report. Remember, she said after the warnings on the pack, I don't want to buy cigarettes for you anymore, and he said, buy my cigarettes. That's what they talked about. You want to talk about nonsense, all that other stuff is the nonsense.
The Frank Statement. What in the world does this have to do with Mr. Allen? He never heard about it, he never saw it, he never talked about it. There's no evidence that he cared about it or
that he relied upon it.
And by the way, here's another fundamental problem with the plaintiff's case, and particularly as it bears upon the issue of reliance. This came out in 1954.
But in 1952, two years before any asserted conspiracy, before any Frank Statement meetings at the Plaza Hotel or all the subsequent statements, Mr. Allen had already come up with his own rule about smoking before any of this stuff ever occurred.
And that standard didn't vary. You heard from Mrs. Allen, that standard didn't vary over the course of his life. He wasn't waiting to hear anything that a tobacco company said. He already had his rule in place and was living by it.
And there's, you know, criticism -- and I'll try move through these quickly -- about, well, the statements that were made by the companies at this time or the statement there and there, we don't believe it was injurious to health.
Do you remember I showed Dr. Burns a document written contemporaneous with the meeting where the executives who actually met at that meeting said we don't believe our products are injurious to
health, and they pointed to the fact that there were contemporaneous conclusions from government officials that were consistent with that viewpoint?
And, in fact, I went through with Dr. Burns
that there were leading scientists over the same time period who were saying exactly the same thing. There's criticism about the research that was funded. Dr. Burns said these companies funded important research.
Yes, the green monster you heard about, it was cited as a basic reference source by the Surgeon General in 1964 to conclude that smoking actually was the cause of lung cancer in men.
Dr. Burns agreed, yes, you funded research by people who won tne Nobel Prize. The current head of the National Institute of Health is a CTR grant recipient.
Research was co-funded with the government, with the American Cancer Society. It produced thousands of peer-reviewed published articles in the -- in the scientific literature, and was cited hundreds of times in the Surgeon General's reports. You cannot call that record a fraud.
I also went through with Dr. Burns the fact
that the companies made extensive efforts to try to improve cigarettes. We talked about general reduction, we talked about selective reduction. I asked him, didn't they follow up on all the recommendations that they got from people outside? Yes, they did.
We talked about the National Cancer Institute's cooperation with the tobacco companies called the Tobacco Working Group. We talked about how those efforts evaluated all the different kinds of design innovations that have been implemented in cigarettes.
And how Dr. Burns, who conceded he's not an expert in cigarette design -- but I asked him, I said, well, wait a second. I -- we identified some people he agreed were giants in cigarette design, and he -- and I showed him, and he agreed that those people -- as well, by the way, the Surgeon General reports -- have said that these things that were done actually made a difference.
One of the questions after Dr. Burns testified from one of you was, well, if I grew tobacco in my backyard, okay -- if I grew it in my backyard, is it going to -- I'm hoping I'm getting this right -- but is it basically going to be
better than a commercial cigarette available today or one that was available in the 1930s?
In my recollection, Dr. Burns' testimony was he said, it makes no difference.
That, again, was not a candid response to the question, ladies and gentlemen. Absolutely, if you just grew tobacco in your backyard, rolled it up and smoked it and it would not have these design innovations, it would not be safer or of no difference. And these people talking about these design changes were comparing modern cigarettes versus the cigarettes from the 1930s.
So, again, I would suggest, ladies and gentlemen, that the ultimate hired gun gave you an answer that was not candid.
Questions four and five ask you whether or
not Mr. Allen relied on anything from Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds. And you saw the legal standard that they have to achieve to prevail on that. The answer is nothing. There was nothing, no evidence there.
Just a quick -- see if I can -- here we go.
A quick comment on the compensatory damages that Mr. Denney asked for. If you find that everything I've said thus far is unpersuasive and decide to
return a verdict for Mrs. Allen, you'll have to decide the amount of damages. And, obviously, that's not going to be an easy task. The plaintiff has requested a lot of money today. I was totalling it up, it looks like it's close to $9 million.
I would suggest, ladies and gentlemen, that that's a lot of money, and that an award in the thousands would be more appropriate than an award in the millions if you go there. I -- I don't believe for the reasons that I've just been going on about that there is any basis for an award. Don't make any mistake about that.
But at least I would ask for some -- if you disagree with me, for some common sense perspective on what an appropriate award would be.
Finally, on the issue of punitive damages, just very briefly, you already heard and saw -this will be the legal instructions to the standard. But I would suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that asking for punitive damages, this is the question that you'll have to check yes to or no to. It's like going to the Super Bowl when you haven't even made it through into the playoffs. That's what the -- you know, given the
issues with the plaintiff's case up to this point in time.
But in any event, it's a very high standard of evidence. It's different than the standard in the normal case. It has to be precise, explicit, lacking of confusion, such that with such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue.
The legal instruction here, ladies and gentlemen, imposes a further and very important limitation on when that evidence -- or when you can award punitive damages. Because you have to confine, by clear and convincing evidence, that the conduct of a high-ranking executive of Reynolds or Philip Morris was a substantial cause of the loss, injury, or damage to the plaintiff and that such conduct warrants punitive damages. Well, since there's no nexus between anything that Mr. Allen did and anything that Reynolds or Philip Morris did, you cannot, I would suggest, award punitive damages in this case.
And Mrs. Allen, through her testimony, cut this off as a possibility when she said there was no connection between anything the companies did and the choices that Mr. Allen made.
Also bear in mind that if you have
this far, you've already fully compensated Mrs. Allen for any loss that she suffered.
By the way, with respect to this requirement here, less I forget, actions by high-ranking executives is a substantial cause. Think about this: The plaintiffs haven't even demonstrated to you who those high-ranking executives were during the time period Mr. Allen was smoking. So how could you conclude, you know -- they haven't tied this up to show you who was in charge during the time period that he smoked. So how could you, in fact, even conclude this based upon that record?
At the end of the day, ladies and gentlemen, your verdict should be in favor of Reynolds and Philip Morris because there are three fundamental problems -- three insurmountable problems with the plaintiff's case.
First of all, he was always able -- addiction didn't cause his cancer, because he was always able to stop. And we know that particularly from the fact that he did, both, quit alcohol as well as quit tobacco.
Second problem. His cancer was caused by asbestos exposure. Dr. Andrews actually
specifically told you that. He said it was purely asbestos exposure because if it had been smoking, it would have been centrally located. If there was a contribution from smoking, it would have been a centrally located cancer, and it wasn't.
So more likely, his cancer was caused by asbestos exposure.
But that's not my burden. It's their burden to prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence that it was caused by cigarettes. And I submit, for all the reasons I've already described, they failed there.
Finally, both as to the issue of reliance and all the way through the punitive damages.
Mrs. Allen cut off any possible claim of reliance, she cut off any possible claim for punitive damages, because there's zero evidence -- zero evidence in this case that Mr. Allen ever relied upon anything and would have -- if some speculative further piece of information would have been available, would have avoided his injuries.
So for all those reasons, ladies and gentlemen, I would ask for a verdict in favor of Reynolds and Philip Morris in this matter. And I
most certainly appreciate your attention and your patience with me. Thank you very much.
Your Honor, I have nothing further.
