           MR. WILLIAMS:  May it please the Court, ladies and
gentlemen of the jury, good morning.
           Let me first say thank you for your service.  We
have the best legal system in the world, but it wouldn't work
without you.  And we know this is inconvenient.  It takes you
out of your routine.  But the entire Reynolds team thanks you
for your time that you have spent with us the last week and a
half.
           Secondly, we thank you for your patience, because
we know there are breaks and everything and that can get
frustrating.
           Now, Mr. Wilner started this case off by talking
about punishment, by talking about punishment, punishing
Reynolds because of deaths of other smokers and how many
people cigarettes kill.  I think I stood before you about a
week and a half ago and I told you everybody knows, our
government knows that cigarettes cause disease and they are
addictive, but we have decided as a society that smokers
should have the right to smoke if they want to.
           That was not news to anyone, including our
government, that cigarettes kill people.  That cigarettes can
cause disease.  But we give people the right to choose to
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
58 smoke.  We warned them.  And you heard a lot of evidence and
information that tobacco is addictive, no matter what word
you call it, addictive and causes diseases, has been known
before we were a country.  And you heard some of that with
Dr. Schaller.
           So we are not to start off with punishment,
because as I told you when I stood before you a week and a
half ago, this case is about Buck Aycock and the choices he
made about smoking and never trying to quit, and that's going
to be a big thing here because that makes a difference.
           Now, the Court read to you this morning eleven
questions that you are going to have to answer.  And you know
what?  Ten of them have Buck Aycock's name on them.  Ten of
them.  Because the case is about Buck Aycock.
           Now, the plaintiffs spent much of this case
talking about other smokers and other cigarettes, about other
cigarette companies.  And you heard the stipulation that
Reynolds is responsible for American Tobacco and
Brown & Williamson.  Mr. Aycock never smoked any American
Tobacco cigarettes.  He never smoked any Brown & Williamson
cigarettes.  So that's one of those things that you can take
off your plate if there is any confusion there.
           MR. WILNER:  We object to that.  He seems to be
arguing that they are not responsible and the document says
they are.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
59 MR. WILLIAMS:  I'm talking about brand of
cigarettes.
           THE COURT:  I'm going to sustain the objection.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Buck Aycock -- and they --
           THE COURT:  The jury will disregard his comments
about taking it off the table.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  I was talking about brands,
your Honor.
           THE COURT:  Okay.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  But I hear you.
           They showed you a lot of ads.  They showed you a
lot of tobacco executives talking.  And there's no evidence
at all -- and they have to prove this case with evidence.
They can't ask you to fill in the gaps for them, to
speculate.  It said direct evidence or circumstantial
evidence.  It did not say speculate, guess, supposition.
They have to prove their case, and they showed you a lot of
ads, a lot of executives talking, and no evidence that Buck
Aycock ever heard those, relied on them in any way, shape or
form or anything like that.
           The things you saw, a lot of things you saw in
this case, don't go to the issues that you have to decide.
And during my opening statement, I said the facts that really
matter in this case are the facts that relate substantially
and directly as to why Buck Aycock died.  Those are the
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
60 questions that you're going to have to answer.
           Now, as I said and the Judge said, Mrs. Aycock has
the burden to prove those facts to you.  She can't ask you to
guess or speculate or fill in the gaps that may be missing in
things she has to prove.  When you look at the proof that she
and her attorneys showed you, if all you can say is, maybe
she's right or possibly she's right, then she hasn't proven
her case and your verdict should be for Reynolds.
           Let me talk about something that Ms. Aycock said
that is certain in this case.  I told you in opening that
this case had been made a little bit simpler because
Mrs. Aycock has admitted that Buck Aycock was a partial legal
cause of his own death.  The Judge read you that instruction.
           Now, think for a minute.  Under what circumstances
would Mrs. Aycock admit that Buck Aycock was at least
partially a legal cause of his own death?  What would she
have to believe in order to make that admission?
           First, she'd have to believe that Buck Aycock
would not be the cause of his own death if he had not known
that smoking was dangerous.  She has to believe that he knew
that smoking was dangerous and he continued to smoke in order
to make that admission.
           Second, she has to believe that Buck Aycock had
the ability to quit and did not.  Buck Aycock would not be a
partial legal cause of his own death if he did not have the
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
61 ability to quit smoking.  You would never admit that he was a
legal cause of his own death if he was unable to quit.  You
would say that he was blameless or without fault, and that's
not what they're saying.
           Now, Ms. Aycock has admitted unequivocally on that
stand that Buck Aycock never tried to quit smoking.  You
heard the testimony during trial.  She admitted that.  You
heard Mrs. Aycock say she knew Buck Aycock wanted to quit but
he could not.  She said she could read him like a book.
           Well, the truth of the matter is Mrs. Aycock
wanted Buck Aycock to quit smoking.  That was very clear to
everybody in here.
           But Buck Aycock, who this case is about, did not
want to quit.  They didn't bring in one witness, one family
member, one coworker, one friend, no one came in here and
told you, I saw him put down the cigarettes.  He tried to
quit but he couldn't.  He said he was going to throw away his
cigarettes or throw away his ashtrays, the things these
people do when they want to quit.  You didn't hear that
evidence in this case.
           And now they want you to fill in that gap for
them, that blank, to speculate as to what was in Buck
Aycock's mind, but you can't do that.  You have to -- they
have to have proof, they have to prove their case, and it's
clear:  Buck Aycock did not want to quit smoking and he never
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
62 tried.
           And we can't confuse those two things.  The
evidence says that Buck Aycock never tried to quit.  They
want you to speculate and think that he wanted to quit but
couldn't.  Those are huge -- that's a huge difference there.
The evidence is clear he never tried to quit.  There's a big
difference between not trying to quit and not wanting to and
not being able to.  And for Buck Aycock, it's the former.  He
didn't want to and he didn't try.
           Now, this is a wrongful death case.  What does an
admission of fault in a wrongful death case mean?  The only
thing this admission can mean is that Buck Aycock had the
ability to quit smoking at the time that would have
prevented, prevented, his own death.  This means that Buck
Aycock knew that smoking was dangerous, had the ability to
quit, knew that he should quit and didn't at a time that
would have prevented his own death.  That's what that
admission means in a wrongful death case.
           Now, you heard evidence in this case that 60
million people saw the ads and had the same changes in their
brains but they quit.  60 million people have quit smoking.
They had the same nicotine in their bodies.  They saw the
same cigarette ads.  They had the same changes in their
brain.  They saw the same warnings.  They had family members
who wanted them to quit.  And those 60 million people made a
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
63 choice to put down their cigarettes and to quit smoking.
           Others chose to continue smoking, and Buck Aycock
was one of those.  And that's a very important fact that you
need to think about when you decide this case.
           Now, the Judge instructed you that, as a result of
the plaintiff's admission, the Court has already determined
as a matter of law that Buck Aycock's actions were a partial
legal cause of his own death.  That's already been decided.
As Judge Goldberg explained, it's binding on you.  And as a
result, if you get to the questions in the verdict form
assigning fault, you are required under the law to consider
some fault to go to Buck Aycock.
           So as I said, this case has been made a little bit
simpler because you are here to decide issues about Buck
Aycock's death, and the plaintiff admits that Buck Aycock was
a partial legal cause of his own death.
           I want to point out evidence that shows it's not
just partial.  Buck Aycock's informed choices about smoking
make him the whole and the sole legal cause of his death.  He
knew that smoking was dangerous, and we will show you
evidence on that.  He chose to smoke and he never tried to
quit, and the reason he never tried to quit was through no
fault of RJR.  RJR can't be found liable in this case simply
because it makes cigarettes or simply because it advertises
cigarettes or simply because it spends a lot of money
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
64 advertising cigarettes.  Those are not grounds that RJR is
liable for any wrongdoing to Buck Aycock.
           Let me step back in time.  Remember, Buck Aycock
was born in 1923 and likely would have been in the first
grade in 1931.  And I'm getting to things that he knew and
why we can show you that Buck Aycock knew that smoking was
dangerous.
           Dr. Schaller came here and showed you what kids in
Alabama elementary schools were being taught about smoking at
the time Buck Aycock was in school.  Remember this excerpt
from the fourth grade textbook.  It tells you that smoking is
dangerous and addictive.  And this was long before Buck
Aycock smoked his first cigarette.  Remember, there is no
evidence that he smoked anything before he was married and 20
years old, and when he first started smoking he was smoking
Prince Albert RYO, which RJR is not liable for.  You recall
that the Judge charged you on that, instructed you on that
during the case.
           And Buck Aycock continued to smoke Prince Albert
until he went into the Navy, and he smoked a lot of Prince
Albert cigarettes, Mrs. Aycock told you.
           And that should tell you that none of the ads that
the plaintiff took a whole half morning showing you played
any role in Buck Aycock starting to smoke.  You recall that
Mrs. Aycock testified how you smoke a roll-your-own
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
65 cigarette.  You put the tobacco on paper, you buy your paper,
buy the tobacco in a can, spit on it and roll it up.
           MR. WILNER:  Your Honor, excuse me.  We object.
We were told that we couldn't argue about that.
           THE COURT:  I sustain the objection.  Get off the
subject and move on.  The jury should disregard the
references to what he did with --
           MR. WILLIAMS:  The ads you saw, ladies and
gentlemen, were glamorous -- I'm sorry.
           THE COURT:  Go ahead.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  The ads you saw, ladies and
gentlemen, were glamorous Hollywood stars.  You didn't see
ads of what I just described.
           Dr. Schaller also showed you information that was
available to the general public about the dangers of smoking
and about the addictiveness of smoking before Buck Aycock
touched his first cigarette.  You remember this article in
Reader's Digest, which is a magazine of just general
circulation, 1938.  And we know Buck Aycock didn't smoke
before 1943 or '44.
           And Dr. Cummings, who was the plaintiff's expert,
told you that people get information about smoking from their
own world, their families, people around them.  Most of the
people in Buck Aycock's world were nonsmokers.  He was from a
family of eight kids.  Five of them did not smoke.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
66 Mrs. Aycock grew up a few miles down the road and
never touched a cigarette in her life.  Her parents didn't
smoke, nor did her two sisters.  Mrs. Aycock remembered that
Winston jingle, "Winston tastes good," (noise) (noise), "like
a cigarette should."  But she is a non-, never smoker.  That
should show you the disconnect between all the advertising
and its effect on people.  Just -- we're not saying Buck
Aycock never saw cigarette advertisement.  That would be
insane.  But the point is cigarette advertising did not make
him smoke.  It did not force him to smoke.  That was a choice
that he made.
           RJR selling cigarettes in America is legal and not
wrong.  It can't be a basis for liability.  Its advertising
is legal and not wrong and can't be a basis for liability.
           MR. WILNER:  Excuse me.  That's an improper
statement.  It could be a basis for liability if it's
negligently performed.  That is not a statement of the law.
           THE COURT:  I'm going to overrule that objection.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  RJR --
           THE COURT:  I think it goes to what is publicly
presented.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Now, Mrs. Aycock told you that she
hated smoking from day one and started talking to Buck Aycock
about quitting before they moved to Florida in 1953.  She
also admitted to us, and you'll recall this, that she began
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
67 working in a pharmacy in 1953.  And this, again, is about all
the information that was out there about the dangers of
smoking.  You don't have to see a scientific document; you
don't have to see a tobacco document.  If I know, if you know
that smoking is dangerous and addictive, there's no more to
know.
           Mrs. Aycock was working in that pharmacy, and she
testified, in the 1950s, folks would come in and ask for
cigarettes and ask for cancer sticks or coffin nails,
communicating very clearly that they understood that there
was -- cigarettes were dangerous but they were making a
decision to smoke.
           She also testified that Buck Aycock was not the
type of man that you would tell what to do.  She was asking
him to quit during this period of time.  She knew that they
were dangerous, and he did as well; but Buck Aycock believed
that his smoking was his business, and he told her that, that
his smoking was none of her business.  You'll recall she
testified and she continued to complain and implore him to
quit smoking over the years and he decided to ignore her.
But the public information that was available to him was
widespread.  You'll recall the information of that cancer by
the carton in 1952.  You'll also recall a Gallup Poll in 1954
showing that 90 percent of the folks had recently read or
heard something that cigarettes may be a cause of cancer.  So
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
68 it's not a secret.
           But let me stop right here.
           The mid-1960s:  Buck Aycock knows that smoking is
dangerous.  He's been warned and informed that smoking is
dangerous by public health officials, general public
information, his wife, from various sources that you hear
about dangers of smoking.  He has the ability to quit but he
does not try because he enjoys smoking.  But how do you know
he had the ability to quit?
           Well, you heard from Mrs. Aycock that he was
intelligent, he was hard-working, and when he put his mind to
something, when he set his mind to something, he could get it
done.
           And you also heard -- and this was uncomfortable
for me because we are not trying to sully Buck Aycock, but he
started drinking when he started smoking in the 1940s.
Drinking and smoking are two vices that typically go
together.  A family issue arose concerning his drinking.
What did Buck Aycock do?  He didn't continue to drink.  He
went to AA and he quit.  So what did he do?  He acted.  There
was a problem that he saw, he acted and he was able to
surmount that problem.
           There's a big difference when it came to his
smoking.  That was not a problem for Buck Aycock.  That was a
problem for people around him, but not for Buck Aycock.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
69 If he could have quit drinking, he could have quit
smoking if he had wanted to.  But he didn't try, and that
evidence should tell you a lot.
           So when you sort through all the evidence in this
case and put it together, you'll see that Buck Aycock's
choices, his informed choices, about smoking and his choice
not to quit are really the only legal cause of his death.
           Buck Aycock knew smoking was dangerous, but he
wanted to smoke and he just never tried to quit.
           Now, the fundamental -- a fundamental nature of
this lawsuit is that Buck Aycock knew that smoking was
dangerous before he got started, got warnings throughout his
whole life and continued to smoking anyway, never tried to
quit.  And then after his death, a lawsuit is brought by
Mrs. Aycock.  During opening statements, they asked for 8
million and here they have said from 3 to 8 million dollars,
boatload of money.  So they are asking you for a lot of money
in this case, a case where Buck Aycock knew it was dangerous
from the beginning, ignored the warnings he received from
every possible source his whole life, never tried to quit.
That's the fundamental nature of this lawsuit here.
           And that's the fundamental reason that I'm going
to tell you why your verdict should be for RJR, just those
reasons.  It was about Buck Aycock.  And there was nothing
RJR did wrong to make him start smoking, to keep him smoking,
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
70 or anything else.
           Now, class membership, I'm going to talk about the
verdict form.  The plaintiff has three hurdles they have to
clear in order for Buck Aycock to become a member of the
Engle class, and they have to clear those hurdles with
evidence.  Once again, you're not to fill the gaps with
supposition, with speculation, or anything like that.  They
have the burden of proof on this.  They must convince you
that it's more likely than not that Buck Aycock was addicted
to RJR cigarettes containing nicotine, that Buck Aycock's
addiction to RJR cigarettes was a legal cause of his death,
and that Buck Aycock smoking caused him to develop lung
cancer.
           You will remember I told you during opening
statement this case is about three causations:  Medical
causation, addiction causation, and legal causation.
Causation, causation, causation.
           The first question was -- is whether -- was lung
cancer caused by cigarette smoking a legal cause of Buck
Aycock's death?  We'll talk about addiction causation in a
minute.
           Now, the plaintiffs have to prove that lung cancer
caused by smoking caused Buck Aycock's death.  That's what I
call the medical causation.  And you heard a lot of evidence
on this.  And the plaintiff can't meet her burden of proof
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
71 that Buck Aycock had and died of lung cancer caused by
smoking because the medical test necessary, a biopsy, was
never performed.  His doctors wanted to perform one.  His
family said no, and that's not a criticism of their private
decision; but this is about evidence in this case.  It's
about proof, and the proof is not there.
           You heard medical experts in this case.  Every
medical expert in this case told you that you need tissue,
pathology, a biopsy, to diagnose cancer.  You'll recall
Drs. Ford and Andrews readily told you that, and they
explained why.  And the reason is because cancer can look
like -- the abnormality that you think is cancer can be so
many other things on x-ray or on CT scan.  And, in fact, Buck
Aycock's chest x-ray proves that.  The technician thought it
was either cancer or pneumonia or both.  You just can't tell.
           And Dr. Burns, the plaintiff's expert, also
admitted when he was confronted by a medical treatise called
Harrison's, that you have to have pathology; you have to have
tissue to diagnose cancer when my colleague Chris Kreiner
cross-examined him on it.  You remember that.
           Dr. Burns didn't tell you that at first, but there
were three medical doctors in this case:  Two with us,
Drs. Andrews and Ford, and Dr. Burns.  Dr. Cummings is not a
medical doctor, and Dr. Burns admitted that you need
pathology, you need tissue, to diagnose cancer.  Harrison's,
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
72 this is the quote that he did not deny when he was confronted
with it:
           The diagnosis of cancer relies most heavily on
invasive tissue biopsy and should never be made without
obtaining tissue.  No noninvasive diagnostic test is
sufficient to define a disease process as cancer.
           That's what he was asked, and he admitted to that.
He didn't dispute it.
           You heard a board-certified radiologist, Dr. Ford.
He came in here and explained to you why you cannot say from
Buck Aycock's CT scan report and chest x-ray that that was
cancer.  It could equally be infection or inflammation, and
I'll get into why his medical records support that.
           Dr. Ford was the only radiologist that you heard
from in this case, and he is especially qualified because he
was a neuroradiologist, a specialist in studying brain scans
and the central nervous system.  And he explained how
Dr. Freedman's report on Buck Aycock's head CT does not and
cannot prove that he had cancer in his head that started in
his lung.  The lesions noted in the report were just as
likely infection or inflammation as they were cancer, and the
head CT does not prove that Buck Aycock had lung cancer.
           So the question is not whether the lesions could
be cancer.  Dr. Ford readily told you that they could.  But
he also told you that radiologists make lists of what they
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
73 see, and in this case, the list had to include inflammation
and infection, and a radiologist can't narrow that down.  The
technology doesn't allow him or her to do so.
           The list of what could have been going on in Buck
Aycock's head included cancer from other sites in the body,
including the lung or the liver, or it could have been
inflammation or infection.  Noncancerous lesions can be
cavitary, like he talked about, and noncancerous lesions can
come in different sizes and be present and multiply, like in
Buck Aycock's case.
           And, again, ladies and gentlemen, the issue here
is proof.  CT scans cannot prove that cancer is more likely
medically than the other possibilities:  Infection and
inflammation.  The plaintiff has the burden of proof.
           If you have to guess or speculate about what it
was, or even if you think it's 50/50, then they don't meet
their burden of proof.  Your verdict should be for RJR.
           Dr. Ford is not a professional witness like
Dr. Burns.  He wasn't glib.  This was his first tobacco trial
that he's testified in.  This was his first tobacco
deposition in this case.
           Dr. Burns is not a radiologist, and he certainly
does not have the expertise in brain radiology that Dr. Ford
did.
           The chest x-ray, let's talk about that for a
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
74 minute.  Dr. Ford explained it revealed an abnormality that
could be cancer, could be pneumonia or some inflammatory
process or a combination of the two.  An x-ray just doesn't
tell you.
           The chest x-ray finding does not prove more likely
than not that Buck Aycock had lung cancer, and it certainly
doesn't prove that he had lung cancer caused by smoking,
because there are more than smoking as causes of lung cancer.
You need to know cell type, and you heard evidence on that:
You have to have pathology.
           And Dr. Ford also told you that the brain scan,
the bone -- I'm sorry -- the bone scan and the x-ray of the
abdomen were not diagnostic.  Mr. Wilner said they showed
cancer.  They did not.  They were nondiagnostic.  They did
not say that Buck Aycock had cancer.
           You heard from Dr. Andrews yesterday, a
pulmonologist.  He treats patients with all sorts of lung
cancer, both critical and infectious, as well as people with
other critical life-threatening diseases.  He reviewed all of
the medical evidence in this case, and he noticed several
reasons why Buck Aycock's clinical presentation is
inconsistent with lung cancer.
           For example, he showed you Buck Aycock's June 1995
chest x-ray, which was clear.  Dr. Andrews pointed out that
it would be very unusual for a lung cancer to be undetected
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
75 in June 1995 and one year later to have spread and developed
significantly and metastasized to the brain with multiple
nodules.  He told you Buck Aycock's clinical presentation
under these circumstances is more consistent with infection.
           He also noted that Buck Aycock did not present
with the typical pulmonary symptoms that you see in an
advanced lung cancer, like difficulty breathing or spitting
up blood or something like that.
           Now, Mr. Wilner talked about hearing hoofbeats,
don't think about zebras.  Well, the problem with that is you
can't take some of the evidence into consideration,
cherry-pick what supports your theory.  You have to look at
all of it.  That's the way -- what you have to do in order to
get the right answer.  Mr. Wilner and Dr. Burns did not show
you Buck Aycock's June 1995 chest x-ray, and they didn't talk
about the record that showed he did not have pulmonary
symptoms in 1996.  We had to do that.
           They also didn't point out the 1996 chest x-ray
showed that Buck Aycock's mediastinal -- and these are big
words that Dr. Andrews went over -- and hilar structures were
normal.  And the significance of that is it would be
extremely unusual for an advanced cancer to start in your
lung, to metastasize to your brain without the mediastinum
and hilar lymph nodes developing some abnormality.  And as
you'll see, Buck Aycock's were normal in June of 1996.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
76 Now, Dr. Andrews told you how Buck Aycock's
medical history revealed that he had been diagnosed with
hepatitis, cirrhosis of the liver and two unusual infections
in 1991, E. Coli and Klebsiella.  And Dr. Andrews explained
to you how Buck Aycock's liver disease and age -- he was 72
at the time -- rendered him immunocompromised, which means
his immune system did not respond normally to infectious
agents.
           This gives further reason to why infection and
inflammation were significant probabilities in June 1996 and
could not be ruled out without tissue pathology.
           Dr. Andrews also noted that Buck Aycock had an
elevated CEA, he called it, in June of 1996.  That's a tumor
marker that principally indicates a GI tract tumor.
           And Buck Aycock did not have an abdominal CT scan,
which would have detected an abdominal tumor or liver cancer,
which he was at increased risk from because of cirrhosis.
           Again, ladies and gentlemen, the issue is one of
proof here.  And this is not being critical of the medical
decisions that the family made in 1996.  However, this is a
lawsuit and a lawsuit demands proof and the proof is not here
because there is no tissue.  It cannot be proved more likely
than not that Buck Aycock had lung cancer caused by smoking.
           Now, Dr. Andrews practices in Tampa, Florida, as
he told you.  And as part of his practice, he has to certify
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
77 death certificates.  He explained to you that without
pathology, Dr. Gleason's June 24th final diagnosis was not
proof with medical probability.
           And when Dr. Gleason completed Buck Aycock's death
certificate without pathology, and said, cause of death,
carcinoma left upper lung, that was Dr. Gleason's best
estimate.
           But without pathology, it does not prove more
likely than not that Buck Aycock had lung cancer.  And most
importantly, it does not prove more likely than not that Buck
Aycock had lung cancer caused by smoking.  Nowhere does
Dr. Gleason talk about smoking.  It's not in any of the
medical records or anything like that.  But Buck Aycock's
problem was caused by smoking.
           He could have put that on the death certificate if
he so desires on the line beneath that, due to consequences
of smoking, or something like that.  He did not.  He left
that blank.
           Dr. Andrews explained to you that a death
certificate is not a diagnosis.  The same standard of care
does not apply.  It's your best estimate.  You are dealing
with a person who has passed and not a live patient and so
the standards are not the same.
           Dr. Burns told you that it's either reasonable
degree of medical probability or unknown.  And that simply is
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
78 not the case in Florida the way medicine is practiced.
           Let's talk about addiction causation.  There is no
definition of addiction in the legal instructions that the
Judge gave you.  You will have to decide what addiction means
for the purposes of this case.  No doctor treated Buck Aycock
for addiction while he was alive.  There is no medical record
that says he was addicted to nicotine.  There are no medical
records that say Buck Aycock was being treated for nicotine
addiction.
           The claim that Buck Aycock was addicted was really
developed for this lawsuit.  It didn't happen or occur while
he was alive.  It was never a medical issue that any doctor
identified that he was having a problem with nicotine
addiction.
           The witnesses who told you that Buck Aycock was
addicted are Drs. Cummings and Burns, both of whom never met
him, never examined him, never talked to him during the
course of his life.  They have been paid a lot of money for
their opinions, which are based solely on the testimony and
depositions of people who want Mrs. Aycock to win this case.
So their testimony is slanted.
           But even they could not say that someone had --
that Buck Aycock had tried to quit, because if that evidence
existed, you could bet your bottom dollar that you would have
heard it again and again and again, and you didn't.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
79 Now, the plaintiff can't prove that Buck Aycock
was addicted if he never made a real quit attempt.  And
Dr. Burns defined a real quit attempt as a sincere motivation
on the part of the individual to try to quit.
           An attempt that shows genuine motivation.  Like
when Buck Aycock stopped drinking.  That was genuinely
motivated.  He wanted to stop.  He got help.  He put effort
into it, and he did it.  That never happened with smoking.
That's not -- was not a problem for Buck Aycock.
           Now, you didn't hear any evidence about any
smoking cessation aids, him going to clinics, or him doing
anything to stop his smoking.  And for those reasons, you
should vote no on this question of whether he was addicted to
cigarettes.  He never tried to quit.  So how can you say that
you are addicted?
           Question 3, and this is the third question,
remember, the findings don't apply to these three questions;
this is just based on the evidence in this case.
           The plaintiff must prove that addiction to
nicotine was a legal cause of Buck Aycock's death for him to
be a member of the class.  When you look at what plaintiff
said, their claim is essentially that Buck Aycock had no
choice but to smoke himself to death, and the evidence shows
that's just not true.
           An addictive smoker can stop smoking, and you
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
80 heard a lot of evidence in this case about how many that have
from Drs. Burns and Cummings.  60 million people stopped
smoking.  And Dr. Cummings told you 80 to 95 percent of them
were addicted.
           In 1965, one year after the Surgeon General's
Report, 17.6 million people quit.  By 1985, that was 40.9
million people.  And according to Dr. Cummings, these folks
were addicted.  They weren't casual smokers.
           And this was a period of time that Dr. Burns and
Cummings claimed that RJR and other tobacco companies were
preventing people from stopping smoking because they were
giving them a psychological crutch or they were advertising.
But that did not stop people who wanted to quit from
quitting.
           Now, Dr. Cummings admitted the 60 million people
who have quit would have had the same brain changes that Buck
Aycock supposedly had.  They would have seen the same
advertising that he saw.  They would have heard the same
tobacco company messages that he saw, but they were able to
put their cigarettes down and quit.  And the evidence is not
that he was a tortured smoker who couldn't quit, who was
trying and trying and trying and just failed.  That's not the
evidence here.  The evidence is that he never quit.
           When we were in jury selection, on that Monday,
there was a man that stood up and said he was biased against
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
81 the tobacco companies and his problem was --
           MR. WILNER:  Excuse me, your Honor.  The jury
selection is not --
           THE COURT:  I'll sustain the objection.  Move on.
The jury will disregard the reference to jury selection.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  The question you have to ask
yourself is why wasn't Buck Aycock one of the 60 million
people who quit.  The plaintiffs have the burden to prove
that to you.  They need to show you a reason why he was
different than those 60 million people.
           Were the cigarettes he was smoking more addictive?
No.  There is no evidence of that.  Was his brain affected
differently than theirs was?  No.  There wasn't any evidence
of that.  Was he exposed to different advertising?  No.
There is no evidence of that.  Was he exposed to different
companies' statements?  No.  There is no evidence of that.
Did he smoke more than other smokers who quit?  There is no
evidence of that.
           Those 60 million smokers who quit wanted to try
and did, and Buck Aycock, if he had wanted to, could have
done the same thing.
           In order to be a legal cause of his death, Buck
Aycock's addiction must substantially and directly cause his
death.  The evidence does not show that, ladies and
gentlemen.  Buck Aycock's desire to smoke and failure to try
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
82 to quit were the causes of his death.
           Once you sort through all the information, you
should answer no to this third question, and if you do,
that's the end of our case.  Buck Aycock is not a member of
the Engle class.  You sign the verdict form, and you bring it
back to us and the case is over, and the evidence supports
that result.
           But if you do find that Buck Aycock is a member of
the Engle class, we have other issues to talk about.  And
although obviously I don't think the evidence supports you
getting there, it is clearly and certainly your decision and
not mine, and we understand that.
           If Buck Aycock is a member of the class, one of
the things that you have to -- that comes into play of the
Engle findings -- and here is an instruction that's really
important, it's No. 8, and you'll see that the Engle findings
do not, as the Judge said, establish whether Buck Aycock was
injured by the conduct of RJR to any degree.
           And the Engle findings also, even though they have
a role in the case now, they do not decide any liability of
RJR, and they don't decide whether RJR's actions were a legal
cause of Buck Aycock's death.  The plaintiff has to establish
legal cause, and that means they have to offer proof that
demonstrates that the conduct embodied in the Engle findings
had a direct and continuous sequence that contributed
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
83 substantially to Buck Aycock's death, and you won't find the
evidence of that here.
           Now, Question No. 4, and Mr. Wilner talked about
this, about how addictive cigarettes are and how we design
cigarettes to be addictive.  You heard evidence to the
contrary.  If you went out and picked a piece of tobacco off
a plant, it would have nicotine in it, it would be addictive,
and if you smoked it, it would be dangerous and could cause
cancer.  Nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco.  Tobacco is
naturally addictive.  It naturally causes disease.
           Dr. Cummings said no cigarettes in the world are
less addictive or dangerous than those that Buck Aycock
smoked.
           RJR cigarettes are not a legal cause of Buck
Aycock's death.  The reason is that Buck Aycock's choices
about smoking and him not quitting, his failing to try to
quit, that's the legal cause of his death.  So the evidence
supports a no vote as to Question No. 4.
           I'm going to address Questions 5, 6, 7, and 8
together because they are all about concealment.
           These are the questions on the verdict form.  6
and 8 ask you about reliance.  Questions 5 through 8 require
plaintiff to prove to you that Buck Aycock relied to his
detriment after May 5th, 1982 -- that's an important date --
on concealment or omission of material information by RJR.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
84 Statements by RJR, not cigarettes like Mr. Wilner told you.
It's about statements and information.  And that Buck
Aycock's reliance must be a legal cause of his death.
           And the Judge is going to give you an instruction
on that.  He has already.  It's Instruction No. 10.  And
you'll have that with you.
           The bottom line is that the plaintiffs have to
prove that but for the wrongful conduct of RJR, Buck Aycock
would not have died of lung cancer caused by smoking.
           Now, Mr. Wilner said that RJR knew and hid
information about the health risks and addictiveness of
smoking.  He said internal company documents marked secret
kept in the company files prevented Buck Aycock from making
an informed decision to smoke or not to smoke and that the
tobacco companies kept him smoking by a campaign of doubt and
deception.
           Well, the evidence in this case has shown you that
no concealment by RJR prevented Buck Aycock from making an
informed decision to smoke.  And here's the reason why,
ladies and gentlemen.  You can't conceal information that's
already known and that somebody knows.  You can't conceal
public knowledge.
           The evidence has shown that Buck Aycock was fully
aware of the dangers of smoking and the addictiveness of
smoking long before May 5th, 1982.  And he chose to smoke,
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
85 and he liked it, but that was his decision and his choice and
not due to any wrongdoing on the part of R.J. Reynolds or any
other tobacco company.
           The effects of nicotine and the health effects of
smoking were well-known and no secret to Buck Aycock.  That's
what the information and the evidence shows, and that's why
your vote should be no on Questions 5 through 8.
           The bottom line is going to be whether Buck Aycock
knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive or whether it
was a secret.  And it was no secret to him.
           Dr. Cummings admitted -- and you got a history
lesson while this trial was going on about Columbus seeing
his sailors could not quit smoking when they were heading
back and Mark Twain talking about he quit smoking a thousand
times.
           He acknowledged that scientists -- this is
Dr. Cummings -- acknowledged that scientists in the 1920s
observed that nicotine had compulsive effects.  But more
importantly, he admitted under oath, Dr. Cummings did, that
it's been common knowledge for over a hundred years that
smoking is hard to quit, addicting, habituating, whatever
word you want to use.
           And you remember Dr. Cummings showed you a secret
document from Claude Teague of Reynolds in the 1970s.  He
said this was a hidden document.  And it says, Nicotine is
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
86 the sine qua non of smoking.
           Now, we had to show you that the same information
was in Reader's Digest without the fancy Latin, that nicotine
is the essential ingredient of tobacco.  It was common
knowledge.  It was common information.  It was no secret to
Buck Aycock.
           And you remember that plaintiff's counsel never
showed you a document, not a single document from Reynolds,
where Reynolds is denying that it could be difficult for
smokers to quit.  Reynolds did not do that.  There is no
evidence of that.
           Now, they showed you the 1994 congressional
hearings, but there is no evidence that Buck Aycock looked at
those or saw those.  And Dr. Cummings admitted that RJR's CEO
on those hearings testified later in the day that smoking can
be difficult to quit.
           You only saw a short part of the clip.  So there
is no secret about nicotine being addictive.  And Buck Aycock
certainly knew after May 5th, 1982, he was not relying on
information from Reynolds.  You can't conceal what somebody
knows, and the jury charge tells you that.  It has to be
otherwise unknown.
           Buck Aycock knew smoking was addictive.  He knew
smoking was dangerous, and he certainly knew that after May
5th, 1982.  That's why the evidence indicates you should vote
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
87 no on those questions.  There is no concealment here.  There
is no proof that the concealment of Reynolds, of any
information about the addictiveness or harm of smoking was in
any way the legal cause of Buck Aycock's death.
           Because he knew it already.  You can't conceal
what's known.
           You'll hear -- you did not hear any evidence that
Buck Aycock relied to his detriment on anything of Reynolds,
any information concealed by Reynolds, Brown & Williamson, or
the American Tobacco Company, any of them.
           You should find for plaintiff only if they prove
that Buck Aycock would not have died if Reynolds had done
something differently or had said something more or different
on the subject.
           But there is no evidence of that.  There is no
evidence if Reynolds had done something differently, that the
result wouldn't have been the same.
           You heard Mr. Wilner say, If Reynolds had not made
its cigarettes, if Reynolds was not in business, Buck Aycock
would have just been smoking Philip Morris cigarettes.
           Let's talk about the health effects.  And I talked
about some of this already.  The bottom line is that Buck
Aycock certainly knew the dangers of smoking well before May
5th, 1982.  And that date is important.  It's in your
instructions.  It's in the jury form.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
88 They have to show you that he relied to his
detriment on some concealment or omission by Reynolds after
May 5th, 1982, and there is absolutely no evidence of that.
           None.
           You saw the reports and report after report
detailing the growing evidence about the health risks of
smoking.  Well before 1982.  This is 1957.  The Surgeon
General telling about the information that's in the press and
the radio and TV about smoking being dangerous.
           You saw a clip from the Orlando paper.  And
Ms. Aycock said they got the Sunday paper.  This is the
Sunday paper.  Sunday, January 12th, 1964, when the Surgeon
General's Report came out.  Clearly, it says smoking causes
lung cancer.
           In 1959, the Aycocks get a television, and Buck
becomes a big news watcher.  Ms. Aycock says Walter Cronkite
was his man.
           And Dr. Schaller talked to you about the news
reports about the health effects of smoking in the late
1950s.
           Ladies and gentlemen, Buck Aycock got the message
from multiple sources for many years that smoking was
dangerous.  What he did with that message, though, he termed
it his business.  Those were his words, That it's my
business.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
89 Plaintiff has to show you with evidence that Buck
died because the dangers of smoking were unknown to him, and
the result would have been different if RJR had acted
differently.  And there is simply no evidence of that, ladies
and gentlemen.
           The evidence in this case shows clearly that
that's not Buck Aycock's story.  That may be some smoker's
story, but this is Buck Aycock's story, and that's not his
story.  He knew smoking was dangerous and addictive long
before May 5th, 1982, and he did what he wanted to do.
           What about advertising?  You saw all the
advertisements that he was shown.  But Dr. Cummings and Burns
admitted that the advertisements were legal.  When cigarettes
were advertised on TV, it was legal.  When they were
advertised in print, it was legal.  When they advertised on
billboards, it was legal.  When cigarettes were advertised,
it was legal.  And no one has ever said that RJR did any
illegal advertising.  You need to remember it was perfectly
legal.
           And you can't find that any of that advertising
changed Buck Aycock's conduct.  Nothing wrongful concealed
from Buck Aycock.  You can't conceal what's already known.
           Now, Dr. Burns and Cummings told you about the
Frank Statement.  Remember that?  TIRC, CTR, all these, the
Tobacco Institute, all these tobacco entities.  But the
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
90 evidence is Buck Aycock didn't deal with that.  He wasn't
tuned into the tobacco companies.  There is no evidence
whatsoever that he ever saw the Frank Statement, was
influenced by it, changed his smoking habits because of it or
anything like that.
           So the four questions, ladies and gentlemen, have
to do with concealment and agreement to conceal and reliance.
And as I've said, the plaintiffs don't provide the evidence,
the link between that conduct and those findings and that
causing Buck Aycock's death.  That is the key here.  It's not
whether that happened.  It's whether it caused Buck Aycock's
death.  And there is no evidence that it had any effect on
Buck Aycock.
           I addressed the four together because the evidence
of the four goes together.  The four things, they rely on the
same evidence.  Therefore, when you get to those four
questions, the answer really needs to be the same for all
four.  And it should be no based on the evidence you heard in
this case.
           There is absolutely no reliance after May 5th,
1982, on anything R.J. Reynolds did or did not do.  It had
absolutely no effect on Buck Aycock's smoking, continuing to
smoke, not trying to quit, or his death.
           Now, allocation of fault.  I obviously don't
believe you should get this far, but if you do -- we think,
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
91 if you do, then you should answer no; but if you get to this
question, there are some things that you should think about.
           The first is it's not a question of comparing the
conduct of how you feel about RJR versus Buck Aycock's
conduct.  It's a question about whose actions were a legal
cause of his death.  That's what the question says.
           And as I told you, the plaintiff has already
admitted that Buck Aycock was a partial legal cause of his
own death.  And we have shown you evidence of why he's the
sole, 100 percent cause of his own death if his death was
caused by cigarette smoking.
           Now, a lot of times when people think about
allocating things, they say it's okay to go 50/50 or
something like that.  But that's not okay under the law,
because the law says plaintiff must prove to you that
Reynolds has some measure of fault.
           Each percentage point of liability that you assign
to Reynolds must be based on proof.  Plaintiff has admitted
some fault.  RJR says it's not at fault for Buck Aycock's
death.
           The plaintiffs have to prove that with proof.
           Let's look -- we have looked at some of Buck
Aycock's fault.  He didn't start smoking cigarettes because
of any wrongdoing of Reynolds.  He didn't continue smoking
any cigarettes because of any wrongdoing of Reynolds.  It's
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
92 not wrong to manufacture cigarettes.  Winstons were legal.
Camels were legal.  And as you know, he smoked other
cigarettes.
           We know that Buck Aycock chose to smoke and
continued to smoke when millions of other people were
quitting, and we know he chose to ignore the warnings from
the media, the public health community, and that he never
tried to quit.
           We know that every day for 30 years he chose to
smoke there were warnings on each pack of cigarettes.  And we
know that warning eventually told him that smoking will cause
lung cancer, long before he was diagnosed with lung cancer in
the mid-1980s, but he continued to smoke.
           If you get to the fault question, ladies and
gentlemen, the evidence shows that the proper response is
that Buck Aycock was responsible.  He was responsible for his
choices, for his decisions, for not quitting.  And he was
responsible.  He was the legal cause of his death if his
death was caused by cigarette smoking.
           Another way to think about it is if RJR had done
something different, if it had never been in business, would
the result be different?  And answer is no, because he would
have been smoking someone else's cigarettes.
           I'm rushing along because my partner has told me
I'm running out of time.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
93 Damages.  We don't think you should get this far,
but I have an obligation to talk to you about it if you do.
The plaintiff asked you for a lot of money.  More money than
we believe defies common sense and justice.  And all I can
ask is that if you get to this question, that you be fair,
that you be fair to Reynolds just like you would be fair to
an individual.
           They are seeking damages for loss of support and
for pain and suffering, but the amount they are seeking
defies logic, and this is because this case is about Buck
Aycock smoking.  It's about Buck Aycock's choices.  And Buck
Aycock, as we have shown, those choices were not made because
of any wrongdoing.  It has to be wrongdoing of Reynolds.  And
there is no evidence that any wrongdoing of Reynolds affected
Buck Aycock's smoking decisions.
           And that's why the amount of money that's being
asked in this case defies common sense and fairness and the
justice that you are going to be asked to do.
           I want to say a word about punitive damages.
           I know I'm running out of time.
           First of all, they can only be awarded for
concealment or agreement to conceal if you answer yes to
those questions, 6 and 8.  And as I have shown you and argued
and the evidence in the case, which is important, has shown
you, Buck Aycock did not rely on any wrongdoing, any
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
94 concealment of RJR after May 5th, 1982.  There is no evidence
of it.  It did not happen.
           So you should only answer this question if you
answer yes to questions 6 or 8 and the evidence supports a no
answer to both questions 6 and 8.
           Secondly, you need to understand that punitive
damages are extra damages above compensation to Mrs. Aycock.
Her lawyers are asking you to compensate her for her loss,
and then they are saying, Give us extra money.  We want to
award Mrs. Aycock additional money above and beyond what
compensated her, and that's what you are being asked to do
here.
           Plaintiff has to prove the concealment, as I told
you about, and it has to be by clear and convincing evidence,
and that's evidence that's more compelling and much more
persuasive than by a preponderance of evidence.  It's a much
higher standard than the preponderance of evidence.  It's the
highest standard in a civil case.
           Some of the evidence on the issue of punitive
damages -- and once again, it's only about concealment -- if
you find RJR's concealment was a legal cause of Buck Aycock's
death, that's the only way you get to this question, and
there's simply no evidence of that.
           But I need to let you know that the Engle
findings, just like they don't establish liability for
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
95 Reynolds, they don't establish liability for punitive damages
either.  It has to be done with evidence.
           Now, you may think Reynolds should have changed
its position on causation earlier and done things like that.
No debate about that, but the evidence establishes that that
did not cause Buck Aycock's death.  The evidence establishes
that the overall information available to people was enough
to motivate millions and millions to quit.  Buck Aycock did
not, and you know that he was not tuned into the tobacco
companies.  He wasn't waiting on Reynolds to make a statement
about whether cigarettes were addictive or whether they were
dangerous.  No. 1, he knew that already.  His wife knew that
back in the '50s.  He did as well.  There's absolutely no
evidence of him relying to his detriment on anything Reynolds
did or did not do after May 5th, 1982.  That is a very
important date.
           And Reynolds did some things, and they certainly
were not perfect; but you have to look at all of the
evidence, and you get a chance to do that.  You heard about
them funding CTR research, and the articles that the Surgeon
General used to make the Surgeon General's Report was based
in part on tobacco money through CTR.
           And you heard about the Knapp study that they
sponsored that said tobacco was addictive before the 1963
Surgeon General's Report.  And you need to know that awarding
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
96 punitive damages won't change anything because all the change
has been done at Reynolds.  All these documents that you see
are on their website.  They've been there for 10, 12 years.
They've been admitted that cigarettes are addictive, cause
disease.  It's been on their website for 10 or 12 years.
           On the verdict form, if you get to that question,
I ask that you say no, that you're not going to go forward
and award the family more money if you decide to compensate
them.
           If you answer yes, we'll come back for another
short phase of trial and you'll hear additional evidence
about whether punitive damages should be awarded, and if so,
how much.  But as I said, the evidence doesn't support
getting that far, but it is, of course, your decision.
           Ladies and gentlemen, I'm summing up here.  From
the beginning, this trial has really been about personal
responsibility.  In the United States we have the freedom to
choose how to live.  With that freedom comes the requirement
that you take personal responsibility for your actions.
That's the way our society has always viewed the issue of
smoking and not smoking.
           Buck Aycock took personal responsibility for his
personal -- his smoking decisions.  And in this lawsuit,
they're trying to turn him into a victim, but the evidence
doesn't support that.  Mr. Wilner gets the last word with
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
97 you.  I don't get a chance to get up and speak to you, but
see if he answers these questions with proof, not argument,
not debate, but proof.
           That Buck Aycock never knew smoking was dangerous,
that Buck Aycock could not quit and had no choice but to
smoke himself to death, and that Reynolds cigarettes that
Buck Aycock smoked are more dangerous or addictive than other
cigarettes out there on the market.
           I don't think he's going to be able to prove that
to you, and without proof, there is no link between RJR's
conduct and Buck Aycock's death, and that's the reason your
verdict should be for RJR.
           I thank you for your attention.
