           MR. WILNER:  Thank you, your Honor.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
35 It's a pleasure.  I've been looking forward to it.
Most of the time during the trial, we can't address you
directly.  I don't have a lot of slogans and don't have a lot
of time.  I'm going to speak for 40 minutes to you, and then
my adversary over there will have an hour and I'll have 20
minutes.  If I start going too fast, it's not because I want
to do that; but we are limited to time.  But we'll do it.
           I want to start -- I'm going to go through the
jury instructions and the verdict because that really is what
you'll be asked to do.  And you know what:  I'm going to
start at the end, because that's where the rubber meets the
road in this case.  And the end is punitive damages,
punishment to the tobacco company.
           And I'm going to tell you why this case is about
punishing Reynolds.  And here it is:  You'll be asked --
you'll be instructed -- and you'll have a copy of these.  We
will go over them a little more.  But Instruction No. 16,
you'll be told by his Honor, punitive damages -- that means
punishment, are warranted if you find that Mrs. Aycock has
proved by clear and convincing evidence that Reynolds had
actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of its conduct and there
was a high probability of injury or damage to Richard Aycock,
and despite that knowledge, intentionally pursued that course
of conduct resulting in Mr. Aycock's death.
           Well, we are here to talk only about Mr. Aycock,
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
36 but then we're not.  The circumstances that killed Mr. Aycock
are the largest public health disaster that this country has
seen, the largest preventable public health disaster in
history.  But we are dealing with a horrendous amount of
death and disability.
           This graph here from the 1989 Surgeon General's
Report, which you'll have in evidence, shows how lung cancer
started out almost nonexistent before cigarettes became
important and how it, contrary to these other cancers graphed
here, climbed like a meteor, like a deadly meteor, to a point
where it far surpassed all other cancer deaths.  And Richard
Aycock was right in the middle of it.  He was a contributor
to this horrendous event.
           So we're here today really to understand why that
happened and who's responsible in part.  Who's responsible
for his -- in other words what does Reynolds do -- how
important is Reynolds' contribution to this?  I think you'll
see from what we have said before and what we are going to
say again, Reynolds and the other conspirators that it worked
with in unity, lockstep in the cigarette industry in America
did this.  They produced products which were deliberately
designed to be addictive.  They produced products which were
deadly.  They produced a fog that made it hard to understand
that.  Though there was evidence to the contrary, they
continued to do that.  And they marketed them like crazy.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
37 And they marketed them like crazy and they pushed their
product and they pushed the safety of their product and they
concealed the addictive nature of it up until today.  They
still are concealing it.  I'll tell you about that.  And the
products were used, became addictive and killed, and Richard
Aycock was in the middle of that.
           That's it in the nutshell.  That's what we're
talking about.  We are here to ask for punishment -- to ask
for compensation for Mr. Aycock but punishment to Reynolds
for doing -- for being a prime mover in this public health
disaster.  And every bit of it was preventable, every single
bit.  It never should have started.
           I want to start with the beginning because I
started with the end.  So now I'm going to go back to the
beginning real quick.
           I'm going to go over here where I can put
something up.  So you'll be given a few preliminary
instructions, and then you'll be taking -- your instructions
will take you through the verdict form.
           One of the preliminary instructions I want to
emphasize is you use your common sense.  You may make
deductions and reach conclusions, and you can use your common
sense.  And another important part of this instruction -- and
I'll get to why it's important -- is that circumstantial
evidence is proof of a chain of facts and circumstances and
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
38 it's just as important as direct evidence.  Why is that
important here?  Because Richard Aycock was never interviewed
prior to his death.
           He was never -- no one had a chance to go to him
and say, Now, let's see, exactly what advertisements did you
see?  We don't care.  We'll show to you that Richard Aycock
was caught in the net, like everybody else, and he was part
of the fabric of society at the time.  And that society
promoted cigarettes, and he was no different.  And this is
what we're talking about as part of a chain of events.
           It's circumstantial evidence, just as good as any
other evidence.
           You'll also be asked about -- you'll be given an
instruction about who to believe and whether you should
believe a particular witness or not.  And let me give you a
comment on that, because it's important.  We don't really ask
you to believe anybody, from -- any expert based on just the
fact that they raised their hand.  We'll submit to you that
every single thing that came out of Dr. Burns or Dr. Cummings
is not subject to just, you know, you've got to believe them,
but it's proven.  It's proven in the scientific literature;
it's proven beyond a doubt in everything that you'll have
before you.
           Now, for instance, you'll have Exhibit 123, but it
won't be in a book form because we didn't have enough books,
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
39 so it's photocopied.  And it's called Risks Associated with
Smoking Cigarettes with Low Machine Yields of Tar and
Nicotine.  And you'll see -- and this is by the National
Institute of Health, National Cancer Institute.  And in it,
you'll have a chance to read it, and I'll point out a couple
of chapters or a couple of pages that I think are interesting
to read.  But the senior editor on this is Dr. Burns.  He
wrote it.  Endorsed by the National Cancer Institute.  I
mean, it's not bologna.  The list of contributors here are a
long history of renowned people.  And what Dr. Burns is
saying is not something we dreamed up.  This is reality.
This is what's happened.  This is why we had cancer shooting
through the roof.
           Another interesting part of this, and I'll talk to
you about it later, in the preface of this book, it says,
This monograph is unique in other important aspects.  For the
first time, the authors who prepared the various chapters
have had extensive access to the information gleaned from the
internal documents of the tobacco companies.  The National
Cancer Institute is saying this.  It's not -- we are not
making this stuff up.
           The information gleaned from the internal
documents of the Tobacco Institute files, now open to the
public -- this is early 2000 -- available on the internet,
millions of pages, and they explain the importance of that
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
40 because, up to this time, it had been concealed what the
cigarettes were doing to people, how they were being designed
to be as addictive as is necessary to cause that kind of
cancer.
           And when those documents came out -- you've seen a
tiny bit of it, just the tip of the iceberg of what's out
there, but you've heard from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings who
have been tasked by the National Cancer Institute and others
to review these things and to make conclusions.
           So we don't say that.  Dr. Burns contributed and
Dr. Cummings are both in this book, the 2010 Surgeon
General's Report.  You can't get more mainstream than that.
This is mainstream science.  We stand by a hundred percent of
it.  I'd like to see what Reynolds stands behind, and you'll
see almost nothing.
           And to come back to punitive damages for a minute,
we say, and along with all the other scientific -- all the
other science of the -- the mainstream of science, and you'll
see on Page 105, Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason
why individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this
persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described
in this report.  Addiction is the key to disease because one
cigarette provides only a tiny amount of carcinogens and you
have to keep hitting the cells, bam, bam, bam, a million
times during your life.  That's why you die.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
41 So addiction drives it.  They've put on nothing to
contradict that.  Addiction drives this.  Now, why is this
important?  Why do I say punish Reynolds?  Well, because if
you will remember, Dr. Gentry was on film.  I was questioning
him.  And I said, Do you agree that nicotine addiction is --
well, it's a reason -- here's the point.  The -- Reynolds
did, in the '50s and in the '60s and continuing, try to
design a cigarette that produced less cancer.  Sure they did.
I mean, as long as they could sell it, it would be great if
they could make one that didn't kill you.  That would be
great.  That's not a problem.  They couldn't.  They didn't.
           But here's what they didn't try to do and they
won't.  They never tried to treat addiction.  Why, you
wonder, if they will try to treat cancer?  Why in their
cigarettes, why wouldn't they treat addiction?  Well, the
reason is obvious.  Addiction equals sales.  Cancer doesn't
equal sales.  Addiction equals sales.  So no right-minded
person in Reynolds -- well, I say that with quotes -- yes,
right-minded people should do it -- can ever say that
addiction causes disease because then they're forced to
answer the question, well, why don't you treat addiction in
your product?  Why do you -- why don't you use your powerful
facilities to produce the product that people can use -- can
stop using if they want to?  Not are just driven to use pack
after pack after pack.  Why can't you do that?  And there are
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
42 many leads.  There are many scientific leads, and you'll see
in this chapter that it discusses them.
           And up until -- up until 2000 or 1999, the public
health community didn't know what was going on inside these
Reynolds factories that was designing the cigarette, not to
reduce addiction, but to increase it.
           If that's true, if it's true, if we prove it, then
that's terrible.  That is a terrible, terrible thing, and the
one reason it was done is to drive sales.
           And that's the equation.  Addiction equals sales.
Unfortunately, addiction equals death.
           How do we break out of this cycle?  We have to
tell them.  How do we tell them?  It's up to juries such as
yourself.  Tell them.  You can't --
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Objection.  Send a message,
your Honor.
           MR. WILNER:  It's valid.  Punitive damages.
           THE COURT:  I'll sustain the objection.
           MR. WILNER:  Reynolds has got to understand that
addiction is not acceptable and they must confront it with
modern scientific methods and not deny it.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Request that the jury be asked to
disregard that comment, your Honor.
           THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, when
I sustain the objection, that means you are to not consider
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
43 the comment made by Mr. Wilner.
           MR. WILNER:  We next go to the beginning of the
case, which is you'll be asked whether Mr. Aycock was
addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that cigarette
smoking, because of such addiction, was the legal cause of
death.
           So the first question is:  Did Richard Aycock have
lung cancer?  And there was a lot of discussion about this --
and could we get the death certificate pulled out real quick?
           Thanks.
           This is a recent -- this is a recent thing in this
trial, and so we don't --
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Your Honor, we're not supposed to
be using demonstratives.
           MR. WILNER:  This demonstrative was exactly what
was worked on with the witness.  So we believe we can use it.
This was shown to the jury in its exact form.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Still not proper to use it like
this.  We were told we couldn't do that.
           MR. WILNER:  You didn't tell them.
           THE COURT:  No, I'm sorry.  Mr. Wilner, it is not
proper.  Sustain the objection.  The jury disregard it.
           MR. WILNER:  Well, you'll recall that we did a
chart with this last witness, and we went through the various
tests.  The head CT, the chest x-ray, the bone scan, whether
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
44 there was a white blood cell increase, the tumor marker, CEA,
and we lined them all up.  And the only one that made sense
was the cancer.  That was it.  Then that checked every one.
I mean, that's reality.  And the death certificate, of
course, totally agrees with it, and all the doctors that
treated Richard Aycock agreed with it, all the treating
physicians agreed with it, every single one.  All the
radiologists, all -- and the general practitioner who treated
him, Dr. Gleason, who signed it, who is the same doctor who
had been seeing him at least since 1991.  Big surprise.
           So in response, we get a physician from Reynolds
who has his own opinion about what is necessary.  And his own
opinion --
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Misrepresentation.  He's not from
Reynolds, your Honor.
           MR. WILNER:  Your Honor, I think that's an
interruption and not really an --
           THE COURT:  I'll overrule the objection.
           Mr. Williams, unless you're being wounded, don't
get up.
           MR. WILNER:  The physician came in here and said
you have to have this, you have to have that.  Where was the
law?  There was no law.
           The physicians who treated Mr. Aycock treated him
correctly.  The idea that he was sent home with an infection
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
45 and never treated for an infection and an infection is
treatable is crazy, of course.  He had no index of infection.
His white blood cells were normal.  His neutrophils were
normal.  His leukocytes were normal.  He didn't have a fever.
To create an infection out of that, when no treating
physician even mentioned infection, is crazy.  And if they
had sent him home with an infection to die when he -- and as
we know, he had inoperable brain cancer with at least five
tumors in his brain, and the way that happens is metastatic
disease from the lung, and everybody got it right.  And to
think that because they didn't want to do a cell type, which
gives you treatment options -- and there were no treatment
because the brain cancer was killing him.  You can't treat
it.  And you can't biopsy it.  So that's bologna.
           It was easy to see that it was a metastatic.  It
had multiple seedings, whereas a growth that starts somewhere
has one.  The bone, if you remember, had multiple.  The head
had multiple.  The lung had one.  So it's bologna that it
came from some organ other than the lung because it would
have seeded in the lung in multiple places, but it didn't.
Of course, it started in the lung, and that's what happens
when you smoke addictively for year after year after year.
           And next question is:  Was addiction a cause?
Well, this is an interesting point, so let me get to that.
Then I'll go back to that.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
46 The question is:  Was addiction a contributing
cause of Mr. Aycock's death?  Well, first of all, we've heard
nothing from any of the Reynolds witnesses that Mr. Aycock
was not addicted.  They did not call any expert to explain to
you why Mr. Aycock did not meet every medical definition of
addiction.
           All they'll say is that Mr. Aycock wasn't addicted
because he chose to smoke.  This is my comment to that:
Everybody who smokes chooses to smoke, in a way, because the
human will is free.  I mean, we all get up.  We're not total
robots, but that doesn't mean -- to say that addiction
doesn't influence us and isn't a cause of what we do, that's
crazy.  Because that would be turning back the clock on all
science of psychiatry, psychology, all understanding of the
human brain.  That would be turning that back 200 years.  We
know that we are both free and also part of nature.  We know
that we have brains as well as minds.  We know that our
brains are affected by drugs.
           We know that nicotine affects the brain in a
dangerous way because it affects the centers of the brain
that make you want things.  And when you get those brain
changes in your brain from addiction, it changes you, and it
becomes a force inside you that compels you to smoke.  Does
that mean you choose to smoke?  Yeah, sure.  Does that mean
you're not addicted, the fact that you choose something?  No.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
47 Because what's affecting your choice?  The addiction is
loading the deck.  It's affecting you at a level that you
have a very hard time even understanding.
           That's why it's so dangerous.  You can say to
yourself, I'm not going to smoke.  I'm not going to smoke.
And another cigarettes comes right out.  Why?  Because you
love it?  It's so great for the next one?  No.  Because your
brain is driving it.  We don't say that people don't have
free will.  Never said that.  We say free will is always
affected by things that go on in your brain.  And when you
have a drug, you have a permanent brain change, drugs in your
brain, then it affects you.
           So, of course, nicotine addiction played a role in
putting these carcinogens into Mr. Aycock's body, once his
brain will be changed early on.
           The third question will be:  Was it Reynolds?
Well, okay, yes, Reynolds' brands were his premier brand.
Did he smoke Marlboro?  Yes.  But that isn't the question,
whether there was some other brand that also contributed.
Your question is:  Did Reynolds' brands contribute?  And the
answer is:  They did.
           You will then be asked -- so if you finish -- if
you answer to those three questions -- and you'll see them at
the beginning.  Did Mr. Aycock die of a cigarette related --
was his lung cancer due to smoking?  Yes.  Did he have lung
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
48 cancer due to smoking?  Was it due to addiction?  Was it due
to Reynolds cigarettes?  Then he becomes in our -- in this
lawsuit, a class member.  And when he becomes a class member,
he then has a series of important -- of important findings
that have already been determined that are now part of this
case.
           And here they are real quick.  I put them up
before.  Smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer.  We know
that.
           Nicotine and cigarettes is addictive.  The Engle
defendants, including Reynolds, placed cigarettes on the
market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
That's done.  That cannot be challenged.
           What is the defect in them?  We know.  We know
what it is.  They are highly addictive and cause cancer.
           No. 4, these are more interesting.  That the Engle
defendants concealed or omitted the -- the Engle defendants
concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known
or available knowing the material was false or misleading or
failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health
effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
We totally -- that has already been found.
           We put on even more proof of that, but even if we
had not put on anything, the previous case found that and
that's part of this case if Mr. Aycock is a class member,
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
49 which he obviously is.
           Next, that the Engle defendants agreed to conceal
or omit information regarding the health effects of
cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that
smokers in the public would rely on this information to their
detriment.  They say that's what they -- that is binding.
They agree.  We know they agree.  We got the document.  We
even showed it to you.
           Philip Morris, Reynolds, American, all those guys,
got together and they said, This is what we are going to do.
That conspiracy lasted until at least 1999.  You'll be asked
later, Was there a reliance on things after '82?  Well, if it
started in the '50s and went to '99, '82 was part of that.
That's just a Statute of Limitations technical issue.  It has
nothing to do with anything
           Okay.  That all the Engle defendants were
negligent.  That's another finding that you cannot dispute.
And that is -- so -- all right.  So what do you do with that
going forward?  Okay.
           Instruction No. 9 says, R.J. Reynolds is legally
responsible for the conduct of both the American Tobacco
Company and Brown & Williamson.  That is a given in this
case.  There was some buzz about whether Reynolds was the
same and -- because there are lots of documents.  They all
come from Reynolds.  They come from Brown & Williamson.  They
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
50 come from American, and they come from Philip Morris.  Of
course, they have all conspired.  They were all there
together.  They have stood as a unit.  They have got benefit
from the unit.  That's the key to the conspiracy.
           So you'll also be asked in Question No. 4 -- let
me put this up.
           Instruction No. 11, If you find that Mr. Aycock --
if you find that it happened as we suggest, you'll be asked,
Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds a legal cause
of Richard Aycock's death?  Well, you already answered that.
I don't know why it's there.  I don't know.  But smoking
cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds.  Yes.  I mean, there may
be some others, but cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds.
           And, incidentally, we don't care -- we are not
talking about the roll-your-owns.  Roll-your-owns are -- were
the Prince Albert stuff.  If he had stuck with
roll-your-owns, he wouldn't be dead because --
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Objection, your Honor.
           THE COURT:  Mr. Wilner, we have been through this.
That's sustained.  And the jury will disregard the
conversation of roll-your-own.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  I ask for a fair response in my
time.
           MR. WILNER:  Your Honor, we are saying we are not
basing any case on roll-your-owns.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13 THE COURT:  Mr. Wilner, I sustained the objection.
Move on.
           MR. WILNER:  Right.
           So we are talking about cigarettes.  We are
talking about manufactured cigarettes.  They are the
addictive product.  Camels, Winstons, and Marlboros, we will
agree are addictive cigarettes, and that's what we are here
for.
           So smoking cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds was
a legal cause of Richard Aycock's death.  We totally agree.
           Now, we get to another part of the verdict form
which asks you about fraudulent concealment.  The third claim
is for fraudulent concealment.  Another one of the Engle
findings was that Reynolds concealed or omitted material
information not otherwise known or available, knowing the
material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a
material fact concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes.
           Well, we have seen how -- tracing these documents,
we have seen how Reynolds knew darn well that the cigarettes
were harmful and that they were addictive, and further
tracing the documents, we have seen how they have designed
the addiction into the product.
           So what have they failed to say?  They have failed
to disclose to people that it is critical that they know that
Trial Day 8 4/17/13 that has been done.  So they will see what it is that has
been controlling them and have some way out.
           Now, let me play for you -- if we could have that
switched -- No. 68.  This is 1988.
           (Video played.)
           MR. WILNER:  Thank you.
           Sound familiar?  Denying addiction because some
people quit.  That's like saying that -- I guess if addiction
does not cause disease, there would be no Engle class, no one
would be in it, because one of the requirements is that
addiction have caused the disease of the person.
           None of these -- the Surgeon General's Report
wouldn't exist.  There would be no medical science about
addiction.  And the Tobacco Institute stands alone in saying
what it says, even up to today.  This is from '88.  And they
haven't changed their stance on addiction.
           They say, Well, yes, nicotine is addicting, but
because anyone can quit, it doesn't really matter.  It
matters a whole lot.  And how the cigarette was designed
matters a whole lot.
           Here's the point here.  You are going to be asked,
did Richard Aycock rely to his detriment on Reynolds'
concealment or omission of material information after May
5th, 1982, concerning the effects or addictive nature of
smoking cigarettes?
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
53 Now, let's think.  Here's -- I'll take it out of
cigarettes for a minute.  Let's say that we had a case where
we found that the brakes in Ford automobiles -- I just picked
Fords.  I like Fords, but I just picked it -- was defectively
designed and that it was put in -- it was such a cheap brake
that it was going to break after a certain -- in a very high
probability.  Let's assume that to be the case.
           And we went back and we found that the Ford
engineers had known about it.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Objection, your Honor.
Judge Corrigan's orders specifically address this.
           MR. WILNER:  Address what?
           THE COURT:  You've got to state a little more than
that.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Comparing conduct of one company to
another.  It's in there explicitly.
           MR. WILNER:  I'm not comparing it to any other --
there is no conduct of Ford.  It's a hypothetical.  It has
nothing to do with any other conduct.
           THE COURT:  I think it's improper, Mr. Wilner, so
move on.
           Jury disregard the Ford Motor Company.
           MR. WILNER:  If a company produces a product and
in that product it designs a defect for its own gain, whether
it be whatever -- I use brakes, whatever you want to say, it
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
54 was cheaper, or it produced sales, and in this case, it
produced sales, to design this addiction into the product
produced sales -- in fact, they all got to do it.
           But let's pick one at a time.  Every time that you
smoke that product, you are relying on that design.  Every
time you drive your car, you are relying on the design of
that vehicle.  If there are defects designed into that
vehicle, your driving a car every day is a new reliance.  You
rely on the brakes.  You rely on the steering.  You rely on
things being designed correctly.
           In the cigarettes that he smoked, in the Winston,
in the Camel, they were designed to addict you.  They were
designed in a way that he would not know.  There was never a
release of the information that they were designed in that
way.
           By lighting up every day is a reliance.  So the
question is, Did that occur prior to 1982?  Of course.  Did
that occur after 1982?  Of course.  He did not stop smoking
until the '90s.  We have heard lots of information that every
cigarette contributed to his death.
           Up until the very end.  The carcinogens keep
pouring in.  The cigarettes -- the carcinogens in the
cigarettes keep promoting the cancer, and that stopping
cigarette smoking at any time is very beneficial.  So we have
learned that, and we agree with that.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
55 The issue of reliance has nothing to do with
whether Richard Aycock alone remembers somebody saying
something.  The issue of reliance is, first, that he lived in
the world and the world believed in cigarettes.  Why did that
world believe in cigarettes?  Because it was recharged daily
by marketing, a billion dollars a year.  Secondly, he relied
on it every time he lighted up.  He relied on that cigarette
being what he thought it was, which was at least
nonaddictive.
           Nobody ever put a warning on the product that said
addiction.  There was never a warning on the product.
           Oh, it might be hard to quit, but nobody ever
said, This product has been designed by various design
features to addict you and keep you smoking for our benefit
because we make a lot of money doing it.
           If you find for Richard Aycock on any of the class
membership, you'll be asked about what are the compensatory
damages.  Compensatory damages are a way to compensate -- and
you'll see from the jury instructions, there are no exact
standard and intangibles -- read the instructions, you'll see
intangibles are permissible.  You can use intangibles,
including pain and suffering.
           For this horrible watching her husband die of
brain cancer, what that must be like, and then having the
time since then to reflect on it, it's less -- it's more
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
56 than -- more than 3 million and less than 8-, we would
suggest.
           How do we come to that?  You think about it.  You
think about that kind of horror and what it means.
           The last question is a punitive damage question,
which I talked about earlier.  Until there is a change, there
will be no change.  And we ask you to think about that when
you deliberate on punitive damages.
           Then I will speak to you again following the
remarks of Reynolds' attorneys.  Okay.


           MR. WILNER:  You bet we can answer, bet we can
answer, could answer for hours.  We are going to point in the
direction of some of these answers.
           Craziest thing we heard was that -- two things:
Reynolds says -- gets up here and says, well, prove to us
that our cigarettes are different, more dangerous than
another company's cigarettes.  It's astonishing that they
would make that argument.  It isn't the law.
           They have to stand behind their cigarettes.  They
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
102 stand behind the products they make.  We don't have to
show -- we don't have to go out and show some other company
makes a different kind of a product or go into that.  There
is no evidence of that whatsoever.
           Reynolds gets up here and says -- the biggest
company, the biggest cigarette company gets up there and
says, Oh, well, we just do what everybody else does?  Well,
true, they do because they all got together.  So that's like
saying, Well, I didn't -- you know, we all got together, we
all robbed the bank together.  I wasn't any worse than
anybody else.  That's not the law at all.  Of course, they
have to stand behind it.
           The other crazy thing they said was that, if he
didn't smoke Reynolds, he would have smoked something else.
Well, what does that have to do with it?  That has nothing to
do -- Reynolds has to stand behind it -- Reynolds makes the
billions it makes from selling its product.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Improper, your Honor.
           THE COURT:  Mr. Wilner, I think you can probably
use some more temperate words.
           MR. WILNER:  Temperate?  Okay.
           Reynolds makes money from its products.  Reynolds
is the one who has to stand behind its product.  You will not
find a single instruction in the instructions that his Honor
gives that says that Reynolds is somehow relieved of
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
103 liability because some other company makes cigarettes.
That's a crazy comment.  I can't believe they said that.
           Another thing, okay, what about, Well, other
people quit.  Why didn't Mr. Aycock quit?  Other people quit.
Well, very interesting.  Here's why:  If I were to release
a -- like an influenza virus into this room, into the air,
let's say there's a hundred people here, maybe 50 would come
down with it and 50 wouldn't.  Why?  Nobody really knows.  I
mean, that's the way humans are.  They are different.  So 50
people might get it; 50 might not.  When the plague came
through Europe, it killed a third of the population.
Everybody was exposed.  Why did it kill that third and not
another third?  No one knows.  Probably genetics.  Nobody
really knows, but that's what happened.  Somebody gets it
worse than others.
           Of the people who get influenza, in my
hypothetical here, maybe half would live and maybe half would
die.  Why is that?  Well, we don't know exactly.  But that
isn't a defense to anything.  The fact that some people were
able to swim upstream against this current that was pulling
them, this addiction that was pulling them, and all the other
things in the marketplace that were suggesting to them they
ought to smoke, the fact that some people could get out of
that, fine.  And if you want to blame Mr. Aycock for not
being able to do that, then that's the section in the verdict
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
104 form where you allocate blame between Reynolds and
Mr. Aycock.  And if you think Mr. Aycock didn't try hard
enough, you know, what about this?  So the challenge is,
Well, why didn't he try?  Why didn't he try?  Why isn't there
evidence of it?
           Well, we don't know exactly because he wasn't
interviewed during his life.  But nicotine affects the brain,
and we have heard this, in a way in some people that means
that they don't want to quit.  People don't want to quit.  If
they are heavily addicted, they do enjoy it.  There's no
question.
           That's not the question in this case.  That's the
problem with things that affect your brain.  It would be
really nice if you could say, Well, everybody just retains
the same reasoning capability as they had before.  But we
have learned that, if your nicotine receptors have grown in
response to this nicotine and you don't have it, that you're
not normal anymore.  You're not normal until you get it
again.  And what you can endure before you get it again,
that's an individual thing.  That's probably genetic.
           But here's the third thing.  Here's the third
thing.  You can't -- you can't tell people what -- that they
should smoke, which Reynolds did.  We will show you that.
That's the marketing.  A billion dollars a year to market.
You can't tell people, Do it.  Smoke it.  Buy our cigarettes.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
105 Light them up and smoke it.
           And remember, you heard the first witness in the
case, Heimann, from the American Tobacco Company, that
Reynolds responsible.  He said we want people to follow our
advertising.  We want people to buy our product.  We say buy
as much as you can.  We don't put any limits on it.  We don't
tell you one pack, two packs, whatever.  You buy them, that's
what we are in business for.
           Well, here's what I say.  Here's what I said:  You
can't tell people, do something, and then blame them when
they do it.
           It's crazy.  You can't tell somebody, You do this.
This is our position, you do it.  And then what, when they do
it, they do it, okay.  And then come around later and say,
Well, you shouldn't have listened to us.  You should have
listened to somebody else.  What kind of nutty, improper
logic is that?
           Of all the people in the world who can't blame
Mr. Aycock or any of the other hundreds of thousands of
people who died from their products, if there's anybody in
the world who can't blame them, it's them.
           Because they said do it.  Now, maybe -- I mean,
they come in and say, Well, the public health authorities
told them.  Well, really?  Really?  And what did you say?
And so, if you remember -- let me get this real quick.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
106 Let's get the ELMO.
           They said, Oh, he didn't hear us when we said it.
He didn't hear us.  We said it, but he didn't hear us.
           But somehow he heard everybody else.  He heard the
Surgeon General, but he never heard us when we came on and
said the Surgeon General was wrong.  How do we know that?
Well, nobody knows that, how silly that is.  But I'll tell
you, I don't even care.  I don't think that's the issue.
Because the big issue is really, what I drew before, I didn't
put on earlier the tug-of-war for the hearts and minds of
America, and if you remember, we had all the marketing here,
which is a billion a year, and then where did it go?
           Well, it just didn't go to the one consumer,
Mr. Aycock.  It went to the public.  It went to doctors.
Military.  It went to his friends.  It went everywhere it
could.
           So, you know, they are saying, Well, you can't
tell us what advertising he saw.  Well, I don't care, because
you know what?  When you put -- let me show you one.  This is
so typical.  I mean, it isn't even that unusual.  Let's say
this:  Because it hits the military where he was in the
military.
           So here you go.  Here's ads -- advertising and
marketing all over the place, a billion dollars a year,
directed to military people.  Now, this is one out of a -- I
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
107 don't know -- a thousand.  So let's say that Mr. Aycock
didn't see that one.  But the guy next to him saw it or the
guy next to him saw it, and it created the flavor that it's
acceptable to smoke, especially in the military.
           So when you're -- all your friends -- let's say
Mr. Aycock had earplugs and sunglasses on and never could see
a single advertisement or hear it.  Let's just say that.  He
walks into the military.  He goes through basic training.
And everybody else is smoking.
           Why are they smoking?  Well, one reason is
Reynolds and the companies with it made it acceptable to
smoke by pushing cigarettes, a billion dollars a year, a
billion to make people smoke, to tell them it was okay.
           And now they come in and they say, Oh, no, no, no,
you should listen to the fake voice of Reader's Digest or the
fake voice of the Surgeon General, even though we spend more
in a day than they spend in a year to do this.
           Then they say, Well, he never heard us say
anything.  Well, okay.  How about this?
           I submit for your consideration that this is a
statement -- and I'm sorry the lights are bad.  But what this
says, For digestion sake.  I don't care about digestion sake.
That doesn't mean anything.
           What it means is that this is a picture that stays
in your brain for your whole life that cigarette smoking is
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
108 an okay thing to do.
           These people are sitting around a beautiful table.
They are healthy people.  They are smiling with one another.
They look like they are on top of the world, and on top of
the world means they had a cigarette with them.
           You can see this when you're ten years old and
never forget it.
           And, you know, if it were true, if it's true, the
way they tell us, the way we have heard from this company, if
it's true, that, oh, everybody really knew that this was so
bad, they knew, too.  All right?  And yet they do that.
Criminal.  And if you don't think --
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Move to strike criminal,
your Honor.
           MR. WILNER:  It's part of the instruction.
           THE COURT:  Why?
           MR. WILNER:  We will withdraw.
           Bad, bad, bad.
           MR. WILLIAMS:  Move that the jury be asked to
disregard it.
           THE COURT:  All right.  Disregard it.
           MR. WILNER:  Bad, bad, bad.  Really bad.
Intentionally bad.
           So if you don't think that modern advertising --
which this really was the leading edge, and this was the
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
109 latest, this was the most expensive, the best you can buy,
that the images told more than any words could ever tell.  If
that isn't clear, then nothing is clear, because we live in a
world of advertising.
           And they go right in.  It's kind of like -- it's a
little like the nicotine, they go right into your brain.  You
can't forget them.
           People buy things because, one thing, of the
images that are presented to them.  They do.  They might not
remember they do.  They might not like to admit it.  They
might not want to walk in and say, Hey, I bought a vacuum
cleaner today because I saw an image of a beautiful woman
pushing it.
           But you know what, why would you spend billions,
billions, to put those images in front of people if they
didn't work?  Well, we know they don't do anything that isn't
profitable.  It's profitable to buy a billion dollars worth
of advertising because you get more than a billion dollars in
sales.  It's got to be.
           So that's baloney.  You've got -- yeah, oh, did
the ads extend past 1982, this thing about '82?  Of course.
They continued through the '90s.  Today they are restricted.
But, you know, at times when Mr. Aycock was driving after
'82, one out of every two billboards in the country was
cigarettes.  It's insane to think of that.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
110 And, you know, we barely heard a word out of them.
They all want to talk about, well, the Surgeon General in
1960 -- who cares?  Why does this -- if -- you know, if you
look at this -- oh, how about this.  This is really
something.
           Oh, there was a school book.  There was a school
book that said, Tobacco can be harmful.  And, in fact, if you
went on and read it, which I hope you get it, it says, Wait
until you are grown up.  Okay.  Big warning.
           Anyway, I want you to just think about this for a
second.  You just sat in school, you know, and the school
book said, if you even read it, Cigarettes will hurt your
wind, for instance.  And then you come home, and in the
magazine sitting on the counter Jumpin' Joe DiMaggio, your
hero, is sitting staring at you with a cigarette in his hand.
Well, I guess whatever you read in school, if it's good
enough for Joe, it's got to be good enough for you.
           If that isn't a statement that says, Well, you
know, you can take your school books -- just like you saw in
The Beverly Hillbillies, you can take your school books, but
this is where it's at.
           And that is wrong.  That's a terrible thing.  And
did it continue?  Well, obviously it continued -- it
continues today.  It's not exactly the same.  Now they
sponsor NASCAR and everything else.  It's not as overt as
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
111 calling Joe DiMaggio, but this certainly went on and on.
           I like the picture, actually.  Let me put it up.
           I mean, he says, mildness -- I can't read the
whole thing -- 28 percent less nicotine, whatever that's
supposed to mean.  So you think, I'll get my Camel.  It's
good enough for him.
           They did the same thing with filters.  Okay.  So
there is stuff out there that hurts.  There is.  But if you
buy the filters, well, you know, your problem may be solved.
           Now, also, Reynolds says -- I want to say we have
had our moments of levity.  And I don't want to overemphasize
this, but in the end, this is serious stuff.  In the end, it
is.  I mean, this isn't -- we have been a little lighthearted
at times, but it's not all smiles, because you are talking
about an insane epidemic.  We are just so -- it's almost like
we are, like, immune to it.  I mean, we can talk about it as,
oh, well, yeah, all these people wanted to smoke.  And that's
not the way human behavior is.  Human behavior is influenced,
and it has been influenced.
           Oh, okay.  I'm sorry, I forgot.  Let me get back
to it.  They want to say, Oh, nicotine in our cigarettes is
just part of the plant.  And, oh, oh, we didn't do anything
to it.  It's just part of the deal.  Really?  Let's forget
about your marketing with Joe DiMaggio, because that's how
you push this nicotine on people.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
112 But let's go to the science for a second and see
whether anybody stands with Reynolds on the science or not.
Because, you know, Reynolds stands alone.  The cigarette
industry stands alone when modern science appears.  And
you've seen it.  You will see it.  It's all over these
documents.
           So, here's what I suggest, if you have the chance
and the inclination, I beg you to consider Exhibit 237, the
2010 Surgeon General's Report, in evidence.  It will be just
like this.  We actually had a couple of extra books.
           Read anything you want.  There is a great chapter
on nicotine addiction.  It says, Nicotine addiction is the
fundamental reason.  They don't like that.  And here is a
great chapter on what they did, Cigarette Design Changes Over
the Years.  Fascinating.
           And here, I'll read one paragraph because time
presses.  It says -- it goes on to talk about how the
documents -- the formerly secret documents, when they were
put out, how the science people looked at them and said,
golly, that's bad, and we did not know what they were doing
inside.
           It says it in here.  It's page -- starts at
Page 15 and 16.  And here on Page 17, it says, Other changes,
talking about how they engineered the cigarette to be
addictive.  I didn't make it up.  It's the Surgeon General of
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
113 the United States.  Other changes during the last 50 years
have included efforts to potentially have made cigarettes
more addictive through the use of flavors, chemical
treatments to alter the smell and appearance of cigarette
smoke.  Methods to mask noxious sensory effects and control
of the nicotine dose.  And there is more to it.  But in the
interest of time, I'll let you read it, if you wish.
           Because this is the modern science.  There is no
better textbook on earth than this entire textbook on
tobacco.  And we are standing behind this.
           Reynolds is going, Well, we like some of it.  We
don't like all of it.  And, also, this National Cancer
Institute publication that we talked about, this will be in
evidence, but it will be photocopies.  The most fascinating
chapter is the first one called "Public Health Implications
of Changes in Cigarette Design."  It's the introduction to
the chapter.  And who is it by?  David Burns and Neal
Benowitz.  And this first chapter, which starts at Page 1,
goes through the whole thing.  It talks about how they found
the documents.  It ends at Page 10.
           So I suggest -- we don't have time to go through
this now, but what we are saying is not bologna.  It is what
the scientific community has concluded.  And you bet
Dr. Burns is busy, because he is in huge demand because he is
one of the people who authored the Cancer Institute books and
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
114 the Surgeon General books.  And he's not making up any of it.
           As unbelievable as this story is in a sense, and I
don't mean it's unbelievable that you don't believe it, I
mean, it is so big.  It's such a long-reaching conspiracy, it
has such enormous implications that you almost throw up your
hands and say, How did that happen?
           I want to give to you real quick some document
numbers that in the interest of time you can actually look at
these documents yourself.  I'll read the numbers off.  71,
163.  71 talks about the psychological crutch.  These are
plaintiff's exhibits.
           163, an unbelievable memorandum from 1963 by a guy
named Addison Yeaman of Brown & Williamson, where he says
nicotine is addictive, in '63.  Unbelievable.  Really there.
           No. 3, the original Frank Statement.  Fascinating
reading.  They all got together.  Conspiracy.  Lasted until
'99.
           889, a whole group of press releases.  That's what
they are sending out.  Pumping out.  Remember, I drew it.
It's the tug-of-war.  Here's the ads.  Here's the public
health authorities trying to get to people.  Here's the
counter stuff trying to block the public health authorities.
           Was it perfect?  No.  Some of the public health
stuff got through, but they tried everything to block it.
And the overwhelming power was the marketing.  And they had a
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
115 secret weapon.  And that was addiction.  That greased the
rope of the tug-of-war, because when you are an addicted
brain, you need it.  And a little disinformation, a little
doubt, goes a long way to an addicted brain.  You want to
hear that doubt.  Oh, it could be.  It just could be.
           And Joe, it's good enough for Joe.  It's good
enough for my buddy.  It's good enough for my girlfriend.
It's good enough for whatever.  And you want to hear it.  And
that's what keeps you smoking.  And they knew it.
           So, okay, 72.  This is the famous document from
1982.  After this '82 cutoff date, that says -- it says, How
can -- if the exit gate from our market were ever opened, we
would be out of business.  Guess what the exit gate is?  The
nicotine addiction is designed in.  If it were out, we would
go out of business.  That's connecting the circle.  They did
it in their own document.  If they cure the nicotine
addiction, they are out of business.  So they are never going
to do it unless they are made to do it.
           377, document destruction.  Whole subject itself.
           450, the anti-Surgeon General Report.  Called the
Continuing Controversy.  What baloney that is.
           No. 27, doubt is our product.  How crazy is that?
Company makes -- has an internal memorandum that says that's
what they are doing.  Doubt is our product.  Punitive
damages.
Trial Day 8 4/17/13
116 No. 2, can we have an open debate on smoking --
           COURTROOM DEPUTY:  Mr. Wilner, your time is up.
           MR. WILNER:  Thank you.
           And No. 210, structured creativity.  The medical
is certain, and I won't go into it.
           Thank you very much.