MR. BELASIC: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. May it please the Court, Counsel,
Mrs. Baker.
You know, there was one thing that Dr. DiFranza, the plaintiffs witness from Boston, and Dr. Eth, the man that they attacked so much, agreed upon. And what they agreed upon was that among people in general, and among the patients that they both see, that lots and lots of patients and lots and lots of people made unhealthy choices, even choices that involve unhealthy activities that aren't addictive. You heard, for example, when I asked Dr. DiFranza, that out of all of his patients, he must be counseling so many that they need to lose weight and, in fact, he said, sure, year after year after year you counsel them to lose weight, but they don't do anything or they don't take action. Or people who make New Year's resolutions about exercises, and Dr. DiFranza said,
I counsel them and I tell them and they know, but they don't exercise.
Or Dr. Eth talking about alcohol and all of the hard drugs and other substance dependences that
he sees at the VA.
And I suppose if you looked at the hundreds of millions of people in this country, you'd see an individual story from birth until the time they passed away, the pleasure, the pain of life, the triumph and tragedy, the pathways that they would either take or not take. And those pathways would be decisions, decisions that often affect their health. And those decisions can involve just personal activities like, do I exercise? Or they can involve, do I purchase and use harmful substances, harmful legal products? Like when Dr. DiFranza said, obesity, diabetes, the things that come from buying and using high fat food or from alcohol or from smoking.
Now, this case we won't be talking about the hundreds of millions of stories. But there is two stories, sometimes competing, sometimes overlapping stories in this case. And one is the story of Mr. Baker and the decisions that he made in his life, particularly, but not limited to, the decisions that he made about smoking.
The other story is the story of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and, according to the plaintiff, other tobacco companies. And we'll call that the
tobacco story.
The problem is, as you've seen from the evidence, particularly the sworn testimony of the people who knew him best, the people who loved him and the people who had no reason not to tell the truth, the problem is those two stories don't match. Those two stories don't fit together because the evidence from the people who observed Mr. Baker and what he knew about smoking, what he said about smoking, what he chose to do and really, importantly, not to do about smoking, doesn't match up with the tobacco story that the plaintiffs tell.
And let me give you an example.
In the tobacco story that the plaintiffs tell, smokers are tricked and deceived into smoking. In Mr. Baker's real life, he wasn't tricked or deceived. Plaintiffs didn't put on a shred of evidence that he thought that smoking was good for him, that he thought that smoking wasn't dangerous.
Just the opposite. You saw all of the sworn testimony that his own family told him and that he was warned repeatedly.
Now, in the plaintiffs tobacco story, smokers eagerly search out every, single statement that a tobacco company might make or they watch every show
where a tobacco company gets to have the last word after all the doctors tell you that smoking is bad for you. According to the plaintiffs tobacco story, smokers sit around waiting for tobacco companies to say things before they decide whether to quit or not.
But in the real world, in Mr. Baker's real life, we know that's not true. He was telling his children not to smoke because it was bad for them.
Richard, in at least 1960, 33 years before he ever got -- before he ever got cancer, we know he was repeatedly warned, we know he told Todd Baker that smoking was bad for him. We know there is no evidence in this record that he ever thought, hey, smoking is good, or that I saw something that an old man said on a 1950s TV show and that's why I smoked. The stories don't match.
Now, in plaintiffs tobacco story, smokers try desperately over and over and over again to quit.
In Mr. Baker's real life, for 40 years, his own wife agrees, she admitted that for 40 years, from the 1940s until apparently the 1980s, he makes no effort to smoke -- I mean, he makes no effort to quit. His wife says he enjoys smoking and he does nothing until the 1980s. And then he buys some
products like gum or patches, but never stops at all. In fact, as we heard, maybe too many times, the only time he stopped is when he sat in the pew at church.
Now, here are three critical facts that apply to a lot of the issues in this case: Plaintiffs talk about the conduct of R.J. Reynolds and they say at the end of this case that it is so gross and so flagrant, I don't think they -- or that it is without any care at all that they should be punished.
We know that cigarettes are a legal product and we've heard the evidence they're not legal because society thinks they're safe. We know that Florida was banning cigarettes more than a century ago. They changed their mind.
We know the government and the Surgeon General had long since determined that smoking causes disease and can be addictive. But right or wrong, our society and government have determined that cigarettes are a legal product. And the evidence in this case is that the tobacco companies complied with those products -- and those laws.
You saw Dr. Cook say, they followed the warning laws, they followed the regulatory laws,
they followed the disclosure laws to turn over the ingredients and what's in the cigarettes.
But second, no one forced Mr. Baker to smoke, and his own doctor said he could quit at any time.
Of course, no one knows why Mr. Baker picked up that cigarette that we saw in the photo and no one knows how much he was smoking then or whether he started really smoking the next year or the year after that. And that's the point. Plaintiffs want you to guess, but they know and they admit it was their burden. No one forced Mr. Baker to smoke.
Now, his own doctor, who is Dr. Rosen -- I heard Mr. Shevin say some of the things I would say about Dr. Rosen. And apparently he thinks I was going say that he thought I thought Dr. Rosen was some dumb guy. Not at all.
Dr. Rosen was the only doctor that has actually testified at this trial that ever met Mr. Baker. And Dr. Rosen is the doctor that said Mr. Baker could quit at any time.
Now, plaintiffs lawyer tried to quibble with that, but you'll see and we'll review exactly what Dr. Rosen said, that Mr. Baker could quit at any time.
In fact, if you remember the testimony, when
he said he could quit at any time, the plaintiffs never even asked him the question that you're going to decide first. They never even asked Dr. Rosen, hey, was addiction a cause of his lung cancer? We know smoking was. That's not a dispute. But the only doctor that actually saw him says the following: "Smoking was a cause, I think he was addicted, but he could quit smoking at any time."
The issue you're going to be asked to decide, ladies and gentlemen, is, was addiction the legal cause? That wasn't even asked of Dr. Rosen. And you saw no other evidence from any doctor. Forget whether Dr. Eth or Dr. DiFranza, who's the most biased? We'll talk about that. You saw no other evidence from any doctor that ever met him, except Dr. Rosen. And he says he could quit at any time.
And then finally, nothing Reynolds did affected Mr. Baker's choices to start or continue smoking. I think we all know that when we saw the sworn testimony of Mrs. Baker, of Richard Baker and all the conversations they had over the years, and even of Todd Baker when he said that his father had never once mentioned hearing anything from any tobacco company, never said, you know, I never knew it was bad for me, I'm surprised this happened.
So here's what I promised in opening statement the evidence would show: He enjoyed smoking, Mrs. Baker admitted that; his wife and son constantly warned him, you know the evidence; that he rejected those warnings repeatedly with "shut up" and "it's my life;" that he went 40 years with no effort to quit.
And so the plaintiffs focus all of their attention in this case on that last narrow strip of his life, those last few years from the late '80s, whether it's '88 or '89 -- counsel this morning said '89 -- until his death in '93. And they really ignore the first 40 years where he smokes as a willing smoker, he enjoys it, he makes no effort to quit.
We know in the mid 1980s he started buying some things, some gums, some pills. And we'll see evidence and you saw it, it was to get his wife off his back.
And we know that he quit when he was sick and he started sneaking cigarettes again and that Mrs. Baker herself said she only saw him smoke twice in those last seven months and never smelled it on him.
Now, one word and one name you never heard in
plaintiffs closing was Richard Baker.
Richard Baker was the most important, would have been the star witness for the defendant in this case. That's why I spent so much time talking to you about Richard Baker. He knew his father and spent time with him, even in a way that Mrs. Baker didn't, because he worked with him for 20 years at that ambulance company. He didn't just see him at night when his dad came home for dinner and would smoke at home or have a drink. He saw him during the day for 20 years. And he had conversation after conversation with Mr. Baker. So you don't have to rely on my word or Mr. Shevin's word or whichever one of these doctors decided to read you what depo.
Let's look at what Richard said. I'm not even going to paraphrase. This is about four minutes of what Richard Baker told us.
(The following video was played:)
Q. When was the first time you ever told your d, you know, that or recommended that your father not oke or that he cut back because for just pure health asons?
A. I constantly asked him to slow down, at least,
to quit.
Q. Did you tell him that you thought that igarette smoking was dangerous, that it could be
armful to his health or something similar to that?
A. Yeah. Oh, yeah.
Q. What would he say when you said that?
A. I -- I can't remember the exact response, if e just kind of ignored us or what.
Q. Well, did -- at that point when you first -ind of -- tell me kind of in your own words what you ould say to him to encourage him to stop smoking ecause of health reasons. What would you say?
A. Just tell him, hey, you know, you need to uit, you need to cut down; otherwise, you know, we're Lot going to be able to go fishing.
Q. What do you mean by that?
A. Well, he's going to be dead.
Q. And tell me about how often you would warn our father about smoking and the health reasons onnected with what might happen to him if he continued
o	smoke.
A. How often?
Q. Yeah.
A. Constantly.
Q. What do you mean by "constantly"?
A. Generally, when we were alone. I didn't, you
)w, try to embarrass him, you know, in front of other >ple and stuff like that.
Q. What would you say to him, Richard?
A. I just told him, you know, you've got to quit.
Q. But did you tell him why you thought he should t?
A. Because he's going to kill himself. It's -stuff is poison. There is no telling what's even in se things.
Q. We were talking about people that may have --luding yourself, that may have spoken to your dad or ir mom about the health risks associated with smoking.
Do you know, what did your mother -- you ntioned that she encouraged your dad to stop, too. d what day -- what do you remember your mom saying to ir dad about stopping?
A. She rode him like an old Harley. I mean, she s on his ass constantly.
Q. When your mom would tell him he needed to t, do you ever remember her, you know, telling him - as you say, riding him about, hey, listen, these ngs are dangerous, this will make you sick, that kind hing?
A. Yeah.
Q. After you knew that he was back smoking after
pping for that period of time, what would you say to n at that point, if anything?
A. What would -- when he started back?
Q. When he started back, yeah.
A. I didn't say anything to him. Just he'd tell li to shut up, it's my life, or whatever. You know, just -- it just became redundant. And after a ile, you just, you know, throw in the towel.
Q. There was one thing I wanted to ask you about,
1 that was, you told us about an incident where mething about your mom -- your dad was smoking, maybe as after he had stopped smoking or not, I don't ow. Your mom was smoking. And I think it was when ■. Reid was asking you about warning labels on arettes. And you might have said your mom said, see, right here, you're referencing, pointing to the -1 then she threw a pack of cigarettes at him?
A. Well, she threw them down on the table in nt of him, yeah.
Q. Let's talk about that. I kind of rambled ough that just to point you in the direction of, tell about that episode. What were you referring to in t instance?
A. That was in her attempt to make him stop oking, harping on him and telling him, you've got to
tit, you know. And then one time she picked it up and oved it in his face and says, it says it's right here, u know?
Q. Do you know if when he did try to stop oking, if he was trying to stop to please your mom or s he genuinely interested -A. I think he was just trying to shut her up.
Q. Why do you think that?
A. Because she stayed on him constantly about his loking.
(Video concluded.)
MR. BELASIC: Does anyone doubt, based on that evidence, that Richard Baker was not telling the truth? That he didn't love his father? That he didn't care for his father? There was not a shred of evidence to dispute or to refute that.
This isn't something that an expert gave an opinion on. It's not something that we made up.
This is the real life, what actually happened with Mr. Baker, and the way Mr. Baker actually acted and felt about smoking. And it's an amazing thing to leave out in a closing argument that reveals the evidence.
If you consider what Mr. Baker said about their conversations that they had and all those
decades and remember that Mrs. Baker said that for 40 years he showed no indication or effort to quit. Remember what happened?
When Mrs. Baker took the stand, Mr. Domnick was asking her questions. And Mr. Domnick asked her a question about drinking. And she, for the first time in this case, raised this drinking issue. And she said, I worried that he was having a midlife crisis. She said that he was starting to drink too much.
We know that around the same time, the mid to late '80s, he started to get up in the middle of the night and she didn't know why. We know he had a cigarette when he did.
Now, why did he have this midlife crisis and why is it relevant? Well, none of us know why he had the midlife crisis. Mrs. Baker didn't explain it and I didn't ask her because I'm not in the business of trying to pry or embarrass that woman. She didn't tell us.
But we do know, and there is certainly no evidence that R.J. Reynolds had nothing to do with the midlife crisis. Whatever he was going through, the evidence was that it focused on drinking.
Now plaintiffs say, oh, sure that's a tobacco
company trying to smear a guy for having a drink? Really? Is that the way I presented it? Is that the questions we asked Dr. Eth? Were we trying to show he was a bad man because he drank? If you remember the testimony, the issue here was Mr. Baker made an amazing change in his conduct. And he gave up using a substance that was causing him problems.
How do we prove that?
Cheryl Brendel, a close friend of Mrs. Baker, who introduced Mrs. Baker to her church, said that during the years she worked with her at the flower shop, Mrs. Baker said that she was upset and worried about her husband and her husband's drinking, that she was having to shoulder too much of the load at home.
Ms. Brendel said drinking was the elephant in the room. And when asked, what about smoking, she said, well, I don't think smoking was that big of an issue.
Well, Ms. Brendel and Donald Baker, you saw his video, he -- the grandson, who is a police officer, both said Mr. Baker changed his behavior, changed his life, stopped drinking.
And as Dr. Eth said, based on thousands of
patients he's had, it's not surprising, it's not unusual that a person would have greater motivation to stop a substance that was causing him immediate problems than another substance.
Dr. Eth said, and there was no evidence to refute it, if he had made the same serious effort that he did for alcohol to smoking, he could have quit smoking. And there was no evidence to refute it.
Now, plaintiff's only answer is, hey, Belasic is a bad guy. He's trying to smear him because he drank. That's not the evidence and I hope that none of you think that. He could change. And he could when he wanted to make serious efforts, not just sitting in church, because after all, he wasn't drinking in church, not just buying a patch and not even stopping for a minute, but the kind of effort he put into stopping drinking.
Now, what if smoking caused his midlife crisis? What if smoking had disrupted his life?
What if he was caught smoking in the car and had been suspended from work and lost a week's pay and was demoted?
Dr. Eth says that's the kind of motivation that caused him to change his drinking behavior.
That's the kind of motivation that Cheryl Brendel said in 1986. 1987, just one year after the drinking on the job incident, he quit drinking. He had motivation.
Cheryl Brendel said drinking was having an immediate short-term effect, an immediate effect, unlike the long-term effects of smoking.
There is no evidence that if he had put the same type of effort into quitting smoking that he did drinking, that he wouldn't have quit smoking.
But what we do know is that what the plaintiff calls quitting attempts, she said hypnosis, that was a quitting attempt. Patches, gum, those were quitting attempts.
I'd admit to you what the evidence actually was, is a series of purchases, but not actual attempts to quit. Does anyone know how long he supposedly stopped smoking in this case? Does anyone remember when he got the patch? Mrs. Baker says he didn't stop smoking at all. He bought something, but he didn't make an effort to quit.
He was smoking while wearing it. How long did he quit when he bought something called nicotine gum? No evidence that he quit for even 2 minutes.
The two hours was in church. He wasn't
drinking or smoking or eating or doing anything else in church. Those weren't quitting attempts.
What the plaintiff -- what Mrs. Baker called quitting attempts were things he bought, but then when she took the stand she admitted he didn't stop at all during those times.
There isn't any evidence in this case that he even stopped for 10 minutes because of patches or gum.
The evidence was that if he did go to hypnosis, he was smoking on the way back. The evidence is that when he and a large group of people went up to the altar at church, he was smoking on the way back. There isn't any evidence that he actually took concrete steps.
Now, what this case comes down to, when the plaintiffs claim, well, he meets some criteria for addiction and, therefore, addiction must be a legal cause, it has to be a direct and continuous and substantial cause, what this case comes down to is, well, he couldn't quit smoking; that he was caused to develop lung cancer.
And when you ask these -- when you ask the witnesses and the experts, well, what is it that stopped him from quitting smoking? Is there some
sort of horrible withdrawal? What they told you is, he was fidgety, that he was fidgety. He must have shifted positions. He moved his leg at church. Sometimes because he was an usher, he walked to the back of the church.
What if we had applied that standard to anything else in our lives?
Dr. DiFranza took the stand and said, to him, addiction is if quitting smoking is not effortless.
He said, if there is any effort involved at all, then he calls it an addiction.
Like Mr. Shevin said, you're not required to throw your common sense out the window.
Is it really common sense that you were caused, you were doomed to develop lung cancer, because if you quit, you would get fidgety? Would we evaluate any other part of our lives? Would someone tell you, I haven't look for a job in 40 years and now I've looked for a job once in the last year, would anyone seriously think that that was a sincere effort to find work?
You know, when Dr. DiFranza says if there is effort involved, it has to be addiction, you know the answer to that is, well, what involves a lot of effort? Life. Life is hard. Life takes effort.
And life is more than just buying something and not making an effort to quit, because there is no evidence that when he bought the patches or the gum that he actually stopped for any length of time.
You saw what Richard said. We know he was warned constantly, not just for a few years, but at least from the 1960s on. We know the warnings were that he could die. We know his response to Richard in their private conversations, because Mr. Baker was polite to his wife. There is no question that they loved each other and she loved him. There is no suggestion in this case.
What we hear from Richard, though, you're going to die, he would just tell him to shut up and say, it's my life.
We know that Mr. Baker would say when asked why he was smoking by the grandchildren, because I can.
Now, there was almost no mention in the closing argument of Mrs. Baker's testimony about what she observed, other than he got up at night at the same time he was having his midlife crisis.
What Mrs. Baker said is -- obviously, she is filing this lawsuit. We know she has a financial incentive. We now know the amount of that
financial incentive. Mr. Domnick says it's 8 to $10 million, is what he's asking for in just this phase of trial.
You heard there could be another phase of trial in which they would ask for more.
But Mrs. Baker clearly says that her husband was warned and she contradicts her testimony. I'm going to let you see the videotaped deposition of -- that you saw portions of in the trial. And we'll talk about, did it match up with what she said when she took the stand.
(The following video was played:)
Q. Did you ever encourage him to quit smoking? A. Oh, yeah, all the time.
Q. Did he ever say anything similar to that, I st can't quit -A. I don't believe he admitted he couldn't quit. don't think he ever verbally said it.
Q. Did your husband ever tell you that he was etermined to quit smoking?
A. Did he tell me that?
Q. Yeah.
A. I don't think he came out and said it, no.
Q. Did your husband ever -- when he wasn't able smoke -- well, what's the longest time that you
emember your husband not smoking?
A. Well, at church.
Q. So two hours?
A. Uh-huh.
Q. Ma'am?
A. Yes.
Q. And you don't remember him stopping smoking or a whole day, for example?
A. Oh, no, never.
Q. Never?
A. I don't remember that.
Q. When your husband couldn't have a cigarette, id that -- did his mood change any?
A. When who said what?
Q. Well, when he couldn't have a cigarette ecause he's at church, other than being a little jumpy, mean, was there anything else you noticed about him?
A. No. You know, we'd drive down there to the hurch and he seemed to be okay and he seemed to be all ight in church.
Q. When you left the church, you told me esterday, I think, that the first thing he did besides pen the door to get in the car was to take out a igarette and smoke it?
A. Have a cigarette.
Q. What did you say to him when he did that?
A. Well, I asked him, you know, why? And he id, I can't help it, you know. He just more or less : me know that -- he didn't say, you know, mind your vn business, but it was more or less, you know.
Q. It was almost -A. I'm going to smoke it whether you like it or it. That's not what he said, but...
Q. Okay. So he didn't say, mind your own siness, but he -A. No.
Q. He was his own man at that point?
A. He was going to do what he was going to do.
Q. What he wanted to do?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And up to that point, smoking before he s diagnosed back in '92, smoking, as you described to , a lot. And then when he was diagnosed, he pretty uch stopped smoking almost all together, didn't he?
A. Yes.
Q. Sure. When you would come home, do you ever member feeling -- being able to smell cigarette smoke your husband?
A. When I came home?
Q. Yeah, from the store.
A. Oh, when he was sick?
Q. When he was sick.
A. I don't really remember smelling anything.
Q. Okay. All right. But you never smelled like was smoking a lot after he was diagnosed?
A. No.
(Video concluded.)
MR. BELASIC: You are the judges of the facts. And I'll suggest to you that some of that testimony given one year ago under oath prior to trial was contrary to some of the testimony that Mrs. Baker gave. But you're the judges of the facts, you're going to weigh credibility. I'm not going to go on and on attacking some witness.
Mrs. Baker told us what she observed and what she told her husband.
We know, quit smoking all the time. When I asked her that on the stand, she would say, well, it's not really all the time. We saw that she said that under oath a year before.
We know from her son that she showed him the warning on the pack -- and this was interesting.
She said, I don't think this ever happened or I don't remember it.
And I asked her, you know, is there any reason
that Richard, that your son would make up -- would make this story up? And she said, well, maybe he was on drugs, some sort of prescription medication.
So do you remember right at the end of our case we had to play you two short clips of Richard? One of the clips we had to play you was Richard saying under oath, no, I'm not under any medication.
So for whatever reason, I mean, she was willing to sort of throw her son under the bus and say, well, he might have been on drugs when he said that. As he told you, he wasn't. There is no evidence that this didn't occur.
And this is 26 or 27 years before he developed cancer. We know that the next year, 1968, she quit smoking. According to his own doctor, Dr. Rosen, he could have quit smoking with her at that time,
25 years before he got the disease.
He could have wiped out, we'll see the evidence shows, he could have wiped out his risk for lung cancer.
Now, they talk about the life insurance application. And they said, you're trying to say he was committing fraud. Look, I don't know what he was doing. What we do know is that by 1983
there is no question that for decades Mr. Baker has known that smoking is dangerous and that it could kill him and that when he applies for life insurance, he ended up applying as a non-smoker. He was a man that understood the risks.
The plaintiff’s version is, well, he accidentally signed it or he never looked at it or he just filled out an application and never saw it. You'll have to decide if that makes sense.
But is there any doubt that by that time he clearly knew that smoking was a major risk? His son had been telling him since the '60s that it could cause disease and death.
You heard her say that she believed,
Mrs. Baker's belief was that her husband was going to do what he wanted, whether she liked it or not. That's why for those 40 years, when she said he enjoyed smoking, he never tried to quit.
She confirmed that the longest he ever stopped was for two hours. But, again, it wasn't when he was trying to quit, it was only when he was in church. She doesn't claim that he ever stopped 2 minutes, 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 20 minutes. There is no evidence in the record when he was buying things like a ginger pill or gum.
And we know what Richard Baker said, that he believes, based on all of the years that he saw his dad, that his father was just trying to get Mrs. Baker, as he says, to shut her up; to get his wife off his back about something she says she warned him all the time.
Now, you know that question 1 is, "Was Mr. Baker addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" This question doesn't say, why did he quit smoking? It doesn't say, was nicotine a reason that he smoked? It doesn't say, was nicotine the most important reason? It says, was it a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?
Now, you know that the DSM-IV was used by Dr. Eth, and we're going to talk about Dr. Eth. Here's what the Surgeon General's report says about DSM-IV, that it is the criteria necessary for a diagnosis of dependence.
Mr. Shevin says that Dr. Eth came in and bragged that he was one of the smartest men in the world. I don't remember that. You'll have to decide.
What I do remember is that the first witness
in this case, the gentleman from Canada, Dr. Eth, who they brought in, said, quote, I was a prodigy, bragged that he had been the most published author in Canada, even when he was 18, and said, quote, that he was the most sought after expert in the world, talked about how he had made $30 million, billed $30 million to lawyers. That's what I remember. I don't remember Dr. Eth bragging about how smart he was.
I remember him talking about the fact that he is a professor at the addiction medicine school at Miami, that he is, yes, board certified in addiction psychiatry, and that he is trained to use DSM-IV.
As he pointed out, DSM-IV says that there has to be clinical significant impairment or stress.
Dr. Eth never said you have to lose your job to be an addict, to be a cigarette addict or nicotine dependent, that you have to lose your life. Mr. Shevin makes those claims.
Did Dr. Eth say anything like that? He went through the seven criteria. We know what they are. We know what the criteria for withdrawal is. We know there was no evidence of any withdrawal. Being jittery isn't on here. If jittery is
restlessness, that is one symptom in the 1990s or late '80s, according to the professional medical definition, using four or more symptoms in 24 hours. There wasn't any evidence of, quote, withdrawal, other than he's being jittery.
So what plaintiffs are saying is that you can go 40 years and you can smoke for 40 years, you can make no effort to quit -- there is no dispute about that -- for 40 years, and that in the last few years of your life you can go to church and not smoke. And if you get fidgety, if your leg moves a lot, like some of us get fidgety in the courtroom, you can then recover or your wife can recover $10 million.
We heard the evidence that withdrawal from things like heroin and barbiturates is life threatening. You can die. You have to go to the hospital. No one goes to the hospital because they say, I was fidgety in church.
This is what the DSM-IV says. We saw the Surgeon General said that the DSM-IV is necessary for a diagnosis.
It says, "The proper use of these criteria requires specialized clinical training that provides both body of knowledge and clinical
schools."
You know, Mr. Shevin can make fun of Dr. Eth, but does he have the clinical training? Of course he does. He's board certified as a psychiatrist, as an addiction psychiatrist, as a forensic psychiatrist. The witness they brought in,
Dr. Eth, isn't a psychiatrist at all. And even if he has written about nicotine addiction, remember what I asked Dr. DiFranza, their expert from Boston? One of the first things he had said on direct examination is, in his practice he doesn't make a diagnosis of addiction or nicotine dependence because he doesn't care. He's treating anyone that wants to quit, he treats. And I asked him again to confirm that. Dr. DiFranza doesn't make diagnoses of nicotine dependency.
And remember I asked him, I said, you know, everything is real life, but in your real life as a doctor, you don't do what plaintiff's lawyers brought you to Court to do? You don't make diagnoses? And he agreed. And he certainly doesn't use the DSM-IV. He admitted this was one of the first times he had ever done it, for the purposes of a lawsuit; the same Dr. DiFranza that said he didn't read all the testimony and all the
information about Mr. Baker, the same Dr. DiFranza that said he got e-mails of some depositions from the plaintiffs lawyers, and said the plaintiffs lawyers told him not to read them because in their opinion, the depositions were, he called them, peripheral. Peripheral.
So if Mr. Shevin wants to attack Dr. Eth as some sort of hired gun, what is Dr. DiFranza, who is being told by the lawyers, don't read the peripheral depos?
And remember when Dr. DiFranza said there was something in the granddaughter's depo? I asked him, did you ever read it? Well, I read some excerpts. Excerpts? Where did you get the excerpts? Plaintiffs lawyers. Plaintiffs lawyers picked it out, sent it to him. Asked him who the granddaughter was. He didn't know. So Dr. DiFranza doesn't have any training in that.
If you think Mr. Baker is addicted, then you can move on to the second half of this question and we'll talk about legal cause.
But one of the things I want to point out is, every time that either Dr. DiFranza or the plaintiffs lawyers talk about that, they talk about this from the standpoint of the 1990s and the
late 1980s, because what they call getting jittery in church, that doesn't occur for 40 years. What they call larger amounts than intended, that didn't exist for those 40 years. He smoked a pack a day, decade after decade after decade. Around the time of the midlife crisis he started smoking a lot more, he started drinking a lot more. And Dr. Eth said, the larger amounts, the longer period than intended is not whether someone predicts the future saying, hey, if I start drinking coffee or alcohol or smoking, am I going use more in 50 years?
As Dr. Eth explained what DSM-IV is talking about, is somebody that says, I'm only going to do one line of cocaine tonight and because of the addictive nature of the substance, they do more.
I'm only going to have one drink with the boys in the bar. I'm just going to get high on the weekends. We know that there were no efforts to cut down use at all until the late 1980s.
They talked a lot about chain smoking. There were three people who said that at some time he lit one cigarette off another. So instead, the plaintiff's lawyers emphasized, well, what about when he was smoking two packs a day? Again, that's after 40 years. There is no indication that he
reduced his activities. They want to say going outside to smoke is giving up an activity, like giving up his job or picnics, et cetera. It's going outside to smoke.
You'll have to decide if that is somehow a sign of addiction because you respect your wife's wishes and can control your behavior so that you don't smoke in the house.
And we know that the continued use, despite negative consequences, did not occur until 1993.
Now, Mr. Eth criticized this requirement, but no one can deny this is what the official medical criteria say. There has to be clinical significant distress or impairment caused by the attempt to stop the behavior. There isn't any. There isn't any. There was never clinically significant distress. According to his own wife, other than being jumpy, he seemed normal, even when he was in church.
Now, you saw this figure a lot. Why is this important? That 60 million people have quit.
First, because it shows that quitting smoking is incredibly common. Plaintiffs act as if the fact that Mr. Baker got jumpy for a couple of years while he was sitting in a pew at church means that
it's a somewhat impossible burden that therefore he was doomed to develop lung cancer and his wife should receive $10 million. But 60 million people have quit, including tens of millions of people who would meet the definition of addiction.
Addiction doesn't mean you're going to be caused to smoke, you're going to be forced to develop lung cancer.
Here's what their own expert, Dr. Feingold, said: Of course addicted smokers can quit smoking. He says he thinks 80 or 90 percent of those 60 million were addicted. So you do the math, that's over 50 million addicted smokers.
Addiction is a label and their own experts agree it doesn't mean that you're being forced to smoke, it doesn't mean you don't have free choice.
If it meant that, we wouldn't have seen 60 million people put their cigarettes down. Do what Perry Baker never did, throw your cigarettes away. Throw your ashtrays away.
Plaintiffs often pointed out during the trial that, well, if you don't have medicine, you can't quit. That's not what the Surgeon General says.
It's historical.
Going back into the history, the great
majority of the smokers that successfully quit smoking, more than 90 percent of them quit on their own without this formal assistance.
We know that the official position of the Department of Health and Human Services is, you can quit smoking. And remember, every time I used this, Mr. Domnick or Mr. Shevin would show you the first page, and it says, look, nicotine is addictive. Nicotine is a powerful addictive drug.
Of course that's what the government says.
Does the government say that nicotine addiction is going to force you to smoke? That it's going to cause you to continuously for 40 years be doomed to develop a disease? No. They say the study suggests that everyone can quit smoking.
The most recent Surgeon General's report on addiction, 2010, now is the time to quit. No one can make you quit and no one can do it for you.
That isn't some sort of -- whatever Mr. Shevin says, some sort of line that a tobacco company uses.
This is the Surgeon General that wants everyone to quit, saying, look, no one can make you quit. Richard Baker couldn't make his father quit,
Mrs. Baker couldn't make her husband quit, Todd Baker couldn't make his father quit. No one could do it for him. And buying a pill and putting a jar of ginger pills on the kitchen table or buying a patch and never stopping smoking for even a minute is not something that is a serious effort to quit.
No one could make him. He had to make an effort.
This is the instruction that the judge gave you and that you'll have for how to answer question number 1: Is addiction a legal cause?
A couple of things: Mr. Shevin in his closing concentrated on one out of at least three parts.
He said, look, if it contributes substantially to producing lung cancer and death. At first he left out the other two requirements, that it has to be direct, directly and in a natural and continuous sequence, but then he got to it and he poked fun at me and he tried to imitate my voice. Oh, Belasic says, direct and continuous, direct and continuous.
Well, you know, you can make fun of me, but this is the Court's instruction. This is Florida law. This is what Judge Crow says you have to follow. This is what you promised to follow. And the requirement is that it's not just contributes substantial, but that addiction must be a direct
cause and it must be in a natural and continuous sequence.
I submit that there is no evidence.
Plaintiffs didn't even try to prove that he was addicted in the '50s and that it was a direct and continuous cause; that he was addicted in the '60s, and that it was a direct and continuous cause; that he was addicted in the '70s; that he was addicted in the 1980s.
Now, if we don't like this requirement, if you don't like this requirement, it's the law. It has to be followed. Florida doesn't allow a legal cause to be determined unless it is in a continuous sequence. And there is no evidence, no evidence that he ever continuously met the criteria for addiction. Dr. DiFranza didn't even get there.
All he talked about was what happened after the midlife crisis, the late '80s, the early '90s.
It's not continuous.
I put this up in the opening. It's the three main factors. This is the one Mr. Shevin concentrates on.
These are the two I'd ask you to consider.
Now, why wasn't addiction a cause? It wasn't a direct cause.
Dr. DiFranza says nicotine doesn't cause lung cancer. In between calling someone an addict and getting lung cancer 40 years ago are thousands and thousands of days in which that person can choose to quit. And his own doctor said he could quit at any time along the chain.
We know it's not continuous. I just summarized that. His own doctor didn't say this.
You know, Dr. Rosen's deposition had to be read to you. His deposition was taken beforehand. Plaintiff's lawyers asked him, you know, did it cause his death? Everyone agreed smoking was a cause. That's not what this lawsuit is about. And plaintiff's lawyers asked if he was addicted.
The defense lawyer said, even if addicted, was he capable of quitting smoking at any time? He said yes. That was the end of it.
There is no testimony from Dr. Rosen that addiction was a cause of his death. And if it was, he could have put it on the death certificate. And if it was, the plaintiff’s lawyers could have asked him. And if it was a cause of his death, they could have asked Dr. Feingold that as well. And they did not.
The only doctor that says it was a cause of
his death, that addiction was a cause of his death is Dr. DiFranza, the guy who's been working on these lawsuits for 25 years, who goes to the conferences, he says, to train lawyers to sue tobacco companies, who wrote the article that you saw that talks about strategy for winning these lawsuits, and talks about juries and stories that we can tell. That's the only person that they could find to say addiction was a cause of his death.
His own doctor, who knows more than anyone, never said it. His own doctor says Mr. Baker could stop, if he wanted to, at any time.
Now, the plaintiffs themselves admit that his actions caused his death, but they do it in an inconsistent way. They say -- and you can look at the instruction. It's instruction 22 or 23. If you go back to the jury room, it will say that the plaintiffs admit that Mr. Baker's acts were a legal cause of his injury and death. But then they say it's a partial responsibility. But the only way his actions can cause his death is if he's capable of quitting smoking. If he could have quit smoking 10, 20, 30 years earlier and avoided it, that's what they're admitting, whether they call it
partial or not.
We know Dr. Rosen said he could quit at any time. And the evidence in this case is that if he had quit earlier, he would have avoided his risk of lung cancer.
Let's see what Dr. Rosen actually said. He was asked in the deposition, you heard, Mr. Baker was able to quit smoking. So addiction, being addicted, doesn't mean that he couldn't quit, true? That is correct.
And then point blank, he could have quit at any time that he was a smoker; do you agree with that? Yes.
Unlike what Mr. Shevin said, I'm not going to make fun of Dr. Rosen. Dr. Rosen is a good doctor and he's the only doctor that ever met Mr. Baker. And he never said that addiction was a cause of his cancer. They chose not to even ask him that question. This is what he said.
Now, Dr. Feingold, you remember he was on the stand for three days. And for about a day and a half he was being questioned by plaintiff’s counsel. I tried to count, but during that time, he mentioned Mr. Baker, I think, once or twice in passing.
When Mr. Murphy cross examined him, it turned out that Dr. Feingold had actually written a 70-page written report about this case and that he had actually reached his own conclusions about Mr. Baker. And one of them was that Mr. Baker could have quit smoking at any time. And like the plaintiffs, he said inconsistently, yes, Mr. Baker had a free choice, but that choice was affected.
He didn't say he couldn't quit, he didn't say he had made a serious effort if he had done what he did to quit drinking, that he couldn't have quit smoking. He didn't say that at all.
Now, is this just based on whatever the individual testimony in this case is? No. The Surgeon General himself says that nicotine dependence doesn't have much to do with quitting or relapse, meaning, starting up again.
Here's what the Surgeon General says: "Even in the best circumstances, tobacco dependence accounts for only modest amounts of variation in risk of relapse. This finding is consistent with the notion that relapse is a function of multiple personal factors."
They don't say it was a substantial contributing factor or a legal cause. They say
that there's only a modest connection between dependence and people starting up again.
They say relapse is a function of personal factors. Yes, the personal factors, the decisions by someone like Mr. Baker to buy a patch, but not stop for even a moment; or to tell his wife something when his own son says he was trying to get her off his back; or to go 40 years without ever trying to quit and then when a midlife crisis occurs, put his focus into quitting drinking, but not smoking. Even the Surgeon General doesn't say that dependence is the cause of lung cancer.
The National Cancer Institute -- this was raised with Dr. Feingold -- says that the people who keep on smoking are not more addicted than the people who stopped.
The difference isn't whether you can check off a couple of boxes on the DSM-IV. The difference isn't whether you call one addicted or not. The difference is in the people and the choices that they made.
Now, we've talked about Mr. Baker. This is what was said -- I'm not going to go over it again -- but his motivation was clearly to quit drinking. From Cheryl Brendel, they never said
anything about it, there was no evidence to contradict her. She said it had an immediate impact and it was the elephant in the room.
From Dr. Eth, they didn't even question him about that.
There is no evidence to refute this. He had a serious problem with drinking, according to his own wife. And when he focused his attention on it, he stopped. He didn't say, I'm only going to stop drinking at church. He didn't say, I'm not going to stop drinking for more than two hours. He put his effort into it and stopped.
Mr. Shevin also criticized this. He said that I didn't show a picture of Mr. Baker's brain. And it's true that Mr. Baker had a brain like we all do, and that the 60 million people who quit smoking or the 50 million people who were addicted but quit smoking, they all had brains.
What we know from the testimony is that these nicotine receptors already exist in every human being, whether they smoke or not. They're called acetylcholine receptors. Nicotine fits into them.
We know that after a person -- that after a person quits smoking, the effect on these nicotinic receptors is over. We know, because it was
unrefuted in this trial, that our brain has trillions of receptors, that caffeine can grow new receptors, that sugar reacts with receptors, that starch reacts with receptors, that even liquids like alcohol can. There is no evidence in this case.
When I asked Dr. DiFranza, is there any published research that says in the end it's the receptors that cause addiction, he said, no.
So just saying that Mr. Baker had a brain in his head, which obviously he did, he was a strong and accomplished man who made his own decisions, one of which was, he liked smoking, and until the end of his life made absolutely no effort whatsoever to quit.
Now, could Mr. Baker have quit earlier? Of course. His own doctor says he could have quit at any time. He could have quit along with his wife in 1968. And here's what would have happened.
This is the Surgeon General's report from 1981. It talks about when you quit, your risk of getting lung cancer in the future goes down. And you'll see, if you smoke more than 20 cigarettes a day, that's him for at least part of his smoking history, there is no reduction in risk of cancer
for at least three years; however, the risk decreases thereafter, and after 10 years of cessation begins to approach that of one who has never smoked. There is no evidence in this record to refute that.
He could have quit in the '60s or the '70s or even 10 years before, by '83, and the Surgeon General says he could have gotten his -- the risk of cancer back to normal, to a nonsmoker.
Now, I'm going to turn to a new topic, but of course plaintiff’s counsel read the finding of that other jury. You know that those findings don't apply at all unless you answer certain questions.
Here's what the Judge instructed you: Even if the findings would apply, these findings do not establish that Reynolds is liable to the plaintiff in this case, meaning, that Reynolds -- that Reynolds has to pay money or that you have to answer yes. Nor do they establish whether Elmer Baker was injured by Reynolds, nor the degree to which the conduct was a legal cause. The findings are still no substitute for what you have to decide.
I'm going to go to questions 4 and 5. The reason I'm doing that is, you can answer those
questions based just on what we know about Mr. Baker. And then we'll talk about RJR, rather.
I'm going to address every one of those charges.
Dr. Teague, Dr. Rodgman, all of the claims, lying, murderers, you heard it all. I'm not going to run from that. I'm going to address those charges.
And you'll have to decide if the behavior was without any care, as the instruction for punitive says, without any care.
But here's this question. We can answer this based on what we know about Mr. Baker from his wife and son.
"Please state whether Mr. Baker reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement by R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company which concealed or omitted information."
All right. First off, is there any evidence in this case that Mr. Baker even saw a statement by Reynolds that concealed information? Did any of their witnesses even try to make that claim?
When Dr. Feingold was putting up 70-year-old ads or I Love Lucy, did he suggest, well, you know, there was someone or something in this record that suggests, you know, that tricked him? That Mr. Baker saw it because Lucille Ball smoked, he
thought, I think it's safe? There isn't a shred of evidence in this record.
But on the other hand, we know from Mr. Baker, himself, that he thought smoking was bad for him. That's what he instructed Todd and Richard, his sons, to the point he said in 1960 that he would beat Richard if he caught him smoking. Actions speak louder than words. And there are no words, no evidence on the plaintiffs side to prove reliance.
Now, is there any reliance -- was reliance a legal cause of his lung cancer? Was there reliance on a statement after May 1982? It's not even close. We know in the 1960s he was being told repeatedly that he could die by his son. We know that in 1966 the warning came out and that his wife put it in his face. We know that he believed smoking was dangerous. So there is no question after May 1982 that the answer has to be no. You know, if plaintiffs are going to make this claim, they have the burden of proof. They have to come in and show you something, something that would allow you to believe that they had proven that Mr. Baker saw a statement by Reynolds and said, you know what? I'm not going to quit. Before May 5,
1982, there isn't any evidence at all, from the time he picks up that first cigarette, to 1982, there isn't any evidence that he relies on any statement. And instead from the family it is a history of this man knowing the risks of smoking.
You know, maybe some mythical smoker, maybe there is a smoker out there who said, I think it's safe because I saw the Philip Morris ad or I saw something else. But it's not Mr. Baker. With all due respect, we can't ignore what his own wife and his own son said. And the only way you could answer yes is to ignore it.
You should answer no on those questions.
Number 5 is the same thing, except now it talks about whether there is an agreement to conceal and did he rely to his detriment on any act. Again, whether it's before 1982 or after 1982, we know there is no evidence. We know that he was telling his family that it was dangerous for them, telling his sons they should quit. We know he was being warned it was deadly. There isn't any evidence that he was choosing otherwise because that's the way he acted.
Now, notice it says, if the reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. And that means that, but for a statement he would have avoided it. Knowing what you know, seeing the Richard testimony, knowing what you heard from Mrs. Baker, is there any proof that if R.J.
Reynolds, say, in 1964 or something, had written an article in the Palm Beach Post and said, the statistics that the Surgeon General cites are impressive, we now think smoking causes lung cancer, is there anyone who seriously believes, based on Mr. Baker's response to all those warnings about death and disease, he would have said, I've been waiting for that and now I'm going to quit smoking? Is there anyone that can believe that, based on this record? Because we know how he acted when he got real life statements that smoking could do damage, that smoking could cause death and disease. He said, shut up. He said, it's my life.
His wife said he wasn't interested in quitting for those 40 years.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. BELASIC: Ladies and gentlemen, I said there were two stories and the story doesn't fit.
This is the second story.
The plaintiffs make very serious charges against R.J. Reynolds. Whether or not the charges that they make against R.J. Reynolds have anything to do with Mr. Baker's smoking is something you're going to decide when you answer, was addiction actually a direct and continuous, a legal cause of his death? You're going to answer it when you decide whether he actually relied on some statement and that he would not have gotten lung cancer, but for the reliance. You're going to make those decisions. But regardless of whether or not it affected Mr. Baker, we're going to address what they say about R.J. Reynolds.
They say that everything they talk about,
whether testimonial evidence, call it negligence or concealment, they say it all goes to punitives.
You'll probably not be surprised that I don't think you should ever get to punitives. You should answer questions 1, 2 and 3, the rest of the questions, no. But let's keep in mind what they're talking about when they say that Mrs. Baker shouldn't only get 8 to $10 million for her husband's decisions to smoke, but that she should be entitled to some unknown amount of punitive damages that will be decided in another part of the trial, if we get there.
This is what the law is, that in order for you to find punitive damages, you have to show, look -you can read the instructions, but it's gross and flagrant behavior, an entire lack of care, an entire lack of care to disregard the safety or such reckless indifference to be equivalent to the intentional violation of those rights.
I bet if I asked every one of you, did the presentation of evidence, whether it's from documents or Mr. Feingold, make you mad at the tobacco companies? I know the answer has to be no -- I mean, has to be yes. I'm sure it did. The question now is whether based on the evidence and
the evidence we're going to review if you could find there was an entire lack of care on the part of R.J. Reynolds, because the evidence that either they don't emphasize or the evidence that's already in the record shows a different explanation.
First, was information that smoking was dangerous really secret because somebody wrote something in a memo? Did the citizens of Florida, including Perry Baker, not have the information that smoking was dangerous? Well, you saw what we put up about the history.
I suppose for a part of the trial, maybe you thought there was a contest to see who could throw up the most newspaper articles or magazines, but here's where it started: We know that Florida thought cigarettes were so dangerous a century ago they banned it. We know that they were using the word "addiction" to describe the cigarettes a century ago. It wasn't some secret. We know they were teaching it in the schools in 1918, 10 years before Mr. Baker was born. We know they were calling tobacco a narcotic.
And if you remember, when Dr. Feingold took the stand and Mr. Murphy asked him what was being taught in 1918, was a series of experiments that
was designed to show the school children that nicotine was deadly, that it could kill a frog, for example.
We know that Reader's Digest was the most popular magazine in the country. It covered it.
We know from Mrs. Baker that they subscribed to Reader's Digest at some point.
These articles aren't about, well, the tobacco company's explanation. These articles are all about smoking being bad.
We know that nicotine in the '20s and '30s was being studied. We know in 1942 they were saying things that were similar, I guess, to what Claude Teague meant.
We know it continued in the 1950s, again, a magazine that the Bakers subscribed to.
We know that all of these studies about when they did some mouse studies and they did statistical studies were in some of the most popular magazines in the country, Newsweek, Time. We know they talked about addiction, lung cancer, statistical studies. The mouse paint, the poor mice that they're painting tar on their back, all of that was in the public. That wasn't hidden knowledge. It's not fraud when plaintiffs say,
well, what was concealed was something that was already in the public. We know it was all over the papers, all over the papers in Palm Beach, lung cancer and nicotine.
We know that 90 percent of the public in '54 -- this is only a few years after Mr. Baker is a regular smoker -- and 90 percent of Americans had already heard that smoking could be a cause of cancer.
We know the Surgeon General -- now, the Surgeon General is no friend of the tobacco industry. And he could have said, you know what, all those old men that were on TV in the 1950s, they're interfering with our message. But that's not what he concluded. You talk about the way-back machine. This is the man who was in charge of the nation's health.
This is what he concluded: "We have informed the public through the excellent coverage of press, radio and TV." He didn't say that tobacco companies are interfering with this message, because they couldn't. There was too much mass media.
The '64 Surgeon General's report was headline news. This was around the time that Richard Baker
says from '64 to '78 they worked together at the ambulance service and he started talking to his father all the time about the risks of smoking.
All over the news. In magazines.
The State Department of Health in Florida said that nearly every Floridian, nearly all Floridians heard about the Surgeon General's report on cancer.
We know the pack warning labels came out. One of them, this one, is the one that Mrs. Baker put into her husband's face and said, see, it says it right there. We know that for 30 years, 27 years, he saw that every time he had to pick up a pack.
It was in advertisements for decades.
The next step was Mr. Baker. And we know what his response was. And it was direct and he made it clear.
There was some attack on these warnings. They read a Federal Trade Commission report saying the warnings aren't very good.
Let's look at real life. Let's not guess at what happened to the warnings.
In 1970, four years after the warning went on the pack, government stats show that 13 million adult Americans had given up cigarettes in the last four years. In just four years 13 million people
quit. And you know who one of those people was,
who quit between 1966 and 1970? Shirley Baker.
In 1968 Shirley Baker said that smoking was hurting her throat, she had a bet with a doctor, she quit smoking. She had chosen to smoke for 19 years. She chose to smoke five cigarettes a day instead of a pack a day, but she quit, even though she was smoking for 19 years along with her husband. Her husband made a different choice. He didn't even attempt to quit.
Now, who was the man that they brought to say, well, there was a -- there was this concealment and everything was secret? That's Dr. Feingold.
When I heard all the attacks on Dr. Eth, I couldn't help but compare it to Dr. Feingold. They said Dr. Eth has been on the Reynolds' payroll since 1998. Really? Did he say that?
What he said was that in 1998 he was contacted to see if he would be in litigation. I asked him specifically, since that time, how many trials have you done? How many times has he come to testify for a tobacco trial, this horrible professional witness? Twice. This was the second time that Dr. Eth had ever, ever testified in a tobacco trial since 1998.
We asked him, how many times have you given a deposition, testified on the tobacco company's side before trial? Two more times. In 14 years, four cases, four cases.
Dr. Eth is a public servant. He works at the VA helping sick veterans. This is not someone who is a $30 million man, because that's what Dr. Feingold is. He's made $30 million off of lawsuits, not medicine. He starred in 15,000 asbestos cases, and as he explained, what they did in this -- the asbestos cases, the reason the asbestos companies like to hire him is, he's the guy that would say it was smoking, not asbestos.
$30 million from lawsuits.
Now, if being on the payroll, as Mr. Shevin says, means that you're biased, what does it say about Dr. Feingold? We know that the name of his company is Medical/Legal and he's got these employees who work on litigation, not medicine.
Here's what Dr. Feingold said about his tobacco work: He met a tobacco lawyer, actually an asbestos lawyer, and in 1994, he and the lawyer met and decided to sue. What kind of doctor sits down with a lawyer and says, I just figured out a new industry to sue?
He said they wrote an article on litigation on how to sue tobacco companies. And here was the incredible thing: He sent letters, he,
Dr. Feingold, sent letters to thousands of doctors in Florida to drum up lawsuits saying, you can sue, I'm available, I'll testify. If he's paid, that's $700 an hour. And I've got a lawyer who will bring the lawsuit for you. And does that sound like somebody who is not biased?
Now, look what he's doing in his hospital.
I -- wasn't it surprising to hear that the hospital he says he works for doesn't pay him? Wasn't it surprising to hear that he rents space from the hospital? He's not employed by the hospital. He's a doctor who rents space from them and he said that nearly all the patients he sees today are sent to him for the purpose of lawsuits. Those aren't patients. When a lawyer sends you over somebody to examine, that's the lawyer's client. Those aren't patients. He's running a lawsuit mill called,
Feingold Medical/Legal.
Now, Mr. Shevin asked Dr. Feingold questions about this very issue, and they were good questions. He said, all that money you've made, does that change the fact of the tobacco company
documents? Does that change what the tobacco companies did or what you claim they did? And he said no. And you know, that's probably true.
But look at what Dr. Feingold ignored and what Dr. Feingold didn't tell you. He wrote a 70-page report, but he never even reviewed the testimony of the only doctor that ever met Mr. Baker. How do you do that by accident? How do you come in,
$30 million man, the expert, the most famous expert witness in the U.S., he says, how do you just forget to review the only testimony by the doctor who saw Mr. Rosen?
He talked about The Frank Statement, but he didn't know there was a survey that actually said it scared people off and reduced smoking.
He didn't know that the information on carcinogens was given by the tobacco companies to the Surgeon General.
Mr. Murphy had to show it to him and he said, oh, yeah, now I remember that. That's not what he said on direct examination. He didn't even research whether the Reynolds research that he said was secret was actually published in the scientific literature. And we know that he didn't provide any evidence that Mr. Baker ever relied on some
statement.
He talked about this meeting and he told you with a straight face that it was secret. He even said, maybe it's some sort of anti-trust violation. Obviously, he's not an anti-trust doctor. When we asked him, secret? Well, here's what they first said: They weren't having a secret meeting to lie. These notes show the industry strongly is convinced there is no sound scientific basis. They had no desire to set up a smoke screen or a front organization.
Remember, he admitted they wrote a letter to the government saying, we're going to have a meeting.
What kind of -- agreement to conceal. What kind of secret plan is hatched and you tell the government in advance, hey, we're going to meet? He left that out.
He left the survey out that showed The Frank Statement actually scared people into cutting down and in some cases stopping.
And he never told you this: Even though he had admitted to Mr. Murphy he was well aware of these studies, Roper, second only probably to Gallup as famous surveyors, as he mentioned, they
asked people, who would you be most likely to believe if someone said there was no connection between lung cancer and cigarette smoking? And as you can see, the vast majority would trust the American Cancer Society, the American Medical Association or the Government Health Department. Only 3 percent, only 3 percent would even consider listening to a tobacco company.
Now, is that really surprising? When you think about what Mr. Baker and what smokers are like? Were there really smokers? Was there evidence that smokers were saying, the best way for me to get medical information on smoking is to wait for the tobacco company or to listen to them?
As we know, almost no one in the country even considered the Tobacco Industry Research Council to be reliable on this. He didn't tell you that.
That's the evidence when you ask real people, are you listening to this? And they say, it's not even reliable.
Again, in 1970, who do you think is the most reliable? American Cancer Society, American Medical Association. Again, one tiny fraction of people who say the tobacco companies could be reliable. And it's true, they showed you a lot of
videos where they have shows saying smoking caused cancer, and they go through all the evidence. And then at the end, there would be a tobacco guy to say, but, but, but.
When he's saying, but, but, but, they don't put any evidence in that Mr. Baker relied on it.
We know he didn't. We know he thought smoking could kill him. But they didn't put in the evidence that Dr. Feingold knew about it, that no one, no one was looking to the tobacco companies for health.
Now, Dr. Feingold said, well, the whole thing was a fraud from the beginning. But you know we walked him through, that the major experts of the day were saying at that time there wasn't enough evidence, it hadn't been established in '53 that these lab investigations on animals, that you needed to do more studies, the guy who invented the mouse painting study said, look, taken alone it doesn't prove a thing in human beings; that the National Institutes of Health said, a great deal of additional more evidence, it needs to be found, and that the American Cancer Society itself said, look, they resolved to support efforts to identify whatever cancer inciting substances may be in
tobacco and to find the means of eliminating them.
Plaintiffs make a big deal because that one guy back in the '50s said, if we can find some constituents, I think we can eliminate them. And we'll talk about all of work they did to try to eliminate them or to try to reduce them.
Dr. Feingold told you there is no magic bullet that you can just figure out a way to set tobacco -- or to burn tobacco and somehow magically eliminate all of the chemicals that are going to occur when you take plant matter like that and set it on fire.
But let me ask you this: Was the American Cancer Society part of some sort of fraud because they said they were going to find the ingredients?
This is something that the researchers wanted to do and that was something that was in good faith. It was a good idea to do that research.
This is the earliest tobacco company document they ever showed you. It's 1953 by Claude Teague, a young chemist at Reynolds.
First, let me know, this is seven years after Mr. Baker started smoking. Let's say he started smoking, say, when he was 17. That's 1945. So in this case it would be eight years, eight years
after Mr. Baker started smoking.
Now, you're going to be asked, did some agreement to conceal cause his death? They don't even claim that whatever this meeting was occurred until eight years after.
Dr. Feingold didn't even claim that in 1945 or 1946, R.J. Reynolds did something wrong or that they knew something Mr. Baker didn't. There isn't any evidence that Mr. Baker starting smoking in 1945 could have been caused by a meeting that the companies had in 1953. But anyway, as Dr. Feingold admitted, every one, every piece of evidence in Dr. Teague's evidence and Dr. Teague's memo was public. He actually -- it was a bibliography. It was a book report. All of these things were available.
And Dr. Teague didn't say, hey, we know it causes cancer and let's lie about it. He said, in fact, observation, research and theorizing for the past 2000 years, the cause of human cancer is still unknown. And he said, this parallel increases led to the suspicion. That's not, again, what Dr. Feingold chose to tell you.
He chose to pretend that some single researcher had somehow concluded in 1953, with no
evidence, this isn't about secret science, this is about his book report, that's why the bibliography lists what he reviewed. Feingold spun it the other way. He showed you Claude Teague in 1972 said something about the crucial role of nicotine in smoking. Thirty years earlier, it had been out in the scientific press.
Twenty-five years earlier, there had been a number one hit song called, Smoke That Cigarette, saying that people smoked because they were nicotine fiends. That wasn't a secret. He didn't tell you that Claude Teague's memo concluded all of this is, of course, speculative.
He didn't tell you that in 1963, when the word "addictive" appeared in some document from Brown & Williamson, that the tobacco companies were financing published researchers at the same time talking about addiction.
Let me remind you that what Dr. Feingold said at the time was that for a long time in the '50s and '60s, the words "habit," "addiction" were being used interchangeably. And we know that 100 years ago, the people in Florida were talking about tobacco being addictive.
We saw the 1906 announcement. We know that
nicotine was being discussed as an addictive habit.
It was in hit songs. We know that it was being discussed publicly. It was in Time Magazine and Reader's Digest. So the idea that the word "addictive" might appear in one of millions of pages of company documents isn't exactly shocking.
Dr. Rodgman, Dr. Feingold really attacked him. He was the chemist that was doing some of those studies to find out what's in smoke. And he made it sound like Dr. Rodgman concluded these all caused cancer, no one else knows it, let's hide it.
Here's what he really said: He lists about 20 of these that he had found and he said, "The controversy concerning the influence of cigarette smoking on the increasing incidents of cancer of the lung in the human male has not yet been settled."
Wouldn't it have been more fair to give you all of the information, to say what the tobacco company guy was actually saying, is that, we're researching this, all of these numbers are published research that aren't secret and that it hasn't been settled? Instead of coming in -- and I don't know what Dr. Feingold's reason is to spin these things the way he does.
In 1964, we know that the Surgeon General announced that smoking caused lung cancer. And he actually gave a list of constituents. That means these are the things in smoke when you set tobacco on fire and carcinogens, some of them cause cancer in laboratory animals. Every, single one, every, single one -- and you can look yourself and I'll show you where -- every, single one of the carcinogens that was listed in this report was provided to the Surgeon General years earlier by the tobacco companies. Dr. Feingold didn't tell you that.
Here's where you can find it: On page 56 of the Surgeon General's report, the Surgeon General starts listing what he calls carcinogenic compounds that were in smoke.
On the other side, here are the documents that the tobacco companies gave the Surgeon General in 1961, three years earlier, 1963. Every one, every, single one of these carcinogens is disclosed and listed by the tobacco companies. Dr. Feingold didn't tell you that. He had 30 million reasons to make you think that there was some sort of horrible secret.
These are more of the documents. The list
that they gave the Surgeon General and every one of those constituents was included. And you can do it yourself. You can ask for these documents and you can compare, if you have to go through every one of the 43. I'm serious. If you really are concerned, go through every one of those 43 carcinogenic compounds and you'll find they were already disclosed.
Now, another secret he claims was psychological crutch. He didn't tell you that actually the Surgeon General had used the same term saying that, smoking provided some benefits to people, some mental health benefits, making them feel better, and that the Surgeon General had used that term. It wasn't some evil secret or plan.
The Surgeon General had, in fact, had published that term.
The Surgeon General, even though it said smoking caused lung cancer, said that there was a lot of argument over what the word "cause" meant. This wasn't some technicality from the tobacco companies.
Look what the Surgeon General said. The various meanings and conceptions of the term "caused" were discussed vigorously at these
meetings. They were debating what the word "cause" even meant.
Of course, Dr. Feingold says, you can't do that. It's bad -- it's fraud to be able to contest the word "cause." That's what the Surgeon General is doing.
And the Surgeon General said that statistics couldn't prove cause and effect.
Well, that's what the tobacco companies were talking about.
They showed Dr. Robert Heimann, who is the bald guy from the '80s with glasses, and they asked him, what's your view? Is the Surgeon General wrong? And when the full clip was shown you, the conclusion was, well, do you deny that there's this statistical association between smoking and lung cancer? He said, no, we've been admitting that for
25	years.
The issue was whether or not the fact that statistically smokers died more often was proof of a causal effect. And the Surgeon General admitted that. It wasn't some sort of fraud.
And Dr. Feingold admitted that this statistical proof was a new standard that was used in the report for the first time, and that even
then, it wasn't accepted by the scientific community.
Here's the proof: The Surgeon General, in '64, most physicians were not prepared to understand, much less be persuaded, by the epidemiology data. Epidemiology data means they took a group of smokers and a group of nonsmokers and, not surprisingly, the smokers had higher rates of lung cancer.
Now, can you prove that the lung cancer was caused by smoking through math? Most doctors didn't think so.
And at the end, Dr. Feingold agreed that the reason the tobacco companies were disputing this, the reason they were going on saying there is not enough evidence was two things: The companies thought you needed to show either in the lab, or otherwise, some sort of biological mechanism, how is it that smoke can make a healthy person develop cancer? Why is it that most smokers don't get lung cancer? What is the mechanism? And what he called, Dr. Feingold called an animal model, testing.
Now, was that crazy to rely on it?
Dr. Feingold himself had said that having an animal
model was important. Look how long it took for science to actually find this animal model.
Dr. Feingold said there was no valid animal model, meaning, animal research that could show how smoking might cause lung cancer, until 1996. A few years after that, RJR and every other tobacco company gave up and said, we're not going to dispute that, we're not going to say there is no evidence.
Now, look, the evidence that plaintiff showed you may make you mad and you may well think, you know, the tobacco companies, they shouldn't have clung onto, we need to have an animal model or statistics aren't good enough. You might think that they waited too long. But that's not the question you're going to be asked.
The question you're going to be asked is things like, does that show a complete lack of care? Is that gross and flagrant? And their own expert and the Surgeon General says it wasn't, that there was legitimate grounds for dispute. You can debate, did it have an effect on some other smoker? We know it didn't change Mr. Baker. He thought it was dangerous for 40 years. But there was no way that this is some sort of lie or bad faith when
Dr. Feingold himself says this stuff didn't even happen until 1996, a few years later. The companies are saying on the website, we believe that our product causes cancer, and they still do today, including R.J. Reynolds.
I heard today an attack on Dr. Eth saying he disagreed with something the Surgeon General said. Well, first of all, Dr. Eth agreed that nicotine was the primary reason that people smoked. And the chart they put up, other reasons? That's because I asked him, first, if nicotine was a reason that people smoked. Then we asked him, were there other reasons? Of course there are. Dr. Eth didn't say that nicotine wasn't addictive. He agreed.
But, you know, you know who did say nicotine wasn't addictive under oath? Do you know which expert did say under oath that nicotine was addictive and said it -- as recently as 1994?
Dr. Feingold. The $30 million man that they brought in. Mr. Murphy walked him through it.
In 1988 he was working for the asbestos companies. The Surgeon General's report comes out on addiction and he says he disagrees with it. He doesn't think that, he says, smoking can be addictive, because he disagrees with some
definition of what tolerance means. Mr. Murphy walks him through it all the way back to 1994.
Dr. Feingold admitted he was still testifying in lawsuits, under oath, raising his hand like the experts did or like the CEOs did, that the Surgeon General was wrong.
And Dennis asked him, didn't you testify that the Surgeon General was dead wrong on addiction? And he agreed. He did. That was the same year as the CEOs.
Now, was plaintiffs star witness a member of the fraud? Was he a member of some sort of agreement? Of course not. As the testimony shows, different reasonable experts could disagree on addiction, et cetera.
In fact, when we showed you what the CEO of R.J. Reynolds really said, not just that 15-second clip where he says, I think in my opinion it's not addictive, where he gave the full explanation, it was very, very similar to what Dr. Feingold said, that he didn't think it met the classic requirements of addiction, something that would cause intoxication, something would impair the ability to think and reason.
So how do you bring a fraud case and your very
first witness is a guy that says the Surgeon General was dead wrong on addiction and swore that under oath the same year as the tobacco company? How do you bring a fraud case and do that?
There is no evidence today that the tobacco companies are making some horrible, malignant bad effort to make cigarettes somewhere addictive.
Here's what the evidence is: The smokers who stopped aren't even more addicted -- the smokers who remain aren't even more addicted than those who stopped.
Here's what the National Cancer Institute says: "There is little evidence to suggest that there is an increase in level of addiction. In fact, because so many people now only smoke occasionally, maybe they only smoke three cigarettes a day, there is more of those people than ever." The National Cancer Institute says that's consistent with less rather than more addiction.
So when you decide, did Reynolds have an absolute lack of care? Is the fact that they made a legal product that naturally contains nicotine so gross, so flagrant, so lacking in care that Mrs. Baker gets to get more money through punitive
damages? Consider this: That's what the National Cancer Institute says. They're no friend of the tobacco companies. There is less addiction today with modern cigarettes, not more.
Now, Dr. Feingold says some things about cigarette design, but I think the most important thing he said is that it's impossible to make a safe cigarette. Cigarettes have tobacco, tobacco has nicotine in it, cigarettes are meant to be smoked. If they're set on fire, they will have constituents that are dangerous. It says -- he said it's impossible to make a safe cigarette.
So what plaintiffs are saying is, either do the impossible, make a cigarette that people could actually smoke that would be safe, their own expert says, you can't do that.
What's the other alternative?
Well, Dr. Feingold said it. Go out of business. He said, well, a safe cigarette would be one that no one would buy. But cigarettes are a legal product. The government has decided that even though they cause cancer and even though they can be addictive to smokers, our society has decided that they're able to be sold. And there isn't any evidence that the tobacco companies knew
that they -- a way people could smoke cigarettes and not run these risks. Dr. Feingold says it's impossible.
We know he said that companies don't add nicotine, and actually when they manufacture it there ends up being less nicotine in cigarettes than in the tobacco that's in the plant that's in the ground.
Ingredients, at various times they refer to some scary ingredients. Dr. Feingold admitted for 30 years the government has had every, single ingredient and that today the FDA has it. You saw the sworn testimony from Dr. Cook. No one has ever found an ingredient that increases the risk or asked that they should take it out. Reynolds today publicly lists every ingredient on its website.
You can go on the Internet. In fact, the current list of ingredients is in evidence, it's AN1324.
And no, it doesn't have levulinic acid in it, whatever that compound that's in beer and coffee is, it's not on Reynolds' current ingredients list.
You can look at it. There it is.
There was some talk about pH. I don't know if it there was any claim at all that somehow the pH in smoke had something to do with Mr. Baker. There
wasn't any evidence about Lucky Strikes or Winston in the 10-year period that he smoked. They didn't make any effort to link up something that was in a cigarette to disease.
But he did talk a lot about filters. They say it was bad faith because some guy at Philip Morris said the illusion of filtration.
Let's not talk about the illusion. Let's not talk about tests with machines.
When the Surgeon General, no fan of the tobacco companies, an enemy of tobacco companies, when the Surgeon General actually looked at real people, actually looked at death rates, how many smokers do we have, what are the rates of lung cancer, they found the people who smoked filters had a lower lung cancer mortality rate. Is that bad faith for a company to do what the Surgeon General says actually lowers death rates? That's not a lack of due care. It's a legal product.
It's impossible to make it safe. What is wrong with doing that?
The Surgeon General, again, said, lower rates of lung cancer. And this isn't based on some tobacco trickery. They are simply looking at the death rate and they find that people who smoke
filters have a lower rate of lung cancer.
Was there any suggestion from Dr. Feingold, you know, what would be best is if everyone had unfiltered Lucky Strikes or unfiltered Camels and that was the only product today? Of course not.
He didn't even hint at that. Ten years later, they show, again, the risk of lung cancer. This is in human beings, it's not some machine study that Mr. Shevin says we faked.
Same thing in 1990, a lower risk of lung cancer for filters compared to non-filters.
And then R.J. Reynolds, at the same time period when they're working on improving it, here's the president. Did you ever see anything from the CEO or the president of R.J. Reynolds saying, let's keep on lying, let's try to trick the government?
No. This is the only time we ever saw a president giving direct advice.
And he said, the president of Reynolds, that they should cooperate with the government, prepare a plan, foster any relationship with government personnel, gain their cooperation and proper research. If there is a safer cigarette, let's continue and increase our efforts.
So when they say, look, these companies are
evil, we heard every pejorative adjective they can think of in their closing. When they say that, remember, this is what the company was actually advising its people to do, and that was right from the president.
Now, you know what year this is? This is the year that Mrs. Baker quit smoking. Even though this is very helpful of the tobacco company, it's the president saying, let's cooperate with the government to make a safer cigarette. It didn't have anything to do with lung cancer. It didn't have anything to do with her husband. She decided to quit smoking on her own. He decided not to.
The final study that we showed Dr. Feingold was from the National Cancer Institute in 2003. Look what it says.
Dr. Feingold pointed out, you know, filters don't reduce the overall rate of disease, heart disease, other diseases. But Dr. Feingold had to admit this: That when the studies are taken as a whole, there is a lower risk of lung cancer for the populations who use lower-yield products, meaning, low tar or filtered cigarettes. He had to admit that, that when it came to lung cancer there was a lower risk, even if the other diseases weren't
affected.
Here is the last question that Dennis Murphy asked him: "At the end of the day, Dr. Feingold, do you agree filters provide some benefit to the people who smoke filtered cigarettes?"
"True. Some mixed benefit."
Now, he was fighting until the end. It doesn't solve all of the diseases. But every government study that was looking at these populations, when it came to lung cancer, when it came to lung cancer there was a benefit. So how is it that filters, that making filters is some sort of evil plot? Or that it's a gross and flagrant violation? That it's immoral? All of the words they used. That's not what Dr. Feingold claimed.
He talked about this reconstituted tobacco sheet, and that's because sometimes there are small pieces of tobacco and they have to stretch it out and make it into a tobacco sheet like paper. There isn't any, any dispute in this case, because Dr. Feingold admitted that when they do that, it reduces tumorgenicity. It means reduces the probability that it will cause tumors.
Is that bad faith? Do we really want R.J. Reynolds to stop doing that? Was that something
that was an evil plot to kill their own customers?
Of course not.
Now, this is in the evidence and you can look at it. We discussed it in opening. It shows in 1979, this is after 20 years of changes and design, the Surgeon General basically gave a report card on these different tobacco varieties, the reconstituted tobacco, using paper, filters, et cetera. And they rated a plus as a significant reduction. And you saw there were all kinds of design changes that significantly reduced nicotine. BAP, that's benzoapyrene, one of the top carcinogens they were worried about. Look at how many different things the Surgeon General found the tobacco companies had done that reduced benzoapyrene. Remember, a plus is a significant reduction. Even the filters they gave pluses.
Now, the Surgeon General had all the cigarettes. They had the studies. That's what they concluded. This isn't some biased tobacco company work.
Is this an example of an evil company that wants to kill its customers? Even if the public health community disagrees, is this an example of a company that took no care, absolute lack of care,
as the instructions say?
Dr. Feingold admitted that Reynolds itself works with the government.
I'll ask you this: How many industries do you know where the government says, we're interested in you changing your product, it's a legal product, but we're thinking that you should make it differently, and the industry says, yes, we will join you? That's what Dr. Feingold said happened.
Obviously, the tobacco companies could have said forget it, it's legal, we're going to make it the way we want it. If you regulate us, go ahead.
No. The tobacco working group, the three objectives, the first one is most important, producing a less hazardous cigarette.
We saw from the Reynolds president that he instructed his staff to cooperate with the government and to do this research with him.
Dr. Feingold agreed the National Cancer Institute was involved and all these tobacco companies, Reynolds, Philip Morris, Brown & Williamson, Lorillard, they worked with the government for 10 years. Dr. Feingold agreed, there isn't any hint this is some bad faith. They produced all these reports on different types of
cigarettes that could be made. The government concluded low tar cigarettes are less hazardous.
And then what happened in 1977? It's shut down by the secretary of HEW because he wants cigarette smoking to end. Is it bad faith? Is it bad faith when the government calls you up to say that you're going to go and work with them and to at least try to make a safer cigarette that their own expert says is impossible? Is that a lack of due care? Were they trying to kill their customers?
I'm only going to talk about Premiere. You heard that Premiere was a cigarette that didn't burn tobacco. You heard maybe that could be the ultimate solution.
Dr. Feingold says it's impossible to make a safe cigarette that burns tobacco. Is there any way? Well, you can make one that doesn't, that heats. And Dr. Feingold agreed.
And this came in, that the Lancet, the premiere medical publication for Britain said, this would seem a mere perfect, low-tar cigarette. No doubt it would be less harmful than most other brands on the market.
Well, I'd say that makes sense because
Dr. Feingold told us that it's the burning of the tobacco that causes the problems.
But look what the government said. Talk about your secret meetings. This is a meeting at the Office of Smoking & Health with three different agencies from the government, the Center for Disease Control, the Center for Disease Prevention, the Office on Smoking and Health. And here they are saying in the minutes of this meeting that the preliminary research shows there were fewer carcinogens in Premiere. Did that make them happy? No. Just the opposite.
The government was mad that this cigarette might be safer.
Look what they say. The panel was concerned about the ramifications of a cigarette that is actually safer.
Why on earth is the government upset about the ramifications of a cigarette that is safer?
Shouldn't they be praising R.J. Reynolds and saying, keep it up, try to work on it?
Look what they say. The Premiere studies indicate the cancer risk associated with smoking Premiere was lowered significantly.
Now, is that a company -- was R.J. Reynolds
trying to kill its customers when they designed a new cigarette that lowered the cancer risk significantly? Was R.J. Reynolds taking no care at all, gross and flagrant violation? And yet the government was upset about it. Look what they did.
First thing they said, research should continue, but there is no need to wait for results to initiate a war against the new tobacco products. And remember, this was after the government had shut down the joint effort with R.J. Reynolds and the other companies to research a safer cigarette. Now they're going to war on a cigarette that they already said was safer. And here they are. Tell me if they're happy or sad about what happened.
Ms. Wilkenfeld -- you can read it, she is from the Federal Trade Commission -- she gloats, the negative publicity drawn to Premiere was partly what caused its demise. They wanted to set up a new expert panel and attack the problem of the new tobacco products. And what was the problem? Just one more time. What was the problem? Was the problem that it was more dangerous? No. The panel was concerned about a cigarette that is actually safer. They were afraid Premiere might be safer.
You know, the government is not on trial, but
you can consider Reynolds' good faith in working with the government and you can consider whether or not the government response has affected Reynolds' ability to make a cigarette they thought would reduce the risk of cancer.
Now, the only thing they said about youth advertising, when it actually came to the ads, because what they did was, they said, look, some guys met at Hilton Head and talked about an age group. On one of the documents it said 14 to 24, and Mr. Murphy showed Dr. Feingold another document that said 18 to 24. And then they just moved on.
Dr. Feingold just moved on.
But the only campaign, the only actual ad that's ran that they showed you evidence of that he said came from this plan was, Meet the Turk.
Now, first of all, Mr. Baker didn't smoke Camel. We know right off the bat this has nothing to do with Mr. Baker. You have to decide, why raise this? This has nothing to do with him. Look at the dates, 1974. Mr. Baker was born in 1928, so he was 46 or 47. And you'll have to decide whether this guy with a parrot is trying to get a 14-year-old to smoke or whether this guy with this woman with the kerchief is trying to get a
14-year-old to smoke. I mean, there was a lot of debate as to whether or not he was wearing a shirt.
What does this have to do with Mr. Baker?
What does this have to do with anything?
DEPUTY CLERK: Counsel, 15 minutes.
MR. BELASIC: Thank you.
Did they even show you evidence that, well,
Meet the Turk made a whole bunch of kids smoke or something? They didn't show you anything like that.
In fact, the Surgeon General says that even in countries that completely ban TV advertising, it had almost no effect on cigarette consumption.
They pointed out that in Communist countries, they don't have advertising, at least at that time. And yet smoking is prevalent without any advertising of any sort.
So what they did is, they threw out some documents that said kids, and they threw out documents that said 18 to 24, 14 to 24. Maybe it worked. Maybe it made you mad. But they didn't connect it to Mr. Baker at all. They didn't show anything about any effect it had. They just threw out some documents, and the only ad that ever ran, the only ads they showed that came from those
documents are the guy with the parrot.
You heard Mr. Domnick say you have to give her 8 to $10 million, is not going to be enough in compensatory. You have to award punitives to punish and deter, deter future misconduct.
The plaintiff put in evidence that surveys the likelihood of future misconduct.
But let me just review a few things. Today, the tobacco companies have not disputed that smoking causes lung cancer, back since the '90s. There is no chance, no one is going to have a TV show where they say there is not enough evidence. We know that. That's been for the last 13 or 14 years. The tobacco companies, including Reynolds, don't dispute that it's addictive. There is no chance that's going to happen in the future. They say publicly on their website the diseases it causes and it's addictive. No one is going to see the kind of advertising that they talked about.
I'll show you the evidence on how advertising has been restricted.
There is no longer a Council for Tobacco Research. Dr. Feingold said all those organizations were disbanded in 1998. They don't exist.
They kept talking about the way-back machine. Well, deterrence, what he says, you need to decide punitives on the future, the way-back machine doesn't matter. They want to confuse the stuff that was done in the '50s and say, why don't you give Mrs. Baker a lot of extra money to deter future ads. But we're not in the way-back machine. There is a warning on every pack, the companies don't dispute it.
And here's what the evidence is: Dr. Feingold said the FDA now controls. He raised the FDA. Here's in their evidence, the evidence they put in, the FDA now controls the manufacturing marketing and distribution, including restrictions on marketing and sales to youth. Manufacturing, that's making the product and what's in it; marketing, how you sell it; distribution, what's left.
When they talk about you have to deter future misconduct by saying yes on entitlement to punitives, they don't mention, they don't mention that the FDA controls every aspect of this regulation.
Here is the Surgeon General. FDA can reduce or eliminate other constituents, including
standards for nicotine. So the FDA, not R.J. Reynolds, there is not going to be any Claude Teague memos or whatever it is they wanted to claim.
The government is in control of the nicotine.
The government is in control of the constituents. They're regulated like a utility. And there is no need to add millions of dollars to Mrs. Baker's bank account to deter future misconduct. The government has already taken over this part of the tobacco industry.
Same thing, they can regulate in order to promote the public health. And tobacco companies now are subject to regulations that would limit any ability to market to young people.
Again, yet another regulation issued by the FDA that lists all of these different types of marketing activities that will now be illegal.
Dr. Feingold talked about the elimination of advertising.
Here's what the Surgeon General says:
Billboards have been eliminated, transit ads, they're not on buses or taxicabs, et cetera, print ads that appeal to underage youth. Those are all gone. A nationwide anti-smoking campaign has been
done. It's a different time.
Don't let them say that because of the way-back machine, you somehow need to give even more money to Mrs. Baker, because everything that they've talked about either no longer exists, it's been dismantled or the tobacco companies agree that smoking causes all of these diseases, have put that on their website, there are warnings on every pack, or the government has taken the power away from the tobacco companies.
The government, now the FDA, decides what's in the cigarette. And so there is no reason, there is no reason to vote yes on that entitlement to punitives.
In fact, as a result of these changes, tobacco use among adults and youth are going gown.
Now, the last thing I would leave you with on this is, obviously, we know what these purposes are. That's what Mr. Domnick said. But punitive damages, they're not going to go to some stop smoking fund. It's money that's going -MR. SHEVIN: Your Honor, objection. You sustained this objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SHEVIN: I move to strike.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DOMNICK: Take the slide down.
MR. BELASIC: All right. Here is the organization they said were at the heart of this case.
They spent three days discussing, they spent so much of their time in closing, CTR, TIRC and the Tobacco Institute. They're all gone. The companies now agree. The dispute and the debate is over.
Now, let's look at the verdict form. I've already covered the things you can answer with the clear testimony about Mr. Baker. Frankly, it's not disputed. We've talked about the addiction as a legal cause. You've seen the evidence on whether or not the companies were negligent or in bad faith, whether they were making a defective product or whether it was impossible. And for those reasons, I think you should vote no as well on number 2 and number 3.
We've already discussed that number 4 and number 5 required the plaintiffs to prove that Mr. Baker actually saw some statement that had an omission and that he relied on it. If you look at the instruction, it says that he had to have relied
on it, so that if he -- if it hasn't been made, he wouldn't have gotten cancer. Of course, there is no such evidence. I'm not going repeat that, but nobody, nobody who testified here even hinted that he had ever been influenced by some statement. Instead, they spent their time warning him. So you should answer no to 4 and 5.
Now, finally, this percentage of fault, you don't get here unless you find that the plaintiffs have actually proven that Mr. Baker pretty much was continuously addicted, that addiction was a direct and continuous cause. I'm not going to repeat all of that, but we know there is no evidence it was continuous and there was no evidence it was direct.
But if you do get here, the plaintiffs say that Mr. Baker is 20 percent responsible, even though jury instruction 22, you can read it, even though the plaintiffs say his actions were a cause of his death. But they say they're only 20 percent responsible. And they make a big deal out of saying, well, Reynolds denies responsibility. It's not exactly that. Let's think. Who was in a better opportunity to make Mr. Baker quit? The Surgeon General says, no one can make you quit, no one can decide for you. That was the 2012 report.
He ought to know. No one could make Mr. Baker quit.
R.J. Reynolds, if they sent someone to his house and said, it's dangerous, why don't you quit, do you think they would get any different reaction than when he would tell his son to shut up when his son said he would die? Or his son said he would end up in the back of an ambulance? Could Reynolds have made Mr. Baker quit?
Only Mr. Baker could make himself quit. He didn't say, you know, it's my life 20 percent of the time or it's 20 percent of my life and 80 percent Reynolds. He didn't say that. He didn't say, you know, I take 20 percent of the risk and Reynolds takes the other 80 percent.
The only one that was making the decision, the only one that was going to stop for more than a minute or more than two hours in church was Mr. Baker. And so it doesn't make sense. They can make you mad at the companies, but in the end, R.J. Reynolds couldn't stop smoking for him.
Now, think about the 60 million people.
Sixty million people quit. It's almost a huge number, it's almost too large. It's many times the population of Florida. But how is Mr. Baker
different than the 60 million people who quit? I mean, was it different information? No. He was exposed to the same info.
Think of his wife. His wife quit. She was exposed to the same information, the same ads, the same newspapers he did.
Was it different cigarettes? No. He smoked the most popular brands of the day, like millions of other people. There wasn't anything different about Mr. Baker's Winston than there was for the other millions of people who quit. And we know his wife quit. Well, was it something that a tobacco company did only to him? No.
What was different about Mr. Baker from the 60 million people who quit was that he was Elmer Perry Baker and that he was going to do what he wanted to do, like his wife said, and he didn't want to quit for 40 years. And then when he had a midlife crisis, he focused his effort on quitting drinking and not smoking.
So you should find Mr. Baker was responsible, and by "responsible," we mean that he could control his smoking.
Dr. Rosen didn't say, well, he could quit 80 percent of the time or he could quit 50 percent
of the time. His own doctor said -- you saw the testimony -- he could quit at any time.
Finally, they get to damages. Mr. Domnick said, well, it's not about valuing a life, but it is about valuing the loss of her husband's companionship and protection.
I'm going to ask you to consider a few facts.
Mrs. Baker is 84 years old. She has no dependents. There is no claim in this case for lost wages or lost income or medical expenses. It is just this claim.
The instructions would instruct you that if you ever reach damages -- I don't think you should -- that you must give an amount that would fairly compensate her for it. I would suggest that 8 to $10 million because her husband chose to smoke and chose not to quit like 60 million other people is an incredible windfall. It would make Mrs. Baker a wealthy woman.
Now, she quit smoking. Her husband made a different path. There isn't any evidence in this case about this evaluation. Mrs. Baker certainly didn't give some estimate. As you saw, it's a lawyer's number. I think that when you base -when you look at the evidence, if you do reach
damages, that this woman does not deserve to become a multi-millionaire. She loved her husband, everyone knows that. Mr. Baker was a good man, everyone knows that. The idea, though, she becomes a multi-millionaire because something that happens to her husband for buying a legal product that he wanted to buy just doesn't make sense.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, the two stories are the story of Mr. Baker, and it's largely unrefuted because it's from Richard Baker and from Mrs. Baker themselves.
The story of R.J. Reynolds, as you see, is something that maybe makes you mad or that's what they tried to do. But it's not something that affected Mr. Baker. It's not something that meant, well, negligence or making the defects on purpose is causing his lung cancer. It's not something that says, oh, he's relying, we tricked Mr. Baker.
I don't know if there are such other smokers, but they're not Elmer Perry Baker. He did what he wanted to do and when people told him smoking could kill him, he said, it's my life, and he went on smoking.
It's been a long trial and all the lawyers thank you for participating in this process. If
you vote no on these questions, the case is over, as the Judge said. If you vote yes, we'll come back, there will be more testimony that follows.

