          MR. ALVAREZ:  Good morning.
          JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  First of all, on behalf of Ralph
     Ballard and myself, we want to thank you very much
     for giving up two weeks of your time.  This is an
     important service.  Jury service is very, very
     important.  It's the backbone of the civil justice
     system.  The system would break down and collapse
     if it wasn't for you all.
          So we don't take it lightly that you guys gave
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1686 up two weeks of your lives and your work and your
     family to come here and listen and judge this case.
     So thank you.
          There is a lot of history that we talked
     about.  We went back almost 60 years.  I hope that
     you learned something about the history, because we
     tend to live in today and what happened today.
          But to be able to judge this case, I told you
     at the beginning was you have to go back and you
     have to judge the tobacco company, you have to
     judge Ralph Ballard on things that happened 50, 60
     years ago and how life was 50 or 60 years ago.
     That's important.
          You can't use today's standards to do that,
     you have to use what he knew, what was reasonable
     for him to believe, just like with tobacco
     companies, what was reasonable for them to believe.
          So that's why it was important for us to take
     you back in time and show you, and hopefully, you
     know, you took something away from this that you
     could maybe teach your friends and family members
     about what you know about tobacco and the history
     of tobacco, because not many people know, so you
     are part of a select few people that have been
     given an education about this.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1687 So let me first talk to you about class
     membership.  Remember I told you that this was a
     class action lawsuit where one of the things, the
     first question you would have to decide was about
     addiction.
          If you could put it up, please, Mr. Philipson.
          Okay, class membership is not about fault.  In
     order for Mr. Ballard to qualify as a class member,
     we have to establish certain things.  Now, class
     membership is about whether he was addicted, okay.
     And was the addiction -- "Was Ralph Ballard
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if
     so, was such addiction a legal cause of his bladder
     cancer?"
          That's the first question.  You're going to
     get a verdict form, so you can write this down or
     you can hold off because you're going to get a
     verdict form that is going to have the very same
     things that I tell you about here, okay?  And those
     are very -- two questions.
          The first question is was Ralph Ballard
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.  Now,
     all cigarettes contain nicotine, so the real
     question is was he addicted.  Okay?
          The second part of that question, since there
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1688 are two separate questions, is and was such --
     "And, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of
     his bladder cancer?"  Okay?  They have stipulated,
     meaning they agree, they don't dispute, that his
     bladder cancer was caused from smoking their
     cigarettes.  Okay?  So that -- answer to that
     question should be yes.
          Now, we're going to talk about addiction in
     quite detail in a few minutes.  Okay?
          Now, the legal definition of legal cause,
     because you say, okay, what's legal cause, well,
     legal cause is simply, addiction is a legal cause,
     the judge is going to tell you this, and you're
     going to get these instructions.
          They're going to get these instructions,
     right, Judge, when they go back?
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  He's going to read them
     to you, and then when you go back to the jury room,
     you're actually going to get a copy of this, okay.
     And it's going to say addiction is a legal cause of
     loss if it directly and in natural and continuous
     sequence produces or contributes substantially to
     producing such loss so that it can be reasonably
     said that, but for the addiction, the loss would
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1689 not have occurred.
          That means a lot of things, a lot of words,
     but basically what it means is contributes
     substantially, did the addiction play an important
     role.  But for the addiction, if he wasn't
     addicted, would he have smoked one to two packs of
     cigarettes for 49 years and developed lung -- and
     developed bladder cancer.  That's really the
     question.
          If he wasn't addicted, would he have continued
     to smoke for 49 years?  That's really what that
     question is.  Okay?  It's a very simple question.
     Okay?  So there really should be no -- you know,
     there may be a move to try to confuse, but this is
     what it means.  That's the law.
          Now, let's apply the law to the facts.  Okay.
     He was addicted to nicotine, that caused him to
     smoke, and the smoking caused the lung cancer
     {sic}.
          Directly produces or contributes substantially
     to loss, okay?  That's how it is.  He was addicted,
     did the addiction cause him to smoke, and did the
     smoking cause the bladder cancer, okay?  And the
     last two we know have been stipulated to by the
     defendants.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1690 Now, we could talk about concurring cause, and
     I'm going to skip over that for now, but, you know,
     people always request ask, well, listen, how do I
     weigh this evidence?  How do I know what weight to
     give it?  Well, listen, how do I know which side
     wins?  Who proved the case, you know?  How do I
     measure that, you know?
          You know, it's like, for example, if you've
     got two kids and you want to make sure that you
     give them each enough rice and meat on the plate,
     you want to make sure that, you know, it's even.
     But if you give one just a little bit more, then
     that's one way to think about greater weight of the
     evidence, means the more persuasive and convincing
     force and effect of the entire evidence in the
     case.
          And a lot of times you see the scales of
     justice that kind of signifies that, and if it
     tilts just slightly to one side, that side has met
     their burden by the greater weight of the evidence.
     That's what that means.  So I don't have to prove
     it like this (indicating), it's one-sided like
     this, all I have to do is prove it like this.
     Okay?  Whoever proves their case this way or if I
     prove my case just slightly, I win the case.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1691 That's the law.  Okay?
          Now, was Ralph Ballard addicted?  That's the
     key issue in the first question of the case, okay?
     Well, he started at 16 years of age smoking.  And
     we know from the studies that I read to you, the
     Surgeon General's Report and all the other stuff in
     the DSM, that 95 percent of all smokers start as
     teens.
          The younger you start, the more likely you
     will become a heavy smoker.  You heard from
     Dr. Henningfield.  Smoked one to two packs a day
     for 49 years.  That's 400 hits of nicotine to the
     brain each day.  He smoked first thing in the
     morning.  He smoked before going to bed.  He smoked
     everywhere, in the house, at work, in the car.
          He smoked in the hospital.  Remember when he
     was injured, he was put on a Navy ship and sent to
     a hospital in Japan, he smoked in the hospital.  He
     smoked in the foxhole while he was fighting.  He
     smoked in the Navy ships.
          Now, NIDA, which is the National Institute for
     Drug Abuse and the Surgeon General Report say that
     the majority of regular smokers, a regular smoker
     is somebody who smokes about a pack a day, okay,
     regular smokers are addicted.  Okay, the vast
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1692 majority.  That's the Surgeon General.
          The DSM.  We heard about the DSM with, you
     know, Dr. Phillips, we're going to talk a lot about
     him in a few minutes, even the DSM says 80 to 90
     percent of regular smokers are addicted.  Okay?
          So that -- let's talk about what his family
     said.  Maria, his wife says he -- in bed, he smokes
     and he watches TV -- while he's watching TV.  He
     tried to quit every day.  He would start on a
     Monday, and by Wednesday, he was smoking again.  He
     stopped today, and two days later he was smoking
     today.  Took several years for him to quit.
          Dolores, his first wife, says first cigarette
     of the day before he put his feet on the floor.  He
     smoked a lot.  "Seemed like you were walking into a
     fog," is what she said.  Okay?  Well, you don't
     walk into a fog by smoking two or three cigarettes
     a day; right?  If you're walking into a room and
     it's foggy, it's because you're smoking a lot.
     Okay?
          His children, Lisa, he would smoke more than a
     pack a day.  First cigarette, in the morning.
          Ralph, III, his son, "It was something they
     all did, seemed like everyone smoked.  As far as I
     could remember, it's what all the adults did.  All
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1693 I know is he was smoking."
          Okay.  So his whole family, no one -- no one
     that met him, no one that's testified, they haven't
     brought you one person to come in and say he wasn't
     a smoker.  He was a smoker, and the evidence is he
     was a heavy smoker.  Okay?
          Now, you know, nicotine is the drug that's
     inside of cigarettes that make it addicting.  Okay?
     And they knew that.  And it's very, very addicting.
     If you could bring out for me --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  I can't pull it out.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Oh, you can't put it out.
          Well, these documents are in evidence.  And
     these are internal documents from the tobacco
     company.  And if you'll look at the one over here,
     it says, "If we move towards reduction or
     elimination of nicotine from our products, then we
     shall eventually liquidate our business."  Okay?
          What they were selling was nicotine, it's all
     in their documents.  They kept nicotine levels at a
     certain level to keep you addicted, to keep smokers
     addicted.  That's what they wanted.  They could
     raise or lower the level of nicotine.  Okay?
     That's what the testimony was from the corporate
     representative, Dr. Figlar and Dr. Cooke from R.J.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1694 Reynolds.
          They could lower it and they could -- you
     know, naturally -- there is naturally-occurring
     nicotine, but by their processes, they could lower
     it or raise it, and they kept it at a certain level
     always to keep you smoking.  Okay?
          "Moreover, nicotine is addictive.  We are then
     in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive
     drug."  I mean, there is -- I mean -- I think you
     heard all these, because I remember reading them to
     you, and they're going to be in folders for you and
     you're going to get them back there, but these are
     documents that are in there.  And, please, go
     through them.
          Here is another one here, "My reason for this
     high priority is that I believe that the thing we
     sell the most is nicotine."
          How about this one down here, "However, we
     cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which
     most of our customers would stop using if they
     could.  That is to say, if the exit gates from our
     market should suddenly open, we could be out of
     business almost overnight."
          So what they're saying is, look, guys, are we
     going to be comfortable selling this thing that if
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1695 -- that if people could stop using it, we would be
     out of business?  And we could be out of -- they
     could stop using it (snaps fingers) and we would be
     out of business overnight.
          Here it is, "Nicotine delivery can be
     controlled via a filter or smoke pH adjustments."
     That's theirs.  So they know that they could do it
     scientifically.  Okay?
          Here is another one that's interesting.  "I
     would be more cautious in using the pharmic-medical
     model.  Do we really want to tout cigarette smoke
     as a drug?  It is, of course, but there are
     dangerous FDA implications of having such
     conceptualizations go beyond these walls."
          They knew that it was addictive, they knew how
     addictive it was, they knew they could be out of
     business in a day if they lowered the levels of
     nicotine or people didn't smoke it because of
     nicotine, they would be out of business (snaps
     fingers) like that.  They knew it.
          Here is the other thing because this is --
     this is a conspiracy.  This is a conspiracy.  It's
     not just R.J. Reynolds, it's Philip Morris,
     American Tobacco, Brown & Williamson, which merged
     with Reynolds, Lorillard, Liggett, all these
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1696 tobacco companies that you saw in the Frank
     Statement that signed off, all these guys were, you
     know, shoulder to shoulder, you know, they decided,
     hey, listen, we've got to stick together, we've got
     to stick together and figure out a way to get these
     people to doubt that our products is dangerous.
          And, you know, that's very important, because
     one of the counts that I told you early on is a
     conspiracy count, that they agreed with these other
     tobacco companies to conceal the health effect and
     addictive nature of cigarettes, and that's what
     they did.
          So what did they do?  What did Philip Morris
     do, one of their co-conspirators?  What they did
     was when they found out that Dow Chemical was
     selling Nicorette gum, they went after them, said
     how could you do that.
          Well, if they really cared about the public
     and if they were really sincere about the public
     health as they said in the Frank Statement and as
     they said in some of those videos, they said we
     really care about people, then why would it bother
     you that people would use a product to help them
     stop smoking if they're addicted?  Why would it
     bother you?  Because they put profits over people.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1697 And this is in evidence, NIDA, the National
     Institute of Drug Abuse, "Addiction is defined as a
     chronic relapsing brain disease that is
     characterized by compulsive drug" -- "drug seeking
     use" -- "and use despite harmful consequences."
     Okay.
          What that means is, hey, look, if you have
     that urge, if you have that desire, and I think
     Mr. Ballard, who has got an eighth grade education,
     okay, very smart guy, but he's got an eighth grade
     education, what he was trying -- what he was
     telling you is I can't explain it, all I know is
     you had this urge that I had to have one, you know,
     he goes, "I can't explain it."
          Okay?  That's what they're talking about here,
     compulsive drug seeking, use despite a harm -- and
     let me tell you about "despite harmful
     consequences".
          1977, when the doctor told him, hey, you
     should quit, he smoked knowing it was harmful.
     That's the definition of addiction.  If you can't
     stop or you have a desire -- not can't stop because
     everybody -- but if you have a desire, a compulsion
     to smoke and you know it's bad for you, that's
     addiction.  That's what the government says, that's
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1698 addiction.
          In 1988, the Surgeon General Report came out,
     and they made certain conclusions, and cigarettes
     and other forms of tobacco are addicting.
     "Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes
     addiction.  The pharmacologic and behavioral
     process that determine tobacco addiction are
     similar to those that determine addiction to drugs
     such as heroin and cocaine."
          That's 1988.  That changed the game.  That
     changed the game because the tobacco companies
     couldn't come back and say, oh, you know, we didn't
     know it was addictive.  We know from their internal
     records now that they knew from way, way back.
          But when the Surgeon General came out in 1988
     and said, by the way, this is addicting, this is
     addicting, they were on the hook.  And I'm going to
     show you the congressional hearings where one of
     them tried to say, no, it's not addictive, in fact,
     it was a R.J. -- it was a CEO of R.J. Reynolds.  He
     says, no, there is no intoxication, there is no
     this.
          And do you remember yesterday, Dr. Figlar,
     their representative by video, he says, well,
     because he was using the 1964 Surgeon General
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1699 definition of addiction.  Remember that?  I think
     somebody wrote that down.  Right?
          You know what the problem with that is?  Is
     that statement, that statement when he said that
     was 1994.  And in 1988, the government changed it
     and said smoking is addictive.  So he was trying to
     wash himself off and cover himself with the 1964
     report that said we don't know if it is a habit or
     addiction, but by 1988, they knew, the government
     published it, and when they asked him about it, he
     lied.
          Let's listen to the Surgeon General. MR. ALVAREZ:  Now, that's the Surgeon General.
     They heard it, what did they do?  They attacked him
     again, they continued to attack the Surgeon
     General.  Any public health official that
     criticized the tobacco company and said that there
     was a link between smoking and lung cancer or other
     types of cancers and diseases, they attacked, every
     single time.
          So why are they disputing addiction?  Let me
     tell you why.  Because if you answer no, that he
     was not addicted, (gestures) case is over, we all
     go home.  Okay?  That's why -- that's why you see
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1700 the push on he was addicted, he was addicted, he
     was addicted.
          This is a man who started smoking at 16,
     barely 16.  A month before, he just turned 16.  He
     smoked for 49 years, a pack to two a day.  That's
     over half a million cigarettes.  So who do they
     bring to testify that this man wasn't addicted?
     Dr. Phillips.
          He's never conducted any research on nicotine.
     He's never written any articles on nicotine,
     nothing.  He never taught any classes on nicotine
     or addiction.  Never treated -- he's never even
     treated a single patient, not one patient
     exclusively for nicotine addiction, not one.  And
     before working with the tobacco lawyers, he had
     very limited knowledge or interest in nicotine
     addiction.
          Now, he never worked for the FDA, for the CDC,
     for the Surgeon General, or any nicotine addiction
     specialist.  In fact, I asked him, "You're not a
     nicotine addiction expert?"
          He said, "No, I am not."
          He disagrees with the Surgeon General, this
     guy is not an expert, but he disagrees with the
     experts.  He disagrees with NIDA, he disagrees with
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1701 them.  He admits that he has the minority opinion,
     that he is in the minority, he says everybody is
     wrong, he's right, the government is wrong, NIDA is
     wrong, Surgeon General is wrong, CDC is wrong, FDA
     is wrong, but he's right.
          But you know what?  He slipped up, because in
     his report, what does he say?  He says, under
     diagnosis, "Nicotine dependence, parentheses mild,
     in sustained full remission."
          And then he says, "Oh, no, no, no, I made a
     mistake.  I meant to say rule out nicotine
     dependence."
          I said, well, wait a minute, if that was true,
     if that were true, then why would you say mild?
     Why would you have to say mild?  Why would you have
     to say anything?  Why wouldn't you just say rule
     out nicotine dependence?
          Then it says, "In sustained full remission."
     If you were saying rule out nicotine dependence,
     how could you rule out something that's in full
     remission?  Doesn't make any sense.
          He refuses -- the other thing he does is he
     wants to use the DSM, we're going to talk about the
     DSM in a minute, but he refuses to acknowledge that
     for nicotine addiction, all the experts that know
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1702 what they're doing that treat people use the
     Fagerstrom test, that's what all the experts use.
     They don't use the DSM the way he uses it.  I'm
     going to tell you why in a minute.
          In fact, if you go to the website at the
     university where he teaches, guess what they use?
     They use the Fagerstrom test.  They use the same
     test that our expert says he -- that he should be
     using.
          And you know what, his own DSM, he says I use
     the DSM, but he disagrees with the DSM, because
     there, I read to him, well, here in the DSM it
     says, "Since it is estimated that between 80 and 90
     percent of regular smokers have a nicotine
     dependence, up to 25 percent of the U.S. population
     may have nicotine dependence."
          He says, "I disagree with that."
          I said, "Wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a
     minute.  This is the DSM.  Okay, you are using the
     DSM to say my client is not addicted, all right?
     You are using the book to say that; right?"
          You can't take selective parts.  Either it
     works or it doesn't.
          Now, in there, it says 80 to 90 percent of
     regular smokers are addicted.  He says, well, I
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1703 don't agree with that.  So he's going to cherry
     pick, he's going to take bits and pieces of what he
     likes to come up with an opinion that my client,
     who smoked for 49 years, a pack or two a day since
     he was 16 years old, and he's not addicted.
          And the DSM -- let me tell you, I said to him,
     "Listen, the DSM, you can't use the DSM the way
     you're using it.  The DSM is to treat people, not
     to come to court.  You're a forensic pathologist --
     I mean forensic psychiatrist, you can't use the DSM
     to come to court.  That's not what it's for."
          And that's exactly what it says.  "Cautionary
     statement, the clinical and scientific
     considerations involved in categorization of these
     conditions as mental disorders may not be wholly
     relevant to legal judgments, for example, that take
     into account such issues as individual
     responsibility, disability, determination, and
     competency."  You are not supposed to use this book
     for that, okay?
          It says, "Use of DSM in forensic settings,"
     that's exactly what he was doing; right?  Look what
     it says, "When the DSM-IV categories, criteria and
     textual descriptions are employed for forensic
     purposes, there are significant risks that
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1704 diagnostic information will be misused or
     misunderstood.  These dangers arise from the
     imperfect fit between the question of ultimate
     concern of law," which in this case was the person
     addicted, okay, "and the information contained in
     the clinical diagnosis.  In most situations, the
     clinical diagnosis of a DSM-IV mental disorder is
     not sufficient," not sufficient, okay, "to
     establish the existence of a legal purpose, i.e., a
     mental disorder or mental disability," which is
     exactly what he was doing in this case, and the
     book itself says you are not supposed to do that.
          And he comes up with some extreme opinions,
     okay?  You know, because sometimes you want to be
     somewhere in the middle; right?  It's always good
     to be in the middle; right?  Well, he's not in the
     middle.  He's way out there.
          Let me tell you why he's way out there.
     Because he said, if you listened to him, he said,
     "You're only addicted if smoking causes you to lose
     your job, your wife, and you are unable to perform
     daily activities."  That's what he said.  That's a
     ridiculous opinion.  That's a ridiculous opinion.
          Do you think 60 million Americans who were
     addicted or quit, lost their wife, lost their job,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1705 and couldn't perform daily activities, that's not
     the definition that the government says.  He's
     coming up with these absurd opinions.
          And I said, "Look, Doctor, there is NIDA," he
     goes, "Alan.  I know Alan."  Well, he goes, "I sit
     next to him.
          Well, something should have rubbed off because
     what Alan says is, "Look, addiction is
     uncontrollable, compulsive, drug seeking and use,
     even in the face of negative health and social
     consequences."  Okay?
          "This is the crux of how many professional
     organizations all define addiction."  Okay?
          DSM is not meant specifically -- the other
     thing is, if you look in the DSM, and I pointed it
     out to him, I said, look, this book is -- there is
     a zillion addictions, there is 13 or 12 categories
     of different classes of drugs that are addictive;
     right?  You can't use -- nicotine, you can't use it
     for this specifically.
          He goes, "Oh, yes, you can."
          I said, "Well, let's look at the book.  Let's
     see what the book says."
          And the book says, under nicotine dependence,
     it says, "To the text and criteria of substance
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1706 dependence, see page 192, some of the generic
     dependence criteria do not appear to apply to
     nicotine, whereas others require further
     explanation."
          You don't use it the way he was using it
     because you can't use it in forensic purposes, and
     when you're using it for nicotine, they're telling
     you be careful because this stuff don't fit.
          Here is the other thing he did.  You know,
     this struck me this morning when I was in the
     shower at 4:30 in the morning, you know, that's
     when I do my best thinking.
          This guy used this DSM to diagnose a patient
     22 years after he smoked his last cigarette.  Think
     about that.  He's using this book and saying you
     know what I'm going to do, you haven't smoked in 22
     years, but I'm going to use this book to establish
     that you weren't addicted.
          Here is the other thing.  Common sense.  It's
     enough to give him cancer after 50 years of
     smoking, but it ain't enough to addict him?  How
     does that make any sense?  He smoked enough to get
     cancer, but he's not smoking enough to be addicted?
          You know, one of the instructions the judge is
     going to give you is to use your common sense,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1707 guys.  Common sense tells you you smoked for 50
     years, a pack or two a day, you get cancer.  You
     weren't addicted?  You didn't have enough nicotine
     in your body to make you addicted?
          They admitted it.  And this is the actual
     instruction the judge is going to give you, it
     says, "And in this case, the defendant R.J.
     Reynolds Tobacco Company has stipulated that
     smoking its cigarettes caused Ralph Ballard's
     bladder cancer."
          So who do we bring?  We played it by video,
     okay, we didn't bring him live, but we played it by
     video.  The judge is going to tell you -- give you
     the instructions, you have to consider the guy --
     the video is the same as if the person was here.
     He had an opportunity to cross-examine, you heard
     it.
          Who do we bring?  Okay, a world-renowned
     expert in nicotine addiction.  He's gone to the
     United Kingdom, European Union, Canada.  He worked
     for NIDA.  He actually worked for the National
     Institute of Drug Addiction.  He was one of the
     leading -- he was their leading scientist on
     nicotine addiction, okay?
          The guy published more than 300 articles in
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1708 scientific and medical journals just on nicotine
     addiction.  He is an expert.  He's testified before
     Congress on nicotine addiction.  He helped -- he
     either helped write, rewrite, edit many, many of
     the Surgeon General Reports.  Okay?
          This is the expert.  This is the expert.
     Okay?  This is the guy who most of his life spent
     as a scientist studying nicotine addiction, not
     Dr. Phillips who has never even treated one person
     exclusively for nicotine addiction and had no
     interest in it until one of the tobacco lawyers
     hired him to do one of these cases.
          And so what does he say?  He says nicotine
     affects the brain.  Nicotine binds to these
     receptors in your brain.  They can measure that.
     Okay?  And when they -- what he said was, listen,
     they check smokers' and nonsmokers' brains, you
     know.  And smokers have 400 percent more nicotine
     receptors in their brains than nonsmokers.
          He said, look, this is what I could tell you
     about nicotine addiction, the younger you smoke,
     like if you are a teen, the harder it will be to
     quit.  Regular smokers find it easier to quit in
     their 60s to 70s.  Remember, he said that.  He is
     the poster child for exactly the type of smoker
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1709 they are talking about, started as a teen, quit in
     his 60s, when it was easier for him to quit.
          20 cigarettes a day is a high dose of
     nicotine.  The most -- this is what he said, look,
     there is two most important factors when you are
     going to find somebody who is addicted, this is
     really what it comes down to.
          The most important two factors in determining
     cigarette or nicotine addiction, one is how much
     did the smoker smoke, how much, and how soon after
     you wake up do you have your first cigarette?
          And let me tell you why that's important,
     because while you're sleeping, obviously you have
     to sleep, your body tells you you have to shut
     down, you have to sleep; right?  The moment you get
     up, what are you in?  If you are a nicotine addict,
     what are you?  You are in withdrawal.  You have
     been sleeping for seven or eight hours, and you are
     in withdrawal.
          So what's the first thing you do?  If you do
     it in the first five minutes, smoke a cigarette,
     that's a key factor in establishing nicotine
     addiction.  That's what he said.  And what does he
     say, the best and most effective way to diagnose
     nicotine addiction is using the Fagerstrom test.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1710 That's what they do at NIDA, that is what they
     teach, this is how you do it.
          That's a horrible copy.  I can see it better
     there.  And it's in evidence.
          This is the Fagerstrom test.  I went over the
     Fagerstrom test with Mr. Ballard when he was on the
     stand.  You probably didn't realize what I was
     asking him, why I was asking him those questions,
     but I was asking him those questions because that's
     the Fagerstrom test.  And he rated very high
     dependence.
          So "Was Ralph Ballard addicted to smoking" --
     "to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was
     such addiction a legal cause of his bladder
     cancer?"  I would humbly and respectfully ask you
     to answer yes to that question.
          Now, let's talk about what they did.  Okay?
     Let's talk about what they did from 1953 until 2000
     until they finally admitted that smoking was bad or
     addictive, okay?
          This is one of the internal company documents
     from 1968.  "Our basic position in the cigarette
     controversy is subject to the charge and may be
     subject to a finding that we are making false or
     misleading statements to promote the sale of
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1711 cigarettes."
          Duh.  Okay?  That's exactly right.  And, in
     fact, the findings that the judge is going to read
     you, okay, if we prove that he's addicted, these
     findings, these things I'm going to tell you about,
     you have to accept them, they are the letter of the
     law, this is the law of this case, okay?
          That RJR agreed with other tobacco companies
     to conceal the health effect of and addictive
     nature of smoking with the intent that the public
     would rely on the information to their detriment,
     that RJR concealed or omitted material information
     not otherwise known or available knowing that the
     material was false or misleading, or failed to
     disclose a material fact concerning the health
     effects or addictive nature of smoking, or both.
          Let me tell you what that means.  What that
     means is, look, because they're going to say, well,
     listen, everybody knew, everybody knew.  Well, what
     he didn't know was that the tobacco companies knew
     what they were saying was lying, and what he didn't
     know was that they were creating a culture and
     creating a controversy; right?  And a conspiracy to
     create doubt.
          Because what happens if you're an addicted
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1712 smoker?  Okay, if you're an addicted smoker and you
     hear two messages, one message is smoking is bad
     for you, you know, doctors and health-care
     officials say smoking is bad for you, or if you
     hear, look, if you smoke filtered cigarettes, this
     is going to be okay.  If you're addicted, which of
     those two messages do you think you are going to
     hear?  Which ones are you going to hear?  Which one
     are you going to believe?
          The third finding was RJR was negligent.  It
     means that they were careless.  And number 4 -- the
     last one is that they manufactured cigarettes that
     were defective and unreasonably dangerous.  This is
     the law of this case.  They have been found to have
     violated these things.
          What needs to be decided -- let me tell you
     the easiest thing in this case, there is four
     counts, the easiest one is strict liability, okay?
     Strict liability, that means they sold a product
     that was defective; right?
          In this case, the judge is going to instruct
     you that the cigarettes that he smoked are
     defective.  Case over.  If you find, if you find
     that he was addicted on this count, on strict
     liability, the case is over, because they've
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1713 already admitted, they've already admitted that his
     bladder cancer was caused from smoking.
          The defendant's cigarettes have already been
     determined as a matter of law to be defective and
     unreasonably dangerous.  Move past it.  Was the
     defective product, cigarettes, the legal cause of
     Mr. Ballard's bladder cancer?
          Now, legal cause, you know, legal cause,
     whether it's addiction, strict liability,
     negligence, or whatever, is -- is basically the
     same thing.  Legal cause, if it directly and in
     natural, continuous sequence produces or
     contributes substantially to producing such loss so
     that it could be said that but for the defect, the
     loss would not have occurred.  Okay.  Contributes
     substantially.
          Did the defective product play an important
     role?  But for the defect, but for him smoking
     those cigarettes, would he have developed bladder
     cancer?  Well, we know the answer to that is no,
     because they admit it.
          So legal cause, if it directly produces or
     contributes substantially such loss.  Smoking
     directly produces bladder cancer.  They're not
     disputing it.  But for smoking one to two packs a
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1714 day for 49 years, would not have -- you know, would
     not have caused his bladder cancer?
          Because that's what they have to prove.
     They've got to prove -- well, they've already
     admitted it, so they can't disprove it, all right,
     they have already admitted that he smoked this
     product, they admit it, he smoked for 49 years, it
     caused his bladder cancer.
          Once you answer yes to addiction, you have to
     answer yes to strict liability.  It's not an issue,
     it's got to be question number 3, I started with
     the easiest one, of course, "negligence is failing
     to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable
     company would exercise under like circumstances."
          Now, the question in the verdict form is not
     was there negligence -- I mean, was the negligence
     of RJR, okay.  They've already -- I've already
     established, the judge is already going to tell you
     that they were negligent.  If he was addicted, they
     were negligent, that's the law of this case.
          The question is a legal cause, was that a
     legal cause of his bladder cancer.  Well, again, we
     go back to the same thing, well, what causes
     bladder cancer?  The smoking.  Whose cigarettes?
     Theirs.  They admit it.  So the answer to that one
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1715 is easy, it's yes.
          Now, this conspiracy started in December of
     1953.  And one of the first things you see is that
     Frank Statement the next month where they come out
     and they say there is no proof that cigarette
     smoking is one of the causes.
          "We accept an interest in people's health as a
     basic responsibility, paramount to every other
     consideration in our business."  Well, if that were
     true, why would they be saying, guys, if we start
     putting a cigarette out there that's not addictive,
     then we're going to be out of business?  Well,
     that's kind of inconsistent with this.
          And they say, "We believe the products we make
     are not injurious to health."  When they knew all
     along that that was a lie.
          And the judge is going to instruct you that
     RJR Tobacco Company concealed or omitted material
     information not otherwise known or available
     knowing that the material was false or misleading,
     or failed to disclose a material fact concerning
     the health effects or addictive nature of smoking
     cigarettes, or both.
          He's going to tell you that, okay, that they
     concealed or omitted material information, okay?
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1716 That's the law of this case.  And how do they do
     that?  This is what they did -- I mean, they're
     very smart people.  Very, very smart.
          What they did is they created a culture where
     smoking was acceptable.  They created it with stars
     on TV, with radio, with magazines, with billboards.
     Everywhere you turned around back in the '40s and
     '50s and '60s, you saw this.  They were the number
     one advertiser, they're -- you've got to give them
     credit, man, they pushed this thing and they
     made -- you know, you've got Humphrey Bogart, Fred
     Astaire, all the great actors, smoking, okay?  So
     that's Lucille Ball, Desi Arnaz, all of them smoked
     or pushed their product.  Okay?
          So they created this culture so that when this
     kid, this 16-year-old kid from Homestead, son of a
     farmer, starts smoking, "Oh, this is what everybody
     does."  Who created that culture?  Who created
     that?  Did he create that?  Did he create that
     culture?  No.  It was everywhere.
          Now, look how much they spent.  I just pulled
     this little part out here because this is part of
     the Federal Trade Commission report in 1967.  And
     they looked back and said how much are these guys
     spending on advertising.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1717 Look, in '63, they were spending 249 million.
     By '66, they're spending 297 million.  And go
     through the report.  Guess what they -- they kept
     spending more and more and more and more and more.
     Okay?  On advertising.  That's a lot of money.
          You know what, 200, almost $300 million is in
     1960?  I mean, I -- in 1966, I was seven -- I was
     seven years old, so I would have been in second
     grade, second or third grade.  You know, I don't
     know if I can count that high.  That's a lot --
     that's a lot of money, man.  That's a lot of money.
     Okay?
          And this defendant, they spent half a billion
     dollars, half a billion dollars just them and their
     companies that they bought out for these Tobacco
     Institute, the Council For Tobacco Research, all
     these front organizations, okay?
          So let me ask you this, because, you know, I'm
     a common sense guy.  I'm a common sense guy.  So
     they're going to come out and say, "Well, that
     money was spent in research.  We did research.  We
     did scientific research."
          Let me ask you a question.  You spend half a
     billion bucks on scientific research; right?  And
     don't you think it's a little late by 2000 to
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1718 finally figure out that smoking is bad for you and
     causes cancer?  You think for a half a billion
     dollars, you maybe got that answer sooner than
     that?  What do you think?  H'mm?  Maybe?
          That was a front organization.  Documents are
     there.  They put that out there because they wanted
     to create doubt and confusion.  That was their
     plan.  Anybody who said anything bad about the
     tobacco company or linked cigarettes to cancer,
     they attacked.  And that's what that money was for,
     it was for attacks.
          Okay, so they come up with this filter thing.
     Remember I told you about the filters, that's why
     he smoked, that's why everybody smoked filters.
     Everybody believed that, hey, listen this
     controversy, this may be bad, but don't worry, the
     cigarette companies are putting filters on the
     cigarettes, we're going to be okay.  Okay?
     Remember they said that?
          Okay.  This is 1964.  This is the industry
     spokesman.
          Can you play that, Mr. Philipson, please? MR. ALVAREZ:  And they're smug about it.
     They're smug about it.  They create this whole
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1719 thing about filters to scam the American public and
     dupe them into thinking that hey, if you smoke a
     filtered cigarette, you're going to be okay.
     Because in their documents it's clear, the illusion
     of filtration is as important as the fact of
     filtration.
          Look what the government says.  This is from a
     government report from the FTC.  It says, "The
     industry has moved strongly toward filtered
     cigarettes, which have increased from .6 percent,
     that's less than 1 percent, okay, less than 1
     percent in 1950 to 87 percent in 1975."
          Why did they do that?  Because it was part of
     the conspiracy to create doubt, confusion, and a
     controversy about the health effects.
          And by the way, it didn't stop.  And we heard
     some of that here, right, when I was
     cross-examining Dr. Phillips, I go Dr. Phillips,
     you know, the science is out there, the science
     says this, the government says this.  He goes,
     well, there's some controversy about that.  Are you
     kidding me?  You guys are still doing that?  Are
     you still doing that, are you still creating doubt
     and confusion in this courtroom?
          MR. REID:  Objection, there was an in limine
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1720 motion on that, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Come over here.
          (The following is at the bench.)
          THE COURT:  Read me back the last statement.
          (The court reporter read back the last portion
of the statement.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Right.
          MR. REID:  That's an attack on our litigation
     and a suggestion that this trial is part of a
     conspiracy.  We had an in limine motion, he was
     going to tell me before he said that kind of stuff.
     It's totally improper argument to say --
          THE COURT:  I don't remember anything about an
     in limine.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  We didn't hear it, but.
          MR. REID:  The point is, the point is he said
     that we, the lawyers in this case, are part of a
     conspiracy to continue to obfuscate and that's an
     attack on the lawyers.
          THE COURT:  Is that what you said about the
     lawyers?
          MR. REID:  Yeah, he said it in this courtroom.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm talking -- I said
     Dr. Phillips.  What Dr. Phillips came in here and
     said.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1721 THE COURT:  Calm down.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  What he said was, Dr. Phillips,
     he came in and said there's a controversy over the
     science on addiction when in truth there is no
     controversy.
          THE COURT:  I heard him say that he
     believed -- he admitted he's in a minority, but.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  No, he said -- and he said there
     was a -- he used the word controversy, Judge.
          THE COURT:  Your concern is he's trying to
     attack you.
          MR. REID:  Our witness, our litigation, he's
     saying that our litigation, he said you're still
     doing it, in other words, he's claiming that we did
     it originally, the client did it, now he says we're
     still doing it in the courtroom, the witnesses we
     put on, that's an attack on the lawyer and the
     strategy in this case, and that's inappropriate.
          THE COURT:  Okay, make it clear that you are
     not attacking the attorney --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  The lawyers.
          THE COURT:  -- you're talking --
          MR. REID:  But he can't say the witness did
     it, because I put the witness on.  He can't say
     that something we did in this case is evidence in a
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1722 conspiracy.  That's what he can't say.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Judge, they can't come in here,
     okay, a witness can't come in here, okay, and say
     there is a controversy over the science of what
     something means --
          THE COURT:  Right.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  -- when that's not true.  They
     can't do that.
          MR. REID:  He's already said that.
          THE COURT:  He can say that.
          MR. REID:  Yeah.
          THE COURT:  He can say whatever he wants.
          MR. REID:  But he can't say they're still
     doing it.
          THE COURT:  And you cross-examined him by
     showing him -- admitting that he's in the minority.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Right.
          MR. REID:  He can't say they're still doing it
     in this courtroom, meaning they, the defendants,
     are still doing it in this courtroom, that's the
     inappropriate part.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Well, Judge, it's not
     inappropriate if they do it like he did.
          THE COURT:  He's concerned the implication is
     that they are doing something wrong in this -- in
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1723 handling this case.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  So I want you to clear it up.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  No problem.
          MR. REID:  I'll move to strike what he said.
     I'll do it in front of the jury.
          THE COURT:  You've already done it.
          MR. REID:  So you'll grant my motion?
          THE COURT:  I'll grant it.  Rephrase your
     statement.
          (In open court.)
          MR. REID:  Your Honor, you were going to make
     a ruling I thought.
          THE COURT:  Yeah, sustained.
          MR. REID:  And move to strike that last
     comment.
          THE COURT:  That's statement is stricken and
     Mr. Alvarez will rephrase.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Sure, I didn't mean the lawyers
     did anything wrong in this case.  The lawyers, this
     is a great group of lawyers, they're defending
     their client.  Okay?  I don't have any problem with
     any of these lawyers, they're terrific lawyers, so
     don't take anything I said to mean that they have
     done anything wrong or unethical.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1724 They are great ethical lawyers, so we may
     disagree about the facts and we each represent our
     clients, but I'm not making any personal attacks on
     them, okay?
          So think about that.  In 1950, less than a
     percent and then jump -- of the cigarettes have
     filters, by 1975, 87 percent of them have filters.
     That's what they did, they created this whole thing
     about filters to get the American people to do
     what?  Keep smoking.  Okay?
          In fact, the poll, when they did a poll, the
     government did a poll, they said filters reduce --
     they asked smokers, smokers and nonsmokers, okay,
     "Do filters reduce the health risk of cigarette
     smoking?"  50 percent of the people -- 51 percent
     of the people who don't smoke said yes, 58 percent
     of the people said yes.  Those are -- that's like
     30 million people.  30 million people.  That's a
     lot of people believed it.
          Now, I don't want you to believe me that they
     concealed stuff.  I want you to hear it from them.
     Okay?  In their own words. MR. ALVAREZ:  By the way, that gentleman you
     just saw, that's the president, CEO of R.J.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1725 Reynolds Tobacco Company. MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  Let's hear that whole
     interview on ABC on Nightline with Ted Koppel with
     CEO of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, Counsel. MR. ALVAREZ:  You noticed at the beginning of
     that, it started with they took out a front page --
     a full-page ad in the newspaper.  Okay, American
     Tobacco Company, okay, that's one of the companies
     that RJR ultimately merged with.  Let's hear what
     his -- what their CEO thinks. MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay, let's hear from some more
     tobacco executives.  Could you play it,
     Mr. Philipson?
          MR. PHILIPSON:  This one?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Next with one. MR. ALVAREZ:  Go on to the next one.  Do you
     want me to move this? MR. ALVAREZ:  I mean, these guys don't stop.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1726 That was the -- that was the drum that they beat
     for almost 50-something years.  They just didn't
     stop.
          And this is Philip Morris, a co-conspirator of
     R.J. Reynolds.  This is a letter on their
     letterhead on May 20th, 1963, to the assistant
     Surgeon General of the United States.
          Because they asked them, hey, what's in your
     cigarettes?  Do they cause cancer?  And it says,
     "None of the chemical substances listed therein, to
     our knowledge, have been found by scientific
     research to be harmful to health of the smoker in
     amounts reported in smoke."  Right?
          So he's telling the Surgeon General there is
     nothing in cigarettes that we found that is harmful
     to smokers.  Here's the problem with that.  This is
     a report two years earlier, 1961, and look what it
     says, "Partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke
     also identified as carcinogens."
          They knew and they were willing to do anything
     so that the public didn't know.  Anything.  Okay?
     Put billions of dollars behind it and look what
     else they said they'd do.  They wrote a letter to
     the legal department and they said, "Invalidation
     of some reports in the research department.  We do
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1727 not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision
     is reached to remove certain reports from research
     files.  Once it becomes clear that such actions is
     necessary for the successful defense of our present
     and future suits, we will promptly remove all such
     reports from our files."
          THE CLERK:  Five minutes, Counsel.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.
          "As an alternative to invalidation, we can
     have the authors rewrite the scientific" -- "the
     sections of the reports where" -- "which appear
     objectionable."  So, hey, listen, we're either
     going to get rid of it or we're going to tell the
     authors and the scientists rewrite it.  That's what
     they would do.  That's the depth that they would go
     to.
          So the question is, R.J. Reynolds -- did --
     "Did Ralph Ballard reasonably rely to his detriment
     on any statement by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
     that omitted material information regarding the
     health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes or
     both, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of
     his bladder cancer?"
          They created that atmosphere, they created
     that culture, they created that whole thing of
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1728 lies, they told him about the filters, they did
     this whole thing to hook this kid so he'd be
     smoking for the next 50 years, and they got him,
     and now that they've got him, they owe him.
          So the answer to that is yes.  And the gall of
     these men, these tobacco executives to go in front
     of our Congress and lie. MR. ALVAREZ:  So that's what they did, they
     lied to the American people, they lied in front of
     Congress, they lied, they lied, they lied.
          So did they agree -- this is -- this is the
     question, was there -- "Was any act taken in
     furtherance of the agreement to conceal or omit
     information regarding the health effects or
     addictive nature of cigarettes or both a legal
     cause of Ralph Ballard's bladder cancer?"  And the
     answer to that is yes.
          They conspired with the other tobacco
     companies to do exactly this.
          All right, now I'm going to talk to you really
     quickly about the polls because I think you're
     going to see something in a few minutes.  Okay?
     Remember I told you in the beginning there's
     something called an awareness poll and something
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1729 called belief poll?  Remember that?  Awareness
     polls are like hey, have you heard that cellular
     phones cause cancer?
          And, you know, they'll get a certain amount of
     people say yeah, I've heard that, but if you ask
     the question, the belief question is, do you
     believe, do you believe that using a cellphone will
     cause cancer, that number will be much lower,
     because people hear it but not necessarily believe
     it.  Right?  Those are two different things.  Every
     single one of the polls they showed you yesterday,
     guess what they were?  Awareness polls.  They
     didn't show you one belief poll.
          THE CLERK:  One minute, Counsel.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm going to use some -- I'm
     going to go over my time.
          THE COURT:  Well, then it's going to be taken
     off your rebuttal.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I get that.
          THE COURT:  Okay, I just want to make sure --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.
          THE COURT:  -- that you know so you've got to
     cover whatever you're going to cover.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm going to cover.
          THE COURT:  Whatever's left you get, if there
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1730 is nothing left, there's nothing left.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Nothing left.
          THE COURT:  All right, let's go.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm going to leave it all here.
          THE COURT:  All right, leave it all there.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Here it is.  This question is a
     belief poll, "What is your opinion, do you think
     cigarette smoking is or is not one of the causes of
     lung cancer?"  And it says yes, this is one of the
     causes, okay, 53 percent of the smokers believed in
     50 -- in '64 and 29 in 1954.  Those are belief
     polls.  What you saw yesterday were just awareness
     polls.  So keep that in mind.  You know, the -- I'm
     going to go through these pretty quickly.
          Mr. Ballard is a man, an honest man, a genuine
     man, a man's man.  Okay?  And he came up here, he
     said I'm going to accept partial responsibility.
     Okay?  And he did that.  Okay?  They're saying
     they're not responsible.  He's saying I'm taking
     part responsibility.  Okay?
          (Phone rings.)
          MS. FURNESS:  Sorry, Judge.
          THE COURT:  That's okay.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  So this is what he's taking
     responsibility for.  Look, from 1942 to 1991, when
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1731 he quit, he had smoked for 49 years, okay?  He
     started to quit in 1977, when the doctors finally
     told him for the very first time, okay, smoking is
     bad for you.  He goes, okay, I should quit, I'm
     going to try to quit.  So from 1942 to 1977, that's
     35 years, they're 100 percent responsible for that
     time.  Okay?
          But once he -- once that thing went off in his
     mind (snaps fingers), says, look, I'd better start
     quitting, doctors told me I'm on the hook for this
     thing now, okay, till 1991, that's 14 years.  Okay?
     And now for those 14 years while he was addicted,
     is 50/50.  It's 50/50 okay, he shares some
     responsibility and so do they.  Okay?
          So for the first 35 years, it's a hundred
     percent.  For the next 14 years, it's 14 percent.
     When you do the math percentage-wise, it's 85
     percent for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and 15
     percent for Ralph Ballard.  That's the math.
          Listen, he's an 86-year-old man and this case
     ain't about him going out on his boat.  He's got
     bigger problems than that, okay?  He's got a bag
     attached to his stomach where urine comes out of
     it, okay?  He hasn't been with a woman for 18
     years.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1732 Okay?  If we were to put up an ad in the Miami
     Herald and said we're going to accept people, and
     we want to do a study, and we want to find out if
     you can go 18 years without having sex, --
          MR. REID:  Objection, that's improper
     argument.
          THE COURT:  Excuse me?  Can you re- --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Sure.
          THE COURT:  Can you repeat.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  What I said was if we put an ad
     in the Miami Herald and said we're going to do a
     study and we asked these study participants that
     you have to go 18 years without having sex and then
     he objected.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Well, I sustain the
     objection.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  All right.
          THE COURT:  Let's keep it to this case.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  Well, that's what he did,
     okay, for the last 18 years, he's had this bag
     stuck to him, okay, where urine comes out of, and
     he hasn't been with a woman for 18 years, and he'll
     never be with a woman for the rest of his life.
     Okay, so you decide what's that worth.  What's the
     value of his loss?  What's that worth?  What amount
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1733 of money will compensate him for that?
          They probably don't have enough.  And they
     have a lot.
          MR. REID:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. REID:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  Granted.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Well, it's up to you to decide
     what's fair and just in light of this evidence, not
     the judge, not the lawyers, not me.  You decide.  I
     can only make a suggestion.  It could be higher or
     it could be lower, it's up to you.  And we think
     $15 million is a reasonable amount of money.
          Now, Maria is his wife.  She testified by
     deposition.  Her -- she moved out of the bedroom
     with him so she wouldn't make him feel bad.  And
     she hasn't been with a man for 18 years, either.
     And she has, under the law, under the law, she has
     a right to damages for the loss of her husband's
     comfort, society, attention, and services.  And we
     suggest that a reasonable amount is $3 million or
     you could make it whatever you want.  You may
     think, hey, she suffered just as much as him, she
     should get the same amount.  That's completely up
     to you.  Okay?
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1734 In conclusion, if I've done anything in this
     trial to offend anyone, I apologize.  I'm only
     trying to represent my client the best way I can,
     and if I've done that, I'm sorry, I apologize, but
     please don't take it out on Mr. Ballard.
          It's been a pleasure being here for two weeks,
     and spending time with you all, and -- but most of
     all, I feel honored in the task that I was chosen
     to represent this very honorable man.  Thank you.


          MR. ALVAREZ:  Leave that there, I want to --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  You want the whole thing?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Yeah, put it back.
          He said that they weren't a front; right?
     They weren't a front.
          Robert, when you get a moment, can you please
     put up the document, please?
          Now, you're going to also see -- Robert.
          R.J. -- this is the final --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  You want that or you want
     this?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  That's fine.  Pull out that
     section, please.
          This is their document.  Okay?  Dr. -- "Bill
     Shinn feels that special projects are the best way
     that moneys are spent.  On these projects, CTR has
     acted as a front."  Go to the jury instruction.
     The finding.
          There has been a finding here, a finding that
     "R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, the Tobacco
     Institute, and other tobacco companies entered into
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1802 an agreement to conceal or omit information."  How
     can they say they weren't a front?  How can they
     say they weren't working together, that they
     weren't conspiring together when there's a finding
     that the law says you have to accept?  They're
     still denying it.  They came in court and denied
     it.
          Now, they say they invited the attorney
     general.  Let me ask you, they didn't send the
     attorney general the forwarding memo that they did
     the very next day with this concocted plan.
          They didn't send the attorney general the memo
     saying we're going to destroy these documents or
     we're going to rewrite all the -- we're going to
     rewrite all these reports that people find
     objectionable.  They didn't send those to the
     attorney general, did they?  And let's talk about
     this timeline.
          Because he said he knew, look at this, he went
     back, 1940, 1950, 1960, this guy knew, everybody
     knew, look at this, he knew, he knew, this guy
     knew, his family was dying, everybody knew, we had
     warnings on the label.  Well, let me ask you a
     question, if Mr. Ballard knew, Mr. Ballard with an
     eighth grade education, if they're saying, hey, he
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1803 knew, guess what?  What about them?  How come they
     didn't know?  How come it took them until 2000 to
     admit it?
          But they want you to use a different standard,
     they want you to say, well, he's a hundred percent
     because he knew way back in there.  Oh, no, not us.
     It's okay that we didn't know until 2000.
          Well, who do you think knew more, a man with
     an eighth grade education or all the scientists and
     people that they had at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company?  Who do you think knew more?  And they
     said, well, we wouldn't have been here if he would
     have stopped.
          Well, we wouldn't have been here if they would
     have stopped this conspiracy 50 years ago.  None of
     us would be here.  He wouldn't have lost his
     bladder, he wouldn't be having these problems.  We
     wouldn't be here -- you're right, we wouldn't be
     here if they stopped lying 50 years ago.
          They bring up all these New York Times
     articles and the Life and Times and Reader's
     Digest, they got an award, Reader's Digest, what's
     the matter, don't these guys read?  Don't they have
     books and don't they have magazines at the
     executive offices at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1804 because if they're saying he should have read them,
     he should have known, well, what about them?
          They said we don't lower nicotine, we don't
     lower -- we don't -- Robert, put the thing on,
     please.  "To enhance the taste, one must raise the
     pH of smoke, so simply to raise pH, say to 6.0 to
     6.5, you raise the level of nicotine."  Come on.
     That's how they manipulate it.
          They could drop it to wherever they want to
     drop it to, but they don't want to drop it to a
     place where people don't want to smoke because if
     they don't make it addicting, guess what?  No one
     would buy it.
          They said a bridge of causation.  This isn't a
     bridge of evidence, it's a bridge of doubt.
          Listen, they said he's not a weak person,
     that's the only thing in their whole presentation I
     agree with.  There's nothing, that's not -- that's
     like the opposite of what he is.  This man is not
     weak.  This man is an epitome of a hero, okay?  He
     is a strong man that when he puts his mind to
     something, he does it.  And guess what it took him
     a while to do before he was able to do?
          Finally quit smoking.  That shows you he was
     addicted, because if not, he could have dropped it
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1805 like that.  And in -- you know, they have
     selected -- you know, they bring out selected parts
     of the deposition, okay, because he said it, his
     wife said it, in 1977, when the doctor told him, he
     started to try to smoke -- to try to quit smoking.
     It's in there.  I had to stand up and read it.  But
     they want to do select -- you know, everything
     about them is selective.
          He says choice.  There's a lot of choices
     here.  These corporations have choices too.  They
     could have chosen not to be part of the conspiracy.
     They could have chosen not to conceal the health
     effects of smoking and its addictive nature.
     That's a choice.
          THE CLERK:  Five minutes, Counsel.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Thank you.
          They said these ads didn't mean anything to
     him.  These ads -- listen, it's not that he sees
     one ad, nobody sees one ad and decides to do
     anything.  It's what that ad represents and what
     all the TV shows, movies, everything of the era,
     that's the culture that they built.  It's not one
     ad, it's not one statement, it's what they built.
     It's the society they built, the culture that they
     build.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1806 That's why they put half a billion dollars
     into the CTR and the Tobacco Institute, to create
     doubt, confusion, and controversy.  There's a
     reason they did that.  If everybody knew, if
     everybody knew, then why are they pumping billions
     of dollars into this?
          And by the way, you're not going to see a word
     in any of the instructions that talk about choice,
     that talk about control.  That's not what addiction
     is.  You saw the definitions, the definitions are
     in evidence, has nothing to do with your ability to
     not -- everybody can quit.  Listen, everybody can
     quit.
          That's not what makes you addicted.  What
     makes you addicted is if you have an uncontrollable
     urge to smoke when you know it's bad for you and
     that's what it is, that's all, it's a very simple
     thing, but think, have common sense.  You think
     this guy smoked for 50 years, it was enough to give
     him bladder cancer, but it wasn't enough to addict
     him?  I mean, come on.
          By the way, they keep -- the awareness polls,
     let's talk about that.  Because they're tricky.
          Turn this on for me.  Is this on?  Okay.
          They showed you two polls, they said, oh, we
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1807 showed you two polls that weren't awareness polls,
     remember, there were two polls that weren't
     awareness polls, they were belief polls, they were
     belief polls, remember that?  Look at the polls
     that they sent.
          They said, "Do you think cigarette smoking is
     harmful or not?"  Harmful.  Doesn't mean it caused
     cancer, doesn't mean it caused emphysema.  Harmful
     could be short of breath, scratchy throat, a
     million other things.  Where does it say cancer
     there.
          There's polls.  Where are those polls?  Where
     are those polls that say do you think cigarette
     smoking causes cancer?  Where is that poll?  They
     didn't show it to you.  Do you believe smoking
     causes lung cancer?  They didn't show you that
     poll.  That poll is in the government report that
     we showed you.  This is harmful.  Yeah, I'm sure
     it's harmful, could cause a million things, but it
     doesn't say cancer.
          And when they come in here and they say
     they're not disputing the findings, we don't
     dispute.  Well, what do you mean you don't dispute?
     You spent the whole hour saying that we didn't
     know.  Well, then when did you conceal?  When did
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1808 you conspire?
          I didn't hear them once saying, yeah, we
     concealed and we conspired, not once.  Did you hear
     them say that?  All they said was we don't dispute
     it.  Well, does that mean that you don't admit it?
     Because that's the law of this case, they did.  And
     somebody got hurt.
          Thank you.