          MR. REID:  It's still morning.  Good morning.
          JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. REID:  Not only do I get to go second, it
     seems like every day I get to go just before lunch.
     So I apologize about that.  We'll do the best we
     can, though.  Might want to write something on this
     in a minute.
          That'll work.
          Let me start first by thanking you also.  You
     know, lawyers usually don't get to be on juries,
     but I've been told by people who have been on the
     juries that it's remarkable when you get back
     there, one of you will remember these facts,
     another of you will remember this fact, and even
     without your notes, you will discover that jointly,
     you will remember everything, and that's why the
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1737 system works, and that's why I told you in the
     beginning that I fully support and believe this is
     the best way to resolve these kinds of disputes.
          So, but it requires your time.  And you all
     agreed when we talked during voir dire last week
     that you didn't mind being asked to resolve this
     dispute.  And as you can see, there is a serious
     issue here, a serious dispute, a serious case to
     both parties.
          So I would like to talk a little bit about
     what the evidence has shown, and I would like to
     start by reminding you of something I said in the
     beginning, and that is that regardless of
     everything that you've heard, this case first and
     foremost is about Mr. Ballard, it's Mr. Ballard's
     case.
          Now, there may be some disagreement, if you
     remember --
          May I see number 1, please.
          In the beginning, counsel said, "I don't have
     to prove anything that defendants said or did that
     had any impact on Mr. Ballard.  So I don't have to
     prove that he relied on any statement that they
     made."
          Well, as a result, the vast majority of the
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1738 evidence that you've heard from the plaintiff in
     this case has been what I'll call generic evidence.
          Some examples.  And we'll talk about these in
     more detail.  Dr. Henningfield, for instance, he
     never heard -- he never met Mr. Ballard.  He didn't
     know anything about Mr. Ballard.  He didn't know
     anything about his smoking, his -- all he knew
     about was generic ideas about addiction.
          If you think about the documents, remember,
     there was -- there were about four hours spent
     showing you a lot of different documents, and not a
     single one had anything to do with Mr. Ballard, not
     a single one.
          In fact, virtually none of those documents had
     anything to do with my client, of the potentially
     millions of documents that are available, you heard
     somebody talking about there being this computer
     base -- you can take that down.  This computer
     system with a lot of documents.
          Out of that, you only saw, and you'll go back,
     you look, 27 documents, that's all, that related to
     my client, and that includes the other two
     companies that are now part of Reynolds, Brown &
     Williamson and American.
          But the point is there is nothing in those
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1739 documents, there are no words in those documents,
     there were no words in the depositions that you
     heard on the video from the plaintiff that had
     anything to do with Mr. Ballard.
          In fact, if you think about the products that
     he smoked that were manufactured for my client,
     Winston, for instance, there aren't any documents
     about that brand in all of the documents that were
     put into evidence.
          Now, we saw something in opening that
     disappeared.  You remember the -- Mr. Alvarez had a
     slide that showed this old TV show of time travel,
     and remember there was a tunnel and people going
     in, and he said I'm going to talk to you about what
     happened.
          Well, that's changed because now what he's
     asked you to do, in effect, is to take the level
     our knowledge today about smoking and health and to
     apply it to decisions and statements and things
     people did in the '50s.  And I'm going to
     demonstrate that to you in a little bit in more
     detail.  That's what you have to think about.
          These documents were all written at a
     different time and a different place with a
     different understanding.  So you were -- you get to
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1740 be the judges.  And if you look at documents, you
     get to decide if somebody wrote something that was
     stupid or that you can't explain, knowing what we
     know today, you have to decide what did they know
     when they wrote it?  And I'm going to talk about
     some of that as we go through.
          I would submit that all of the documents that
     were in have really nothing to do with this case,
     nothing to do with this case, because this case is
     about whether Mr. Ballard was addicted and whether
     it was an addiction or a choice to smoke that drove
     his smoking decisions, and that's what the case is
     about.
          Now, I want to talk about these findings that
     you've heard something about.  Remember, I told --
     Miss Furness when she spoke to you in opening and
     when I spoke to you during voir dire, I told you
     nobody from Reynolds is going to come in and make
     any objection or disagreement or anything about
     those findings.
          But you heard literally hundreds of -- well,
     four hours, hundreds of documents, that dealt with
     trying to prove that smoking causes cancer and that
     smoking is addictive.  Today, think about of all
     the clips that you saw, how often did you see a
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1741 clip that was shown to you to try to prove to you
     that smoking causes cancer?
          Remember the list of cancer -- carcinogenic
     substances?  There was kind of a little trick
     there, you might say, not -- I don't mean that in a
     bad way.  The letter said there -- we don't know of
     anything in the amounts in which they appear in
     tobacco smoke that cause cancer, and then he listed
     the things that appear, and there are thousands of
     chemicals when you burn a piece of broccoli, much
     less when you burn a tobacco plant, so those are
     the kinds of things you're going to have to deal
     with as we go through.
          But as to the findings, I told you and it's
     come true, nobody on our side has contested those
     findings.  Those findings were made by a different
     jury.
          Could we see number 2?
          That jury, the case was called Engle, and it
     was tried here in this courthouse.  They didn't
     hear any evidence about Mr. Ballard.  They don't
     mention him.  They don't decide any issues about
     Mr. Ballard.  They don't decide whether he relied
     on anything we said.  Don't decide whether he was
     injured.  Don't establish whether we were
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1742 responsible for any of his actions or choices.
          If you think about it, the findings -- if the
     findings dealt with Mr. Ballard, we wouldn't need
     you to be here.  You're here because those findings
     left an important part for you to decide, and that
     is whether this individual, not a generic person,
     whether this individual smoked by choice or not,
     whether this individual was aware of the risks of
     smoking, none of that was decided.  None of that
     was decided.
          So the findings don't answer the question,
     notwithstanding what you might have thought or
     heard this morning, or think about how many times,
     how many pieces of evidence, how much testimony the
     plaintiffs have put on to convince you that smoking
     causes cancer or that smoking is addictive.  That
     was completely unnecessary, because I -- we told
     you at the beginning, and I'm telling you again
     now, that's not in dispute.  This case is about
     Mr. Ballard.
          Now, I'll go over the questions on the verdict
     form, but I've sort of organized the evidence that
     I would like to talk to you about in this manner.
     And the first question is whether Mr. Ballard is a
     member of the class.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1743 And the judge will tell you that when you were
     asked the question about addiction, it's really two
     questions rolled into one.  The first is was he
     addicted to cigarettes.  The second question is was
     the addiction that caused him to develop the
     cancer, that caused him to smoke and develop the
     cancer, or was it choice.
          The second -- the second group of things I
     would like to talk about is his awareness.  Was he
     aware that there was a risk associated with
     smoking?  And finally, did we do or say anything
     that he relied on or that caused him to make the
     decisions that he made.
          Now, nothing from Dr. Henningfield can answer
     those questions, because he didn't know
     Mr. Ballard.  Nothing from the corporate
     depositions of Reynolds people can answer those
     questions.  Nothing from anybody that you heard
     from can answer those questions except for
     Mr. Ballard.  That's why you're here, to answer
     those questions about Mr. Ballard.
          Now, the plaintiff talked about the burden of
     proof.  And he told you -- he gave you an example
     of a rice bowl.  Two children, you want to split
     the rice, you've got some rice in this bowl, you've
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1744 got some rice in this bowl, and in order to give
     one a little more, you take one little teaspoon out
     and put it over here.
          That's not what this is all about.  The
     plaintiff has the complete and total burden.  The
     clearer way to say it would be one person has an
     empty rice bowl and in order to balance it and get
     past the other person's, you have to fill it up a
     little bit and then get a little more.
          It's not that the plaintiff has to prove a
     tiny little thing to win the case.  That's what the
     suggestion was to you.  And, you know, he said the
     scales tip slightly.  Well, the scales start on the
     bottom for the plaintiff in this case, and the
     plaintiff has the burden to bring those scales up
     and then to surpass.  So that's the burden of
     proof, and that's why he goes first and last and as
     the judge told you and so forth.
          And what is the burden?  The burden is to
     establish some connection between what my client
     did and Mr. Ballard.
          Now, I wanted to draw something, I'm a
     terrible artist, but I was trying to think
     something that would make this clear, I was
     thinking about -- I thought about this when I was
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1745 driving across one of the causeways, if you can
     imagine this is -- this is Miami, and this is the
     beach.  And in order to get across, you need, what,
     a bridge.  Or causeway, but let's say you need a
     bridge.  I'll try to draw a bridge here, if I can.
     Does that look like a bridge?
          Now, here in town that's called the MacArthur
     or Tubb or different things, but what I'm going to
     call it is the bridge of causation.  And over here
     is Mr. Ballard and over here is his claim of
     causation -- or rather addiction and cause of
     addiction and so forth.  Mr. Ballard has to get
     across this bridge.  And you know what the bridge
     here is?  It's evidence.
          So I'm going to keep referring to the bridge.
     Does Mr. Ballard have evidence in this case that
     connects Mr. Ballard with the claims he's making in
     this case?  Can he cross the bridge of causation
     with the evidence that he has?
          Now, one other thing, I want you to recall
     that the plaintiff's entire case, this question of
     class membership, is based on an assumption that
     Mr. Ballard is addicted.  They want you to believe
     based on the evidence they put in with
     Dr. Henningfield and some of the documents they put
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1746 in yesterday, I think, from the NIDA and Surgeon
     General and so forth, they really want you to
     believe that Mr. Ballard was completely trapped to
     an unwanted life of smoking, that he had no ability
     to control his decision about smoking.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, improper standard,
     Judge, improper proof.
          THE COURT:  Well, no, he's commenting on what
     he believes you want them to believe.  Overruled.
          MR. REID:  Well, let's move on.
          Let's see what they put into evidence.  Let's
     look at slide 6.  This came from Dr. Henningfield
     and from the NIDA document, and basically, it said
     that an addicted person jumps out of bed with a
     cigarette, suffers through or leaves activities
     where smoking is not permitted.  Smoke in excess of
     a pack a day.  Cannot concentrate when smoking.
     Cannot do a job when not smoking.  Often relapses.
     Within hours of -- this is from the NIDA document
     that he showed you this morning, I think, within
     hours of cessation, irritability, craving,
     depression, anxiety, cognitive and attention
     deficits, sleep disturbances, increased appetite.
          That's the evidence they put in to demonstrate
     to you what the generic addicted smoker is.  None
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1747 of that applies to Mr. Ballard, not a single one.
     Now, I realize we had a little disagreement about
     jumping out of bed.  Mr. Ballard testified that he
     went in, made his coffee, and he didn't smoke when
     he was still in the bed.  There has been some
     suggestion that maybe he did, but the point is none
     of that applies to Mr. Ballard.  And that's the
     standard that they have given you in this case
     through their experts.  That's the generic
     evidence, that's not Mr. Ballard.
          So I would like to go to the first question
     I'll talk about, and that is whether or not
     Mr. Ballard is a member of the class, and
     specifically, let's talk about addiction.
          Now, we talked about this during the voir
     dire, you may remember.  Most of you, I asked the
     question, and I think everybody in the room raised
     their hands.  I said at that point in time, without
     knowing anything else, if a person smoked a pack a
     day for 50 years, would you believe that person was
     addicted.  And you know what, you all raised your
     hand.
          Now, the difference now is that you know more.
     You know now that no one says that you can identify
     addiction solely, solely by knowing how much and
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1748 how long a person smokes, that it's a complicated
     question of personal behavior.
          Now, we know, for instance, over the years
     that the definition of addiction has changed.  I
     made this little chart to kind of show you what
     happened back in the -- you know, we showed you the
     chart from the King and John Quincy Adams, they
     were calling things addictive way back, but in '64
     the Supreme Court -- the Surgeon General, rather,
     said it's a habit, it's not addictive.
          And then in '88, they changed the definition
     and said, well, now we're going to take away the
     intoxication requirement, and since then it's been
     called addictive, and that -- as you know, that's
     what my company now abides by that definition.
          But the difference is, even though you changed
     the words, the behavior never changed.  Think about
     this.  If a person had been evaluated, somebody
     came in and did a complete evaluation, such as
     Dr. Phillips did in this case, in 1964, they might
     say, well, there is no addiction.  But if you do
     the same thing in 1988, they would say there is
     addiction, because the definition changed.
          That's why you can't just decide this case by
     saying you smoked a lot, a long time, must be
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1749 addicted, because that's not always had the same
     meaning.
          For instance, can we see the next slide?
          This is from the '64, and it talked about the
     two differences, we showed you this yesterday, the
     difference between addiction and habit.  And that
     was the definition that was used by the World
     Health Organization, it was used at the time, when
     you read these early documents that counsel is
     talking about, some of the early things written by
     the various companies, this was what everybody
     agreed was the definition and the correct
     definition.
          Now he comes in and says, well, back in 1960,
     you didn't say it was addictive, and you need to
     apply the 1988 standard back in 1960.  That's what
     he's asking you to do in this case.  That's what
     he's asking you to do.
          Even Dr. Henningfield and plaintiff's expert
     agreed that people who smoke a lot for a long time
     aren't all addicted.  That means you take a smoker,
     you know how much they smoked, you know how long
     they smoked, and starting there, we know that some
     of those people might be addicted and some of those
     people might not be addicted.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1750 Your job in this case is to decide which
     category Mr. Ballard falls into.  Because we all
     agree, smoking a lot for a long time doesn't mean
     you are addicted.  So you have to decide which
     case.
          Now, their evidence was brought in without any
     reference to Mr. Ballard.  Mr. Ballard, for the
     first time after he filed this lawsuit, and came in
     and testified, for the first time in this
     courtroom, he said he thought he was addicted, even
     though he had never said that before and nobody
     else had ever said that about him before or you
     would have heard it.  That's the first time.
          Dr. Henningfield told you he could decide if
     somebody was addicted by knowing two things, when
     do you smoke the first cigarette, and how much --
     how many do you smoke?  Is that common sense?
          One of the things the judge doesn't instruct
     you, but it's clear when you go back in that room,
     you get to take your common sense with you.  Does
     it really make common sense?  If that were the
     case, virtually everybody would be addicted.  And
     that was all he said, generic, he's generic, he
     knows nothing about Mr. Ballard.
          He talk -- counsel talked about the Fagerstrom
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1751 test today.  Well, the Fagerstrom test, as you
     heard, is not used to identify or to diagnose, it's
     used to determine -- if somebody is addicted, it's
     to determine the depth of the addiction so that you
     can do research about it.
          You heard Dr. Cooke make it very clear.  If
     the Fagerstrom test really was the test,
     Dr. Henningfield would have met Mr. Ballard, given
     him the Fagerstrom test, and then come in so he
     could talk to you about Mr. Ballard.  He didn't do
     that.
          Mr. Alvarez tried to do the test, remember on
     the board with Dr. Phillips, and Dr. Phillips said,
     well, I think that's a two, and he said, well,
     let's give him a three.
          You also heard you could smoke two cigarettes
     a day and still be considered dependent under that
     test.  And the suggestion that he waited 22 years,
     well -- that Dr. Phillips waited 22 years to do the
     DSM, well, Dr. Henningfield, Mr. Alvarez, they did
     the Fagerstrom, attempted to do it.
          The bottom line is it's used for research, and
     it's not the only answer.  Now, I'm not going to
     tell you that it doesn't have some value, just like
     I'm not going to tell you that DSM.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1752 From the plaintiffs, you have a real
     absolutism, they say the DSM cannot ever be used
     and the Fagerstrom is the only test to use.  Except
     Dr. Henningfield said the only test he uses is the
     two questions.
          What I'm saying is all of these tests have to
     be used in conjunction with the person you're
     testing.  Imagine if you went to a doctor and the
     doctor took one blood sample and didn't ask you
     about any of your other symptoms, and came back and
     said, well, you're okay because this one blood
     sample, even though you had all these other
     symptoms, all these other symptoms.
          That's how you have to decide.  You have to
     look at the patient, and then you have to use these
     tests or these -- these devices as appropriate.
     And that's all that language that he was reading
     from DSM, that's all that says, you have to be
     careful.
          And nobody came in here and said all I did,
     Dr. Phillips didn't come in here and say all I did
     was look at the DSM, do a calculation, and come up
     with a conclusion.  That's not what he did.  And
     we'll talk about him in a minute.
          But that's -- their evidence is generic, it's
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1753 not about this case.  It does not prove cause.  It
     does not go across the bridge.  And you're going to
     hear that a lot today, because most of their
     evidence doesn't go across that bridge.  They try
     to convince you that it's -- that it's addictive
     because they say, well, nicotine is the same as
     hard drugs or alcohol.
          Let me see the next slide.
          Now, you know that isn't the truth, and you
     know he wasn't even asked a question about this,
     there was no cross-examination.  This shows you the
     difference in various activities.  And you can get
     an idea of what effect it has on the brain.
     Nicotine is like caffeine, it's -- other things.
     And then the next slide shows compared to other
     substances.
          So you can say, you can say they are similar
     because they both have -- they both operate the
     same way.  Remember, the Dr. Phillips example of
     the house plugging in?  One thing plugs in, you
     need a lot of power; one thing plugs in, you don't
     need much power.  Well, that's what it is, but they
     both work from plugging in.  So you'd say they're
     similar.
          Well, in this case, the brain has the same
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1754 function, it acts the same way, but there is a big
     difference in what happens to you, and you know
     from your common sense that withdrawal from
     nicotine is nothing like withdrawal from the DTs in
     alcohol and from withdrawal of other hard drugs.
          But they want you to believe it's the same so
     then you'll jump to the conclusion, without more,
     without any evidence about Mr. Ballard, that he's
     addicted.  And that was their evidence and that's
     all of their evidence.
          Mr. Ballard smoked a lot.  He smoked a long
     time, a lot of cigarettes, must be addicted, and
     that's all they think -- remember the first slide,
     they don't have to show that anything we did.
          So now let's talk about the evidence that we
     offer.  We don't have any burden, we don't have to
     offer any evidence, but we did.  And you heard from
     an expert witness, from Dr. Phillips.
          And, number one, counsel's attacks on Dr.
     Phillips, when he said he's never treated any
     patient for nicotine addiction, he said that.  Then
     later when he said it, he said -- and I don't know
     if you caught the change in the sentence, he's
     never treated anybody exclusively for nicotine
     dependence.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1755 Well, you heard Dr. Phillips say people don't
     usually go to a psychiatrist if their only
     complaint is smoking, is addiction to nicotine.
     But he has treated thousands of people, thousands
     of people, in jails, in criminal hospitals, with
     the other problems who also have addiction.  It is
     completely false to say that Dr. Phillips has never
     treated anybody for nicotine addiction.
          He is a clinical doctor.  He also does
     forensic evaluations for the Justice Department,
     for the Secret Service, for cases like this, but
     the bottom line is Dr. Phillips came in and he told
     you what he did.
          Now, what did he do?  Well, he read every
     single piece of paper that exists in this case
     about this, to learn everything he could learn
     about Mr. Ballard.  Nobody from their side did
     that.  And then what did he do?  He interviewed
     Mr. Ballard for two hours.  For two hours.  And he
     learned more about Mr. Ballard.
          And his conclusion was in part based on the
     DSM.  And the DSM said that, as a baseline, the
     first thing you have to establish is does -- it
     requires that there be a clinically-significant
     impairment or distress.  And that helps establish
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1756 the threshold for diagnosis of a dependence
     disorder.
          Now, what did you hear about that today?
     Well, first you heard from the plaintiff that this
     is totally irrelevant, you should never use it,
     that the four volumes that they've put out over the
     years, that the entire American Psychiatric
     Association, every medical doctor who deals with
     they can't use that if they're ever going to come
     to court.
          Well, you know who you heard about DSM first
     from in this case who talked about that very
     description?  Do you remember?  Dr. Henningfield.
          Dr. Henningfield understands that that is a
     legitimate device that would assist a doctor in
     making a determination.  Now we've -- that was a
     long time ago.  You probably don't remember that
     Dr. Henningfield talked -- he talked about
     Fagerstrom, he talked about DSM, none of which
     related to Mr. Ballard, by the way, he just talked
     about them as methods.  And yet the position now is
     forget DSM, it's totally irrelevant.
          That's not a realistic.  But the most
     important thing is it goes back to what I said a
     minute ago, you don't take the blood sample and
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1757 ignore the rest of the patient's history if you are
     a good doctor.
          And what you find is Dr. Phillips used this
     and he used all the available information, and
     these were his findings about Mr. Ballard.  And
     we're going to talk about these, because you heard
     a lot of this evidence in this courtroom also about
     Mr. Ballard.
          And based on that, Dr. Phillips reached the
     conclusion that there was not evidence of a
     clinically-significant impairment.  So he didn't
     just take -- in fact, he didn't -- I'm not sure if
     he showed you or not, but if you look at that DSM,
     it also says you can't use the DSM like a
     cookie-cutter method, you can't just go in and
     check off three things and say, well, addicted or
     not addicted depending on how many points you get.
     It's required that you have some clinical
     experience.
          So you're going to have to compare the only
     two experts you heard in this case about addiction
     were Dr. Phillips and Dr. Henningfield.  And let's
     see what -- how they compare.  Which one was a
     medical doctor?
          By the way, there is no doubt that
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1758 Dr. Henningfield is an excellent researcher, an
     excellent academic about the subject matter of
     substance, dependence, and so forth.  I'm not
     saying he's not.  But remember, we agree that
     smoking is addictive.  So the only thing left is is
     this gentleman addicted and was it caused by
     addiction or his choice.
          If you had a physical problem, would you
     rather go to a great researcher who has read lots
     of papers and who does laboratory work and all that
     and never sees a patients or treats a patient in
     his life; or would you rather go to somebody who is
     a licensed psychologist, who treats patients, who
     treats patients, who talked to the patient, who
     found what the patient's situation was and reviewed
     it all?
          Dr. Phillips did all of that, Dr. Henningfield
     did none.  I would submit to you that when we get
     to -- when you get to the verdict form on that
     first question, the answer to whether or not
     Mr. Ballard is addicted should be no.
          Now, I told you there were two parts to that
     first question.  The second part is was addiction
     the cause, in other words, right here, is there
     evidence that carries Mr. Ballard across the
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1759 bridge.  And you have to answer both those
     questions yes or no, and if your answer to either
     one of those questions is no, then your verdict is
     for the defendant.
          Now, let's talk about that question.  Choice.
     We have a real clear question here.  The plaintiffs
     say it's addiction.  And remember all those signs
     they gave you about generic addiction, none of
     which applied to Mr. Ballard, but that's what
     they're claiming.  Our position is that Mr. Ballard
     was aware of the risk and he made a choice.  So you
     have to decide which is which.
          And choice is not something that we made up
     for this case.  As long ago as '77, the Surgeon
     General of the United States called it "a personal
     choice health behavior."  Again in '82, "a personal
     choice behavior such as smoking."  And in '86, "the
     individual smoker must decide," in other words, has
     to make the choice.
          So this is -- this is accepted by the public
     health community that choice is important in
     evaluating whether there is a causal connection,
     whether you go across that bridge or not.  So the
     real question is whether a smoker can quit.  And
     Dr. Henningfield, who doesn't know about
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1760 Mr. Ballard, but nonetheless, made all of these
     admissions in the course of that testimony.  He
     told you about the 60 million who quit, more former
     smokers, 90 percent quit without formal
     intervention, some people quit without problem,
     some people don't want to quit.  Quit requires
     motivation.  The majority of males eventually quit.
     The majority of heavy dependent smokers quit over
     time.
          So if the question is can you quit, and we're
     going to talk about whether Mr. Ballard had the
     ability to quit and chose not to quit or whether he
     falls in that category of all those things that you
     read about in that first slide I showed you, but
     you can't answer this question unless you know
     something about Mr. Ballard.  You can't answer the
     question.
          If you only knew what Dr. Henningfield knew or
     what the other witnesses had testified by video, if
     you only knew what was in those documents, you
     wouldn't know anything about Mr. Ballard, and you
     have to know about Mr. Ballard.
          And if you think about it -- I'm going to talk
     to you about four or five things.  I'm going to
     talk to you about his personality, the reasons he
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1761 smoked, whether he smoked for something -- because
     of something we did or some other reason, whether
     he could control his smoking and whether he could
     quit.  Those are the topics I want to kind of cover
     in the evidence.
          So you met him and you heard him testify and
     you heard other people testify about him, and these
     are the types -- these are the things that people
     have -- either Mr. Ballard or people that knew him.
          Well, he is not a weak person.  And that's the
     first step.  Because you could have someone who
     just personally has problems making decisions,
     problems being proactive.  It's not Mr. Ballard.
          And let's look at how he was described.  First
     of all, Mr. Ballard himself agreed that he would
     evaluate a situation, decide whether he wanted to
     take a risk, and take it or not, depending on his
     evaluation.
          Mr. Ballard understood that he was making a
     choice every time he picked up a cigarette, he was
     choosing to continue to smoke, and he evaluated the
     risk, he told you this is how he -- what he does,
     and you're going to see evidence to that, and he
     was capable of evaluating the risk, and he made the
     choice.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1762 Now, in this case, his lawyer complains about
     that choice and says, well, it really wasn't his
     choice, he was weak.  He didn't know smoking was
     bad at all.  Except a minute ago, you heard that
     they're at least admitting that he knew about it in
     '77.  And we'll talk some more about that in a
     minute.
          But let's look at how people describe him.
     Number 20.  That's what Mrs. Ballard, his current
     wife, said about him.  This all came from the
     testimony that you've heard, hers was through the
     deposition that we read.
          Let's move on to the next one, that's his
     daughter.  Remember what Mr. Ballard said to her?
     "I'm old enough to smoke, do what I want, don't
     tell me what to do."  Does that sound like a person
     who is a weak, captured smoker, who has no ability
     to put down those cigarettes?  Hardly.
          Let's see the next one.
          Now we're talking about -- I told you the
     first thing would be the personality.  Now, why did
     Mr. Ballard smoke?  And we asked, Mr. Ballard said
     all of these, we didn't make them up, we didn't
     lead him.
          Why do you smoke?  And he told you.  He told
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1763 you he enjoyed it, he liked it.  Even
     Dr. Henningfield agreed that some people smoke
     because they want to smoke.  Plaintiff would have
     you believe that nobody who smokes does it because
     they want to.  That's just not realistic.
          Some people choose to smoke.  And you have to
     decide, again, we're back to this which bucket does
     Mr. Ballard come in, is he one of those people who
     chose and knew the risk or is he one of those
     people who couldn't do anything about it because he
     was so weak?  Those are the reasons he smoked.
          Let's see the next one.
          Now, let's look at his brand.  We know -- you
     get insight from a lot of ways.  You know, you get
     insight from Mr. Ballard, from when he testifies,
     from his family, and so forth, and you observed him
     on the stand.
          Let's look at his smoking decisions.  He told
     us under oath why he chose various cigarettes.
     1942, he saw everybody else doing it and took
     cigarettes.  The first one, a friend recommended he
     change because the taste was better.  Then he
     switched to Marlboro or Winston, there was a
     confusion which he did, he did each one of them
     about the same time.  Today -- in the court, he may
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1764 have said he thought Winston was first, but
     Marlboro was milder than the Winston he was
     smoking, it had a filter.
          I'm going to talk about filters before I sit
     down today because there have been some suggestions
     that are just flat wrong about filters.
          The cough, and the friend recommended.
     Winston, same thing.  And then he switched to
     Vantage because a friend said they were less tar
     and nicotine, milder taste, cough.  He was having a
     cough, having shortness of breath.
          So every decision he made -- not every.  The
     last three were all made because of health
     concerns.  It's hard to understand how a person
     could say I didn't think there was anything wrong
     with cigarettes, yet they're changing cigarettes
     because of health,  which is what we have here.
          Lucky Strike, it was taste, but the other ones
     were all related to health.  And that's the
     evidence that you've seen so far.
          Now we know what Mr. Ballard was like and we
     know what -- why he did what he did, and we see
     that through the smoking, so the next question to
     ask is what did my client do, what did Reynolds do
     that caused Mr. Ballard to make smoking decisions?
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1765 And the first thing they try to tell you is
     advertising.  And do you remember last week during
     those four hours how many different advertisements,
     you know, doctors, athletes, movie stars, TV, how
     many ads they put up on that screen and went
     through them and went through them?
          And I fully expected, since they put all those
     up, those generic ads, that sometime in the trial
     they were going to bring Mr. Ballard up and say,
     okay, Mr. Ballard, which of those ads caused you to
     switch to Luckies?  Or whatever.
          They didn't even ask him about it.  He never
     said a word about any ad.  But we do know what he
     thinks about ads and we do know, you know, what his
     philosophy of smoking as it relates to advertising.
          He told you that he doesn't pay attention to
     ads generally.  He doesn't believe everything he
     sees in them.  Ads don't have a lot to do with
     whether he buys a product.  When he started
     smoking, he said he did not rely on any ads, paid
     any attention, I believe were his words.
          And let's look at Exhibit Number 26.  This
     answers the question.
          "When you saw them," talking about the ads,
     "you didn't pay any attention, you did -- you just
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1766 knew they were there?
          "I didn't do what they said.  I did what I
     wanted to do."
          Does that sound like a weak person?  Not what
     they said.
          "Did anything, any ad put out by a tobacco
     company, an advertisement about cigarettes, print,
     television, radio, did any of those have anything
     to do with your decision about smoking?"
          The answer was "No."
          That means that all those ads you saw, all
     this talk about a culture of smoking had nothing --
     had no effect on Mr. Ballard's case, because I can
     assure you that if Mr. Ballard had been able to say
     I smoked because of Reynolds' ads, you would have
     heard it in this case.  They didn't even ask him
     that question.  They didn't even ask you that
     question.
          And he told you that he also didn't know --
     he'd never heard of the Tobacco Institute, the CTR,
     never heard any -- the Frank Statement.  He
     didn't -- none of that, none of that does anything
     to help Mr. Ballard get across the bridge.  It's
     just completely irrelevant to his case.
          Now, it might be relevant to some people's
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1767 cases, there might be some other plaintiff who has
     a case who can say, oh, yeah, I saw that and I
     believed it, and that's why I kept smoking.  Not
     Mr. Ballard.  Not Mr. Ballard.
          In fact, I said to him, you know, he's been
     involved in this case for some time, he's looked at
     all these documents, he's heard all the arguments,
     he's seen all the things that his lawyer put in, I
     said, "You know, knowing everything that you know,
     is there anything about smoking and health that you
     now know that you believe was concealed from you
     originally?"
          And his answer was, in front of you here in
     the courtroom under oath, was no.  He couldn't name
     anything that he now knows that he's learned.  They
     said, well, you can't know what they withheld.  But
     he knows now all these facts, and he couldn't name
     a single thing that he thought ever was withheld
     from him.  And that's because, as you're going to
     learn in a little bit, he was fully aware of the
     risks of smoking and the risks of addiction.
          Now, I told you I was going to mention
     control.  Mr. Ballard testified that his average
     over his life was about a pack a day, during many
     years of smoking.  And that's -- whether it's a
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1768 pack or pack and a half or two, the only importance
     is that Mr. Ballard sometimes smoked more and
     sometimes smoked less.  And you heard the testimony
     about drugs.
          I forgot which -- whether it was a document or
     a witness who said, oh, yeah, drugs, hard drugs,
     tobacco is the same way, you have to have an
     ever-increasing dosage to satisfy your habit.
     That's true with a lot of drugs.
          Well, Mr. Ballard, that wasn't true.  He would
     smoke more, he would smoke less.  He didn't smoke
     the entire cigarette oftentimes.  Oftentimes he
     would leave one burning, walk away and never come
     back.  Sometimes he would go an entire day and not
     smoke at all.
          Mr. Ballard was in control.
          Mr. Ballard also, there were places he could
     not smoke throughout his life, again.
          The next slide, please.
          If you -- if you were this person described by
     the evidence, this trapped person with no
     control --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection with regards to no
     control, it's not the standard.
          THE COURT:  Okay, this is closing argument,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1769 ladies and gentlemen.  You'll follow the law that I
     give you.
          MR. REID:  I'll tell you about that.  The
     plaintiffs put in evidence and listed all of those
     withdrawal symptoms, all of those conditions that
     showed people are not in control.  Now, they were
     not able to relate any of those to Mr. Ballard
     because he doesn't fall into the category of an
     addicted person based on their evidence.  Their
     evidence.
          And so we saw that -- that at night on the
     patrol, sometimes all night, in church.
     Dr. Henningfield said, oh, yeah, they have to get
     up and leave church, the generic smoker that he
     talked about.  That's not Mr. Ballard.
          All of these controls.  Control of your
     smoking is relevant to whether or not you can quit.
     To quit is the ultimate control.  We'll get to that
     in a minute.
          Mr. Ballard could control his smoking.  He
     didn't get up in the middle of the night to smoke,
     and he didn't smoke when he dealt with customers.
     He did not smoke, based on his testimony under oath
     in front of you, when he was sitting in the bed
     first thing in the morning before he got out.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1770 So Mr. Ballard, the evidence is, and they
     haven't contradicted it, other than the quibble
     about whether or not he smoked sitting in bed or in
     the kitchen with his coffee, aside from that, they
     haven't object -- they haven't questioned any of
     that.  It all came from Mr. Ballard's sworn
     testimony, either I asked the question or he said
     it in his direct.
          So now I want to move to the idea of quitting,
     the quit attempts that Mr. Ballard made.  And, you
     know, you have some very compelling evidence about
     what -- the question is whether or not Mr. Ballard
     was able to quit.  You have the best evidence you
     could have about that, and that evidence is that he
     did.  He quit.  He quit cold turkey.
          Now, Mr. Ballard, you heard from Dr. Phillips
     that motivation is the key.  Well, you know what?
     Mr. Ballard gave you a standard for quitting as
     well in his testimony.  Mr. Ballard said -- first
     he said it's not the hardest thing he's ever had to
     do.  But then he said it takes a lot of willpower
     to lay the cigarette down.  It takes willpower?
     You have to want to quit.  You have to be motivated
     to quit.
          That's the same testimony that you heard from
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1771 Dr. Phillips.  You can't quit if you're not
     motivated.  That means did you make a choice and
     say I'm going to quit and mean it, or did you do
     50/50, try a little bit and then go back and try a
     little bit more?
          So let's see how Mr. Ballard's -- how the
     evidence demonstrates Mr. Ballard relating to his
     own standard.
          By the way, let me say this.  If a person
     comes in in front of a jury to say I was a smoker
     and it was absolutely impossible for me to quit, I
     was so addicted, I could not quit for all those
     years, we'll ignore the ultimate quit, my question
     would be this:  "How do you know?"  And the person
     would say, "Well, I never tried, so I guess I don't
     know."
          If a person never tried to quit, how can they
     come in to you as a juror and say, even though I
     never tried, even though I never tried, I'm sure I
     couldn't quit.  Especially when the person did quit
     in the end.
          Now, Mr. Ballard even told you he had thought
     about quitting, he talked to people about quitting.
     He had given the idea of quitting some -- given the
     idea some thought.  But --
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1772 Let's see 31.
          But the evidence is undisputed, the sworn
     testimony.  "Before this time frame," talking about
     the '90, '91, "had you ever attempted to quit
     before?"
          The answer was, "No," unequivocal, under oath.
          Number two, "Had you ever quit before?"
          Answer:  "No.
          "For any period of time at all?"
          Answer:  "No."
          Mr. Ballard under oath admitted that he never
     quit or tried to quit.  So how can he say to you
     with credibility I could not quit, I was so
     captured by addiction, I could not quit, when he'd
     never even tried?
          Now, he did quit finally.  And when the day --
     when he finally quit, he made the decision, and
     that was it.
          Let's look at 32.  "And when you made the
     decision to quit, I think in your words, that was
     it?"
          Answer: " Yes."
          He said -- could we see 33.
          He even describes it as a habit.  When he was
     asked, "Isn't it more like a habit than an actual
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1773 strain on you to quit, is that what you believe?"
          He says, "A combination of both."
          Now, we had this two-year period, plaintiffs
     argue that, well, it was so hard for him to quit
     during that two years, that proves he was addicted.
     Well, now you know what he told Dr. Phillips in the
     interview, and this wasn't contested, they didn't
     jump up and cross-examine, Mr. Alvarez sat through
     that interview, and he told Dr. Phillips that
     during that time when he was -- said he was going
     to try to quit, he told his wife, during that time,
     he said he was only about halfway trying or 50
     percent trying.
          So he wasn't trying, he didn't throw away his
     cigarettes, he didn't throw away his ashtray, he
     didn't throw away his matches, he didn't break
     other habits, he didn't stop drinking coffee or
     drinking alcohol during that period.  That's why it
     took a while, because he wasn't motivated.
          But the day he smoked his last cigarette, that
     was the day he was finally motivated.  All those
     days before, he made the choice to keep smoking,
     because he wasn't trying very hard by his own
     admission.  But on the day he finally said what you
     just read, "I decided, and I quit, and that's it."
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1774 And interestingly, the suggestion was made,
     and you saw the chart, about all of the withdrawal
     symptoms that you have if you're truly addicted,
     anxiety, insomnia, and all that.
          Mr. Ballard testified that he didn't
     personally feel that he had any change in his
     personality, and that nobody told him his
     personality had changed.  He said he had no
     physical problems as a result of quitting.  He said
     it was just as hard to quit coffee as it was to
     quit cigarettes.
          Which is interesting, if you think back to
     that chart, cigarette, caffeine, and nicotine were
     kind of at the same level, compared to hard drugs,
     but he said it was just as hard for coffee.
     Mrs. Ballard said no changes in personality when he
     quit.
          The son, Ralph Ballard, III, said he didn't
     notice any changes in his dad when he came down to
     visit and he was now not smoking and his daughter.
          Lisa Sims -- Lisa Ballard-Swims, I think,
     never -- said her dad never complained, he never
     did.
          So if you consider his personality, in other
     words, his ability to quit, the reasons he smoked,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1775 the lack of any connection between Reynolds and
     Mr. Ballard's choices, the fact that he could
     control his smoking on a regular -- for his whole
     life, and finally, that he, when he was finally
     motivated to quit, by his own agreement, when he
     was motivated to quit, that's when he quit, he was
     able to quit.
          Based on all of that, I would respectfully
     suggest that the answer to whether or not
     Mr. Ballard's addiction caused him to develop
     cancer, as opposed to his choice, the answer is no.
     And I will talk to you about the verdict form, how
     that becomes part of your verdict later.
          Now, I want to talk about Mr. Ballard's
     awareness of the risks.  Because today, when the
     damages were being discussed, for instance, counsel
     made a line of demarcation, he said after 70 --
     until '77, it was entirely the fault of the tobacco
     company because Mr. Ballard didn't know that
     smoking was bad for him.
          It wasn't until that doctor said in '77, you
     have spots on your lungs.  Once you -- once you get
     there, he says, well, then he's 50 percent at fault
     and then he came up with that average.
          So their position is that throughout most was
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1776 his life, Mr. Ballard was unaware of the risks of
     smoking and that something that my client did or
     said concealed from him -- what you have to have
     for concealment is something he didn't know
     otherwise -- about smoking and health.  If he knew
     it from something else, it can't be concealed.
          Could we see 35, please.
          This is the -- this is the finding.  The
     concealment, it says, the finding, "not otherwise
     known or available," and in a few minutes, excuse
     my back for a second here, in a few minutes when
     you look at the verdict, you're going to find out
     that the judge is going to tell you -- let's see if
     I can find it here.
          THE COURT:  Please tell me which one you're
     reading from or looking at.
          MR. REID:  Yeah, I'm going to get there.
          THE COURT:  When you get it.
          MR. REID:  I'm looking at page 7.
          The judge is going to tell you if you find
     that Mr. Ballard was aware of misstatements or
     omissions, then he cannot rely on said
     misstatements or omissions as a cause of his
     bladder cancer as it applies to concealment, only
     concealment.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1777 THE COURT:  Hold on one second.  Stop the
     clock.  When you say page 7, I want to make sure
     we're all on the same page.
          MR. REID:  Yeah.
          THE COURT:  We went over individualized jury
     instructions.
          MR. REID:  Yeah, well, I was given the -- I
     thought this was the -- is this --
          MS. VIEIRA:  That's the conformed copy that
     plaintiff is going to --
          MR. REID:  That's the one that you're going to
     read from.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  So that's the one I'm
     reading.
          MR. REID:  Yes, sir.
          THE COURT:  Not the ones with numbers on it.
          MR. REID:  Right.  This is it; right?  You
     gave it to him this morning?
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Yeah.
          THE COURT:  Okay, I want to make sure I had
     that.
          MR. REID:  Sure.  So as we talk about
     concealment, talk about whether Mr. Ballard was
     aware, whether he made a judgment about the risks,
     we need to talk about what did he know.  Now, I
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1778 made a timeline over here, because it's important
     for you to understand Mr. Ballard's entire life.
     And I had to put it on two boards to cover all the
     years.
          Okay.  I did this so that we could see one
     place all of the evidence of awareness that you've
     heard in this trial so far.  There is overwhelming
     evidence that Mr. Ballard was fully aware of the
     risks of smoking for virtually his entire life.
     Now, the first thing you would consider, perhaps
     when you're talking about getting information about
     risks, is direct personal information, not
     something you read somewhere, but it's stuff that
     would affect a normal person.
          And we know that way back when Mr. Ballard was
     in the fourth grade, he took a health class.  And
     yesterday, we showed you, if we could see the slide
     36, this is what was required to be taught in
     Florida public schools in the year '33 when he
     would have been in elementary school.  And it was
     specifically required to teach is avoid -- avoid
     cigarettes or other forms of tobacco.
          So as early as 1933, Mr. Ballard's in a class
     in Florida where the State requires that they teach
     people the problems, the risks associated with
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1779 smoking or tobacco.  He heard that it was dirty,
     but he said it was mostly your teeth that got
     dirty.
          When he got into the service, he started
     smoking in '42, he had discussions with friends and
     people about tar and nicotine being bad.  Friends
     talked about stuff getting into your lungs.  His
     friend did the handkerchief, blew on the
     handkerchief, and it showed the brown, but then
     it's interesting, Mr. Ballard did it himself, which
     demonstrates that he was concerned about it.  Why
     would he do it himself if it didn't matter?
          He saw people coughing, problems -- now, let
     me just say, this is a matter of building up
     knowledge over time.  Nobody would say that because
     of the fourth grade health class, Mr. Ballard knew
     that smoking might cause cancer someday or might
     have a serious -- nobody is saying that.
          What I'm saying is Mr. Ballard is denying any
     knowledge until now his lawyer says '77, which is
     going to be contrary to the evidence, but you look
     at what he did and when he did it and he began to
     develop.  That's how we all learn things.  We learn
     things by learning a little bit at a time and it
     goes over time.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1780 You know that in 1952, he started changing
     brands based on health, health concerns.  And we
     went through those a minute ago.  The warning, just
     so you know, the warnings to Mr. Ballard are the
     ones in orange.  The red are warnings that would
     have been to Mr. Ballard but also in the public at
     large.  And then these are some of the polls we'll
     talk about.
          So we know that from '52 on, he changed brands
     three times solely based on health reasons, one
     time on taste also, but the rest on health.  We
     know that by 1966, that's why I said, there's a
     real dispute about the '77, 1966, Mr. Ballard
     started seeing the warnings on the packages, the
     warnings on -- by the way, he had heard about the
     1964 Surgeon General's Report, and we'll talk about
     that in a minute.  But in '66, slide 37, that shows
     you all the warnings that went throughout the whole
     period of time, '66, then '70, then the rotating
     warnings.
          So Mr. Ballard knew that cigarette smoking may
     be hazardous in '66.  He knew that the Surgeon
     General had determined that smoking is dangerous in
     '70.  And so it's -- you have to decide if it's
     credible to say that he didn't know there was a
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1781 problem with smoking until some doctor in '77 told
     him there was when you consider all of the
     evidence.  And you didn't hear about any of this,
     all you heard about was '77 today.
          From '68 on, he said, every doctor asked about
     smoking.  He said before that, doctors just didn't
     ask.  But from '68 on, which is nine years before
     '77.
          In the late '60s, he told at least some of his
     children, we don't know which of his children he
     told, because he didn't say, but in the late '60s,
     before he went to Vietnam, he told his children not
     to smoke because it was bad for them.  And then we
     get to '77.  We get to '77.  And he went to the
     doctor at Homestead and he said you have spots to
     your lung, and the interesting thing about that is
     that Mr. Ballard then said to the doctor, oh, do I
     have emphysema?
          So he knew to ask about -- when he was told --
     he knew it was related to smoking.  When he was
     told he had spots on his lungs, he asked is it
     emphysema, which demonstrates that Mr. Ballard knew
     something about smoking and risks and so forth when
     he had that interaction with the doctor.
          And the doctor told him then you should have
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1782 quit 30 years ago.
          So at the very latest, even under counsel's
     admissions for the first time today, Mr. Ballard
     should have quit, and if he had quit, you saw one
     of the announcement that said if you quit at a
     certain time, your lungs immediately start getting
     better and so forth and so on, we might not even be
     here if he had stopped smoking in -- certainly we
     wouldn't be here if he had stopped back during all
     of this, but we might not even be here if he had
     chosen to stop, which he didn't do.
          Now, that's direct personal knowledge.  And I
     should add, if you count up the smoking that
     Mr. Ballard did, assuming a pack a day, might have
     been more, but until -- from the time the ads went
     on until the time he quit, that meant for 175,000
     times Mr. Ballard held in his hand a direct warning
     about the health risks associated with smoking.
     And you know what he said about it?  He said I read
     them, I understood them, thought about them, maybe
     even thought about quitting, I ignored them.
     Ignored.  That doesn't sound like somebody who's
     captured by nicotine.  That sounds like somebody
     who made a choice.  175,000 times, every time he
     took out a cigarette and there is the warning in
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1783 his face, and yet he ignored those warnings.
          Now, that's the knowledge he gets from some
     people, from people directly.
          You also know about his family, the history of
     cancer in his family.  And you know -- and you know
     that his Aunt Myrtle, his uncle -- Aunt Jaunelle,
     four members of his family passed away because of
     smoking-related problems in the '80s, four people.
     And that had to tell Mr. Ballard that there was
     some association between smoking and health at that
     time, and yet he chose not to -- not to smoke.
          His brother-in-law the doctor, or trained
     doctor, talked to him about quitting, his wife
     talked to him a lot about quitting, and they both
     quit cold turkey and he knew that.  And he knew
     that he had symptoms by then, he was coughing much
     more.  And his wife was complaining about -- not
     complaining in a bad way, but saying you really
     need to quit that.  And he chose not to quit.  He
     chose not to quit.
          More importantly, he chose not to try to quit
     even.  It's one thing to say I was so addicted, I
     couldn't quit after I really, seriously tried.
     It's another thing to say, I am ignoring the
     warnings and I'm just not going to try.  And that's
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1784 what happened here.
          So then we also, counsel talked about this
     culture in advertising.  There was also a great
     deal of information out in the public domain that
     Mr. Ballard was exposed to.  Now, we can't prove
     that Mr. Ballard read a particular newspaper, but
     what we did, and the things I went through with you
     yesterday, we looked for places where Mr. Ballard
     was present.
          We knew he read the newspapers, we knew he
     read Time and Life -- Time and Newsweek or U.S.
     News, we knew he saw the Reader's Digest and we
     knew where he lived over the years.  So we started
     looking for those kinds of things.  And what we
     discovered was that there were -- we showed you the
     Reader's Digest.
          And I'm not going to -- you can -- these are
     in evidence, some of these things.  Reader's
     Digest, if you remember, they were given an award
     by the -- by the American Cancer Society for their
     outstanding leadership.  Let's see the next one.
     That's the -- that's the award.  Over the years of
     writing articles about that.
          Can we see the next one.
          Time, Newsweek, Reader's Digest, U.S. News,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1785 American Legion, Leatherneck.  These were all
     things that Mr. Ballard -- you heard yesterday
     Mr. Ballard said he also remembered the public
     service announcements about not smoking, and we
     showed you three of those.
          Remember there was one -- one with the ashes
     and one with J.R. Ewing, you know, the Dallas guy?
     Or if you're as old as I am, the I Dream of Jeannie
     guy and you saw those.  And he said while he was
     living in Atlanta -- can we see 42, please -- he
     heard about the Surgeon General's Report.  That's
     what was on the Atlanta paper.
          The health -- you saw the video yesterday
     where they had that big meeting in Washington with
     the Surgeon General and all.  It was covered
     widely.  There was Atlanta.  Let's move to the next
     one.  It was covered in Stars and Stripes Pacific
     which would have covered when he was in the
     service.
          The next one is the Miami Herald when he lived
     down here and I think there's one more.  There were
     some from Charleston because you remember he was up
     at Paris Island some time, so that's near
     Charleston, so we included some of those.
          THE CLERK:  15 minutes, Counsel.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1786 MR. REID:  I'm sorry?
          THE COURT:  15 minutes.
          MR. REID:  Okay.  Then you heard about the
     cultural things.  But let me just make one point.
     Today counsel told you that my client could control
     nicotine.  The suggestion, obviously, is that we
     were doing something to the nicotine to keep people
     addicted.
          Well, remember what the evidence was.  There
     is more nicotine in the plant than in tobacco.
     Both witnesses from Reynolds say they do not add
     more nicotine than is there, in fact, it's less in
     the cigarette.
          And you remember that chart, I tried to find
     it and we don't have it.  It was a chart you saw
     during, I think, Dr. Figlar's deposition, and it
     showed the tar and nicotine in the '50s, and it
     went just like that down into the '80s.  I forget
     where it ended.  In other words, over those years,
     the companies have substantially reduced tar and
     nicotine.
          So when counsel tells you that we can control
     it, the answer is we can control it and the way we
     controlled it was by reducing it because the public
     health community, and you saw a bunch of articles
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1787 yesterday and they're in evidence, that the public
     health said it's really better to have less tar and
     nicotine, and that's what we did.
          So I would say that's Mr. Ballard's case.  He
     was knowledgeable, he was aware, he was able to
     quit.  He quit, but he never chose to quit until he
     was ready to quit and nothing Reynolds did caused
     him to quit.
          Now, what's their answer to that?  Their
     answer to that is -- I want to say one other thing.
     Let's see slide 49, please.  He told you yesterday
     you only saw do you know polls, not -- I mean, are
     you aware polls not do you believe polls.  Well,
     this is do you believe, this is a believe poll, 70
     percent believed smoking, and let's see 51, please.
     Do you think cigarette smoking is not harmful?  90
     percent said it is.
          Those are not are you aware polls, those are
     do you believe polls and then he said that --
     counsel said, well, you -- the American Cancer
     Society, nobody would believe them, they would all
     believe what the tobacco company said about smoking
     and health and we had a poll about that, 52, and
     what you found out is most reliable sources on
     smoking and health, this is in evidence, American
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1788 Cancer Society and so forth, American Medical
     Association, 3 percent.
          He just told you this morning that people
     would believe us, the tobacco industry, instead of
     these organizations.  Well, that's the poll.  And
     there were belief and -- there were awareness and
     belief polls.
          Now, what did they try to do to convince you
     in light of all of this evidence that Mr. Ballard
     chose to smoke, could have quit, didn't quit for a
     long time, then did?  They put in a lot of
     documents about the companies that have nothing to
     do with Mr. Ballard, and I'm going to give you a
     few examples just to show you.  Let's talk about
     the Plaza meeting.
          The Plaza meeting, they invited the attorney
     general of the United States to come to that
     meeting.  They sent him papers about it before.
     Slide 53.  Judge Barnes, he was assistant attorney
     general and they said we'll talk to you and then it
     was reported in the New York Times.  Hardly a way
     to start a secret conspiracy.
          And by the way, when counsel kept talking
     about these agreements, conspiracies and so forth,
     the only thing he pointed out to you that these
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1789 companies did together was that meeting, and that
     wasn't a secret, and that wasn't a conspiracy.
     Everything else, for instance, Philip Morris had
     some dispute with Dow who was one of their
     suppliers.  Reynolds had nothing to do with that.
          You saw -- you saw I think one executive from
     Reynolds, and as I told you, you saw about
     20-something documents from Reynolds.  You have to
     decide if these companies did something jointly to
     harm Mr. Ballard, and the answer is, number one,
     they didn't show you anything jointly except going
     to this one meeting, and they didn't show it was
     related to Mr. Ballard.
          Now, I want to talk about the Frank Statement
     for just a minute.  This Frank Statement was issued
     one time in 1953, and you have to decide if it was
     true when it was -- and you will find, ladies and
     gentlemen, that virtually everything in there at
     the time is absolutely true and we'll go through it
     kind of quickly.  Recent reports about experiments
     with mice.
          Let's go to the next slide.  They put that
     into evidence.  That's what we were talking about
     there.
          The next one, although doctors say these
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1790 experiments are not regarded, distinguished
     authorities point out, well, let's look at number
     57.  In all the documents that are in evidence and
     all the testimony, I went through and back in the
     '50s and into the '60s, that was a dispute and I
     read to you yesterday a number of articles that
     said while there are some statistical association,
     while maybe there was some mouse, a mouse back is
     not the same as a human lung, it was in dispute.
     And that's what the Frank Statement was talking
     about.
          And every one of these doctors, every one of
     these doctors, there's a document in evidence that
     establishes that they questioned whether there was
     a relationship between smoking and health.  So when
     we said what we said, it was true.
          Could we see 57.
          This was in Cancer Research Journal.  For
     every expert who blames tobacco, another one says
     it's not the cause.  You didn't know any of that.
     All you knew was what happened in years later.
          Could we see 50 -- 58, please.
          And then these are just -- these are all in
     evidence, you can go through them, 58, let's just
     run through them, they're all the same, basically,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1791 they -- these are articles saying there's a
     question.  And that's what we said.  Let's go to
     63, please.
          We accept an interest in people's health.
     Let's go to 64.
          This is what the -- in evidence that the
     companies have done over the years.  You heard
     Dr. Figlar and Dr. Cooke talk about how they worked
     with the federal government, the Tobacco Working
     Group, the HEW, that's what they did to try to make
     cigarettes safer, and you also saw I think number
     64 -- is that 64?  Okay.  Let's go to 65, then.
          We also said, "We believe the products are not
     injurious."  At that time they believed that, and
     there's no dispute about that.  There's no dispute
     about that.
          Let's see 67.  Okay, "We will work with those
     whose task it is."  And we did, with the
     government, with the HEW  In fact, they wrote a
     letter to Dr. Rodgman, 68, one of our scientists
     congratulating him, thanking him for his work on
     trying to find a safer cigarette.
          And 69 deals with CTR and he told you this is
     where we said in the document we would form this
     organization, he told you that was a front
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1792 organization.  Well, you know now what the facts
     are, ladies and gentlemen.
          Could we see the next slide, please.
          The CTR funded -- awarded $3 million to fund
     scientific research throughout the country.  Did
     they bring a single witness in here to say that he
     was pressured or told what to find?  If that
     happened, they would have brought in a study, they
     would have shown you some evidence of that.
          Didn't happen.  We funded 250 scientists at
     200 institutions, University of Miami, University
     of Florida, Harvard, Yale, all over the country.
     There were 7,000 published scientific or medical
     articles, and many of these people were funded by
     the tobacco CTR and the government.  They worked
     with us on that.
          To suggest it's a front organization is belied
     by the facts.
          Let's talk about company documents for a
     minute.  You didn't see a single Reynolds document
     that helps you answer the questions about
     Mr. Ballard.  You saw 27 documents.  Remember one,
     a survey, Dr. Teague.  What they didn't tell you
     was that this was nothing more than Dr. Teague
     going to the public sources, to libraries, and
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1793 gathering all the documents that were in the public
     domain.  78 he found.
          It wasn't anything secret to Reynolds.  They
     suggested to you that that was some secret work we
     did, and they're doing that with all of these
     documents.  They're showing you a little bit, and
     they're misrepresenting them.
          Filters.  You saw the testimony yesterday.
     All of these public health people, all of these
     scientists, all of these people thought filters
     were the right way to go.  Could we see the next
     slide, please.
          You saw these articles yesterday, all these
     studies that found there was scientific evidence
     that filters help.  They didn't offer you any
     evidence that any of that was wrong.  They didn't
     offer you any evidence.
          And finally, I want to talk about the verdict
     form.  I didn't have this earlier or I would put it
     up.  The bottom line is was Ralph Ballard addicted
     to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was
     such addiction the legal cause?  That's two
     questions.  The judge will tell you it's two
     questions.
          Was he addicted?  And we talked about the
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1794 evidence about that.  And was it a legal cause?
     That means was it because of his choice or was it
     because of his addiction.  And if you get together
     or decide the answer to one of those is no, then
     you'd answer no to the whole question.
          The negligence and defective product, again,
     you have to find was there evidence of what
     specifically Reynolds did to harm Mr. Ballard, and
     there's been no evidence of that.  They just say
     the findings say that they're negligent so
     Mr. Ballard gets to recover.  Did he rely on -- to
     his detriment on something, as we talked about, he
     did not already know.  That tells you the answer to
     that.
          Mr. Ballard knew everything that he needed to
     know about -- everything that would advise him of
     the risks associated with smoking, and then finally
     was there a concealment -- I'm sorry, was there a
     conspiracy.  The only time that there -- the only
     document that where people met was at the Plaza,
     and that wasn't a secret conspiratorial meeting
     because they invited the government, and then you
     saw the things, the Frank Statement and the things
     that came after that that established what
     companies actually did.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1795 THE CLERK:  Five minutes, Counselor.
          MR. REID:  Thank you.
          So that's the verdict form, that's the verdict
     form.  I need to talk about damages not because I
     believe that the plaintiffs are entitled to
     damages.  Obviously our position is that the first
     answer to the first question should be no, that
     Mr. Ballard was not addicted, and even if you think
     he was addicted, it was his choice and not his
     addiction that was the causal relationship.  That's
     how he got over the bridge.
          He never gets over the bridge in this case
     because they don't have evidence about Mr. Ballard,
     but I have a duty to my client to talk about all
     the issues and one of the issues was damages.
          Now, there is no claim that Mr. Ballard
     presently has cancer.  There's no medical bills, no
     lost wages, no out-of-pocket expenses.  The judge
     will tell you that your verdict for damage amount
     has to be fair.  It has to be -- it has to
     compensate fairly.  It's not to punish Reynolds,
     it's not to punish.
          Now maybe that's why -- maybe that explains
     why so much time was spent putting in all of these
     old documents about all of these other companies,
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1796 most of which have nothing to do with Reynolds, all
     of which prove nothing that's at issue in this case
     in order to convince you that my client is
     despicable and that you need to punish them and
     that's why you need to award $18 million for this.
     That may be -- that may explain why -- because
     there is no reason for all of that evidence in
     Mr. Ballard's trial.  Because it had nothing to do
     with Mr. Ballard.
          You heard two kinds of evidence.  You heard
     the inconvenience and the loss of intimacy and
     that's certainly a fair -- a fair complaint.  I'm
     not suggesting that anybody would want to accept
     that.  You have to decide, though, who's
     responsible.
          But yesterday, you heard -- or a couple days
     ago you heard a lengthy explanation of how
     Mr. Ballard's life otherwise completely changed
     because he had to sell his boat, he couldn't fish
     anymore, he lost interest in everything he was
     doing.  All that evidence was put in to convince
     you that a damage award would be appropriate.  Now
     we know the damage award was going to be $18
     million, but then you found out on cross that was
     totally false.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1797 Mr. Ballard sold his boat and all those things
     that happened, happened because of Hurricane
     Andrew, not because of anything related to his
     bladder cancer.  And today, the suggestion is to
     try to -- Mr. Ballard, you know, in his deposition
     said he didn't think he was at fault at all.  But
     at trial, he said, oh, yeah, I'm at fault.
          And they want to use this '77, because that's
     when he knew.  Well, I would submit to you, if you
     take -- it's a hundred percent because that's the
     first time he knew, that you start taking that
     hundred percent down for the warnings, the warnings
     on packs, what he told his children, his relatives,
     switching, you take it down, take it down, take it
     down and pretty soon it's all gone because
     Mr. Ballard was fully aware of the risks.  And his
     whole life tells you that.  His whole life tells
     you that.
          This case is about Mr. Ballard.  With
     everything he knew and was being told, there's no
     reason to believe that anything Reynolds said or
     did or withheld could have made any difference.
     Remember, Mr. Ballard's wife and family members who
     were ill and smokers, those people, Mr. Ballard,
     they could not convince him to quit.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1798 The direct warnings on the packs and other
     places Mr. Ballard saw and knew could not convince
     him to quit.  All this media information and the
     books and the magazines and the movies and
     everything else that Mr. Ballard was aware of could
     not convince him to quit.  A specific doctor's
     warning in '77 that he has the beginnings of a
     serious disease, fortunately, it didn't develop and
     there's no claim for that here, even that could not
     convince --
          THE CLERK:  One minute, Counsel.
          THE COURT:  Excuse me?
          THE CLERK:  One minute.
          THE COURT:  One minute.  Thank you.
          MR. REID:  Thank you.
          Even that could not convince him to quit.  How
     in the world could it be argued that something my
     client did would have made a difference with
     Mr. Ballard when he totally ignored and rejected
     all this other information from personal -- how
     could it be that Mr. Ballard, that they could argue
     to you that Mr. Ballard relied on something we
     failed to say or something we did, and didn't rely
     on everything else that happened in his life?  It's
     not common sense.
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1799 Now, I don't get to talk to you again, and
     because of that, I'm going to ask you to answer
     that first question no.  And to return with your
     verdict in favor of my client.
          But the last time I get to talk to you and
     it's terrible if you're a lawyer to have to sit
     down and never get to stand up because he's going
     to say something that I would like to respond to,
     he may say something that he hadn't said before or
     something that I didn't think of, I'll just ask you
     to do this, I assume as you've been listening to me
     and I pointed things out you've thought to yourself
     is that really what the evidence was, you know,
     you've been critically listening, I hope you'll
     listen to him.
          If he says something that I haven't had a
     chance to respond to, I hope you'll maybe think to
     yourself what would Ben Reid have said if he had
     another opportunity to speak to you, because I
     think that's how you've been listening to me, and I
     think that would be fair.
          Last thing I want to say, you didn't realize
     when we got here we have a pact, you and the
     parties.  The parties agree as part of this pact
     that when you go into that jury room, you get to
WWW.USLEGALSUPPORT.COM
813-876-4722
1800 decide this case and you'll never have to explain
     to anybody why you did it or who you believed or
     who you didn't believe and we won't be able to --
     we might not be happy, one side might not be happy,
     we both may not be happy, but we won't get to carp
     about it because we have given you that right.
          But you've agreed to something back to us.
     You have agreed that you will decide this case only
     on the evidence.  You won't decide this case
     because you don't like smoking.  You won't decide
     this case because somebody wrote a stupid memo in
     1950 that had nothing to do with this case.
          You won't decide this case because there's a
     big company over there and an individual over here.
     You won't decide this case because you feel
     sympathy for anybody in the case or hostility
     toward anybody.  You won't decide for -- your
     agreement is I'll decide it on the evidence.
          And that's why the jury system works, that
     agreement that is an unspoken agreement until right
     now when I spoke it, but that's the agreement, and
     I'm certain that as you retire and consider this
     evidence, you will definitely do your duty and for
     that, we thank you.