MR. GEISE:
Counsel?
May it please the Court,
Mr. Bigger, Mr. Berg, Mrs. Barbose, ladies and
gentlemen.
This will be the last time I have an
And judging by your
As I
opportunity to talk to you.
verdict, you may be very happy about that.
told you yesterday, I hoped that would be the last
time, and I mentioned that this morning.
But I'm
here, and it means you found that we were going to
go to a second phase and consider whether you will
award punitive damages against my client.
And as I mentioned this morning, it's a tough
Myself and my team, we worked
position to be in.
pretty hard to try to this case, to ask the
questions we did, to present the arguments that we
thought would appeal to you.
disappointing result when you disagree with us. But
as I said yesterday, I respect it.
home whenever you finish your deliberations, and you
can tell your friends and your family that you did
what you were brought here to do in terms of
listening to the evidence and reaching a verdict.
And it's a
And you can go 4144
And even though it's a little bit harder to do
it right now, I still thank you, and I still
appreciate your service, because you have made a
great service to this county and this state and the
country.
So thank you.
And I can tell you that I and my client takes
We know you looked at
your verdict very seriously.
the evidence and formed your opinions.
phase is a very serious phase, the punitive phase.
I think that was evident from Dr. Figlar today. He
takes it seriously, and he talked to you about some
serious subjects.
And this
I want to start with a couple words about
This is a separate phase of the
There was separate evidence, there's
punitive damages.
trial.
separate jury instructions, you'll have separate
deliberations.
So with the separate jury instructions, there
are different things you look at in this trial. As
Mr. Bigger said, the jury instructions are very
short.
I would invite you when you go back to read
them all, to look through them, to see how they work
together.
And I think you'll see the consideration
of what you look for in making your determination
today is a little bit narrower than you may think. Specifically, as Mr. Bigger said, you will get

"You may, in your discretion,
this instruction:
decline to assess punitive damages at all."
Having heard from
is still an option out there.
Dr. Figlar and Dr. Jupe, you may opt to do that.
So that
Dr. Figlar told you a lot of things you didn't
hear in the first phase, things you may have wanted
to hear during that first phase that you heard
today.
And you can consider that and use your
discretion.
You can also consider all the work Reynolds has
done in the latter part of the 20th century and now
in the 21st century to investigate and manufacture
less-hazardous cigarettes, what they've done to give
customers other product options using tobacco in
place of smoking traditional cigarettes, and even
options for products to help people quit smoking.
As Dr. Figlar told you, the mission now is to
You can consider the
transform tobacco, and that mission includes
reducing the harms of smoking.
changes that have taken place at Reynolds, the
changes that have already been made at the company,
the changes in efforts they've already taken, and
the regulatory environment that has already changed
for these companies. 4146
You can take all that and you can use your
discretion and determine that punitive damages are
not necessary, even though you found yesterday that
they may be warranted.
During jury selection a few weeks ago, there
And one of
was a discussion about punitive damages.
the potential jurors said, you know, do punitive
damages, do these go to the state, do these go to a
charity, or do these go to a person?
And just so
it's clear, that any punitive damages you award,
it's extra money that does go to Mrs. Barbose.
That's where that money would go.
And, also, Mr. Bigger talked about, you know,
what does this have to do with John Barbose. You're
going to have this in your instructions too.
"The amount of punitive damages must be based
only on harm suffered by John Barbose.
You may not
award punitive damages against either defendant for
harms suffered by anyone else."
And then your instructions will also say -- and
this is short.
You'll get these, you can read them.
But you see that evidence concerning harms allegedly
suffered by others, it's only for a limited purpose
in this phase.
In the other phase, you could consider it for 4147
other reasons.
purpose.
In this phase, it's a very limited
And you may consider that evidence in causing
harm to persons other than Mr. Barbose only to the
extent that it was substantially similar to the
specific conduct that actually caused Mr. Barbose's
illness and death.
So in that last phase, one of your instructions
Remember that
was you can infer certain things.
from the evidence?
anything.
connection between whatever the conduct is and
Mr. Barbose.
In this phase, you can't infer
In this phase, there does need to be a
So, in other words, your award, if any, can't
be based on harm to others if it's unrelated. So
not people smoking other brands, not other people
who may or may not have been addicted, not people
who may have suffered from a different
smoking-related illness.
consideration here.
That's not the
And the last thing about this, when we look at
the purpose of this phase of the trial, is, awarding
damages to an individual doesn't do anything to
improve public health, because that money doesn't go
to the Cancer Society or to a research institute; it 4148
just goes to an individual.
Now, Mr. Bigger pointed out that there are two
There is
parts or two purposes of punitive damages.
And to make
punishment and there is deterrence.
your assessment, Judge Stearns will tell you, and
you'll see in your instructions, that you should
consider any mitigating evidence.
That's evidence
that may demonstrate that "no" or a reduced amount
of punitive damages is appropriate.
And this is really one of the times in the
trial where I really wish I had an opportunity to
talk to you and ask you questions to find out what
it is that made you check "yes" to those questions
yesterday.
It would make it a lot easier for me to address
you today, because I might know what it is that
bothers you, what is it that we could address, what
is it that I could have had Dr. Figlar talk about
that concerned you when you deliberated yesterday.
And as the Judge will tell you when the trial
is over, you can talk to us after that point, but I
can't talk to you now.
So if anybody would want to
share that after, that would be great, but it puts
me in a pickle right now, because I can't address it
this afternoon. 4149
But I do ask you to consider that we brought
You had
Dr. Figlar down here to talk to you live.
And he did tell you how things
seen him on video.
He told you how the activities that
had changed.
you saw of events over, you know, many, many years
and you heard about in the last three weeks, those
These are not continuing.
won't ever happen again.
You heard and saw evidence about a concealment.
You heard and saw evidence about formerly secret
documents.
As you know, those documents are no
longer secret, and they haven't been for over a
decade.
are available to the public.
Those documents, 80 million pages of them,
When you're done with this, you can get on and
look at them.
can look at them.
look at them.
Dr. Figlar talked about that. You
You can
They're not concealed.
Perhaps you were troubled by Reynolds' and the
I can understand that.
other companies' positions on smoking and health
over the years.
testified that smoking has inherent risks.
tobacco, like any organic plant, has risk, and
tobacco absolutely does.
dispute about that.
your verdict or the findings or any of that.
Dr. Figlar
Burning
And he said there is no
And he wasn't here to challenge 4150
He told you what Reynolds says on its website
now, that cigarette smoking is a leading cause of
preventible deaths in the U.S.
It significantly
increases the risk of developing lung cancer, heart
disease, bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious
diseases.
And he told you that they admit smoking
is addictive.
Those things may have bothered you in the first
phase of the trial, but you can see that they don't
take that position any longer.
If you smoke or your friends smoke and you want
It lists
to see the ingredients, you can see them.
You can
them.
And this was just the first page.
Dr. Figlar told
get on the website and see them.
you every ingredient is listed.
If you want to see
a specific ingredient in a specific brand, you can
do that as well.
And Dr. Figlar told you that since the 1980s,
Reynolds has shared its information on the
ingredients and additives with the government
agencies, and no one has told them how to make a
safe cigarette from looking at that list.
On Reynolds' website, you'll also see this.
They tell people that they believe individuals
should rely on the conclusions of the 4151
Surgeon General, the CDC, and other public health
and medical officials when making decisions
regarding smoking.
You'll find the links to the Surgeon General's
reports and the other public health publications
right on the website.
contrary view to those any longer.
link that sends you right to that website.
Reynolds doesn't take a
They provide a
And today, and since the turn of the century,
"Quitting
Reynolds says this to customers:
cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk for
serious diseases, and the best course of action for
tobacco consumers concerned about their health is to
quit."
Mr. Bigger asked, Why did you hear the evidence
Why did we bring this evidence to you? And
today?
I mentioned mitigating evidence.
instruction you'll get.
This is the
"You should also take into consideration any
Mitigating evidence is
mitigating evidence.
evidence which may demonstrate that there is no need
for punitive damages or that a reduced amount of
punitive damages should be imposed against R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company and/or Philip Morris USA."
This is why we brought you the evidence today. 4152
You've seen the mitigating evidence of
We believe it is mitigating evidence you should
consider.
what Reynolds has done, how it has changed, and how
it has paid for the things it did in the past.
We thought you may be displeased over what
happened in the research and development department
in the '50s and '60s and '70s and '80s, so we
brought Dr. Figlar here to tell you about what goes
on in that department now.
He told you that going
back in time, they understood that there were risks
for smoking and they did take efforts to try to
reduce those risks.
And he told you how those
efforts have continued.
Outside of tobacco or outside of typical
tobacco, he did talk about Ebola, and that's one of
the ways the company has changed, working with their
sister companies for how can we use our knowledge on
tobacco for public good.
up with the Ebola medicine.
And that's how they came
He talked to you about this continuum of risk
from cigarettes down to smokeless tobacco and
And he talked about that.
nicotine products.
Now, I asked Dr. Figlar, when we talked about
Eclipse and Premier and VUSE.
there been ideas out there before about doing this?
I asked him, have 4153
And he said, yeah.
Some of our documents,
people suggested doing that.
And I asked him, well, why didn't you do it
sooner?
And he told you in those cases that they
couldn't have because some of the technologies
didn't exist.
and, in fact, Reynolds had to develop them
themselves.
They weren't possible at the time,
So Mr. Bigger put a document up and I agree
that that document has these little diagrams on
there.
Dr. Figlar
answered that question for you when I asked it to
him.
There's no doubt about that.
It couldn't be done.
It's like somebody had an idea, like I want do
We still had like rotary
You had to call the operator at that
a cell phone, but in 1940.
phones there.
point.
It wasn't possible at that time.
Dr. Figlar walked you through the developments
with these different types of products.
You heard about Premier, you heard about
Eclipse, you heard about how they heat instead of
burn tobacco, and you saw the charts on how those
constituents are markedly reduced.
reduced.
Markedly 4154
When Premier came out, not only did consumers
not like it, but Dr. Figlar told you the public
health communities didn't like it either.
though it was an attempt to lower those
constituents, nobody embraced it and said, this is a
huge development, let's go with it.
So even
Dr. Figlar told you they published on it. You
And they went out and they talked
saw the big book.
to scientists about what they were doing.
So they
knew what was going on and what they were trying to
do.
I submit to you that the evidence you heard on
Premier and Eclipse is mitigating evidence that
shows there's no need for deterrence here.
Dr. Figlar talked about Snus, the smokeless
He talked about how when they saw these
tobacco.
studies in Sweden about how people that had used
Snus for -- for two or three decades had lower
incidents of cancer, how they went over there then
and they learned about it and how can we use it.
What can we do about it, and that's how they
developed Camel Snus.
VUSE, the e-cigarettes.
He talked to you how
they spent so much time developing their product,
not taking one that was -- might have been out on 4155
the market, but trying to get one right so that
consumers might use it.
And what's the benefit of that?
You have a lot
lower toxins, lot lower carcinogens in that.
And even if there is some nicotine, the idea is
So if people want to do it,
people won't get sick.
they won't get sick.
You heard about ZONNIC.
It's a nicotine
replacement therapy.
Dr. Cummings told you about it when he was
Dr. Figlar told you it's available
here.
nationwide, and he told you about why they set the
prices on it the way they did.
there where people could see it.
them to take it, to try it, and to quit smoking.
So it was right
It might encourage
I submit this is all mitigating evidence that
there's no need for deterrence.
Another form of mitigating evidence is how much
Reynolds has paid under the Master Settlement
Agreement.
over $50 billion for the states and over $3 billion
for Florida in the last ten years.
You heard the details on the amounts,
And it's not just the Master Settlement
Agreement with the states.
Reynolds has paid in other lawsuits.
You've heard about what 4156
And the instructions will tell you this, that
other persons have the right to bring their own
suits and seek recovery of punitive damages in other
cases.
you've heard how much Reynolds has paid in some of
these other cases.
And you've heard that has happened and
Another piece of mitigating evidence that you
Dr. Jupe talked about what
You've
heard was about the regulatory environment that
Reynolds operates in.
the tobacco companies are subject to now.
heard all about the extensive regulation that
they're under, every move is looked at, everything
they do has to be approved.
That's a change. It's
another reason there's no reason for deterrence.
And another piece of mitigating evidence that
you might want to consider is who are the people
that you would be punishing.
to a question of fairness.
And this kind of gets
If the people that upset you and you wanted to
punish are no longer there, who are you really
punishing?
We talked about CTR and TI.
Those
organizations are gone.
If what you saw from some people in the '50s,
'60s, '70s, '80s when they spoke publicly bothered 4157
you, those people are gone.
there now, it's Dr. Figlar.
deterrent to him.
The people that are
Punishing him is not a
You hear what he's doing.
You hear what the
new company is doing.
changed.
You hear how they have
Now, on this issue of punishment, it does
involve money.
much more money do you want to give Mrs. Barbose.
And it's a question of, if any, how
And one thing I'd like you to keep in mind, and
goes back to jury selection too, everybody agreed
that they could set aside any negative feelings they
had toward the tobacco company and everybody agreed
they were okay with the concept of a company selling
a product and making a profit even though they knew
it could cause disease, death, and was addictive,
and you knew from the instructions in the last phase
that these are legal acts.
So that can't be a basis
to punish Reynolds for simply selling cigarettes.
So in light of the fact that Reynolds is a
changed company, since, you know, decades ago, in
light of the sums that Reynolds pays out to states
and to other individuals, what amount should you
consider awarding?
And I would suggest if you'd
listen to Dr. Figlar, that amount could be zero. 4158
If you disagree, I want you to keep in mind
that Reynolds can only be punished for the conduct
that was a legal cause of Mr. Barbose's death. You
can't award money to punish Reynolds for harm to
other smokers.
Now, Mr. Bigger suggested a total of $20
And I suggest that instead of doubling
million.
down or using some term like that, that you look at
some reasonable and objective basis for what you
might award.
this is just a thought I had and I talked to
Ms. Yates about it.
And obviously, this is up to you. And
In the first phase, you awarded $10 million.
It is actually even more than the amount Mr. Bigger
suggested would totally compensate Mrs. Barbose.
That amount in and of itself has a deterrent
Not only on Reynolds, but on any defendant
effect.
in any wrongful death lawsuit.
It does.
If you want to give more money above that, I
would suggest, if you want to, that you make it
$500,000 from Reynolds and $500,000 from
Philip Morris.
obviously, to another million dollars.
of money.
reasonable number.
It's a rational number and it's a
If you do that, that adds up,
It's a lot
And it's a number that has made 4159
Mrs. Barbose whole without giving too much of a
windfall.
You may think that $500,000 is not serious
And it's serious money, and it's
money, but it is.
on top of the $10 million that you already thought
was fair to fully compensate Mrs. Barbose.
So if you take somebody who is fully
compensated and another million dollars onto that, I
think that's appropriate.
The other part of punitive damages is, is it
punishing but is it deterring future conduct?
Mr. Bigger showed you that line from the
instructions.
And, again, I can't read your minds to see why
we ended up in this phase today, but I submit it was
probably based on the events and the conduct of
Reynolds in the 20th century.
From what you heard
from Dr. Figlar about Reynolds in the 21st century,
I suggest that it is a different company and it is a
different culture.
Even Mr. Bigger admitted this afternoon that
they have done good things the last 20 years. 20
years worth.
Now, when Mr. Bigger asked you to send a
message to Reynolds and to any other company, I ask 4160
you to think about what message is sent if a company
continues to be punished over and over for things
that it did long ago, even after it changes its
direction, its approach, its culture, and its
mission, and ask you to keep in -- keep that in mind
in the current company and its employees, ask you to
be fair and just.
It's the last time I'm going to address you,
ladies and gentlemen.
I thank you once again.
Counsel, you may proceed.
Thank you, Your Honor.


MS. YATES:
Your Honor, may it please the Court.
Counsel, Mrs. Barbose, ladies and gentlemen.
I really am a broken record because I get to go
third.
So I get to thank you and I get to say this
is the last time you really will hear from me, and
I'm sure many of you are very happy about that. So
good afternoon one last time.
As I said in my brief opening this morning, I'm
here to tell you that my client Philip Morris heard
and respects the verdict that you gave in Phase I.
And as I also told you this morning, Phase I
focused on Philip Morris from a different era, a
long time ago.
documents from 40, 50, 60, sometimes 80 years ago.
Statements, ideas, conduct, 4161
And I stand here, as I did in the opening of
Phase I, saying, I think you're going to see some
things that you're not going to like and that they,
based on your verdict, probably really upset you.
I, like Mr. Geise, don't know specifically. It
It could have been
could have been a lot of things.
one or two things.
And I stood here and I told you, I didn't think
I didn't
those bad things connected to Mr. Barbose.
excuse them.
evidence connected, and I understand you disagreed
with me and you decided otherwise.
I just said I didn't think the
And based on that, you decided that
Mrs. Barbose was entitled to be compensated for her
loss of her husband and you awarded her that money
that you thought was fair to compensate her for her
husband's lung cancer and death.
So that was Phase I.
Now, we're at the end of Phase II, which was
much quicker than Phase I.
And as I told you in my brief opening this
morning of Phase II, a new job for you with new
issues.
Mr. Bigger said, What does this have to do with
Mr. Barbose?
And, obviously, that was a question that we asked you during Phase I.
Well, the question before you now and what it

has to do with Mr. Barbose is whether punitive
damages should be awarded to Mrs. Barbose today in
2015 to punish Philip Morris and deter Philip Morris
and other companies because of things that happened
in the past, things that will not and cannot happen
again.
for will not and cannot happen again.
to that in a minute.
The conduct that you found us responsible
And I'll get
Mr. Geise went through some of the instructions
with you, particularly on mitigation.
Punishment and deterrence.
That's what has to
do with we're here today and that you have to
decide.
The two concepts of punishment and deterrence
They're two -- they serve two
are very distinct.
very different purposes.
Punishment looks back in time.
It's designed
to act as a penalty for conduct that occurred in the
past, to punish for the specific actions that you
found were a legal cause of Mr. Barbose's injury.
Deterrence looks forward in time.
It's
designed to serve as an example to prevent future
wrongdoing by Philip Morris and other companies. 4163
And for you to properly evaluate what is necessary
to deter in the future, you need to know the company
that Philip Morris is today and the current
environment in which it operates.
that has to do with this case and Mr. Barbose.
And that's what
In this second phase, we brought to you Richard
Mr. Jupe is the head of product development
Jupe.
at Philip Morris.
Philip Morris of today and how it conducts itself.
He told you about the
Mr. Jupe talked with you about what
Philip Morris is -- is today and, in fact, for the
last 18 years.
Some of the important changes that
he talked to you about were made more than 15 years
ago.
Mr. Jupe told you that Philip Morris is a
And we believe these
He described what the company is
changed company.
and what the company says.
changes are significant and that they are important
for you in deciding whether to award additional
damages to Mrs. Barbose to deter Philip Morris and
other companies.
Mr. Jupe told you how Philip Morris cooperates
with the public health community.
voice with the public health community.
They are one
You heard that Philip Morris is committed to 4164
ensuring that the public hears that single uniform
message about the risks of smoking.
The Tobacco Institute, CTR, TIRC, they're gone.
Long gone.
And that Philip Morris has admitted on its
website since 1999 that smoking causes cancer, other
diseases, and is addictive.
And we showed you that
Philip Morris advises smokers the best thing to do
is quit.
He talked to you about the legislation that was
enacted in June of 2009, that Philip Morris
supported that legislation that gave the Food and
Drug Administration power to regulate Philip Morris.
You heard about what the FDA's already done and how
the FDA regulations affect Philip Morris's business
in important and significant ways.
Members of the jury, today, in 2015,
Philip Morris conducts itself very differently from
it did -- from how it did 40, 50, 60 years ago.
It's a different company with different management,
different employees, and it operates in a very
different environment.
The people who plaintiff argued were part of
the conspiracy are no longer with the company.
Wakeham, Bowling, Cullman, Weissman, Seligman, those 4165
names in those old documents you saw, the voices on
the old videos are long gone from the company.
So now that you've heard Mr. Jupe talk with you
about Philip Morris of today, please ask yourself
whether you want to deter that company, that changed
company, or instead whether you'd rather encourage
it to continue in the direction it's moving and the
direction it's been moving for the last 18 or so
years.
Before I talk a little bit about the Court's
instructions for this second phase of the trial, I
want to spend a few minutes talking just briefly
about comparative fault.
In your Phase I verdict, in that form you
filled out, you decided that Mr. Barbose shared some
responsibility for his actions, a small amount. His
decisions, you placed -- clearly placed
responsibility on the companies that manufactured
the cigarettes he smoked, but you also placed a
little bit of responsibility on Mr. Barbose.
And I assume you decided that Mr. Barbose
shared some responsibility because you evaluated the
evidence that you heard in Phase I and what he knew
about smoking, choices he made, and how he lived his
life.
And so you decided that it was 42.5, 42.5 and 15.

And I just want to make sure that you
understand that those percentages are gone.
you found that Mrs. Barbose was entitled to punitive
damages, whatever those percentages were that you
assigned are gone.
compensatory $10 million is going to Mrs. Barbose.
So the full amount of
When
And in this phase, you will determine, based on
everything you've heard, whether you need to award
And it will be up
additional money to Mrs. Barbose.
to you to decide whether awarding Mrs. Barbose more
money is necessary under the law that Judge Stearns
instructs you on.
And that's because unlike in Phase I, where you
were awarded money to compensate Mrs. Barbose, the
question you have to decide in Phase II is how much
additional money, if any, you should award, not to
compensate, but to punish Philip Morris and to deter
it and others in the future.
That's the purpose of
punitives.
The instructions will tell you that it's not
appropriate to award any money in punitive damages
unless the plaintiff persuades you that today in
2015, punitive damages are necessary for that
punishment of the past conduct that harmed Mr. Barbose and to deter future similar conduct.
Let's talk a little bit, a minute about the law.

The Court has instructed you that you can only
punish Philip Morris for the conduct that actually
harmed Mr. Barbose.
Mr. Geise showed you that. So
those dots must connect.
There must be a nexus.
The law does not permit you in this case to
punish Philip Morris for harms suffered by anyone
other than Mr. Barbose.
And throughout this trial,
you've repeatedly heard about the large numbers of
people who die each year from smoking-related
diseases.
under the law, you cannot punish Philip Morris in
this case for any harm to others.
permit it.
I know those numbers are disturbing, but
The law does not
If there are other people who believe they've
been wronged or harmed by the actions of
Philip Morris or the other defendants, they can
bring their own lawsuit and their own jury will hear
those cases and decide.
heard that number.
Many already have.
You
There are still over 3,000 cases pending in
Florida.
And some people have decided not to sue.
The fact is in our society, we, our government,
has decided that cigarettes are legal.
And, yet, 4168
there's no such thing as a safe cigarette, but that
adults are entitled to make their own decisions
whether to smoke.
And our government heavily
regulates cigarettes, but they're still legal.
There have been warnings on each and every pack
of cigarettes for almost 50 years, yet many people
still choose to smoke today.
understand that those numbers of deaths that we see
are upsetting to you.
Believe me, I
But let me tell you, if someone in this jury
room argues that in this case these defendants
should be punished for harm caused to anyone other
than Mr. Barbose, you should tell them that's wrong,
that's not the law.
Your role as jurors is not to hold a referendum
or opinion poll on your personal views of cigarette
smoking and whether it should be legal.
And you
agreed not to do that in voir dire when you were
selected as jurors.
This is Mrs. Barbose's case about the harm
It's not a class
It's
It's an individual case.
caused to Mrs. -- Mr. Barbose.
action.
not about other smokers.
You've heard about the Engle case.
You may have seen a lot of things Philip Morris
did in the past that you clearly did not like. But 4169
your obligation under the law is to identify and
focus only on the wrongful actions that caused
And why is that important?
Mr. Barbose's harm.
Because only after you've identified specific
wrongful actions that caused harm in this case, can
you properly evaluate whether to award additional
money.
And that would be in the form of punitive
damages.
You cannot base your verdict on anger,
sympathy, or emotion.
evidence that you've heard and the instructions this
Court gives you.
It must be based on the
So when you look at Philip Morris today, you
Is it necessary to
have to make an assessment.
punish the company today for things that the company
did in the past so that those things will not happen
again in the future?
I already said in Phase I, you heard about
conduct from many years ago.
And you may feel that
it was absolutely necessary for someone should have
stepped in in the '50s or '60s and stopped the
conduct that you found to be wrongful, but we can't
turn back the clock and revisit the past.
What is
important in this phase of the trial is the present
and the future. 4170
Common sense tells you that the people who
wrote the documents and made the decisions 50 to 60
years ago are clearly different people from the ones
that make the decisions today.
They are generations
removed from the people who worked for Philip Morris
as a company today.
People can change and companies can change too.
Because the fact is, that the company is made up of
the people.
And that's all Philip Morris is. It is
the sum total of all the people who work there. And
Philip Morris has changed.
So what would happen if you went to
Philip Morris today?
someone like Richard Jupe.
Well, you'd probably meet
Mr. Jupe joined Philip Morris in 1995, 20 years
He was born three years after the 1964
ago.
Surgeon General Report.
And by the time Richard Jupe was born, there
were already warning labels on all cigarette packs.
Think about it, ladies and gentlemen.
A different
time.
And just four years after Mr. Jupe joined
Philip Morris, the company put on its website that
smoking causes lung disease -- lung cancer and other
diseases, smoking is addictive, there's no such 4171
thing as a safe cigarette, and the best thing to do
Those are the messages from the
is quit smoking.
Philip Morris of today and the last several years.
Mr. Jupe, like many others, is from a
completely different generation, a lifetime removed
from the conduct that you've heard that obviously
disturbed you.
name, but it's not the same company.
Philip Morris may have the same
You might want to ask yourself if it's
appropriate to punish Philip Morris today for things
that were done by those different employees decades
ago.
What purpose would that serve?
With your verdict, you have already compensated
Mrs. Barbose for her damages and her loss.
assignment of any responsibility to Mr. Barbose is
gone.
Your
Whatever money, if any, you award in punitive
damages is additional money that, as you've heard,
does go directly to Mrs. Barbose, not to scientific
or medical research, not to stop smoking clinics,
not to sick smokers.
Mrs. Barbose.
It is additional money to
So let's talk a little bit more about the
Philip Morris company of today.
Philip Morris like today and what has it been doing
What is 4172
differently for the last 18 years?
Well, let's start with 1998.
You heard
Mr. Jupe talk to you about the Master Settlement
Agreement.
You know that was an agreement that
settled lawsuits that have been filed against
Philip Morris and other tobacco companies by the 50
attorneys general of the states.
You know that the Master Settlement Agreement
imposed a number of permanent restrictions on the
way in which Philip Morris does business and the
states' attorneys general have the power to monitor
and enforce that agreement forever.
You know that the agreement imposed advertising
As a result of the Master Settlement
restrictions.
Agreement, the companies no longer advertise on
billboards.
are no cigarette ads on buses or other means of
transit or transportation.
There's no signage in stadiums. There
There's no longer any branded merchandise. The
hats, the t-shirts, all gone.
heard that since 2005, Philip Morris made a decision
to voluntarily stop advertising in magazines.
And, in fact, you
Philip Morris continually updates plans to help
reduce youth smoking and to communicate those plans
to their employees and any stores that sell 4173
cigarettes.
Under the Master Settlement Agreement, each and
every year, Philip Morris has to make regular
payments to those states.
continue as long as the company is in business.
And those payments will
Since the Master Settlement Agreement went into
effect, Philip Morris has already paid over $70
billion to the 50 states, and that includes 4
billion that it's paid to the State of Florida.
You also learned that Philip Morris has
rigorously complied with the restrictions imposed by
the Master Settlement Agreement.
since that agreement was signed, not one of those 50
attorneys general has ever brought a single action
against Philip Morris for any violation of the MSA.
In the 17 years
And finally on this point, you heard that in
2009, a law was passed that gave the FDA, the Food
and Drug Administration, regulatory authority over
the design, manufacture, and the marketing of all
cigarettes in the United States.
those restrictions and regulations with Mr. Jupe.
I went through all
Members of the jury, we know from your verdict
that you heard things that disturbed you.
But I,
like Mr. Geise, don't know specifically what those
things were.
So let me talk about a few things.
