MR. SLOMAN: May it please the Court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
On behalf of my client, Rachel Baum, and I'm sure I speak for everybody here, I want to thank
you for your time, your attention, your commitment and your service to this case.
Without you we would be left floundering. Again, I want to thank you, and I'm sure I speak for everybody.
At the outset of this trial, in opening statement, I told you that we would prove that Paul Baum was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes and that that addiction caused his COPD.
I believe that the overwhelming evidence in this case is that Mr. Baum was severely addicted to the nicotine in the defendants' cigarettes. And as Dr. Pitchenik testified, that is what drove his compulsion to dose himself 3- to 400 times a day,
30 to 40 cigarettes, 10 inhalations a day, the carcinogens, the ill effects from the smoke, caused his small airway disease and eventually led to his death.
So I want to go through the addiction evidence, just so that we all reorient ourselves.
The essence of any drug addiction is loss of control over the use of a psychoactively reinforcing drug, such as nicotine, cocaine or heroin, as demonstrated by compulsive use of the drug despite severe consequences that are known to
be caused by the drug.
That's what Dr. Pitchenik said. That's what -- when I was cross-examining Dr. Torres, what he didn't want to recognize as a definition. But that is the definition that makes sense, that is reasonable, that is easily understandable, is contained in numerous articles.
What is the evidence of nicotine addiction for Paul Baum?
Well, he compulsively smoked 3 0 to 4 0 cigarettes a day every day for more than 50 years. He didn't take a day off. I like pizza, but I don't eat pizza every single day. I like to play golf, but I can't play golf every single day.
Paul Baum smoked every day of his life compulsively within 5 minutes of waking. He smoked three to four cigarettes at breakfast. He smoked continuously throughout the day. He smoked before he went to sleep. He smoked everywhere. There is no place, until Mrs. Baum finally told him he couldn't smoke in the house.
He started smoking at around the age of 12 or 13. According to Rachel Baum, Paul smoked a cigarette every day within 5 minutes of rising in the morning. Afterward, he continued every time
she saw him throughout the day: The house, the patio, the car, work, socially, every place.
He tried to sneak cigarettes even when he was hospitalized for COPD. According to his brother, Irving, when they lived together, he smoked as soon as he would get up. He would have three cigarettes and a cup of coffee. That would be the start of his day.
Until Paul went to sleep, it was one cigarette after another. And Irving Baum remembered it was up to three packs of cigarettes a day.
Paul Baum couldn't quit smoking when he developed COPD and smoked despite coughing, congestion, and shortness of breath, even though he knew smoking caused these symptoms and it would make it worse.
Rachel said that in later years, Paul still smoked even when he could only walk a few yards.
Rachel said that Paul wanted to quit and tried four to six times but always relapsed within a week or two.
She said she remembered him throwing away his cigarettes, throwing them down and saying, I'm going to stop. Of course, you remember Dr. Torres,
he didn't credit that testimony because it didn't reach the trash can. That wasn't indicative of a true attempt.
According to Rachel, he did last one week and then went back to cigarettes.
Paul couldn't quit smoking even after his throat surgery for tracheomalacia. Paul couldn't quit smoking even when he was on continuous oxygen.
Remember the testimony from Dr. Torres. He wouldn't even credit that as part of the criteria for the DSM-V. He said, Well, there is no evidence that there was a continuous flow of oxygen while Paul was smoking.
As you will recall, the Bible to which Dr. Torres related to -- I asked him specifically -- I showed him the diagnostic features which said that if somebody smokes while they are on -- near flammable chemicals, that that would indicate an even more severe addiction.
He said, Well, there is no evidence that he was smoking while the oxygen was flowing.
Of course, the reason he didn't want to credit that was because that would, then, be two criteria when he only credited Mr. Baum with one criteria. As you will recall from the testimony,
two criteria is indicative of tobacco use disorder.
Rachel observed he had no power when it came to cigarettes. He craved cigarettes. It calmed him. It was impossible for him to quit smoking.
Nobody takes issue with that. Paul Baum didn't quit smoking. He tried. He couldn't quit. He smoked in the face of horrific consequences. He smoked knowing that this was killing him.
So when Dr. Torres said, Well, he could control his smoking because he could -- when Rachel Baum told him, You can't smoke in the house. And I asked Dr. Torres, Well, all he had to do was walk 10 or 15 steps out to the patio.
Well, I don't know how many steps it was.
But the point was that -- to Dr. Torres, that was evidence that he controlled his smoking.
Well, the evidence was he couldn't control his smoking because he could never quit. He was prevented from smoking because of the fact that he got so sick and he was unable to go out anymore on his own.
So clearly he was addicted, severely addicted by any standard.
Remember Dr. Pitchenik's testimony. He said it was a short time to his first cigarette after
waking. That was indicative of severe addiction.
The high frequency of smoking, the number of cigarettes a day, 30 to 40 a day, every day for over 50 years. Like I said, he started when he was about 12 or 13. That lasted until about 2002,
2003	.
He started at a young age, 12 or 13. As Dr. Pitchenik told you, the younger you start, the more of a possibility exists of more severe addiction.
He had no previous attempt to stop smoking until he was diagnosed with COPD.
There was a short duration of abstinence during previous attempts to stop smoking. So he went for about a week or so. That was it. He couldn't -- he craved the cigarettes. He went back. It was the typical -- it was a typical sequence of nicotine addiction: Dosing, abstinence and craving, and then going back to it.
Craving to smoke and continuing to smoke despite awareness of the disease that is caused by smoking, COPD.
And as Dr. Torres admitted, there is no consensus on criteria for diagnosing nicotine addiction.
But Paul Baum meets every known criteria. He met the heaviness of smoking that Dr. Pitchenik told you about. He met the Fagastrom test for nicotine dependence. He met the American College of Chest Physicians criteria. He met the DSM, according to Dr. Pitchenik; but, of course, not according to Dr. Torres. He met the Surgeon General criteria.
That heaviness of smoking index that Dr. Pitchenik testified about is what most clinicians use because this test is simple and objective. It's based on clear cut, reportable and observable behavior. It's a very good indicator of the ability to quit and of the risk of relapse, which is highly relevant to future health.
It provides a time-honored, validated severity scale of addiction on which clinicians base intensity of therapy.
The evidence for that was, Paul smoked 30 to 40 cigarettes a day every day for over 50 years.
He didn't take a day off. He didn't, except on the Jewish holiday, and except when he tried to quit.
It was every single day of his life, same pattern: 5 minutes within waking. Smoking despite severe coughs. When he had the flu, when he had a
cold, he would still smoke. When he had shortness of breath, he would still smoke.
He smoked despite his throat surgery. He smoked even while he was on oxygen, and even though he knew smoking caused all of these problems.
He met the Fagastrom test for nicotine dependence, the American College of Chest Physicians criteria, the DSM-V, according to Dr. Pitchenik, but not according to Dr. Torres, the Surgeon General's criteria.
So clearly, clearly, Mr. Baum, Pinky, met -he was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes of these defendants for his entire -- from the time he was 12 or 13 years old to the time he was prevented from smoking.
Even when he was prevented from smoking, even when he went into a hospital or he went into a rehab facility, he would try to bum cigarettes.
Now, as I told you in opening, we would prove by the greater weight of the evidence, and it's beyond the greater weight of the evidence, Mr. Baum was severely addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes produced and manufactured by these defendants.
Now, I want to talk about the COPD issue.
Okay? We saw a lot of this.
Can I hit the lights?
Again, what is COPD? It's characterized by persistent air flow limitation that is usually progressive and associated with an enhanced chronic inflammatory response in the airways and the lung to noxious particles or gases. Exacerbations and comorbidities contribute to the overall severity in individual patients.
The persistent air flow limitation characteristic of COPD is caused by a mixture of small airway disease, obstructive bronchiolitis.
You remember, these are the small airways, not the alveoli, but the small airways that become inflamed with significant swelling.
And the mixture of small airway disease, chronic bronchiolitis that Dr. Pitchenik told you about, and emphysema -- which there is no evidence that Mr. Baum had emphysema. We're not claiming he did -- the relative contributions of which vary from person to person.
And the chronic inflammation causes structural changes and narrowing of the small airways. The chronic inflammation from inhaling 75 pack-years of cigarette smoke.
Cigarette smoking is the most commonly encountered risk factor for COPD. In this case, there were no other risk factors for Mr. Baum. He had no other risk factors. Cigarette smoking was the only risk factor. That's what caused his COPD.
The addiction, the compulsion to continue smoking day after day, year after year, 50-plus years, 75 pack-years caused his COPD.
Air flow limitation, as Dr. Pitchenik testified, is best measured by spirometry. We saw a slide from Dr. Klein, their expert, as this is the most widely available reproducible test of lung function.
You have a clinical diagnosis: Shortness of breath, cough, sputum production. But spirometry is required to make the diagnosis in the clinical context.
The key to it is the presence of a post bronchodilator FEV1 over FEC less than .7. So remember, in every single pulmonary function test that Mr. Baum had, post bronchodilator, after he inhaled a bronchodilator to help him breathe, he still had this ratio, less than .70, in every single pulmonary function test beginning in 1998.
Now, we know, and there is no dispute, that
Mr. Baum was diagnosed in 1992. So with regard to the issue of whether he knew or should have known before November 21, 1996, that is not an issue. Nobody is going to argue that Mr. Baum was diagnosed in another year besides 1992 . So as far as that issue, there is no dispute about that.
So the presence of a post bronchodilator ratio, .70, that's -- that confirms the presence of persistent air flow limitation and, thus, COPD, excluding other things.
Of course, there could relapsing polychondritis or there could be bronchiectasis.
But we'll talk about that in a second.
So how do we classify the severity of COPD or the severity of air flow limitation? We have the FEV1 and every single one beginning in 1998 started with moderate to severe. And then the last one that we saw, we'll go through it, was in 19 -- I'm sorry, in 2006, which was very severe. It was -the FEV1 was less than 3 0 percent predicted.
So let's start with the first PFT that we have. Again, as nobody disputes, July 1, '98,
Mount Sinai Medical Center, he had a post bronchodilator FEV1 over FEC less than .70. Again, this was from '98 to 2006.
He, at this point in 1998, has moderate to severe air flow obstruction. And he had that ski slope shape, which was consistent with small airway disease.
On May 4, '01, he had another PFT at the University of Miami Health Center. It got worse. Now it's at severe air flow obstruction.
Wait a minute, Mr. Sloman. This was before his tracheomalacia surgery. Okay. We'll get to that.
So on July 6, 2001, he had a CT scan that says "could suggest very early bronchiectasis." So remember that. July 6, 2001, this whole issue about bronchiectasis. It's a red herring. I will show you as we go further why it is a red herring.
We don't contest that Mr. Baum had some bronchiectasis. But that was not the -- That was not the reason for his severe air flow limitation. The COPD, the chronic bronchiolitis in his small airways is what caused his severe air flow limitation.
So let's go on. The day before his surgery at Mass General at Harvard at this world renowned institution, which by the way, didn't pick up the relapsing polychondritis. The best of the best are
at Harvard. Their radiologist didn't pick up this issue of relapsing polychondritis. Nobody picked up the issue polychondritis except Dr. Cole. We'll get to him.
So on December 13, 2001, he has an FEV1 of 32 percent predicted. That is severe air flow limitation.
The next day he has the tracheoplasty.
Dr. Wright, the world renowned surgeon who performed this surgery said, "I was delighted with the bronchoscopic picture. During quiet breathing, he now minimally moved his posterior membraneous wall."
"Membraneous" is the key. Because if it was the cartilage than that would indicate some problem with poly -- it could be relapsing polychondritis. But nowhere, nowhere in any record does it make mention of a problem with the cartilage. It is all the membranous parts of the trachea.
This is consistent over and over and we'll go through that.
So after his -- after his surgery on December 14, 2001, where Dr. Wright said, "I was delighted with the bronchoscopic picture." On September 30, '02, approximately nine months later,
at the Miami Heart Institute he had another pulmonary function test. Guess what? His breathing, his pulmonary function test was still severe air flow obstruction.
In other words, the air flow obstruction was not because of the tracheomalacia. The air flow obstruction was because of his small airway disease. Okay?
So if he had the tracheoplasty and according to Dr. Wright -- and we'll see further evidence that it was an amazingly stable repair, then there would be evidence of -- there would be evidence of less of a air flow obstruction.
In other words, his air flow obstruction would improve. Instead it is the same. Instead it gets worse. We'll go through these and you will see what I mean.
Now, the next few weeks later or actually a couple days later, still at Miami Heart, Dr. Csete performed a bronchoscopy, the gold standard to actually look at the trachea. And what has he said? He is actually -- he has the fiberoptic thing, for lack of a better word, and is actually looking at it. And it says "the appearance of the trachea and lower bronchial tree was remarkable for
diffused tracheobronchitis."
Remember when I asked Dr. Klein, I said,
Dr. Klein, why do you -- the causes of his tracheomalacia? He said, Well, it could be from, blunt trauma. It could be from intubations, which we know didn't happen. Or it could be from relapsing polychondritis. And then there could be some other -Then on cross-examination I said, Why did you leave out tracheobronchitis as a cause? He said, Well, I don't see that. Well, Dr. Csete saw it.
Dr. Csete saw it on October 1, 2002. He said the appearance of the trachea and lower bronchial trees was remarkable for diffuse tracheobronchitis.
Then he said there was some dynamic tracheal collapse on expiration and coughing which appeared to be mild.
In the discharge summary Dr. Csete said a repeat bronchoscopy was performed to assess his trachea and the previous surgery of tracheal reconstruction. There was mild tracheal collapse on expiration but this was felt to be not clinically significant.
What is his pulmonary function test a couple months later? Still severe. Still severe.
So it's not the tracheomalacia. It's not something in the upper airway. It is the lower -it's the small airways. The flow volume loop ski slope is consistent with small airway disease, chronic bronchiolitis.
This was at the Mayo Clinic. Although it was at the Jacksonville Mayo Clinic, but it was at the Mayo Clinic.
At the Mayo Clinic on February 21, '03, they said our main diagnosis is what? Is that he had COPD. He has had a previously tracheoplasty that appeared to be open. His BNP and echocardiogram showed no cardiac disease, and we'll talk about that later.
So again, this is -- Dr. Klein -- Dr. Klein agreed with Dr. Pitchenik that over ten pulmonologists diagnosed Mr. Baum with COPD.
Every time he went into the hospital, over 50 times that he went into the hospital, he went in for COPD or COPD exacerbations.
You will see plaintiff's Exhibit 2003 in evidence, which is a summary of the medical records. Go through them. Find one instance where he wasn't diagnosed with COPD or went in for a COPD exacerbation.
I	know. I cherry-picked. If we brought in all the medical records in this case, it would fill this room.
So this is a representative sample. Nobody is going to contest that. Go through it. Satisfy yourself that there is nothing else but COPD from beginning to end for Mr. Baum.
Let's go on. February 21, '03, Dr. Grinton, the Mayo Clinic pulmonologist, a high resolution computed chest -- scan of the chest showed trachea to be open. Although this was performed during inspiration in this in combination with the flow volume curve does not show any obvious choke points.
Dr. Grinton also noted that the prolonged steroid use "however, I feel is going to be necessary." We'll talk about what the prolonged steroid use had on Mr. Baum's health.
And he notes at this point that the high resolution computed CT scan did show some mild changes in bronchiectasis. Remember I said we're not denying he had some.
But most of this appears to be inflammatory in airway rather than bronchiectasis. Okay?
So now we're going to come up to 2004. In
2004	is important. Again, the beginning of 2004 Mr. Baum goes in for -- he goes in for a procedure for a bronchofibroscopy to rule out tracheal obstruction and possible bronchiectasis.
What did Dr. Csete, who looks with the fiberoptic scope, he says the trachea repair was, not stable, but amazingly stable. Okay? It was actually very collapsed only from the membranous part of the trachea, anterior part of the trachea remained intact.
Essentially normal bronchiectasis --bronchofibroscopy and evidence of good tracheal repair.
What is his PFT? What is his pulmonary function test at this time? It's still severe air flow obstruction. So it's not from the tracheomalacia. It's from the small airway disease that Dr. Pitchenik told you about. He a flow volume loop ski slope shape consistent with small airway disease.
He goes to National Jewish in March. By the way, at this time in the mid 2000s Rachel Baum is trying to pull out all stops to help her husband. Okay? There wasn't a place, there wasn't a hospital that she didn't take him to to try to get
some relief, to try to get some help for him on this downward spiral, this downward spiral to death.
So he goes -- She takes him to National Jewish in Denver, Colorado. They do a CAT scan. They compare it to another CAT scan.
Without going into everything here, they did note some bronchiectasis are noted in the right middle lobe, which Dr. Pitchenik told you is relatively insignificant. And that there was an impression of large and small airway disease second to asthma versus bronchitis versus bronchiolitis. And then they -- We'll get to the discharge summary -- but, again, the pulmonary function test severe air flow obstruction. Okay?
What is the final report? What is the discharge summary? Remember Dr. Cole even said, What is the most important thing -- The first thing in the discharge summary, what is the most important thing? He said -- he said the first thing in the discharge summary is the most important thing.
What did they put? Chronic obstructive airway disease. This was from the world renowned hospital for pulmonary problems.
Then on October 7, 2 0 04, I told you we would get to this, there was a high resolution CT scan performed, which compared to the July 6, 2001 CT scan, the July 6, 2001 CT scan had to do with when they said could be very early bronchiectasis, remember that? Now on October 7, 2004, the reason for the examination, bronchiectasis comparison is made with the high resolution CT scan on July 6.
The conclusion, therefore, it is that no bronchiectasis is demonstrable.
So this is the big thing that the defense says was caused by the tracheomalacia, which tracheomalacia was not caused by chronic bronchitis or tracheobronchitis, it was caused by relapsing polychondritis and that this caused bronchiectasis, not COPD.
Here is proof positive that bronchiectasis is not demonstrable, is not an issue compared to his PFTs. His PFTs at this point in time are very severe air flow obstruction. He is almost near very severe. All he has to do is go down three points.
So it's the small airway disease that is causing his severe air flow obstruction.
Then the discharge summary on October 11,
2004, from University of Miami pulmonary consultation, Dr. Marilyn Glassberg, who is an assistant professor there, said COPD with severe hypoxia. Addendum, high resolution scan performed October 7, 2004, shows no evidence of bronchiectasis.
Now, he may have had some here or there, but clearly, clearly whatever bronchiectasis he had was not causing his severe lower small airway obstruction.
Again, 11/11 Dr. Csete -- he goes in for a postoperative diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. And in that case -- there was another bronchoscopy performed that said the distal tracheas was noted to contain significant amounts of white secretion lining the wall emanating from both main stem bronchi and the airways were cleared. There was some dynamic collapse of the distal trachea but the discharge diagnosis was: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Same thing. June 18th. This is at Mount Sinai. Final diagnosis: Decompensated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and pending respiratory failure. And now you see a downward spiral. By the time you get to April 2006, he has
24 percent predicted and that is very severe, very severe.
All these are post bronchodilator FEV1 over FEC less than .70. This is severe, very severe COPD. And as Dr. -- I believe it's Braver said at that point, he said, Severe COPD not better after bronchodilator.
Again, to confirm Rachel Baum's testimony that he was diagnosed in '92, this is Cleveland Clinic a progress note. He was diagnosed in the early '90s with COPD. He has been on oxygen for seven years.
Then we just -- every single one -- here is one, he has a history of diabetes for a little over three years, which apparently began after steroids were instituted to treat his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
It wasn't his diet. It wasn't that he didn't eat the right foods. But let's talk about that for one second.
This guy is a prisoner. The defense is laying an implication that he just wanted to eat.
He just wanted to smoke. He just wanted -- they just wanted to blame him for everything he did.
But his diabetes was not as a result of his
diet. His diabetes was as a result of the treatment for his COPD.
So we go down 2007, discharge: Chronic obstructive bronchitis with acute exacerbation.
2	0 08, end stage COPD. Pulmonary hypertension.
2009, chronic bronchitis acute exacerbation.
2011 he was diagnosed with COPD approximately 18 to 20 years.
2011	his discharge diagnosis: Obstructive chronic bronchitis with acute as exacerbation.
These are the first ones, as Dr. Cole said, are the most important diagnosis.
Then we get closer to his death. On January 1, 2 012, he was intubated earlier in the month of December. He was extubated. So he is dying. He is dying.
January 9, 2 012, the patient expired. He died. What was the discharge diagnosis? First one was acute respiratory failure. But they keep showing this death certificate to suggest, no, he didn't die from COPD. He died from a heart attack.
Well, everybody dies when their heart stops. But this was the primary -- this was on his discharge diagnosis from the hospital records.
So let's summarize the evidence that Paul Baum had COPD, progressive respiratory failure and death caused by smoking.
He had a typical smoking history for COPD, 75-plus-pack years beginning at around 12 or 13. Typical age of onset, 57 years old; Dr. Klein admitted that. He had the typical symptoms of COPD; Dr. Klein admitted that. He had typical pulmonary function test for COPD; Dr. Klein admitted that.
He had typical clinical course for COPD over the years. And according to the medical records he was admitted over 50 times to more than 10 different hospitals with a diagnosis of COPD, usually because of COPD exacerbation associated with respiratory infection.
They want you to believe he was aspirating. The aspiration caused this. That may have happened here or there. It was the COPD that caused Mr. Baum's respiratory failure and death. It's what caused his steady progressive decline from 1992, 1993 to the time that he died on January 9,
2012	.
According to the medical records virtually every specialist that treated Paul Baum, at least
10 pulmonologists and one allergy or asthma specialist, diagnosed him with having COPD.
In addition, Paul Baum had a typical history of chronic bronchitis and chronic
tracheobronchitis, which we saw in the record from Dr. Csete in -- I believe it was 2002.
The diffuse tracheobronchitis seen on multiple bronchoscopies and the thickening of the bronchial walls seen on high resolution CT scans are highly consistent with the diagnosis of chronic bronchitis.
His chronic tracheal bronchitis is what caused his tracheomalacia. There was no other reason for it. There was no intubations. There was no blunt trauma. There was -- There was no relapsing polychondritis, a disease that occurs in one out of a million, three out of a million, but more often in women. But that is -- It's not mentioned one time in the thousands and thousands -- hundreds of thousands of medical records in this case.
Everybody admits that. So that is a red herring. What caused his tracheomalacia was his tracheobronchitis. What caused his lower airway disease was his chronic bronchitis from
75-pack-years of smoking. There is no other reasonable explanation for the tracheomalacia.
So 75 years of history of smoking that caused the chronic inflammation in the trachea, caused tracheomalacia, the chronic inflammation in the bronchi caused the chronic bronchitis. The chronic inflammation in the bronchioles small airways caused his chronic obstructive bronchiolitis, COPD. The chronic obstructive bronchiolitis caused persistent air flow limitation which progressively worsened over the year which lead to chronic respiratory failure and death.
He had some episodes of aspiration and some modest bronchiectasis occurred after severe COPD was already established. Remember, we saw the CT scan from July '01 compared to '04. It wasn't even demonstrable. Whatever occurred later was very minor and occurred after he had -- severe COPD was established and was caused by severe COPD.
So once you find that he was addicted and that addiction caused his COPD, then the Court is going to instruct you that smoking cigarettes causes chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which we know. And that nicotine and cigarettes is addictive, which we know.
What the Court is also going to instruct you and has instructed you is that these defendants placed cigarettes on the market and you don't -this is a fact. Once we prove that and I believe that -- not only have we proved it by the greater weight of the evidence, but we proved it beyond that.
Once you find that he was addicted and that addiction caused his COPD, Judge Dresnick as he has already instructed you, R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris and Liggett were negligent. R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris and Liggett placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
And that these defendants and other companies and organizations concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing the information was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
And he also has instructed you -- and to reiterate that the defendants -- once you find he's a class member, you have to follow this. There is no -- this is a finding.
So you have to accept as true that these defendants entered into an agreement with other tobacco companies and organizations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention that smokers and members of the public rely to their detriment. So negligence and strict liability are proven.
What we have to prove with regard to concealment, fraudulent concealment, and the conspiracy to conceal is we have to prove that Paul Baum relied on something, relied on something that they said or did. We'll do that.
I believe the evidence has shown that Paul Baum relied on their campaign to create doubt. I will show you specific evidence that he relied on what the defendants said and did in order to keep him smoking.
So with regard -- one other thing. In addition to the findings, the judge will instruct you that the defendants are negligent and that they placed an unreasonably dangerous product on the market.
What we have to prove, then, is that their cigarettes are a legal cause of Mr. Baum's
addiction and COPD.
So what is the evidence of that? First of all, we know that only these defendants' cigarettes are what Paul Baum smoked. Right? It wasn't any other cigarettes that Paul Baum smoked that caused his COPD that caused his addiction.
What is the evidence? You heard Irving Baum who lived with Paul Baum during the years that they grew up. He said that in the '50s, he said that Paul Baum smoked two to three packs a day of Lucky Strike, which was R.J. Reynolds. He smoked two or three packs a day, a heavy smoker of Chesterfields, which is Liggett.
This was all in the 1950s. He also smoked R.J. Reynolds Camel and then in the late '50s, early '60s, he smoked Marlboros.
So clearly R.J. Reynolds -- R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes are the majority in his smoking history. There is no doubt about that.
But Paul Baum began smoking Lucky Strikes and Chesterfields in the early 1950s. You will recall some of the ads that were going on at that time by R.J. Reynolds, and especially Liggett, which really pushed the envelope in terms of trying to create assurance -- reassurance and to create doubt as to
this information that was coming out at the same time.
Remember I played -- we played, with Dr. Proctor, a TV ad for Liggett -- for Chesterfield cigarettes where they had a guy come on and say that reputable doctors have tested Chesterfield smokers for the past two years and each doctor has the opinion that there is no harm to the nose, sinus and accessory organs.
So Chesterfield, Lucky Strikes, Camels -- so R.J. Reynolds, Liggett and -- R.J. Reynolds are the main drivers here.
But then you get into the late '50s, early '60s and you have Mr. Baum smoking, heavily, Marlboro cigarettes.
So from that standpoint I will leave it to you to figure out how much each of these defendants are responsible.
But the point is that all of these three defendants are responsible for Mr. Baum's addiction and his COPD.
When you get into from 1970 to 1987, Rachel Baum testified unequivocally that he smoked Camels, R.J. Reynolds, one-and-a-half to two packs a day.
From '87 to '92, he smoked Philip Morris'
Benson & Hedges. And from '92 to '97 he smoked Marlboros, Philip Morris' product.
Then from '97 to 2003 he started smoking Parliament Lights.
Now, remember I told you that -- so in terms of legal cause, there is no doubt that these three defendants' cigarettes are what caused his addiction and what caused his disease. There is no doubt about that.
The relative responsibilities are for you to decide.
But keep in mind that all three of these defendants entered into an agreement to conceal what they knew about the hazards of smoking and the addictive qualities of smoking.
So when we get to '87 we see that Mr. Baum started smoking Camels, filtered, and then Lights. Then you see towards the end of his smoking history he smoked Lights, which is indicative of somebody who is relying on the idea of -- this was part of the psychological crutch that Philip Morris wanted smokers to rely on.
Remember, however, at some point reflecting the same seriousness -- this was right after the Surgeon General's Report came out: We must in the
near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self rationale to continue smoking. These answers must also point out the weaknesses in the report and the path for future research.
So remember what Irving Baum testified to. Irving Baum testified that:
"Question: In 1964, do you remember the Surgeon General's Report?
"Answer: Yes.
"Question: Where were you living?
"Answer: I was living in Highland Parkway.
I was married then.
"Question: So assuming the Surgeon General's report came out in January 1964, reorient with us when you graduated from dental school.
"Answer: I graduated dental school in June
1964 .
"Question: So when the Surgeon General's Report came out was it big news?
"Answer: Yes."
Then I asked him, what did you talk to Paul Baum about, about the Surgeon General's Report. I said, What did you say to him and what did he say to you?
I said to him, In lieu of the Surgeon General's Report, which is injurious to your health. His reply was, It's just a lot of bunk. It's primarily statistical information with no clear scientific correlation."
I said, are those the exact words or are you paraphrasing that?
He said, paraphrasing.
Well, where do you think Paul Baum got the idea? This was the psychological crutch that the defendant tobacco companies were putting out, either directly or through one of their front companies, the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, the Tobacco Institute, which Liggett joined in 1958, and later the CTR.
So their front companies were putting out this message. Not only were the front companies putting out that message, but the defendants themselves through their corporate executives when they are on Face the Nation and being interviewed, when they were interviewed on Nightline.
That was all -- Those words, it's all statistical correlations. It's all a bunch of bunk. There is no rhyme or reason to the Surgeon General's Report. They were taking issue with it.
They were castigating it. They were denigrating it.
So people like Paul Baum who by 1964 had been smoking for nearly 15, 16 years and he's addicted, which message do you think Paul Baum who is addicted to smoking cigarettes is going to listen to?
Is he going to listen to the public health authorities or is he going to listen to the tobacco companies? Because that's what the tobacco companies wanted. They wanted to give him a psychological crutch to keep smoking.
So let's talk about what the tobacco companies -- remember the Frank statement. The Frank statement is Exhibit 32. Exhibit 32 this went out in January of 1954 after the meeting at the plaza hotel after they met with -- when they decided -- Liggett wasn't there. Okay? But Liggett joins later. Liggett didn't object to this, but Liggett thought the whole thing would blow over.
At this point in time the Frank statement goes out from R.J. Reynolds, from Philip Morris, from all the major tobacco companies, Brown & Williamson, which is now part of R.J. Reynolds.
So what do they pledge? What do they tell the American public? They said that: We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business.
All right? So what is the evidence that they accepted an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility in people's health?
To the contrary. Because at the very same time they knew that cigarette smoking was harmful and caused cancer.
How do we know that? We know that from the forwarding memo, Exhibit 31, which said -- one of the men said, It was fortunate for us cigarettes are a habit they can't break. They know it's addictive.
Said another, Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer free cigarette, what we could do to competition.
We accept an interest in people's health. There is only one problem. This was the only problem that they identified. Confidence in how to establish it, publish reassurance and how to create it in a perhaps long interim when scientific doubts must remain.
Most important, how to free millions of Americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths regardless of any pooh-poohing logic every time they light a cigarette. This is what they were concerned about. This is what they were concerned about a public relations issue, about their bottom line, not about -- accepting an interest in people's health.
In 1964 as I just showed you, we must give -provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch.
In 1972 they did a study to see how successful this campaign was. They said, For nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three fronts. While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. On the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of -- what -- creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it.
So we accept an interest in people's health. This is what they promised. But internally they knew just the opposite.
There is more. These are just representative examples. You will have all the exhibits back in the jury room to look at more of them. In fact, I pulled one that is not on here; I will talk about it in a second.
R.J. Reynolds research planning memo, In a sense the tobacco industry may be thought of as being specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry.
Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique.
Instead we somehow must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking and hope that he will or himself discover the real satisfactions obtainable.
If it is proposed nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking. If we meekly accept the allegations of our critics and move toward reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business.
So they know that this is the importance. We accept an interest in people's health, come on.
Exhibit 136, the Nordine study. "Many but not most of those who would like to stop smoking
are --" most.
"Many but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so." So they know most people cannot stop smoking.
We cannot be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. Some slow and steady progress is being made. So they are talking about these quit smoking products. One of which was Nicorette gum which Philip Morris tried to slow the rollout, tried to prevent the rollout. The probability that such method appearing long term is 100 percent, if and when that occurs, our options include go out of business or find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers to stop smoking.
So we accept an interest in people's health. Remember Mr. Robert K. Heimann. Congress is wrong in requiring these warnings; is that correct?
We don't think they are justified.
So they are wrong?
Yes .
Now, what is the next thing they promise. We believe the products we make are not injurious to health. February of 1953 even before the Frank statement. R.J. Reynolds knew that there were
studies of clinical data that tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and incidence.
Again, the forwarding memo that I have gone over, they knew that -- "Wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer free cigarette, what we could do to competition."
We believe the products we make are not injurious to health. Again, more examples. Think of the cigarette pack as a storage container for a day's nicotine. Think of a cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine.
Then we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health.
The 1972 tobacco institute press lease that said the Surgeon General's Report of 1972 insults the scientific community and that the number one health problem is not cigarette smoking but is the extent to which public health officials may knowingly mislead the American public.
We always have and always will cooperate?
Come on.
What about Robert K. Heimann again.
As far as you are concerned, is the Surgeon
General simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer?
I would use the term misguided.
Then they pressed him. All right. But not being polite about it, in your opinion is it wrong?
Dead wrong.
We always have and always will cooperate? Remember Robert K. Heimann's testimony when he was confronted with -- he was asked is there any study, any study that you are aware of that conforms with your company's position?
He said, I can't think of any.
He went through like 20. Every single one of them that he was aware of. Yet he knew more, a person who is trained -- who did his doctorate in movie scripts, but he knew more than medical doctors. He knew more than the scientific community.
Even the studies that they funded that found that there was a correlation between smoking and cancer, he didn't recognize on behalf of American Tobacco, which is now part of R.J. Reynolds.
We're pledging aid and assistance to the research effort. Yeah. Out of the 6,000 or 7,000 studies that were paid for by the Tobacco Industry
Research Committee and/or the CTR, there was only a handful, about 10, that was any -- that showed any correlation between smoking and health and/or addiction.
Those were not recognized by the tobacco -the ones that they even paid for.
So as Dr. Proctor said, that was leakage.
When those came out they stopped the funding the for them.
So we are pledging aid and assistance to the research effort. For this purpose we're establishing the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, and as we know, that this was just a front for the tobacco industry.
This statement is being issued, why?
Because we believe the people are entitled to know where we stand on this matter and what we intend to do about it.
Well, come on. This was all lip service. We saw from the Exhibit 72, very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine.
They asked Mr. Heimann, would you blame a person for smoking two packs a day?
No.
You wouldn't fault him for smoking one pack
or two packs; is that correct?
Then the company executives appeared before the Waxman hearings in 1994. You saw their testimony. Do you believe that cigarettes are addictive?
No. No.
One said, Well, it doesn't meet the definition.
Then they were asked whether cigarette smoking was injurious to health. They all denied it. They all denied the correlation that at this point was going on 40 years, 40 years since the first epidemiology studies, 40 years since the first animal studies, 40 years since the cellular pathology studies. They are still denying it.
As Dr. Proctor told you, it wasn't until 2000 that they finally admitted that cigarette smoking caused health problems and that cigarette smoking was addictive.
So reliance in this case? The circumstantial evidence is that Mr. Baum relied on this 40-year campaign. He started smoking when he was 12. Can you blame him at that age when every place you go, every place you see, there is a cigarette ad?
Look at the annual reports that are in
evidence in this case where they brag about the penetration of their cigarette ads on television during these years, that they were getting hundreds of millions of views for Chesterfield, for -- you name the product.
Their cigarette advertising was effective. Remember Robert Heimann's testimony where he said that specifically with regard to advertising, would you agree that the amount of money spent on advertising had a pretty direct correlation in 1970 with the units sold of that product?
I certainly would agree with that. There has to be a correlation. That is the purpose of advertising, isn't it.
Yes .
You wouldn't spend money on advertising if it didn't work, would you?
We try not to.
Does advertising play a role in the person's selection of a cigarette?
We hope so when we advertised.
Remember they asked him about, they said, advertising begins by consumers don't -- they showed him an ad for Pall Malls, which is not an issue. All of these themes, all of these
advertising campaigns were ubiquitous across the board for all of these tobacco companies.
So with Pall Mall the theme was:
"Question: He says -- The advertisement begins by telling consumers don't miss the fun of smoking, does it not?
"Answer: Yes, that's what it says.
"Question: And it is sort of a promise to smokers that it is fun to smoke, isn't it?
"Answer: Well, yeah. It is in there, yes.
"Question: The advertisement is not only associated with fun but also supports -- is it not? It shows water skiers; is that correct?
"Answer: Yes it does. It shows a water skier and three people in a boat and one of whom who is smoking."
So he's talking about the promise to cigarette smokers. He said that cigarette smokers and people in the public can rely on their advertising. That's what was done.
Not that Mr. Baum started smoking because of his friends. That's what the defense will tell you. Well, the testimony is from Irving Baum he started smoking because of his friends.
Why does his -- why does -- why is there peer
pressure? It's because of the atmosphere, the atmosphere created by the tobacco companies to make it appealing to young people to act rebellious, to make it seem as though they are grown up, to idolize their sports heros, Joe DiMaggio, to idolize the movie actors, Ronald Reagan.
There are a couple of ads from Liggett which we didn't show during the case. They are in evidence. You will have a chance to look at them.
Here is Ronald Reagan, president -- later becomes president of the United States. I'm sending Chesterfield to all my friends. That's the Merriest Christmas any smoker can have.
Chesterfield mildness plus no pleasant -- no unpleasant after taste, Ronald Reagan.
These were the type of ads that were in the very same magazines that the defendants were showing Dr. Proctor was, everybody knew that smoking was bad. This is what was going on.
So you think Paul Baum the high cool dropout who went into the Navy, the Bronx tough guy, is going through these epidemiology reports or is he being inundated by the advertising campaigns on TV, in magazines, newspapers, any place you go, in a candy storing every single place, bus benches, sky
writing, any place, what do you think? That's the question.
So that's the circumstantial evidence of reliance. But the direct evidence of reliance is Irving Baum's testimony where he said that Mr. Baum told him when confronted with the Surgeon General's Report, he said it's all a bunch of bunk, it's all statistical evidence. That's exactly, that's exactly the message that the top companies were sending out at the time.
Now, once you find that Mr. Baum relied on their campaign to create doubt, then you are going to be asked about punitive damages, whether the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages.
As far as that is concerned, what is the evidence about punitive damages?
Wait, before I get to that there is one thing I left out. I'm sorry. I'm trying to get through as much as I can in the amount of time that I have.
We talked about comparative fault as it relates to this case. What is evidence -- what is the defendants' fault in this case?
Well, they knew -- let's compare fault.
Okay? Let's compare fault in this case because you heard the instruction about it.
Why did -- When the defendants knew of the dangers of smoking in the 1950s, why did they choose to not tell the public? Wait for an answer. Because they won't address it in their closing.
Wait and hear -- because there is no answer to it.
So let's -- this is part of their fault.
Then I'll talk about Paul Baum's fault.
So first thing, when the defendants knew of the dangers of smoking in the 1950s, why did they choose not to tell the public? They won't address it in closing.
When the defendants knew of the addictive nature of smoking in the '50s, why did they choose not to tell the public? They won't address it.
They will ignore it.
Why did the defendants choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the dangers of smoking with warnings on the packs in the 1950s? They won't address that.
When the defendants chose not to voluntarily warn the public about the addictive nature -- no. Why did the defendants choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the addictive nature of nicotine with warnings on their packs in the '50s? They won't address it.
Why don't the -- Why did the defendants normalize and glamorize cigarettes in its advertising campaigns using famous actors and actresses and athletes during the '30s, 40s, 50's? They will not address that.
Why did the defendants choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the dangers of smoking with warnings on the packs in the early '60s? They won't address that.
Why do the defendants choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the addictive nature of nicotine with warnings on the packs in the early '60s? They won't address that.
Why did the defendants choose to conspire with other tobacco companies and create doubt about the health risks of smoking for 50 years despite knowing its cigarettes were deadly? They won't address that.
Why did the defendants choose not to reduce nicotine amounts in its cigarettes to levels that would not sustain addiction when it had the capability and well before Mr. Baum started smoking? They won't address that.
Why did the defendants choose not to cooperate with the Surgeon General in 1964
regarding its knowledge that cigarettes were deadly and that nicotine was addictive? They won't address that.
Why do the defendants urge people to switch to filters rather than quit smoking when it knew that filters were not effective? They won't address that.
And if the Tobacco Institute partially funded -- was partially funded by all of these defendants and has been maintained since 1980 that it was -- that they cannot argue free choice when the smokers addicted, why do they claim that my client is at fault? Okay.
Well, we'll answer that. Mr. Baum's fault in this case is that he didn't try hard enough. He didn't try soon enough to try to quit smoking.
That is it.
All the other things I just went through is on them. It's what they did. Okay?
MR. BASSETT: Objection, Your Honor.
Misstates the law. May we approach?
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: All right. Members of the jury, Mr. Sloman was just in his argument was -- is now talking about comparative fault. So I'm just going to read this to you.
In this case the plaintiff has admitted that Mr. Baum was partially at fault for causing his own COPD. Specifically, the plaintiff has admitted that Mr. Baum's own acts or omissions related to the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking were a legal cause of his COPD.
Accordingly, you must decide Mr. Baum some percentage of fault, up to and including 100 percent on your verdict form. Your determination of each defendant's fault, if any, must be based solely on conduct by that defendant, if any, that was a legal cause of Mr. Baum's COPD.
In making this determination, you should not consider any alleged conduct by any defendant that you find was not a legal cause of Mr. Baum's COPD.
MR. SLOMAN: Thank you, Your Honor.
Ladies and gentlemen, you will also be -assuming that Mr. Baum -- you find that Mr. Baum relied to his detriment and you find in favor of the plaintiff on the claims of concealment fraud and conspiracy to engage in concealment fraud, you will be asked whether the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages.
In this case the defendants knew -- what do we know about the defendants in this case?
They knew about the health risks of smoking their product and chose not to tell the public. They wanted smokers to become addicted to their cigarettes. They marketed their cigarettes to youth. They engaged in a conspiracy to create doubt about health risks and addictive nature of
smoking. They lied to the public about the health risks of smoking. They lied to the public about nicotine not being addictive.
Millions of people have been harmed from defendants' intentional acts. And continued flue-curing despite knowledge of the dangers of smoking.
Just so -- and not really for your consideration but those assuming that you find that there was reliance and that there was an intentional tort, then we will seek not to have an offset of damages in this case.
Now, let's talk about damages. This is really the hardest part of the case. Because our job is to suggest to you the total amount of damages sustained by Paul Baum or Rachel Baum. We believe that the evidence in this case is clear that you should consider the damages to Rachel Baum because this was a wrongful death case.
Paul Baum died of COPD. And assuming that you find that way, then you will consider Rachel Baum's damages. If you believe that Mr. Baum died from something other than COPD, like heart attack, myocardial infarction, then you will consider his damages.
So we don't want you to consider sympathy.
We want you to consider the facts in this case.
From my standpoint, the only way to explain damages in this case is by measuring units of time. We all have to -- I don't have a watch on. But we're all governed by an 8-hour day at our work. We're all governed by the Court starting at 9:00 going to 5:00, an 8-hour day. Our jobs sometimes entail overtime. Our jobs sometimes entail having to do work on the side.
But everything that we do is governed by units of time. So if you're a police officer, if you're a teacher, you put in your eight hours a day, 40 hours a week or more than that. You get paid.
Nobody begrudges you for you getting paid for what you do, whether you're making 30, 40, $5 0 an hour. You put in the time. That's your job. You get paid for it. Some people love their jobs.
Some people hate their jobs. Some professional athletes get paid millions of dollars for jobs that they love to do. There are some people that get paid millions of dollars for jobs they hate to do.
But everything is based on the time and the work that everybody puts in. So if you're a police
officer, if you're a teacher or if you're even an expert witness who is making $600 an hour, you get paid for the time that you put in and nobody says a thing about it because that is your job.
Expert witnesses, that's their job, $600 an hour to come in and to testify about discrete issues in this case.
In this case, in this case the defendants gave Paul Baum and my client Rachel Baum a job.
That job was for Paul Baum to die with COPD. The job that Rachel Baum had was to watch him die and to help him get through and to make him more comfortable every day of nearly half, nearly half of their married life.
So Paul and Rachel got married in 1971. Paul died on January 9, 2012. Half of their married life she spent taking care of her husband.
Now, granted, the first four or five years '92, '93 to the first time he was hospitalized in '97, Mrs. Baum -- you asked questions, Mrs. Baum said I was giving him medications. I was taking him to doctors. He would get worse in terms of shortness of breath. By '97 was his first exacerbation which led to him going into the hospital.
So from 1992 when he was diagnosed with COPD through January 9, 2 012, almost 2 0 years -- let's say 19 years from beginning January 1, 1993, to January 9, 2 012, 19 years Rachel Baum watched her husband die and Paul Baum spiraled downward into dying.
This was the job that they gave my client and Paul Baum. That is the job that they gave him. It wasn't a job. It was a prison sentence. It was a prison sentence because they -- Paul and Rachel went through -Rachel quit her job. She took full-time care of him beginning in 2003. She made his struggle better. She did everything on earth to try and find some cure for him.
She took him -- she endured 50 hospitalizations. Each hospitalization she didn't know whether he would survive or not. He didn't know whether he would survive or not. She took him all over the country. It was a morning, noon and night job.
We watched the day in the life video 10 minutes. That was every day. The last two years of his life, that was every day, 365 days a year,
24 hours a day. There was no rest at night either
because when Paul Baum would go to sleep at night, she would have to -- he would either wake her and she would have to wake him in order to give him treatments, breathing treatments to break up the phlegm.
So this was a woman who endured at least the last 10 years of his life with constant hospitalizations; constant not knowing whether he's going to live; constant day, noon and night treatments for his COPD; constant day, noon and night bathing; constant day, noon and night changing -- what eventually became changing his adult diapers.
Constant day, noon and night having to deal with all types of issues that came up: Feeding, dressing, bathing. He was like an adult infant.
You saw the day in the life with the Hoyer lift.
So when I say that Rachel Baum was an angel on earth, I'm not exaggerating. Even Dr. Klein said, I don't know -- he has never seen -- of course he said, Well, this isn't indicative of COPD because he would have died earlier. But then he admitted that he has seen patients last that long.
Well, I submit to you that this was a testament to Rachel Baum for taking him to every
conceivable possible hospital that could treat him, that could help him.
Yes, she got help in about 2007. But as you saw, you saw my client, I mean how much could she possibly endure on her own?
But that wasn't -- just because she had help during those last few years doesn't mean that it alleviated the burden for her. In many ways it was worse because she knew and he knew that what he was going through was a downward spiral to death. She watched him die; and she tried to help him and make him as comfortable as possible, making his meals, giving his medications, changing him, dressing him, wheeling him around in the wheelchair to the point that he eventually gave up and died.
So that was Paul Baum when they married.
That was Paul and Rachel after they married. This was Paul at Rena's wedding. You saw. And that's on a good day.
There is not many people on this planet that would do for him what she did, not many people.
And because of her he lasted that long.
So I want to discuss with you how do we come up with a dollar figure. As I said, we go by units of time. I don't know of a better way, maybe
somebody else does.
But what I have done is, we first calculated Paul Baum's pain and suffering the. This is if -this is the survivorship, if you believe that Paul Baum died from coronary heart disease or something else.
Then we would base it on a diagnosis date of January 1, 1993, to the date of death, 19 years.
We calculate about 100 to $150 an hour. What is that based on? Well, you saw a whole range -- I just went through a whole range of different jobs and occupations, somebody like Dr. Klein who is making $450 an hour, Dr. Torres who is making $600 an hour, Dr. Cole who is making $600 an hour,
$6,000 a day. Okay? All those people are entitled to receive what they put their time in for.
So conservatively what I have done is blended between the date of his diagnosis to the date of his death, figuring on 100 to $150 an hour, factoring in how horrific his last 10 years suffering were.
At $100 an hour times 24 hours at $365 days times 19 years that is $16,644,000. That's on the low end.
Figuring $125 an hour, 24 hours, $365 days
times 19 years is $20,805,000. Of course this is Paul Baum. We are submitting that the calculation is not for Paul Baum. It should be for Rachel Baum because he died of COPD. This is if -- This is if you conclude that he died from something other than COPD.
But that's what the defendants have argued in this case. And $150 an hour, 24 hours $365 days, again taking into consideration the first five years was relatively -- knowing that he has got a life-threatening illness, knowing that he is going to die from this and going through what he did during those first five years and then compare it to approximately the last ten years of his life, which bordered on the horrific.
So figuring that, you come out to close to -we come out to $24,966,000.
Now, I want you to consider Rachel Baum's past pain and suffering on wrongful death.
Remember this is if you conclude that he died from COPD. We believe that that is what the evidence in this case shows.
Again, figuring a diagnosis date of January 1, 1993, he was actually diagnosed in '92. But for purposes of this we come up with a
diagnosis date of January 1, '93, 19 years.
Again, Rachel Baum is watching her husband die, is doing what she did. So obviously Paul Baum suffered worse than Rachel did, although it's hard to separate the two. I am not going to argue to her that she experienced the same pain and suffering that Paul Baum did.
What I submit to you is, her -- what she did for this man in watching him die garners at least, at least a $65 to $85 per hour range between the diagnosis date and the time that he died.
19	years at $65 an hour times 24 hours times 365 days times 19 years is $10,818,600. If we figure at $75 an hour we come out to $12,483,000.
At $85 an hour, of course this is a blended rate -you can go higher; you can go lower -- I submit that this is reasonable, and that at that rate $85 an hour, 24 hours, $365 days, 19 years, is $14,147,400.
Now, there is also for you to consider Rachel's future pain and suffering figuring a joint life expectancy of 7 years mortality tables are in evidence that's 7 years. Again, remember I asked Rachel about -- there was an after Paul died, there was at some level a sense of relief but there was a
huge hole in her life.
So what she went through those last 10, 13 years obviously cannot be as much as what she -her future pain and suffering can't be as much as what she suffered in watching him die. But it still has a value. I would submit that a range of 10 to $20 an hour for future pain and suffering for his wrongful death, that's 10 hours, 24 hours a day, 365 days times 7 years is $613,200 on the low end, mid range is $909,800 in the mid range and on high range of a very modest $20 an hour would be $1,226,400. Totaling it all up past on the low end is, if you add the past and the future, on the low end is $11,431,800, mid range is adding the past and the future is $13,402,800 and the high range is $15,373,800.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm at the end of my time. I would thank you for your attention. Thank you for your service. And I will have a chance to come back to you later on this afternoon. Thank you very much.



MR. SLOMAN: May it please the Court, counsel ladies and gentlemen. I get it. Paul Baum read all the bad stuff about cigarettes and didn't see any of the stuff out by the cigarette companies. Didn't see the ads. Didn't see the marketing. Didn't see anything. They want you to pretend as though they don't exist.
Remember in opening -- in my open and close I asked you, I read a list of questions. I said they will never address them. They won't address them. Why won't they address them? Because they can't. They can't justify the conduct.
Because all this information that Dr. Proctor told you about, the billions of dollars in advertising, the marketing, everything that went on, the denials, the ridicule of the Surgeon General's Report, all that information was going out to Paul Baum. Okay.
We have one shred of evidence that his brother said he talked to him about the Surgeon
General's Report. What did he say? He says it was a bunch of bunk. Where do you think Paul Baum got it? Do you think Paul Baum knew that was from the tobacco institute or that Paul Baum identified it with a particular tobacco company.
That was because that came from the industry. They conspired together. They hired the tobacco institute.
Liggett, if Liggett paid 3 cents, they are in for a penny, they are in for a dollar, they are in for the whole thing.
Ms. St. Peter-Griffith gets up here and tells you what a great company Liggett is.
Liggett is just as guilty as the other defendants because, why? The Engle findings. If you find that the defendants -- if you find that Paul Baum was a Engle class member, that he was addicted and that addiction caused his COPD, then all the defendants, all the defendants are responsible for placing cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
All the defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known.
All of the defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of
cigarettes or their addictive nature.
All of the defendants are responsible for that. That is the Engle findings in this case.
So, ladies and gentlemen, when Ms. St. Peter-Griffith gets up and tells you that Liggett was this great company, why didn't they admit until 2000 that cigarettes caused cancer?
Why didn't they admit until 2000 that cigarette smoking was addictive?
Instead, they hide behind something they give the Surgeon General's Report. Then through The Tobacco Institute they ridicule it. They ridicule it. I showed you board after board where press release after press release went out by The Tobacco Institute and then by their minions, who denied there is a connection between smoking and health.
They denied that the Surgeon General was accurate in what he was -- in the report that was issued in 1964.
Why was that big news? The defendants will make you believe that, Well, everybody knew.
Irving Baum knew it was bad. What did they know was bad? Did they know it was going to cause cancer? Did Paul Baum know when he was 12 years old, 13 years old he was going to be addicted and
that it was going to turn into a disease that was going to -- he was going to suffocate to death?
What does "bad" mean? What does he know?
You get more information on a package of aspirin than you do on a package of cigarettes in those days. There was nothing on those cigarettes.
Did they put anything on there voluntarily when Ms. St. Peter-Griffith says the Arthur D. Little company submitted all this information.
They didn't put anything on their cigarettes. They didn't put a label on it. They didn't put a warning on it.
They fought it tooth and nail with the Surgeon General's committee. When the Surgeon General committee came out there was ridicule after ridicule. And what did Philip Morris do? They put out a memo. Philip Morris put out a memo. They said, We have got to give smokers a psychological crutch.
What information do you think an addicted smoker like Paul Baum is going to latch on to? Do you think he's going to latch on, Well the Public Health Authority's Dr. Horn and Dr. Hammond says it's your own choice.
Well, he's addicted by that point. Which
piece of information do you think addicted smokers are going to latch on to?
Cigarette consumption peaks in 1982. Why do you think cigarette consumption keeps going up to 1982?
Because the cigarette companies are putting out this information. They are ridiculing. They are creating doubts. That was their plan beginning with the Forwarding memo continuing on through year after year after year.
Now, I wanted to go over a few things from Mr. Hohnbaum's opening statement -- I'm sorry open and close. He said 268 medical doctors, 102 radiologists 47 cardiologists 29 pulmonologists.
They all -- that is the number. He counted them. Take him for his word.
Guess what? Not one found relapsing polychondritis. Not one.
Dr. Cole, when Ms. Kessler cross-examined him, he admitted 55 percent of patients with COPD develop tracheomalacia. 55 percent.
Well, that's a lot more than 1 in 3 million or 1 in a million who develop relapsing polychondritis. He had Dr. Cole -- let's get to him.
Mr. Hohnbaum says, are you going to believe your own eyes? Okay, remember he said that.
Well, you can look at the medical records, okay, or you can rely on Dr. Cole and the 1.4 million dollars he has been making on behalf of the tobacco companies for the last 15 years.
Okay. You can trust by reading the medical records and not seeing there is anything about relapsing polychondritis. You can read the medical records and see that once the tracheomalacia -- he had the tracheomalacia surgery, that there was not clinically significant occlusion of the airway after that.
So what is causing his airway disease? It's the chronic bronchiolitis.
Then he made a big -- both Mr. Bassett and Mr. Hohnbaum made a big deal about the idea that we made a stunning admission that because there is no emphysema, this does not qualify as COPD.
Well, who testified about that? Okay. The statement that was put up in opening and through Dr. Pitchenik, that was about a characteristic of COPD. Small airway disease, chronic bronchiolitis. Nobody has contradicted that. That is part of COPD. So you have a mixture. It varies from
person to person. Not one witness testified otherwise with regard to that.
Now, defense said that there is this theory of COPD. Well, I haven't counted how many times the doctors diagnosed him with COPD. Those other pulmonologists, they didn't say he didn't have COPD. If there was one other pulmonologist who said that he had something other than COPD, don't you think you would have seen it? Don't you think they would have had boards come in here in the dozens to point out that one loan medical record that supported their position? They don't have one medical record other than to show you some radiology from 2001 and to ridicule Dr. Karidas.
Dr. Karidas wasn't called by us to testify about tracheomalacia. During his deposition Mr. Hohnbaum showed him some radiology. Then one of the slides did not meet, according to Dr. Karidas, the diameter for tracheomalacia.
Then as Dr. Karidas tried to explain yesterday, once he saw the other, he did have tracheomalacia.
But the point was, the point was is that Mr. Hohnbaum wants you to believe that Dr. Karidas is such an incompetent fool that since he didn't
see -- since he didn't see tracheomalacia in 2001, he somehow is incompetent to be able to contradict Dr. Cole.
Now, come on. Like I said, not one record.
If this was relapsing polychondritis, this would be written up in the New England Journal of Medicine. This would be one of the studies that doctors from all over the world would come down and say, Oh my God, relapsing polychondritis. How have we missed this for 20 years? How did we -- We thought it was COPD.
Thank God for Dr. Cole. Now we know that we're all incompetent. The guys at Harvard. The guys at Duke. The guys at National Jewish in Denver. They all missed it. They are all goofs. They all don't have the luxury that Dr. Cole did to be able to look at it in retrospect. The 12.4 million dollars had nothing to do with it. The fact he's on retainer by the tobacco companies have nothing to do about it.
Use your common sense, as one of my colleagues just said.
So we didn't call Dr. Benowitz. Well, yeah we could have shown you a three-hour deposition to reiterate what Dr. Pitchenik said. Could have done
that. We could still be here. We could have done that. We spared you three and a half hours of testimony.
Now, this idea about motivation. He didn't throw away his ashtrays. He didn't throw away his lighters. He didn't show enough motivation for Dr. Torres.
Let me tell you something, Dr. Torres, if this guy had cigarettes smoking out of his ears, in his nose, every orifice, he wouldn't find him addicted.
The only way that he would find him addicted is if this poor woman had left him in a wheelchair in the middle of I-95. Then that would have been clinically significant.
Short of that, he couldn't think of an example. So there is nothing that we could do, nothing that anybody could do. He's only diagnosed 12 people in the thousands of people that he sees to say that they are addicted, 12 people.
He doesn't even see people for nicotine addiction. Dr. Pitchenik has this nonsmoking clinic. He treats people in addition to the practice that he had for pulmonology.
He knows the ins and outs of nicotine
addiction more so -- look, you watched Dr. Pitchenik. You watched Dr. Torres. I asked Dr. Torres a question. I asked him what time it is. He told me how to build a watch. He couldn't answer a question directly if -- I would show him the DSM. I showed him the definitions for tolerance. Well, I disagree with that.
Withdrawal. I disagree with that.
Everything in the DSM that he considered the Bible, he disagreed with, that had bearing on Mr. Baum, especially when it came to smoking while on oxygen.
Well, I don't think that that -- he met the criteria for that.
So look at -- the jury instructions suggest that you use your common sense.
Now, I wanted to go through the verdict form, but before I go I wanted to talk about comparative fault.
I started to do that. Again, I want you to consider what Mr. Baum did -- compared to the defendants -- I told you in my open and close they wouldn't address any of those questions. They want to pretend that Mr. Baum was -- all he got was this information that smoking was bad, that they did
nothing, that they are not in the room.
But nobody -- But nobody answered any of the questions. Why? Well, Mr. Bassett in opening said, Now, over that 100-year period, if you pull out some of those documents and you look at them today in 2 014, undoubtedly you would look at them and say, What was that person thinking? Because they are just some wrong headed dumb ideas in there.
THE COURT: Excuse me. Excuse me.
MR. BASSETT: This isn't evidence in the
case.
MR. SLOMAN: This is opening.
THE COURT: This is his opening statement. This is your opening statement.
MR. SLOMAN: It is his opening statement.
He says, Now, I'm not here to try to defend or address those types of statements that may be found in some of those documents.
Well, you're right. He didn't. Okay? The reason he didn't is because they are not dumb headed statements, they are intentional statements. They are intentional statements to keep people like Paul Baum -- to get them addicted, to keep them addicted.
Do you think for 2 minutes if the cigarette companies had come clean when these epidemiology statements came out in the early '50s and the animal studies and the scientific consensus was that smoking caused cancer and was addictive, do you think that maybe Paul Baum would have had a chance to quit or was he too strong willed? Was he too strong headed he wasn't going to listen to anything?
Addicted people will gravitate to the message that they want to hear. If the tobacco companies, if the tobacco companies had come clean and said, You know, we can't refuted this. Then maybe Paul Baum would have had a chance. Maybe he would have had a chance to quit. Maybe he wouldn't have continued smoking for those years. He sure would have had a much better chance of quitting in the early 50's and early '60s if the tobacco companies didn't take issue, didn't force the president of the United States, John F. Kennedy, to convene a Surgeon General's committee and to then come forth in 1964 and then link smoking to cancer.
He might have had a chance if the cigarette companies didn't ridicule the Surgeon General's report. He may have had a chance earlier rather
than in 1992 after he had been diagnosed with COPD.
So I asked are the -- When the defendants knew the dangers of smoking in the '50s, why did it choose --we talk about choice. Let's talk about their choice.
Why did they choose to not tell the public what they knew about the dangers of smoking? When they knew the addictive nature? Why did they choose not to tell the public that it was addictive?
When they chose not to voluntarily warn the public, why did they choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the dangers of smoking?
All because this affected the bottom line.
Why did they choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the addictive nature of nicotine? Why did they choose to normalize and glamorize cigarettes in its advertising with famous actors and actresses throughout the '50s, '60s and '70s? Why did they continue to do all these things?
Then you stack up the comparative fault -MR. BASSETT: Objection, Your Honor.
Misstates the law. We need to go to sidebar.
(Sidebar.)
MR. BASSETT: Your Honor, Mr. Sloman has done
exactly what he did in the first part of his closing. He was instructed not to do that.
THE COURT: The comparative fault goes to addiction.
MR. SLOMAN: Right. They are saying that motivation was built into the addiction.
THE COURT: You can argue with regard to comparative fault we accept responsibility to some level. What is their level of comparative fault? What is their level of fault? All right?
MR. BASSETT: Your Honor, at this point because this is the second violation after he had already been admonished after Your Honor had already said that jury instruction, we move for a mistrial at this point. The prejudice is too much to overcome by any other means than a mistrial.
THE COURT: It's denied.
(End sidebar.)
THE COURT: I'm sustaining the objection and I'm directing you to readdress that point.
MR. SLOMAN: Ladies and gentlemen, what was Paul Baum's comparative fault in this? Are you going to fault him for starting to smoke the defendants' cigarettes as a 12- or 13 year-old?
Are you going to fault him for not trying to quit
sooner? Sure.
Are you going to fault him for not trying hard enough? Sure.
That's it. What did they -- Compare what they did to keep him smoking, to keep him smoking all this -- to give him a psychological crutch to keep smoking for all those years. Okay?
Compare what they did to what Paul Baum did. Sure he will take some responsibility. Give him 10, 15 percent for not trying to quit, for not trying harder to quit.
But this is a man when faced with horrific consequences. He couldn't quit. They just trivialize it: He wasn't motivated.
When I asked Dr. Torres where is that in the DSM about motivation? He says it's not there.
Well, that's the only book that this guy brought up. It's the only book that he relied upon. There was nothing in there about motivation. There was nothing about, yeah, you need motivation. That is not the important thing.
What is important is addiction. Paul Baum was severely addicted because for somebody to smoke compulsively for over 50 years, the same amount, the same time, except for one day of the year, for
one day of the year, and even they look at that as controlling smoking.
I look at that as his inability to quit smoking. Why? Because what does he do the second, the minute that the holiday is over? He smokes a cigarette. He doesn't eat. He has been fasting for 24 hours.
So what is more important to him, eating, drinking or smoking a cigarette?
That should tell you everything about whether Paul Baum was addicted. That should tell you everything you want to know.
So when they say, Well, give 100 percent to Paul Baum. Really? 100 percent to Paul Baum.
Well, if anybody thinks 100 percent -- let's leave early. Okay? Let's just check no because the defendants are responsible for at least, at least 85 percent. We'll give Paul Baum 15 percent for the years and the efforts for not -- for trying not to quit harder, for trying to not quit earlier. Other than that, think about what they did to keep him smoking. Think about Robert Heimann's deposition.
By the way, by the way, Mr. Brenner from Philip Morris got up here and said, Well, a lawyer
from Mr. Sloman's firm went up to Dr. Baum show him a lineup like a criminal lineup as though getting Philip Morris is going to help the case.
How in the world does that help the case? He is smoking. Does it matter whether it's Philip Morris? Does it matter whether it's Liggett? Does it matter whether it's R.J. Reynolds? He's smoking their brands. So throwing Marlboro in doesn't help the case. It's just another player.
By the way, Philip Morris through -- not only through The Tobacco Institute, not only through the other tobacco companies -- remember they got together. They conspired. They agreed with one another.
Those statements, those stupid statements, those wrong headed, dumb statements that they keep referring to that they don't address, that they can't defend, okay, it's not that we're trying to prove Paul Baum watched them process them and then acted according to them.
That's not the point. The point is those were their statements. That is what their attitude was. That's what they wanted people to do.
These weren't some low level executives who just by chance were caught off guard on a British
news show.
The fraud occurred in that the British news show wasn't supposed to telecast it, not that -they didn't doctor anything. They didn't break in like a wire -- like a Watergate burglar.
MR. BRENNER: Objection, Your Honor. None of that is in evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled. It's argument.
MR. SLOMAN: In terms of -- the, quote, unquote, fraud, they weren't -- there was nothing about what they said which was contradictory to what their company policies were and what the internal information that they had.
They weren't -- what they were saying publicly was not -- was totally contradicting everything internally.
In other words, they weren't -- and Mr. Brenner brought this out. In order to rely on something, Mr. Baum knew all this information.
Well, what was being concealed was what the tobacco companies knew, that smoking caused cancer, that smoking caused a variety of diseases and smoking was addictive.
That's what was being concealed. And what they were putting out there was the exact opposite
of that information.
So when Mr. Coleman says, Cigarettes are not hazardous and we can eliminate any ingredient. And when Mr. Coleman says, Cigarettes are not unsafe. And when Mr. Bowling says, I'm concerned about unsubstantiated claims, and we can eliminate things in cigarettes. And until they identify cancer, people should just keep smoking. These are in the '70s.
Then to make matters even worse, is that the other Philip Morris representative, Mr. Wakeham, who by the way had prepared a document which you have in evidence, Exhibit 107, and in it he identifies -- this was from 1961 where he identifies carcinogens in cigarettes and actually points to the evidence linking cancer in tobacco, 1961.
He says it's based on two points:
Statistical and physiological tests.
This was something they didn't give to the Surgeon General. This was confidential. This is Exhibit 107. This was something that they concealed. This is something that they kept from the public.
And had they turned it over to the public,
there would have been no need for a Surgeon General's committee. There would have been no need for a Surgeon General's Report because there wouldn't have been a controversy.
Okay? So addicted smokers like Paul Baum who by 1961 had been smoking for 14 years, two or three packs a day. You think maybe he would have had a chance to quit by then?
So what did that have to do with Philip Morris? It had all to do with Philip Morris. It had all to do with Liggett. It had all to do with RJR.
Because it was the same message being -either coming out of the mouths of the executives or coming out of the mouths of the minions or coming out of the mouths of the front companies: TIRC, The Tobacco Institute and the CTR.
And then with regard to these thousands of studies that have been paid for by the Tobacco Industry Research Committee and the CTR, there are only a handful that had anything to do with smoking and cancer and smoking and addiction.
Mr. Bassett points out one. That was one. Then they denigrated it, they ridiculed it, they pooled it. The point is, they never embraced any
of these studies, even though they were paying for them. That's what they asked Mr. Heimann during his deposition.
Because it was pointed out in his deposition -THE COURT: 5 minutes.
MR. SLOMAN: -- there were even tobacco industry studies that confirm that, and he didn't recognize it. He was the one that said the Surgeon General was dead wrong.
So I want to get to the verdict form because, of course, they check "no" on everything. I guess I'll check "yes" on everything.
Did Mr. Baum have COPD? Obviously. Was he addicted? Obviously he was addicted.
Did he manifest before November 21, '96? Obviously he did. There is no contrary evidence that Mr. Baum developed COPD before it.
On the issue of whether smoking cigarettes a legal cause of Paul Baum's COPD? It was all of their cigarettes. Whether you want to credit Irving Baum's testimony that it was Philip Morris at that time, that's up to you. You think that Irving Baum had made this up?
So it's RJR cigarettes instead of
Liggett's -- or instead of PM cigarettes. I don't care. If there was none -- if it wasn't Philip Morris, it was the others. Okay?
So the point being that it did no good to slip in Marlboro at that time. That was his testimony. That is what he remembered. So that's what the record says.
In terms of: Was COPD a legal cause of his death? It's whether it was a substantial cause of his death. It doesn't have to be the only cause.
It can operate in combination with other things.
We believe that the evidence is clear that that was -- COPD was a substantial cause of his death, and that would actually enure to the detriment of the amount, $25 million. That amount is what I suggested in terms of Paul Baum's pain and suffering.
But I pointed out to you that we believe the evidence is clear that Paul Baum died from COPD, so it will be Rachel Baum's pain and suffering.
So it will be the lesser amounts that I indicated before, and hopefully you wrote down.
The point being that Mr. -By the way, none of the defendants came up with an alternate to determine damages. So all
they did was say, You will never get to that. And said, Well, in order to justify that, the plaintiff has to meet her burden of proof.
Well, the burden of proof is the greater weight of the evidence. It's not some -- it's not beyond a reasonable doubt. It's just 51 percent.
So when you're considering whether he's addicted, when you're considering whether or not he had COPD, think of it in terms of the plaintiff not having to prove it beyond and to the exclusion of a reasonable doubt. It's 51 percent.
Clearly, we have met that burden.
Now, in terms of -- I went through the wrongful death claim.
Now, what we have gone over a lot is whether Paul Baum reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by the defendant that intentionally and with fraudulent purpose concealed or omitted a material fact not already known or available to him.
So the idea is that they kept the information and they did not come clean with it.
They did -- imagine a major auto manufacture knowing that 3 0 percent of their cars blow up. And not only do they not come clean with it and tell
the public, but then they go on the offensive and say, You know, it's these people that are operating the car; they are at fault. They are the ones that are responsible.
That's what the tobacco companies did in this case. They concealed the information and then ridiculed the public health authorities and ridiculed the Surgeon General and denied it and created doubt.
So that is the reliance that we are seeking. That is manifested by Paul Baum's statement to his brother. It's also manifested by the fact that he never tried to quit before then because he obviously was believing what the tobacco companies wanted him to believe. In which they didn't admit until 2 0 0 0.
So we get to: Did he reasonably rely? Yes, as to all. Did he reasonably rely on -- to his detriment on any statement that defendant intentionally and with fraudulent purpose concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available? This is the agreement. Yes, as to all.
Then with regard to the percentage of fault. As I indicated, at most, 15 percent for Paul Baum
and then -- it must be 100 percent, and you can fill in the rest as to the other defendants.
Then the total amount of damages sustained by Rachel Baum. That's what we believe the evidence shows.
The damages for Rachel Baum, not Paul. But if you believe that he died of something else, then it's going to be much higher.
So as far as punitive damages go, as far as punitive damages go, once you find that Paul Baum reasonably relied to his detriment, then you're going to be asked: Is the plaintiff entitled to punitive damages? You should mark yes, because the conduct was intentional.
This was not dumb headed statements. The fact that they didn't even respond to any of this information that they were responsible for for over 50 years. It wasn't some mistake. It wasn't for a year or two.
THE COURT: Mr. Sloman.
MR. SLOMAN: It was for 50 years. So it was intentional. You should mark "yes" entitlement to punitive damages.
Thank you very much.
