MR. BASSETT: Yes. I will shoot for less.
May it please the Court, counsel. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I hope you had a nice but brief lunch.
This is, of course, the defense opportunity to give its closing argument. I am going to go first on behalf of the defendants.
In the course of the last three weeks you have served as jurors. You have been very diligent. You have been very attentive. I think, even though it's been a hard fought case, the one thing that Mr. Sloman and I, and the other defense lawyers can agree with, is how thankful we are for your service. We appreciate that.
I hope you have, in return, learned a little bit more about how this system works, how trials
get put on, how citizens come in and serve as jurors to judge facts.
As Judge Dresnick said in the beginning of the case, that for our process to work, there is no greater service as citizens than serving as jurors, except serving in the armed forces to protect the freedoms we enjoy in this country that includes trial by jurors.
I also hope you know by now a little bit about how this system works in trial. Before we all came here, both sides got an opportunity to meet with witnesses, take depositions of witnesses to try to understand what those witnesses would be testifying about when they came into the courtroom.
It was our obligation as the lawyers representing our clients, for both sides, that if a witness said something that was different than what they may have said in the deposition, to bring that to your attention. Or if that witness may not have remembered what they may have said at that deposition, to bring that to your attention.
Because as Judge Dresnick said, you're the judge of the facts of the case. And part of judging the facts of the case is also looking at the demeanor and the credibility and the
believability of the witnesses that came in to testify.
So that is part of the process of the case. That is part of the process of preparing a case, as well as pulling together all of the documents that you saw during the course of the case. There are a lot of documents.
A lot of those documents will be going back with you into the jury room as you look at the evidence and judge the facts, apply those facts to the issues in the case to answer the various questions that you have on that verdict form that Judge Dresnick went over with you earlier.
So what am I going to do for my closing argument? Well, I told you at the opening statement I was going to try to do a roadmap of what the case was about, what I expected the evidence to show during the course of the case and how that evidence would apply to the issues you're going to have to decide as jurors.
So now that we have the evidence, I want to walk you through what that evidence was, how it does, in fact, relate to the issues in the case to help you answer the questions you need to answer on that verdict form.
I think I told you in the beginning of the opening statement that this case -I still can't figure out the electronics.
Give me a minute. There we go.
That this was a case of Paul Baum. When it came to this case of Engle, that case is over and done with. Those issues have been decided by a different jury. You have been sitting for the last two weeks listening to evidence concerning the case of Paul Baum.
Now, that's where we're going to spend our closing, our time in the closing argument.
Before I get there, I think I need to address a couple of issues that you heard from Mr. Sloman in his closing argument.
The first deals with advertising, because you saw through evidence a number of advertisements.
You saw Mr. Sloman bring back those advertisements in closing. In fact, he spent some, by my count,
20	to 25 minutes talking about advertising.
But, in fact, as part of that discussion, he even talked about Robert Heimann. Robert Heimann and his testimony about Pall Mall cigarettes, a cigarette brand that Mr. Baum never even smoked.
You have to ask the question, why are we
talking about advertising, particularly when we know from the evidence that the advertising and marketing of cigarettes is legal. It was legal throughout the time that Paul Baum smoked.
As you heard from Dr. Proctor -- and we'll talk more about Dr. Proctor's testimony -- he told you, advertising for cigarettes during the period that Paul Baum smoked was like advertising for other products.
Just as cigarettes were advertised in magazines and newspapers and billboards, so were other products during that time.
More importantly, there is no evidence in this case, and we'll talk about the witnesses and what they had to say about Paul Baum smoking and the fact that he did not start smoking or continue smoking based on any advertising that has been presented in the case.
More importantly, when it comes to advertising, remember what the Judge told you about advertising as it relates to the case.
"The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity. Therefore, I instruct you that defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes . "
Okay? So why did you hear so much about advertising, why is Mr. Sloman spending so much time in his closing and during the course of the case on advertising?
We may get to that later, but you're going to have to ask yourself as you see the evidence that actually got presented during the course of the trial.
Now, these are the five key facts I laid out for you in the opening statement; five key facts that I believe were appropriate from the evidence that we expect to present that will answer the issues you have to resolve in this case.
I think these five facts, in fact, are still the key facts and were presented through the evidence.
One, Mr. Baum didn't start or continue smoking because of anything the tobacco companies said or did. All the witnesses spoke to that.
We'll review exactly what they had to say about it.
Mr. Baum, in fact, was warned throughout his life about the dangers of addictiveness of smoking.
Despite knowing those dangers of smoking, he continued to smoke for more than 4 0 years without ever trying to quit.
In fact, as you know from the evidence, he smoked from 1948 to 1992, 1993, without even contemplating quitting smoking, even despite knowing that smoking was dangerous.
Mr. Baum also always had the ability to quit. We know that from how he is characterized by the witnesses as a person. We know that from the testimony of Dr. Torres, and even Dr. Pitchenik, when it comes to the ability of smokers to quit smoking, even those who may be categorized as addictive.
Mr. Baum didn't quit because we also know he enjoyed his smoking. That's the testimony that we heard during the course of the trial.
Finally, Mr. Baum did not have COPD caused by smoking. That, I think, came through loud and clear during the course of the trial through the evidence.
In fact, I heard some, frankly, stunning statements and admissions by Mr. Sloman in his closing argument that we'll talk about in just a minute.
Those are still the five key facts of the case. Those are still the five key facts that we'll have to -- allow you to answer the questions
on the verdict form.
I showed you this hurdle at the beginning, and this is where we'll start the closing argument. Because the first issue that you have to address as part of plaintiff's claims in the case is whether Mr. Baum was a member of the Engle class.
As the Judge has instructed you, that requires plaintiff to prove each of these elements. The first being that Paul Baum -- plaintiff must prove that Paul Baum suffered or died from COPD caused by smoking. We talked a little bit about that in the opening.
Mr. Sloman addressed that briefly in his closing. There are really two independent claims here. On the one hand, plaintiff is seeking to prove Mr. Baum had COPD caused by smoking and died from that COPD.
But then they are saying if they can't prove that, that he just had COPD itself. We're going to talk about the evidence of that.
Second, plaintiff has to prove Mr. Baum was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes.
Third, plaintiff also has to prove that any addiction to nicotine was, in fact, a legal cause of Paul Baum's COPD.
So each of those three hurdles, plaintiff has to present evidence to prove those elements before you even get to this question of class membership and we can go on to the other claims.
Now, I want to tell you, I don't think we get over the very first hurdle. But I have an obligation as a lawyer representing a client to address each and every one of the jury questions that you will take back to the jury room with you. That's what we plan to do.
For this very first question, I am going to let my partner, Mr. Hohnbaum, address the very first question of legal -- or excuse me, medical causation, whether or not the plaintiff has proven that Paul Baum suffered or died from COPD caused by smoking.
Then after he walks you through the evidence on this medical issue that plaintiff is trying to prove, I will come back, and I'm going to address these other hurdles, if you will, for Engle class membership, as well as the other claims plaintiff asserted in the case.
So let me introduce Mr. Hohnbaum to you now. Tradeoff our clicker.



MR. HOHNBAUM: May it please the Court,
counsel, members of the jury.
There are 40 -- over 46,000 pages of medical records in this case over the course of Mr. Baum's treatment for many, many medical conditions.
He saw 268 doctors. Among the specialists he saw and who cared for him in one way or another were: 102 radiologists, 47 cardiologists, and 29 pulmonologists.
We would all grow old in this courtroom.
Mr. Sloman and Ms. Kessler and defense counsel presented all of those records to you during this trial.
So what happens naturally enough, Mr. Sloman and Ms. Kessler, they pick the documents and the medical records that support their side of the case. That is, that Mr. Baum had a condition called COPD and that he suffered and died from that condition.
The plaintiff's exhibits that they introduced are right here (indicating) on the medical records. This is their composite, Exhibit 203. I don't know, maybe 2 inches.
Those boxes over there, those 12 boxes you see, those are the over 46,000 pages of medical records.
That leaves you in a little bit of a tough spot, right? Because we present evidence to you, naturally enough, that supports our view of the case, namely that Mr. Baum did not have a condition called COPD and couldn't have either suffered nor died from that disease.
So you're sitting here. You have a fraction of the medical records of Mr. Baum. Now, you could and we have put all of those documents into evidence. We did it, not the plaintiff. We put all those documents into evidence.
And if you want to go back there and you think you see a record of something we presented or something that they have presented, you want to see something before or something after, you can certainly do that.
What I want to encourage you to do, because of the vastness and the scope of Mr. Baum's medical problems and the medical records in this case, is to simply trust your own two eyes.
I want to show you a picture, an image from Mr. Baum's CT scan from December 13, 2001. This is the image that the doctors at Massachusetts General looked at and decided that they needed to try to fix this condition called tracheomalacia and
perform life-threatening surgery on Mr. Baum to fix it.
This is what Mr. Baum's doctors, both in Miami, because remember he had a bronchoscopy, a couple bronchoscopies in Miami in the fall of 2001, and then he went up to Massachusetts General and they did a CT scan.
This is how Mr. Baum's doctors described his tracheomalacia and what was going on with the images that they saw.
It was obliterating the tracheal lumen. Remember the lumen is just the inside portion. Right?
It was a slit-like opening. It was 90 percent collapsed. It was 2 to 3 millimeters from the front to the back measured.
Here is what plaintiff's experts -plaintiff's expert said about it, Dr. Pitchenik, "moderate collapse" is how he described it in his testimony.
Dr. Karidas on the stand said he looked at those images and didn't find any tracheomalacia.
But the doctors at Massachusetts General looking at this image and others like it decided to perform surgery on Mr. Baum.
Now, let's be clear. This was not a run of the mill surgery. This is what Dr. Wright -Dr. Wright was the surgeon that performed the surgery. This is what Dr. Wright said -- warning Mr. Baum about the dangers of the surgery.
He says: He -- that's Mr. Baum -understands that there could be serious complications after this operation. There could be a real chance of death and that Mr. Baum both understands and accepts those risks.
Now, you also remember the record where we showed you before, it's in this same letter, where the doctor says, Look, if we don't think the trachea collapse is causing Mr. Baum's problems, we're not going to do the surgery.
Then they go look at the CT scan. What do they determine? They determine to risk this man's life, to risk his life, to perform this surgery; and they would only do that if the tracheomalacia was causing this man's problems.
Why else would you do life-threatening surgery unless it was going to solve the problem? That's what they thought would happen. That's exactly why they did the surgery.
Plaintiff I think acknowledges that Mr. Baum
had tracheomalacia despite the fact that Dr. Karidas stood up here and told you on the stand that he didn't find tracheomalacia. So they say this image and the problems that the doctors saw caused -- is emblematic diagnostic tracheomalacia. They acknowledge that.
Here is where we differ, and differ dramatically. The plaintiff would have you believe that the surgery fixed Mr. Baum's tracheomalacia. They want you to believe that because the condition caused by tracheomalacia, the problems caused by tracheomalacia, are the same problems that Mr. Baum had.
So if his tracheomalacia wasn't fixed, then it explains why he continued to have the problems that led to the surgery in the first place.
Just talking about the experts. We had Dr. Karidas say there was no tracheomalacia. We had Dr. Pitchenik who they called to the stand -and Dr. Pitchenik read CTs scans in his practice.
He said he does. He reads them regularly.
Dr. Pitchenik didn't take the time in this case to read any -- to look at any of the scans themselves. All he looked at were the medical records associated with those scans.
Ask yourself why Dr. Pitchenik didn't take the time to actually look at the scans, both from this period of time in '04 and '08 and '09 and '10 and '11.
The evidence in this case with your own eyes establishes that Mr. Baum's tracheomalacia was not fixed. It wasn't fixed.
Here is the image in 2001, which even the plaintiff conceives was tracheomalacia. Here is the image in 2004. Dr. Cole testified that that is more than 50 percent collapsed. I'm looking at it. You judge. It looks a little better to me than it was in 2001, but it still is significantly collapsed based on normal.
Then you look at what it was like in 2008.
To me it looks worse. You be the judge. 2 009 it looks worse. But it's clearly still present.
There is not a single witness from that stand for the plaintiff or anybody else in this case that has looked at those scans and said it's not tracheomalacia, except maybe Dr. Karidas. I was a little confused about where he was. I know he said he didn't have any and then he really couldn't open scans and he wasn't really sure.
Nobody showed you -- it's not like they put
that picture up for Dr. Karidas and said, You know what, Doctor, this looks kind of like what he looked like in 2001. They didn't do that. They didn't do it because you can see with your own two eyes that that trachea is still collapsed. It's collapsed in '08 and it's collapsed in '09. It was collapsed throughout the decade up to 2004.
Now, you already heard from Mr. Sloman that Dr. Wright was delighted with the surgery. That's his term. He was delighted with the surgery.
Do you know how many times Dr. Wright saw Mr. Baum after he wrote that note the day after the surgery? Zero. We don't see -- We don't hear or see from Dr. Wright again.
He went in. He did the surgery. He said, Looks good to me. Then we never hear from him again.
What we do know is that six days after this procedure there was a bronchoscopy and a CT done. You know what it showed? It showed 5.4 millimeters between the front and the back. 2.3 millimeters led to life-threatening surgery. 5.4 millimeters is tracheomalacia. He still had tracheomalacia a week after the surgery. It's still there.
We know in '04 there are references to mild
collapse, moderate, mid range, stuff that was sort of confusing in the records, to me at least.
That's the picture. That's the picture that looks pretty doggone like 2001, and then we see what it looked like in 2008 and 2009.
You don't have to believe anything of what anybody told you on that stand to know that those pictures show what they show.
Now, it's true there is no mention of trachea collapse after 2004. Okay? There is no mention of it. If that's all that was needed was a mention, and I don't have it, well, I would sit down and make Mr. Sloman's life very easy. Right? If no mention in the records means it doesn't exist, if that's what it means, then you have to disbelieve what you can see with your own two eyes.
Now, remember the plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case. We as the defendants don't have to prove anything to you. The plaintiff has to prove every element of their claim.
Now, again, the plaintiff doesn't want you to find that Mr. Baum's tracheomalacia continued after 2001 because the symptoms that are caused by tracheomalacia are the exact symptoms that Mr. Baum had the entire time that is at issue.
He had airway obstruction. He had an inability to clear mucous and secretions that resulted in the buildup of the mucous. He had aspiration. You heard Dr. Klein talk about aspiration. It's all over the records and the records that the plaintiff presented. He had recurrent infection. He had pneumonia.
Mr. Sloman acknowledges that Mr. Baum had bronchiectasis.
I like Dr. Cole's example of a clogged drain. It makes sense to me. If you end up taking a bath or shower and the drain is clogged, it's not going straight down. What happens? All the gunk that falls off our body stays in the shower bed or stays in the bathtub. Right?
That's the stuff that causes -- in the lungs, it's not drained out. That's what gets with the mucous coming out. That's what causes the clearing. That's the cleaning that comes out, it's through the mucous when you cough. Those sort of things. That wasn't happening the way it needed to in Mr. Baum. It caused those problems.
Now, just establishing that he had tracheomalacia doesn't tell the whole story because the plaintiff's theory, in addition to saying that
he had the tracheomalacia fixed, they say that the tracheomalacia was caused in the first place by his COPD. Right? That's the cause of his conditions. The case is about whether or not Mr. Baum had COPD.
So they want you to believe that leading up to the time period of his surgery in 2001 that what was causing his problems and what ultimately caused the tracheomalacia was COPD.
Now, that requires you to think hard about what evidence do you have about this man's medical condition and what was going on with him in the late 1990s -- mid to late 1990s, right?
If you have some COPD and it's causing you to cough so significantly and it's inflammatory and you're coughing for such an intensely and for such a long period of time it causes a collapse of the trachea and the main stem bronchi, that is a serious problem.
Here is what we know. We know that Loren Baum testified -- and Loren Baum, he was doing other things, but this is a close-knit family. I think we can agree on that. Mr. Baum was living in Miami throughout the 1990s, early 2 000s.
He testified that his father did not show significant signs of breathing problems until when
he was in his MBA school. I asked him. I said, What are the dates, because I was confused. He told you the dates. It was 1990 to 2000 is when he got his MBA.
He testified his father didn't have significant signs of breathing problems. And he testified that -- everybody has testified that Mr. Baum worked throughout the 1990s. There was some testimony that sort of in that -- clearly when he went up and had his problems at Mass general in '01 or so, we know he had to have flown down.
But what we know is he worked his demanding job until 2003. How do we know that? Because Loren Baum did not take over the business until 2003. Right?
Mrs. Baum up to that point in time was a full-time teacher. She was working. So Mr. Baum was working throughout the 1990s and doing his job until 2003 when Loren took over the business.
Now, the first medical record we have is from 1997. We don't have anything before that. There is testimony that he was diagnosed in '92. We don't have those records.
The first PFT, pulmonary function test -- we heard a lot about pulmonary function test. We saw
lots of different formulas and ski slopes and plateaus and all the rest of that stuff.
What is clear is that PFT shows that there is obstruction. It doesn't show what the cause of that obstruction was.
We, of course, say the cause of that obstruction was tracheomalacia. The tracheomalacia led to recurrent infections, which is a large airway disease. Right? Large airways, the tracheomalacia. Trachea, the large airways.
It leads to small airways disease, right?
You get all that clogging and then you get bronchiectasis and you get pneumonia and it becomes further out, the problem becomes further out.
That's bronchiectasis. That's recurrent infections. That's inability to clear secretions.
The plaintiff's theory is that he had COPD. This is an easy slide. You have seen it before to show the components of COPD.
It is a combination of emphysema and chronic bronchitis. The chronic bronchitis, that is a clinical diagnosis. That means that you're just coughing for three consecutive months for two consecutive years. It's a clinical diagnosis. You don't see it on an X-ray. You talk to the patient.
You say are you having these symptoms? They say, okay. That's chronic bronchitis but it has to exclude other causes. All right?
Let's talk about that for a second.
Dr. Pitchenik, 10 pulmonologists diagnosed Mr. Baum with COPD. I will acknowledge to you, I see COPD a lot in the records that the plaintiff has produced.
Mr. Baum saw 2 9 pulmonologists, 29. You will not see the term chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD, on the 19 other pulmonologists who saw Mr. Baum.
Now, this is not a weighting game. They just made the point 10, 10 diagnosed him with COPD. If that's the game for them, the fact of the matter is, 19 didn't use that term.
What else do we know about COPD? We know that not a single doctor that told him -- told Mr. and Mrs. Baum he had COPD, not one of those 10, not any other doctor told him was his condition was specifically caused by smoking, not a single doctor.
We'll get to that, why I think that is in a second. It has to do with emphysema. What people most think about when they think about somebody that smokes, they think he has emphysema.
What does Dr. Pitchenik say? Dr. Pitchenik says, chronic bronchitis, which is one of the elements of COPD. Well, chronic bronchitis does not cause collapse of the trachea. That's Dr. Pitchenik's testimony.
The condition that they are seeking damages for and that their case is built around is COPD. Chronic bronchitis is an element of that. It does not cause the trachea to collapse.
Look, I have to tell you, we as lawyers, we hear all this evidence. Last night I guarantee you Mr. Sloman was up late. We were up late. We're trying to put everything together. We don't know exactly what the other side is going to say.
Right? We're not sure.
We think we know but we don't know until we get here what they are going to say. We have our view of the evidence. We're like you. We sit and look at the evidence. We have to make our own decisions about how it is coming in and what impact things are making. Right?
So this was stunning to me. I will tell you it simply answers the question that you have to decide today.
The chart that I showed you says what? You
have to have emphysema and you have to have chronic bronchitis. It's a combination of the two.
Mr. Sloman put this slide up. The persistent air flow limitation characteristic of COPD is caused by a mixture of small airways disease obstructive bronchiolitis -- and then I can't pronounce that next word -- parenchimal -- I don't know what that word is actually -- but it's shorthand for emphysema. Look, words mean something, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. They mean something.
What Mr. Sloman is telling you is exactly what we're telling you, that to have COPD you have to have a mixture, a combination of small airway disease, obstructive bronchiolitis, and -- and emphysema.
The stunning admission that we heard -- I was waiting for it all trial -- was: Is there going to be testimony that Mr. Baum had emphysema?
The stunning admission from Mr. Sloman, standing right before you, is what? I wrote it down. There is no evidence that Mr. Baum had emphysema. The only radiologist that you heard from -- and emphysema is diagnosed by a radiologist, it's a CT scan. The only radiologist
you heard from confirms that. That's Dr. Cole.
Mr. Baum did not have emphysema. You have to have both.
That partly explains to me at least the references to COPD throughout the records. It's a catchall phrase as Dr. Klein testified. When somebody has these conditions, these problems in the lung, it's easy to just call it COPD.
Although, we don't see any reference to emphysema; it's a catchall phrase. That's why the term COPD is used in the medical records.
The first issue that you're going to have to decide when you get back into the jury room, you're going to have a verdict form. The judge is going to give you a verdict form.
The first question on that verdict form -can you see that okay? Now can you see it? Everybody see it? Okay.
The first question: Did Mr. Baum have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? The answer to that question is no.
You will see if you answer that question no, you should proceed no further except to sign and date the verdict form.
But as Mr. Bassett said, Our obligation is to
go through all of the claims in the case. So I want to do that. I have a couple more things to touch on.
We spent time talking about what caused the tracheomalacia. Again, we don't have the burden of proof. We don't have a burden to prove anything to you.
The fact of the matter is, though, that the evidence establishes that Mr. Baum had what is called relapsing polychondritis. That is what caused his tracheomalacia.
Look, this is the normal picture of what the trachea ought to look like. Even Dr. Karidas acknowledged that.
Do you see -- We described it as smooth imperceptible wall. Do you see how smooth and imperceptible this is right here? That's the cartilage. Smooth and imperceptible.
Relapsing polychondritis is thickening, sparing the posterior. Sparing down in here.
Right? That's the picture.
Now, Dr. Cole showed you a couple of images. This was one of them. Does that wall look smooth and imperceptible to you? Does this look like this? Of course it doesn't. All you have to look
is your two eyes.
Here is what happened: Dr. Karidas got here up on the stand yesterday. What did he say? There is no relapsing polychondritis. What the plaintiff want you to do is just believe it. Why? Well, because he said so. Because they didn't show him any images, did they?
Did Dr. Karidas say, I have looked -- I have seen right here. Let me show you what I mean. Let me show you. Let me compare and tell you why it's not relapsing polychondritis. Did he do that? He didn't do that.
That's because it would require him to actually look at these pictures and come in and tell you that this picture looks like that picture. It doesn't.
So they put him up on the stand. He says he didn't have it. He hopes that you will believe him. The plaintiff hopes you will believe him just because he's on the stand telling it to you.
This does not look like this. This is relapsing polychondritis. It caused Mr. Baum's tracheomalacia.
Dr. Karidas also, just lets put this into perspective, says he didn't have relapsing
polychondritis. You know what else he says he didn't have? Tracheomalacia. He didn't have tracheomalacia. Not tracheomalacia. Didn't have relapsing polychondritis.
You have got to judge for yourself, as the judge said, what credibility to give Dr. Karidas on this point or any other point.
This was a man who when given the option, when knowing what the assignment was: I'm supposed to find he didn't have relapsing polychondritis.
He knew what his assignment was right when he got it. It's not like he was given the records and supposed to come up with his own impressions. He was told what the issue was.
What did he do? Did he go consult a textbook? Did he go consult a learned journal to get a picture of it?
No. What did he do? He Googled it. He got it from some article in Korea and didn't even read the article.
One more thing on this. You see these little white areas here, that white? It's really big and white there. Remember Dr. Cole, he stood right here and he told you what those were. He told you those were calcifications. You remember what
Dr. Karidas said? There were no calcifications in Mr. Baum's trachea, none. He didn't have any calcifications.
Did he show you a picture? No, he didn't show you a picture. Why didn't he show you a picture? Because he would have to try to explain that and there is no way to do that.
I want to switch gears. I'm sure I have taken more time than I am supposed to. Mr. Bassett is shaking his head. We have sort of an allotted time. He is not going to be happy.
Look, Mr. Baum had a lot of problems, a lot of problems. This is the discharge diagnosis.
This was what Mr. -- Dr. Bernstein, his physician, wrote after he died: Discharge diagnosis, 23 medical conditions.
Now, Dr. Pitchenik testified that patients who have COPD often have some of these conditions. He did not testify that COPD causes each and every one of those problems. He didn't testify to that because they don't -- it doesn't.
You can well imagine that if he could come in and say COPD causes all those problems,
Dr. Pitchenik would have come in here and he would have taken this down and he would have explained to
you, this is how COPD causes this problem. This is how COPD causes that problem. He didn't do that.
In fact, there is no reference to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 -- there is no reference to 10, 10 in the record. We get the transcripts and you get to type in. Those words don't show up anywhere. I don't how to pronounce some of those words and certainly nobody pronounced them from the stand for you.
Look, quickly, Mr. Baum did not die from COPD. He didn't have COPD. He didn't have the condition. It requires both chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
So he died of an acute myocardial infarction. This is Dr. Bernstein's death certificate. The notion that everybody dies from a heart attack, which is what a myocardial infarction is, is simply not the case.
Otherwise, why would you even have a death certificate to tell you what people died from?
This man died from myocardial infarction.
What they didn't show you in their case is that Mr. Baum had significant heart issues throughout his life.
In 2005 he had a cardiac catheterization,
which shows that he had coronary artery disease, 80 percent lesion. They put a pacemaker in temporarily to fix the problem when they did the stent. This was in 2005.
In 2007 there is a reference to severe coronary artery calcification. 2011, active problems, problems that he is having: Congestive heart failure, coronary artery disease.
We know that Mr. Baum's father died from a heart attack. We know that Mr. Baum's mother died from a heart attack. We know that Murray Baum, his older brother, at the age of 58 had a quadruple coronary bypass surgery. And we know that Irving Baum, who never smoked, ate well, took care of himself, exercised, he had an angioplasty for a 90 percent, 90 or 95, I can't remember right now, occlusion of the widow maker artery.
Mr. Baum had a significant family history of cardiovascular disease.
If you find that Mr. Baum had COPD, you are also going to have to answer whether or not -- do you see that? Number 5: Was COPD a legal cause of Mr. Baum's death? Do you see that? The answer to that question is no.
Thank you for your attention. I'm going to
turn it back over to Mr. Bassett.



MR. BASSETT: Mr. Hohnbaum and I have told you, you can stop at that first question because the evidence is overwhelming that he didn't have COPD caused by smoking.
We're obligated, though, for our clients, to go through each of these issues. So that's what I'm going to do, pick up from where he left off.
And I'm going to move more quickly because he left me less time than I was expecting. We're going to keep moving through it.
The next issue that plaintiff would have to prove if you were to find from the evidence that he had COPD caused by smoking, is that he was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
Mr. Sloman spent a fair bit of time talking about that in his closing statement.
Let's talk about what you didn't hear from Mr. Sloman. Because when Mr. Sloman got up here and gave you an opening statement, he promised to bring you his world renowned expert on nicotine addiction called Neil Benowitz.
And throughout the last two weeks you haven't seen, you haven't heard from Neil Benowitz, this world renowned expert who is going to present
testimony about nicotine and testimony about addiction on this issue.
Now, I can't tell you why Mr. Sloman didn't present to you the testimony of Neil Benowitz. I can tell you that it wasn't because Neil Benowitz wasn't available because he also told you he was on videotape. He was going to play the videotape about that testimony.
But he decided not to. He decided not to present that testimony to you. Instead, what did he do? Dr. Pitchenik, the pulmonologist who has been retired for three years, who doesn't -- did not have a career treating people with behavioral disorders, including addictions, came in to testify about this issue of addiction.
What did he tell you? He told you what I would consider circular reasoning. He told you that if you have someone who smokes every day, smokes for a period of time, they are going to be addicted.
In fact, if they don't try to quit smoking, that just shows how addicted they are.
Now, you will have to judge for yourself to weigh all that testimony and whether Dr. Pitchenik would say, Well, if someone did try to quit and
relapsing back into tobacco, does that mean they are not addicted or does that mean they are less addicted?
We also know and I think you would know that what he also told you from the stand is, he, over the years treated patients with pulmonary conditions that included smokers. And initially I thought I heard him say he considered every single one of them addicted.
When I had a chance to ask him about that, he said, Oh -- he hedged. He said, No, no, no. I didn't mean to suggest every one but the vast, vast majority were addicted. So that's where Dr. Pitchenik comes out on this issue of nicotine addiction.
And, of course, what did he bring to you? He brought to you different criteria that he never used at the time he was practicing pulmonary medicine, that he only brings into the courtroom when he is testifying in a case like this.
I told you I was going to bring you a board-certified psychiatrist and I did, Dr. Torres. Dr. Torres, that's what he does day in and day out. He diagnoses and treats people with behavioral disorders.
We had a lot of discussion about this DSM.
The DSM-V. Dr. Torres was the only witness to testify to you as a doctor, board-certified psychiatrist, who uses that DSM day in and day out to diagnose patients with behavioral disorders, to include addictions.
Dr. Torres looked at the case, looked at the information available to you. He talked about conflicting information, some of the conflicting information that I talked to you about that gets developed before the case comes to trial.
He gave you his best assessment under that DSM-V criteria for tobacco use disorder. He concluded that Mr. Baum didn't meet the criteria under the DSM for nicotine addiction.
He is the only expert in actual substance abuse to be in this courtroom to testify.
Mr. Sloman can address why we didn't hear anything from Neil Benowitz but we didn't.
There was some agreement, though, between Dr. Pitchenik and Dr. Torres about nicotine. You saw this chart from Dr. Torres. Dr. Pitchenik agreed that when it came to how nicotine acts on the brain, there are many other substances that are much more powerful to the brain, substances like
methamphetamine, like cocaine, even alcohol.
They release much more dopamine, the reward pathway, than nicotine. Nicotine, as you can see from the graph, there is no dispute over this, acts on the brain similar to caffeine, similar to caffeine.
There is also some other agreement when we talk about nicotine and nicotine addiction. First off, nicotine addiction doesn't interfere with one's cognitive abilities. Remember what we talked about with -- and Dr. Pitchenik agreed, you don't get intoxicated when you're smoking and you have nicotine.
Unlike alcohol, unlike cocaine, unlike methamphetamine you still can understand information that is being provided to you. And nicotine addiction doesn't prevent you from making decisions based on that information being given to you.
Dr. Torres and Dr. Pitchenik also agreed to this. That nicotine addiction doesn't prevent smokers from quitting smoking.
More than 50 million smokers have quit smoking and they had to both agree that over -half of those smokers would fit that DSM diagnosis
for nicotine addiction.
So when you're thinking about in this case whether or not plaintiff has proven that Mr. Baum was addicted to nicotine and cigarettes, look at what was presented to you both by plaintiff and by the defense and, likewise, what was not presented to you.
Plaintiff hasn't proven -- and they have the burden to prove -- Mr. Baum was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. Of course, that's the second hurdle.
We have the third hurdle. These questions on your verdict form are combined. Before I go to the verdict form and show that question to you, I'm going to talk about both of these issues.
The second part of this question on the verdict form is plaintiff proving that an addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of Paul Baum's COPD.
The first issue you have to understand is what does "legal cause" mean? How do you understand if addiction can be a legal cause without understanding what legal cause is?
The Judge tells us from the law what legal cause is: Establishing legal cause under this very question, you have to show that the addiction
directly and natural continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing COPD, that it can reasonably be said that but for his addiction, his COPD would not have occurred.
What is that last sentence? In other words, plaintiff must prove that, but for Mr. Baum's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, he would not have developed COPD.
So if there are other reasons -- and you find he had COPD and there are other reasons he developed that COPD, if there are other reasons he was smoking beyond that addiction, it can't be but for the addiction that he developed COPD. No legal cause.
That is what the Judge's -- that's what the law is on this issue. That's how you need to interpret the evidence that has been presented to you.
Here is how we look at it: Under the evidence, did Paul Baum have the ability to quit smoking but chose to continue smoking or, as the plaintiff would have to prove, did nicotine addiction control him such that he had no choice no matter how hard he tried but to continue smoking until he developed COPD?
That's the "but for legal causation."
What is the evidence on this question? What is the evidence that you heard over the last two weeks?
Well, the first place to start is knowing that more than 50 million people have quit smoking and that millions and millions of those were themselves addicted, judged to be addicted to nicotine but they quit.
So the natural question is: How does 50 million of those smokers who quit, millions of which were addicted, stack up to the evidence you have heard about Mr. Baum and his smoking behavior and his efforts to quit smoking?
What does the evidence tell you that made him somehow different than the 50 million who quit?
Well, was it the cigarettes? Was he smoking cigarettes different from the cigarettes that those 50 or more million people who quit smoked? There is no evidence of that.
Was it that somehow his brain was being affected differently by nicotine than those more than 50 million smokers who quit? Again, there is no evidence of that.
In fact, the evidence was that the nicotine
acted on the brain just as any other smoker would have.
Was he, Mr. Baum, exposed to advertising that was somehow different to smokers that quit? No.
Did he receive different statements from tobacco companies than those other smokers? No.
Did he smoke longer or more than those other smokers? You heard from Dr. Proctor who agreed that millions and millions of those smokers who quit were very heavy smokers, very heavy smokers. No.
In fact, was Mr. Baum somehow different from Loren who came in to testify that he was a smoker? He quit. He quit when he got motivated to quit.
No.
What made Mr. Baum different was that he chose to smoke, and the evidence shows he chose to smoke because he enjoyed smoking.
Dr. Baum told you just that. Loren, his son, told you that when he was smoking, that he would let the family come talk to him about his smoking until -- he was going to give them lip service to get them off the back until at a certain point he would just say, leave me alone at this point.
Even Dr. Pitchenik admitted, first off, you
can't quit smoking unless you try to quit. Maybe the only other admission that Dr. Pitchenik was willing to state outright, you can't quit smoking unless you try to quit.
When it came to Mr. Baum, he saw no evidence that Mr. Baum ever expressed any feelings, any interest in quitting until he was diagnosed with a respiratory condition in 1990s. At that point he was told by doctors to quit smoking.
44 years he smoked without ever trying to quit, without ever expressing an interest in quitting.
That's what 44 years of smoking represents. You will judge what those -- that testimony was about the efforts to quit smoking after 1992.
You heard the testimony four, five, six efforts. But when it came down to it, the real testimony was about four times Mr. Baum tried to quit smoking between 1992 and 2000, over eight years.
Once when the doctors recommended the nicotine patch to him. Once when he was using nicotine gum. Two times cold turkey. And no more than a week, no more than a week did he stop smoking.
When you look at that evidence about those efforts to quit smoking, look at what they mean in terms of, as Dr. Torres said, his motivation to quit -- was he motivated to quit -- because motivation is the most important factor in determining whether someone is going to be able to quit smoking.
He's using the patch. He knows he is not supposed to smoke while using the patch. He never put down the cigarette. Even while using the patch, he continues to smoke.
He does the same with the gum.
Even over that time he quit cold turkey for a week, what is the testimony about what happens over the course of that week? Is the testimony that he experienced terrible withdrawal symptoms, that he had cravings that repeatedly forced him back to smoking? No.
The testimony: He may have been a little edgy. May have had a little bit of increased appetite.
Dr. Torres talked to you about what withdrawal symptoms from nicotine are like and that when it comes to quitting smoking for some smokers, yes, the withdrawal symptoms can be significant and
you have to fight through those withdrawal symptoms. You have to be motivated to quit smoking.
Does the evidence tell you that someone like Paul Baum was motivated to quit smoking on those times?
What else do we know about whether Paul Baum could have quit smoking? Well, this is the one piece of evidence you saw before the case even began, because it's plaintiff's own admission about the fault of Paul Baum.
The plaintiff has admitted that his acts in not trying hard enough, not trying long enough to quit smoking were themselves a partial legal cause of his own COPD and death.
Now, that says a lot in that admission. But let's unpackage it and let's talk about what it really means.
First off, if you're going to come in and prove that you had an addiction that was so significant it controlled your smoking and forced you to smoke against your will until you got COPD, what would you expect that evidence to be? That you tried over and over and over again to quit, that you went to cessation clinics, that you sought
counseling, that you repeatedly were out doing everything you could to quit smoking, that you were frustrated, that you were angry over your inability to quit by your continuing smoking.
But that's not any of the evidence in this case. None of that evidence you heard from the stand through any of the witnesses in the case. That's because what this admission means is, to be a partial legal cause, they're admitting that Mr. Baum had the ability to quit smoking had he only tried harder, had he only tried more frequently.
That's the only thing that this admission can mean because the only way he could be a legal cause of his own COPD and death is if he had the ability to quit but never followed through on that ability to actually quit until it was too late.
What does that also mean? It also means that he had and he knew that smoking was bad for him. That he knew that there was a point in time where he needed to quit and he never acted on that to actually try to quit, to follow through on that quitting, to actually quit in order to avoid a COPD and death.
The admission itself tells you that he knew
smoking was bad for him; and had he tried, had he tried hard enough or long enough he could have quit.
One piece of evidence. Does that evidence, that admission make sense here? Of course it does Because what is the evidence you did hear from the stand about Mr. Baum?
First of all, he was intelligent. He was successful. He was an entrepreneur. What does that mean? That means he knew what was going on. He was well informed.
What else did you know? Everybody talked about him being a hard worker, tough guy, strong willed, stubborn.
What does that tell you about his personality? What does it tell you about, if he had the motivation, whether he could have followed through on that?
It tells you he could have, because what did Dr. Torres tell you? He talked about persistence. Persistence is part of the evidence of motivation. Persistence is what it may take to quit smoking.
When it came to Mr. Baum and other parts of his life and particularly his career, he was persistent.
Remember what the stories you heard from the witnesses? He worked his way up from a waiter, construction worker, established his own business as a carpenter, established a real estate business, flipping homes, buying and renovating apartment buildings. That is persistence.
But then ask yourself, what is the evidence that he applied that same level of persistence to quitting smoking, to quitting smoking?
Compare that to the admission you heard from plaintiff in this case that the judge has read to you.
Of course, what do we know also about Mr. Baum from the testimony of witnesses? He is a do as he please guy. He was going to do what he wanted to do. He made his own decisions. When it came to his smoking, those were the decisions he was going to make to continue smoking.
You heard from the witnesses, Loren said -Dr. Baum said he was a do as he please kind of guy. Loren said one of his favorites saying was, Do as I say, not as I do.
You also heard from the witnesses that when they confronted him about his smoking, when they talked to him about quitting, yeah, he would pay
them lip service until he would say, leave me alone. I'm going to make my own decision about smoking.
That is the kind of person he was. That is consistent -- that evidence is consistent with the very reason we have an admission that Mr. Baum himself was a partial legal cause of his COPD because he didn't try hard enough and he didn't try often enough to quit smoking.
When it comes to this question of addiction and addiction causation, the plaintiff has not carried the burden of proof.
When you get to that question on the verdict form -- Before I go there, let me make one other point here because I'm sure Mr. Sloman will come back on this. He touched on it in his closing.
There is a lot of evidence about Yom Kippur, that Mr. Baum -- there is no dispute -- for decades did not smoke for 24 hours of Yom Kippur. He fasted. You upheld his religious convictions to that religious holiday.
What does that mean to this issue of addiction and addiction causation?
What that tells us is the type of person he was that had the persistence, who had the strong
willpower, he, for 24 hours every -- once a year for decades applied that willpower, that persistence to not smoke, to not smoke.
Mr. Sloman said, Oh, he never took a day off from smoking in those years. Yeah, he did. Every year he did for 24 hours.
In fact, not only that, we also know that he put that persistence and willpower to use at times to control his smoking on airplanes and movie theaters and even at worship.
You didn't hear stories he is rushing out in the middle of a service or middle of a movie to have a cigarette because when he wanted to, he could put that willpower to use to control his smoking.
But he never wanted to do that permanently because that is -- he enjoyed his smoking. That's what he wanted to do.
When it comes to this question, this is question number 2: Was Mr. Baum addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his COPD. The answer would be no.
The plaintiff has not carried her burden of proving that issue to you.
That takes us through those questions in dealing with Engle class membership.
Now the next couple of claims in the case as we march through that verdict form: Concealment, conspiracy to conceal. Mr. Sloman has touched on that.
When it comes to this, I showed this in the opening because you will remember plaintiff has to present evidence to link that Engle finding on concealment, that Engle finding on conspiracy to conceal to Mr. Baum. It can't just be out there in the open air. It has to be actual evidence linking some concealment to Mr. Baum.
Of course, you only even get there if you find that Mr. Baum was himself an Engle class member.
As Mr. Hohnbaum pointed out, if we go to that verdict form, if you answer no to question 1, it will tell you to go to the bottom and sign and turn it in.
If you answer no to number two on addiction, addiction causation, it will tell you to sign at the bottom and turn it in.
So this if we get beyond that.
What does the law tell us about this issue of
concealment and conspiracy to conceal?
First off, it tells you that Mr. Baum has to have reasonably relied on some concealment of information.
Importantly, to do that, first off, it tells you that it has to be information that was not known or available to him. In other words, it has to be information that was a secret from him, that he otherwise didn't have available to him; and it has to be such information that is so significant that it was going to have him act differently had he had that information.
What does that mean? Well, it means -- the question for you would be: Does the evidence tell you that Mr. Baum developed COPD because the information about the dangers of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him? Okay?
So the question for you is: What does the evidence tell you about that? You will know that we talked about this with the very first witness, Dr. Proctor.
Dr. Proctor came in. He spent about a day testifying, part of the day one day and most of the next day the following day.
What was he telling you? Well, he was
telling you that somehow people didn't talk about smoking and cancer, cigarettes and cancer before the 1950s. No one was saying anything about smoking and cancer before the 1950s.
In fact, you will remember it was very tedious. I had to bring out different newspaper articles, different periodicals to show him, hold on, Dr. Proctor. If you're saying no one was talking about this, then why do we have textbooks from schools talking about it? Why do we have articles in the New York Times talking about it?
Why do we have periodicals like the Reader's Digest talking about it?
Dr. Proctor -- As you will remember,
Dr. Proctor, in fact, finally conceded. I don't know if you can read that, but he says -- I asked him: The bottom line is Dr. Pearl's study found that smokers die about eight years earlier than nonsmokers.
This was one of the very early studies about the effects of smoking, the dangers of smoking, that smoking leads to premature death, smoking causes cancer.
That's right. And I think you made mention of it but this was a famous study in the annals of
smoking.
Yeah, it was big news. There was really nothing like it before. It got lots of media attention.
It did.
It was even reported in the New York Times?
That's right.
Guess what, that was something published in the 1930s. Okay?
So why is it that Dr. Pearl's study is being picked up by all these publications and spread around if no one is talking about it?
What else did you hear about Dr. Proctor? He is not the biographer of Paul Baum. He wasn't here to talk about Paul Baum. What was he here for? He was a generic expert.
You heard at the very end of his testimony, this was the fourth case he had testified in in the month of August already. He had earned some $75,000 testifying in just the month of August.
He has made $2 million coming into courtrooms like this and testifying the same way over and over and over again. Not talking about specific smokers. Not talking about the case of Paul Baum, but talking generically as a generic expert.
The question really is: What do we know about what Paul Baum had before him about the dangers of addicting to smoking?
Let's start not with the generic expert.
Let's talk with Dr. Baum who testified too in trial.
He testified that smoking wasn't allowed in school because it was dangerous. He testified that he knew about the health hazards of smoking as a teenager in the 1950s when he and his brother Paul were living together.
Dr. Baum also talked about -- In fact, the risks of smoking to him were self-evident by the time he made it to college in the late '60s.
Of course, we know when he finished dental school, he starts educating his patients about the risks of smoking.
Now, what else do we know about the evidence on dangers and addictiveness to smoking? They weren't secret.
Dr. Proctor admitted to all these points, not because it was common knowledge but because it was not secret. It wasn't being hidden from anyone. That for hundreds of years people have been writing and taking about tobacco being bad for your health,
that people have been writing and talking about tobacco being addictive.
School books taught this issue, that smoking was bad for your health and addictive for over a hundred years. And that this term "addiction to smoking" was showing up commonly, he said, in the periodicals of the time starting in the 1850's.
In the 1800s medical journals started picking up on this term "smoker's cancer." Remember we talked about that as it relates to the death of President Grant being picked up, publicized in the news .
Even that the U.S. census had a category for smoker's cancer in order to track deaths over the years and, specifically, by smoker's cancer.
Of course, we had discussions of the public health authorities of the 1800s specifically discussing cigarettes and the fact that they were inhaled.
And the fact that people of the time understood that what made cigarettes uniquely dangerous was that they were inhaled and that that inhalation brought the smoke into the lungs and it absorbed into the body more rapidly.
You remember the New York health department
did a very specific study on just that issue in 1889, on cigarettes being manufactured by none of these defendants, none of these defendants.
Of course, coffin nails. We talked about the slang and what that meant. We specifically talked about how coffin nails was a term that Paul Baum himself used and Dr. Baum remembered that.
Going back to the New York Times -- I'm not going to spend a lot of time on this; these articles are in evidence. You have look at them, read them if you want to.
You can see that starting in -- we got in the early 1900s, 1920s, this discussion in the New York Times. Periodicals talking about the dangers, the addictiveness of smoking.
Again, the New York Times talking about how cigarettes themselves are specifically being linked to lung cancer. This is in the 1940s.
Is any of this a secret? Is any of this being concealed? Of course not.
By 1957 this is what the top public health authorities in the country are saying about how information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking are being disseminated.
Our position is that we have informed the
public through the excellent coverage of press, radio and TV. Dr. Heller, director of the National Cancer Institute. Newspapers, radio, TV and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem; a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public.
Is this a secret? Is this a secret that was unknown or something that was unavailable to Paul Baum?
1964 scientific consensus, smoking causes lung cancer. Smoking causes chronic bronchitis.
We talked about how widely disseminated that '64 report was, the information in it. This is the New York Times front page. Multiple articles inside the paper covering that report.
1966 first warning label goes on cigarettes. Even that itself is news. That itself is news.
We know that this actually becomes something that is discussed by Mrs. Baum. I asked her the question. She remembered that warning.
What was her take away on it? Remember she was not a smoker. Her take away was that that language in that warning meant that cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. Right? That meant that a person should try to stop smoking
because smoking can't be good for them. I imagine the interpretation would be that to anyone, to anyone.
That information wasn't a secret.
Now, let me address -- Let's close out 1968, the end of that decade. I showed you this. We talked to Dr. Proctor about it, the person responsible for distributing information across the United States about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking.
What did he say? You could stand on a top of a rooftop, shout to the top of your lungs smoking is dangerous. You wouldn't be telling anyone anything that they didn't already know.
What was the result of all this information that is coming out? Coming out in the '40s, '50s, '60s? People, smokers are quitting by the millions.
You heard from Dr. Proctor, between 1966 and 1970, 13 million smokers quit. The greatest number of smokers quitting smoking ever in the country's history in that three-year- or -- excuse me four-year period.
1970, warning label changes. What happened shortly after that? Advertising ends on television
and radio. That same warning label appears on the print ads for cigarettes.
So from 1966 through 1970 and on every cigarette Mr. Baum -- pack of cigarettes he bought and smoked contained some form of a warning. Every print ad he ever saw after 1972 contained that same warning.
What is the effect? What was the effect among that information going out to the public?
Smokers quitting by the millions. As you heard on the stand, millions of those smokers were addicted smokers who also quit smoking.
Between 1955 and 1965, 17.6 million smokers quit. In between 1964 and 1979, 30 million smokers quit. All during the time that information is being sent out to the public about the dangers, the addictiveness of smoking. That represents 5,000 smokers quitting each and every day, each and every day.
Mr. Baum was aware of the dangers of smoking. He kept up with current events. We know he read the newspaper every day. He enjoyed it. He read the New York Times when he lived in New York. He read the Miami Herald when he was living here in Miami.
We know from his brother Dr. Baum, he called cigarettes coffin nails and cancer sticks.
We know he was aware of the warning on the packs of cigarettes because Mrs. Baum testified about that, about talking to him about the warning label, asking him why don't you quit, look at the warning label.
Mrs. Baum started -- you heard her tell you that she started talking to her husband about quitting in the -- after they were married.
Of course, she started saying more and more about quitting as the 1990s came along and he was diagnosed and his doctors were recommending that he quit.
The children, Loren and Rena, also talked with their father about the dangers of smoking and quitting.
In fact, doctors explained to him the health risks of smoking and told him he needed to quit starting at least by the time he was seeing Dr. Parmet in that early 1990s period.
Mr. Baum was aware of the risks of smoking.
Coffin nail goes all the way back to the 1860s. You see it's used again in the 1930s and in the 1950s. In the 1950s, of course, cancer sticks
also comes up as a slang term.
And Irving Baum testifies:
"Question: It's fairly self-evident but your understanding of the term coffin nails: is that cigarettes lead to death?
"Answer: Yes.
"Question: And cancer sticks lead to cancer?
"Answer: Yes.
"Question: And Paul Baum referred to cigarettes both as coffin nails and cancer sticks; isn't that right?
"Answer: Yes."
Now, Mr. Sloman talked about Dr. Baum's testimony, that his brother also talked about,
Well, after the '64 Surgeon General report came out, that was just a statistical association.
You're going to have to judge, ultimately, the credibility of that information versus all the other evidence that has been presented to you.
Both evidence of newspaper, magazines, public health announcements about the dangers of smoking. About other conversations Dr. Baum had with his brother and what he said about those. About the testimony from other witnesses as well.
That is going to be for you to judge whether
Dr. Baum's testimony on that issue is believable to you.
You will remember that at points in time during his testimony Mr. Hohnbaum had to remind him of what he had testified to before. He had forgotten. He was testifying two ways that were different than what he testified to when we saw him before trial.
You're going to have to ask yourself, how do I credit that testimony? How do I credit the testimony of Dr. Baum on that issue that Mr. Sloman raises versus this testimony we know about?
How is Dr. Baum in a position to remember 50 years later a specific conversation to the detail that he wants to offer on the stand?
That's one of the difficulties you have as jurors in the case. You've got to weigh that evidence and judge the credibility of that evidence being presented to you.
Even if you're to credit Dr. Baum's testimony, what the plaintiff wants you to believe is that a single statement back years ago caused Mr. Baum to act in a way that is different to all the other smokers out there and contrary to all the other information that was being put out and that
he never acted differently for the next 25 years.
Remember that conversation, according to Dr. Baum, took place in 1964. For another 25 years the testimony is: Mr. Baum never tried to quit; never even thought about quitting.
What is the other testimony on this issue:
Mrs. Baum, before your husband went to see Dr. Parmet, you are sure he associated the symptoms with smoking, right?
I'm sure -- I said I'm sure he did.
In fact, you certainly associated his symptoms with his smoking, right, ma'am?
Probably, yes. Probably, yes.
Mr. Baum started smoking, became a regular smoker before there is any concealment. You heard from Dr. Proctor that that started in 1953. The evidence here is that Mr. Baum started smoking in 1948 .
So when you are looking at this issue, if you get to this issue, no concealment, no conspiracy to conceal could ever have been a basis for Mr. Baum to start smoking, even by plaintiff's own generic expert's testimony on this.
When it comes to whether Mr. Baum made any decisions about continuing to smoke because of
statements he heard or saw or read from tobacco companies, the evidence -- there is no evidence.
In fact, what we know from the testimony of the witnesses, including Mrs. Baum, is that there is nothing that anyone could have said to Mr. Baum to have him act differently because he was making his own decisions about smoking.
All of the witnesses that knew Mr. Baum testified that advertising had no impact on his decisions.
You see the testimony of Dr. Baum, Rachel Baum, Loren and Rena.
When it comes to this question of the Frank Statement that Mr. Sloman showed you, there is no testimony that he relied or even saw that Frank Statement.
CTR statement. No testimony, no evidence that he saw or relied on those. Or statements by the TIRC or statements from The Tobacco Institute.
Tobacco industry press releases, there is no evidence that he saw or relied on any of that information.
In fact, Dr. Baum was asked that:
Now, Paul never told you he started smoking because of something that the tobacco company said
to him, correct?
It was primarily peer pressure.
Peer pressure is why, according to Dr. Baum, Paul Baum began smoking.
My question is, Did he ever say to you that he was ever misled by any tobacco company?
Answer, Never.
Part of that conflicting evidence in the case that you will have to weigh and decide upon.
Loren Baum:
He never said to you during his life that he continued smoking because of something the tobacco companies told him; isn't that right?
Right.
Rena:
Isn't it true that you encouraged your dad not to smoke because you knew there was significant health risks associated with smoking?
Yes .
And that's the very same reason your mom encouraged him not to smoke?
Yes .
And he never argued with you and said smoking wasn't bad for his health, did he?
No.
He never responded to any of those questions saying: I've been misled. I didn't know. I didn't realize. There was secret information that I was unaware of.
Mrs. Baum:
And Mr. Baum never told you that he relied on any information from tobacco companies in making a decision about smoking, right?
No.
And Mr. Baum never told you that he thought the tobacco companies had withheld information from him, right?
No.
Mrs. Baum:
As you sit here today, you would be fairly comfortable in saying, there is nothing you could have said to your husband about the health risks of smoking that would have caused him to change his smoking behavior during the 1980s?
Probably not.
And likewise, as you sit here today, there is nothing you could have said about the dangers of smoking in the 1970s that would have changed your husband's smoking behavior at that time?
Probably not.
There is no one who could have influenced his decisions about his smoking other than himself, right?
Probably.
When it comes to this question of concealment and conspiracy to conceal, the Court has instructed you, the law is that it has to be material fact that is of such importance that Mr. Baum would not have acted as he did but for that concealment.
What is the evidence that there is some little fact that had been a secret from Mr. Baum, that had that one little secret fact been revealed to him, somebody was going to tip the balance for him to go out and try over and over and over again to quit smoking, to not continue smoking?
There is no secret about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking to Mr. Baum. That information had been out there for decades. For decades over the years when he continued to smoke in the '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s, while millions and millions of other smokers given the same information are quitting smoking.
Mr. Baum did not develop COPD because information about the dangers of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him.
When you get to that question on the verdict form -- I don't think you will -- there is going to be question 6 and question 7 for the -- you can see that, for the wrongful death claim.
The answer is no to each of the defendants. And no to each of the defendants on question 7.
Now, there's another series of these same questions, because this is that alternative claim, that survivor claim. The answer is going to be the same: No, no, no, no, no, no.
The instructions will be, if you answer no, you go continue on.
I have to got to the next issue.
We're almost done. We're in the home stretch, I promise.
Next issue relates to an issue that Mr. Sloman touched on, this issue of comparative fault.
I told you the plaintiff has admitted that Mr. Baum himself is partially at fault.
What Mr. Sloman wants to tell you is that the defendants share some of that fault with Mr. Baum.
And the Judge has instructed you that when it comes to this question of comparative fault, if you get there -- I don't think you will -- but if you
get there, at least you have got to put 1 percent of Mr. Baum. You don't have to put any percentage on the defendants.
What you have got to judge from the evidence is, what fault, if any, by the defendants' actions were a legal cause of Mr. Baum's COPD?
In other words, you can't assign fault to any of the defendants unless you find that that fault -- the actions leading to that fault, were themselves a legal cause of Mr. Baum's COPD. Okay?
I see some confusion on your faces. Let me say that again.
Generic evidence, like what Mr. Proctor presented to you, doesn't lead to finding of fault under this part of the jury instructions.
Only if those actions that could be fault are a legal cause of Mr. Baum's COPD can you assign any percentage to Mr. Baum -- excuse me, to any of the defendants in the case.
That's what that part of this jury instruction means.
What I would submit to you is, when it comes to -- if you get to this question -- I don't think you will -- but if you get to this question and you're trying to judge what percentages of fault
would be applied to any of the defendants versus Mr. Baum, consider all the fault from the evidence to Mr. Baum.
Of course, we have an admission that he admits he's partially at fault already. You have to assign at least 1 percent there.
That he is at fault because he could have tried harder, could have tried longer to quit, but he didn't.
That he didn't quit despite being aware of the dangers of smoking, despite being aware over the decades when he continued smoking and others around him were quitting smoking.
That he didn't quit in 1966 when the warnings went on cigarette packages. Or 1970 when those warning labels changed. Or 1972 when that warning label also started appearing on all the print ads for cigarettes.
That for 44 years, from 1948 to 1992,
Mr. Baum never tried to quit, never made any suggestion of a desire to quit, for 44 years.
Then in the 1990s when the doctors told him he needed to quit, what fault do you put to him for four times? Use of a nicotine patch while continuing to smoke, use of nicotine gum while
continuing to smoke, never going to cessation clinics, never seeking out counseling or any other of the types of resources available to him to actually quit smoking.
So when you add up all of Mr. Baum's choices along the years, all those choices that he made about whether to continue smoking or whether to make that effort to quit smoking, I would suggest to you that that is where you start before you consider any fault by any of the defendants.
I would suggest to you that that level of fault, that level of fault is for Mr. Baum 100 percent.
Because Mr. Baum's choices are the only legal cause of the COPD in this case.
You agree your husband was responsible for his own decisions in life?
He made his decision.
You all agree adults bear responsibility for decisions in life?
That's correct.
That's Mrs. Baum:
And your husband was not going to take advice from you when you urged him to quit, was he?
Well, apparently not.
I mean, he was going to do -- he was going to do what he wanted to do, wasn't he?
Yes .
Those are the choices Mr. Baum was making throughout the decades of his life.
Nothing defendants could have done would have prevented Mr. Baum's COPD because it was his choices that were the legal cause of his COPD.
Only Mr. Baum had the ability to prevent his COPD. We know from the evidence he could have had he chosen to do so, but he chose not to do so.
That is his right. He was perfectly in his right to live the life he wanted to live.
When it comes to being in a courtroom and asking for tens of millions of dollars, you have got to look at the choices he made and judge those choices.
When it comes to this issue of Mr. Baum's fault, I would suggest to you when you go to the verdict form and you get there, question 12,
100 percent to Mr. Baum, zero percent to the defendants.
Let me touch on this issue of damages because you heard from Mr. Sloman about damages. He has asked for up to $25 million for plaintiff in the
case.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. BASSETT: Yes, Your Honor. Thank you.
I know everybody is tired. I'm tired too. I promise you, I'm almost done. I thank you again for your patience.
We were talking about damages. Again, I don't think you get here. I think the evidence stops you on that first question.
But I'm obligated to talk to you about damages. Particularly in a case like this where you're being asked to award $25 million, because it's important to understand what the damages are and what they are not in this case.
What they are not is, they are not damages for loss of support services. They are not damages for net accumulations, for lost wages, medical expenses.
We know from the 12 boxes, there have been a lot of medical expenses, but that is not what the damages being asked for involve. They're not about funeral expenses. They're not about any other smoking-related disease other than COPD. All right?
$25 million. For those damages, remember
there is two separate alternate claims. There is this wrongful death claim. All that you're entitled to award under that wrongful death claim would be Mrs. Baum's pain and suffering from the death of her husband from COPD.
That does not involve Mr. Baum's pain and suffering at all. That's a separate consideration. That goes to this separate claim of survival.
If plaintiff proves to your satisfaction that Mr. Baum had COPD but he didn't die from it, then you would consider this second element of damages for Mr. Baum's pain and suffering for his COPD.
But it doesn't have to do with any other physical or mental condition he had. All right?
Mr. Hohnbaum showed this to you as one of the discharge summaries showing all the illnesses Mr. Baum was suffering from.
You will remember that Day-in-the-life video. It's hard to watch. Mr. Baum clearly was very sick, very ill.
But he had a whole host of problems, a constellation of issues. There has been no evidence to link all of these back to prove that all of these were the result of some COPD.
In fact, you saw one of these illnesses that
Mrs. Baum talked about, dementia. That her husband was separately diagnosed and treated for dementia. That as a result of his dementia, he was losing his memory, that he stopped talking.
These constellation of his conditions are what you're seeing on that Day-in-the-life video.
But for you, in consideration of damages, your consideration has to be for that smoking-related disease, COPD, if you get there.
I've got to cover one more issue with you and that is this issue of punitive damages, because there is a claim for punitive damages.
The plaintiff is seeking not only damages for the loss of Mr. Baum, the pain and suffering associated with that, but also a claim for punitive damages seeking to punish the defendants. So I need to address that issue with you.
What are "punitive damages"? First off, punitive damages in this case can only be awarded for concealment that was a legal cause of Paul Baum's COPD.
I have talked to you in detail about what concealment meant. In other words, you remember that there was some information that was unknown or unavailable to Mr. Baum that was going to make a
difference in how he was going to live his life and change his smoking behavior.
In other words, the question on that concealment was whether Mr. Baum -- whether COPD -he got COPD because the dangers of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him. That is the only claim in which you would also consider this question of punitive damages.
Second, you can't punish the defendants for any harm to anyone else other than Paul Baum.
Now, Mr. Sloman has shown you a bunch of documents and talked to you about a bunch of issues through Dr. Proctor. You have to ask yourself,
What does this have to do with Paul Baum?
When you're considering the issue of punitive damages, you can't consider punishment to any of these defendants unless it deals with the harm directly connected to Paul Baum.
And then we know that punitive damages are in addition to damages that are already fully compensating the plaintiff for any loss in the case. This is damages above and beyond what the damages you would be awarding to compensate the plaintiff for damages we just talked about, the pain and suffering damages. These are additional
damages.
Punitive damages can only be awarded to the estate of Mr. Baum. They can't be awarded to public health authorities, to the state of Florida, to any other entity other than the plaintiff,
Mr. Baum's estate. Okay?
What did the Judge tell you about punitive damages? He told you that when you consider this issue of punitive damages, you're not dealing with a burden of proof that is the greater weight of the evidence, which is what we have been talking about.
What we're dealing with is a higher burden of proof: Clear and convincing evidence.
When you're considering all this generic evidence that Mr. Sloman is talking to you about, you also have to consider if you can even get to this question.
Has this issue of punitive damages been proven with clear and convincing evidence? What does that mean?
It means evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation, without hesitation about the matter.
In other words, if you're back there and
you're deliberating this issue and you're hesitating whether that has been proven, you haven't met clear and convincing evidence because that represents a hesitation.
It has to be so clear and so direct there is no hesitation in looking at the evidence that punitive damages should be awarded here.
If you were to decide that issue on punitive damages, we would come back and have another proceeding.
MR. SLOMAN: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BASSETT: Let's look at what the evidence is. First off, you can't use the Engle findings themselves to establish whether punitive damages are appropriate or not.
When we look at the issue of what the companies have been doing, and when Mr. Sloman talks about punitive damages, remember what Dr. Proctor also told you.
He talked you to about the Council of Tobacco Research, but look at what else the Council of Tobacco Research is doing. $350 million in grants to fund independent scientific research projects. What did that result in? 7,000 published
scientific and medical articles and reports.
Dr. Proctor agreed with me, 600 of those articles -- 600 of those research pieces themselves were cited by the Surgeon General reports over the years.
CTR, itself, and its funding, researchers, 10 of those researchers went on to win Nobel prizes. And the research is being funded at universities across the country.
So when Dr. Proctor sits up here and talks about some sort of sham research, and Mr. Sloman wants to claim that this is sham research, ask yourself: Does that evidence suggest that the work of CTR was a sham?
In fact, I have addressed this with Dr. Proctor. One of the studies published through a grant research with CTR that was actually cofunded by the American Cancer Society was a study that looked at the addictiveness of smoking in 1963 and concluded, in fact, that heavy smokers appeared to be true addicts. Okay?
Not sham research, not sham work by the CTR.
What about my client, Reynolds? Dr. Proctor, begrudgingly, but he did have to agree that Reynolds and other defendants had spent a fortune
trying to make cigarettes more safe. Trying to make cigarettes more safe by reducing levels of carcinogens starting all the way back in the 1950s, developing a process that heats tobacco but doesn't burn it.
Remember what we talked about in the beginning, you take a leaf of tobacco from the field, you roll it up and you light it, what is going to happen? The smoke from that burning leaf is going to have nicotine in it. It's going to have thousands of chemicals, some of which are going to be carcinogenic and cause disease.
Reynolds was out there trying to figure out, can we heat that tobacco, get the flavoring out but not burn it to produce those chemicals?
Over a billion dollars was spent doing this in releasing products called Premier and Eclipse.
Dr. Proctor is right, the products failed in the marketplace, but Reynolds was out there trying to do this. They are continuing to do that.
When it comes to this issue of punitive damages, let's look at what the evidence is. Cigarettes and cigarette packages have carried warning labels since 1966.
Defendants -- none of these defendants have
disputed the dangers of smoking for over a decade. Dr. Proctor agreed with that.
Punitive damages are not needed to prevent defendants from concealing dangers of smoking because there is no disagreement about the dangers of smoking.
If you get to this question, if you find first that there has been some concealment to consider this question of punitive damages, and you are considering that question whether there has been clear and convincing evidence that you don't have -- is that evidence so clear there is no hesitation in your minds?
The evidence -- based on the evidence provided to you, the answer should be no for each of these defendants, for each of these defendants.
A lot of the discussion you have heard at the beginning of the trial, and even back with Mr. Sloman during closing argument, is life was different back, years ago.
I think we can all agree that the life and the way America lived its life many years ago was very different. I have showed you this back in that time when this early TV show was broadcast about the dangers of smoking.
This is Dr. Hamner, one of the early researchers for the American Cancer Society who did that early epidemiological research throughout the connection between smoking and lung cancer.
Here is what he had to say at that time.
(Playing video clip.)
That was the attitude of Dr. Hamner, one of the early researchers providing epidemiological research connecting smoking and lung cancer.
He agreed that smoking was the business of the smoker. That smoker could make that decision with the information about the dangers of smoking.
That is exactly the same attitude you heard from the witness stand during the course of the trial.
Your husband is not going to take advice from you when you urged him to quit, was he?
Apparently not.
He was going to do what he wanted to do, wasn't he?
Yes .
And you agree your husband was responsible for his own decisions in life?
He made his decision.
You agree all adults bear responsibility for
decisions in life, correct?
Correct.
I don't mean any criticism to Mr. Baum by any of this. But what I do ask you is, listen to that evidence. Mr. Baum smoked because he wanted to smoke. He made those decisions. He made those choices.
No one else made it for him. No one else could make it for him.
When it came to his decision whether to continue smoking or quit smoking, it wasn't anything that any of these defendants said or did that influenced him. He was going to make the decisions he wanted to make. That's how he lived his life. There is nothing wrong with him being able to do that.
I thank you so much for your time. Thank you for being attentive to me. I am done. I'm going to sit down.
Each of the other defendants have an opportunity to address you. I promise you they are not nearly as long as I have been going through each of these questions.
We look forward to sending you the case and having you be able to deliberate that case.
Thank you very much.



MR. BRENNER: May it please the Court, counsel, Mrs. Baum, good afternoon.
Everyone caffeinated, following the Judge's orders?
Let me start off, I think I told you during opening statement that I would talk about less, and I would try not to repeat what my colleague said, whether it came from the plaintiff's side examination of witnesses and the defendants' side.
I'm going to keep that, except I will start by repeating the thank you part. Thank you is very important. You guys have been great jurors.
You've done a great service. You're doing a great service. That can't be told enough. I thank you for that.
I think of a trial like a puzzle. Let me tell you what I mean. Everyone has done puzzles, right? So what do you do? You get a puzzle box, whether it's with your kids or by yourself, whatever you're going to do. Let's say you do it on the floor.
First thing you will do is take the puzzle and spill the pieces out. What is it going to look like? It's going to look like a bunch of cardboard on the floor.
What you're going to do is take the box that it came in and you're going to prop it up at the end of your puzzle station, and that's going to tell you what the picture looks like.
Then you're going to be solving French.
You're going to be trying to build that picture.
Trials are like a puzzle in the sense that the pieces of the puzzle are the evidence. As you will see, as I go through mine, at the end of the
trial we all have the same evidence. No one can makeup the evidence.
As lawyers, we don't get to say, Well, I wish someone would have said this or that. We all have the same evidence.
So those are the pieces of the puzzle. Here is where a trial is different. That you guys at the end of the day get to decide what picture is formed when you put the pieces together.
Although we have the same evidence, there is no doubt that the plaintiff's side and the defendants have a completely different view of what that puzzle is supposed to look like when you put the pieces together. No doubt about it.
What I'm going to do is, I'm going to spend almost all my time today talking about a piece of -- or a part of the puzzle, just like I told you I would do in opening.
I'm going to focus on the part of the puzzle that relates to Mrs. Baum's claims against my client, Philip Morris.
Before I do that, let me just comment briefly on a couple of other issues I think that sort of not -- well, they were pretty heavily covered, but I'm a little old-fashioned in this way.
One of the issues was the medical case, right? And Mr. Sloman spent a lot of time talking about it. Mr. Hohnbaum spent a lot of time talking about it.
To tell you that I can say anything different or better or more persuasive about Mr. Hohnbaum -than Mr. Hohnbaum did would not be right. I can't. I'm not going to waste your time.
You're going to get a verdict form at the end of the case. It's going to have this question number 3 there.
I don't think anyone meant to do it, but no one showed you this question. It's going to be on the verdict form. I don't want you going back and saying, Why is there a question here? Mr. Sloman said it is not in dispute.
Actually, what happened is, both sides during their closing gave you the issue of whether the COPD manifested during November 21, 1996.
What Mr. Sloman said and, frankly, this part is uncontroverted -- what Mr. Sloman said is you need a PFT or spirometry to diagnose COPD. No doubt about it. The only medical record we have of spirometry is 1998 or a reference in '97.
The plaintiff's evidence is that Mrs. Baum
recalls that her husband was, in fact, diagnosed with COPD in 1992. We don't have that.
The other piece of evidence that Mr. Hohnbaum gave you on that is that Loren Baum, the son,
Mrs. Baum's son, testified that his dad really started getting sick when he went to get his MBA. That's what all that evidence -- a lot of that evidence is about, which is, has plaintiff proved that -- you will see the manifestation instruction -- has plaintiff proved that Mr. Baum had COPD before November 21, 1996 or "manifested" is a legal word which will be defined.
I wanted to cover that for you because it is on the verdict form.
The second issue is addiction. Here is what I saw. We had two experts. We had Dr. Pitchenik and we had Dr. Torres. They got up and they each had completely different views of the issue of addiction.
Forget Mr. Baum for a second. They just had completely different issues of what addiction was. They were, frankly, two ships passing in the night.
Dr. Pitchenik addressed it as a pulmonologist, someone who treats people who have lung problems, and no doubt his practice is filled
with people that have problems associated with smoking.
Dr. Torres came at it from the perspective of, what I'll call, the scientific or psychiatric definition of addiction.
The bad news is, the Judge isn't going to give you a definition of addiction. I'm not going to waste any more of your time on that. I think that has been fully covered by Mr. Bassett, and I'm not going to go into that.
When you got here this morning, the first thing you did is, the Judge read you some instructions.
Before you even got, sort of, comfortable in your seats before the Judge's voice got a little momentum going, from my perspective he read you the most important instruction in the case.
Now, I don't mean that all the instructions aren't important. You have to follow all the instructions. No doubt about it.
Unfortunately, instructions, when you get to them, you will see are written by lawyers.
You can't see that very well, can you? Let me see if I can make that closer.
So instructions are put together over years
by lawyers and stuff like that. There is no doubt, they are wordy. You sat here for 40, 45 minutes with the Judge reading instructions, which I'm sure made him very pleased to read that to you.
Look, what I'm going to tell you today can all be answered with that instruction. That instruction is simply: Use reason and common sense. That -- I think I told you in opening, that's the beauty of the jury system.
The jury system is all based on the fact that you guys collectively use your common sense and reason, you will reach the right result. Collectively use your common sense, you will reach the right result. That's the instruction.
No one is going to dispute it. Everyone wants you to use your common sense. Particularly as the claims apply to my client, just keep that in mind. Keep that in mind.
So let's talk about what -Can we go to the PowerPoint?
So I told you during opening I didn't have any fancy slide. I'm not suggesting this one is fancy, but it's better than what I had in opening.
These are the two issues, as I see it, when you use your common sense as it relates to my
client. The first one is: Was Paul Baum unaware of the health risks of smoking when he started smoking Philip Morris cigarettes in the late '80s?
The second one, which I'll get to towards the back part of my closing, is: Did Paul Baum rely on anything Philip Morris did or said in making his decision to smoke cigarettes.
So on that first question, during opening statement -- here is the deal. It's a puzzle.
It's pieces of the puzzle. What I'm going to do, I'm not asking you to take my word for anything.
I'm going to show you the pieces of the puzzle. My pieces -- this is as fancy as it gets. The rest is just testimony.
What do we know? The first thing I want to show you, and I told you during opening, that Paul Baum did not start smoking my client's cigarettes,
I think I said in opening, '87 or '88. Okay?
I put the late '80s. Let's give him '87. I think that's the earliest it can be.
What did we learn about that? I told you during opening, and let me just show you the testimony first. So let me just let you read Mrs. Baum's testimony. I won't talk over it.
As I told you during opening, here is what
happened. Here are the facts of the case. No doubt about it.
Mrs. Baum testified for two hours, a lot of emotional topics, a lot of cross-examination. I had one topic for her. This was it. This was the whole thing. I think I got up there about 4:50, we were done by 4:54 or something. I think she and I were both very appreciative of that.
Here is what she told us. The "he" on the top -- it's a lead in before that. She is talking to her husband.
What she told us is, before her husband had any memory problems, before any dementia, they sat down in connection with this case and talked about the brands of cigarettes he smoked prior to 1970 when they met.
He told her -- he told her that he smoked four brands.
I asked her specifically, were any of them Marlboro? No. None of them were Benson & Hedges? Marlboro is 1992. Benson & Hedges '87, '88. Parliaments is '97, as Mr. Sloman said.
That's her testimony. Not only did she talk to her husband about it. After she talked to her husband, she confirmed it with who? She confirmed
it with Dr. Irving Baum, because he too knew her -excuse me, he too knew Mr. Baum in the '50s and '60s.
No doubt the three of them, the same exact brands, same exact story, none of them made by my client. As I said to you during opening -- it's a little bit of a cheat. We kind of know what people are going to say, as Mr. Bassett said.
I said they may bring someone that says a different story. Lo and behold they brought Dr. Irving Baum.
Dr. Irving Baum suddenly says, Wow, I don't remember talking to my sister-in-law, but I know he smoked Marlboros. He had to smoke Marlboros. I think Mr. Sloman said late '50s to '64, somehow...
What did we learn from Dr. Baum? How did Dr. Baum suddenly have an epiphany that he figured out different brands? Well, what happened?
Dr. Baum has this conversation with Mrs. Baum and Mr. Baum. They all confer and confirm.
All of a sudden, comes to his deposition. He gets -- out of the blue he gets called by the plaintiff's lawyers. It wasn't Mr. Sloman. It was one of Mr. Sloman's former colleagues. In fact, from my vantage point, Mr. Sloman even seemed a bit
surprised.
They called Dr. Baum and said, Can we be your lawyers for the deposition. Remember Dr. Baum said -- he actually first said they weren't my lawyers. I showed them they were.
What do they do? They sent him out of the blue, just sent him some pictures of some brands and said, Does this jog your memory? Sure, now I remember.
The fact of the matter is -- and look,
Dr. Irving Baum, I'm not here to judge him. He got -- that was sort of one of your lessons in impeachment, what we lawyers do as Mr. Bassett said, we show old testimony.
Let's face it. Dr. Baum came in here and changed his tune at least a dozen times. Sure, he wanted to help his sister-in-law. He wanted to help, I think, his nephew and niece. No doubt about it.
The fact is, this is the only place in the case, the only place that plaintiff has asked you to do what? To find your common sense because here is what the plaintiff's asking you to do: Don't believe the plaintiff when she tells you that no Philip Morris brands before 1980. Don't believe
her. Don't believe Mr. Baum, the man who smoked. Don't believe him. He doesn't know.
Don't believe Irving Baum who had said also none of our brands before 1980. You should only believe Irving Baum after we met with him and sent him brands of cigarettes. That's the only believable testimony on brand.
Use your common sense, folks.
Now that we have established -- the evidence established that Mr. Baum did not start smoking Philip Morris brands until 1970, we move on to the rest of our question, which is: Okay. What did he know by then?
What did he know? It's just the testimony of the folks that know him best.
Let me start, because we did spend so much time with Dr. Proctor. Let me start.
Dr. Proctor came and testified, I think Mr. Bassett said, it was a day-and-a-half or something. It was a long time.
But from my perspective on this question, I was done -- I didn't need to hear anymore after about 6 minutes of his cross -- excuse me, his direct examination.
This is what he said.
I think it's about the first 6 minutes or so. He says, I don't know the first thing about the guy. I don't know anything about him. Candidly admits it, fine. That's his job. That's what he is doing. He can't help us. He can't help us determine what Mr. Baum knew or didn't know.
Let me just take a little sidetrack on that. Dr. Proctor gave a lot of testimony about what other folks knew and other folks didn't know and was cross-examined on it or not.
I	think we can all agree if we use our common sense, if he doesn't know anything about Mr. Baum, he can't help us determine if Mr. Baum in 1987 knew that his smoking was bad. He just can't help us.
So here is Irving Baum. This is the first time -- I don't know if it was the first time he was impeached. Here he's asked about, Did you know smoking was dangerous when you were teenagers? Living in the house with his brother, Irving's born, I believe, in '37 or '38, so we're talking about the early '50s.
Of course, on the stand he said, no, he didn't know. Then his testimony, he had an interesting word for it. He wanted to "qualify" his answer. He always wanted to qualify. One time
he even said, I would like to qualify that yes by making it no. That's an interesting use of the word "qualify."
They knew smoking was bad when they were teenagers, no doubt about it.
They knew the hazards of smoking when they were in college.
Before I move through the rest of Irving's testimony, let me remind you of one thing. Again, using our common sense. Paul Baum starts smoking Philip Morris cigarettes in 1987. What is happening in 1987? What is happening with Paul Baum and what is happening with his smoking?
Paul Baum is 51 or 52, depending on the month. Paul Baum has been married for about 16 years. Paul Baum is raising two children. Paul Baum is running his own business. Every cigarette Paul Baum has smoked at that point for the last
2	0-plus years has had a warning on it.
According to the plaintiff, by the time he picks up the first Philip Morris cigarette, by the plaintiff's own claim, he has been addicted to smoking for three decades, and he is on the verge of being diagnosed with COPD. All that takes place before he picks up the first cigarette by Philip
Morris.
Use your common sense and, like I said in opening, what is the claim against Philip Morris?
So we can just go through the testimony. Look, these are the people that knew him best. I mean, look, you heard from a bunch of experts. I already told you I'm not talking about the medical folks, I'm not talking anymore about Dr. Torres or Dr. Pitchenik.
These are the folks that knew him.
So this is the discussion about the Surgeon General's Report. You will recall from Mr. Sloman's closing, there is -- after that question of Irving saying that he discussed the Surgeon General's Report with Paul, there is that whole thing where Paul said -- and we'll get to it later -- the whole statistical correlation thing. They definitely discussed it.
We will click through these. They are using slang. Paul Baum is using slang for cigarettes: "Coffin nails" and "cancer sticks." I'll be a little quick only because Mr. Bassett showed you some of the same things.
Again, we have all the same puzzle pieces.
If I could create new ones, I would, but I can't.
Here is their own daughter. Their own daughter learned about the dangers of smoking in elementary school. So the plaintiff's claim is, Rena is going off to school with her backpack and her lunchbox and seeing movies about black lungs and things like that, but dad, who's been smoking for 4 0 years has no idea it can cause him any harm.
Common sense. Go back to the instruction.
It makes no sense.
Here is Rena talking about her conversations with her dad. I think Mr. Bassett showed you this one.
Here is Rachel Baum. I think you saw this one too -- excuse me, Mrs. Baum. I apologize.
This is Dr. Parmet. This is the doctor that he was seeing. We're not sure when he started seeing him. We know by the early '90s he is already seeing him.
And Mr. Baum knows that smoking is bad by then, no doubt about it. It's really not, as Mr. Sloman said, about some other issues. It's an issue that cannot be seriously in dispute.
So if you use your common sense, what is the answer to this question? By the time he starts smoking Philip Morris cigarettes was he unaware of the health risks of smoking? The answer of course
is no.
So let's go to the second question. The second question is: Did Paul Baum rely on anything Philip Morris did or said in making his decision to smoke cigarettes?
In this one -- this one it's two questions. I'm just going to focus on -- well, they both say essentially the same. You will see in the verdict form that you have a lot of repetition because at some point the plaintiff has made alternative claims. You will see the same questions under whether it's a wrongful death claim or survival claim. And I will tell you if I get to a place that's different. And it's not different here.
What is going on here? These are the -- The Judge instructed you, I believe, there is a concealment claim and an agreement to conceal claim.
Let me just clarify one thing. Concealment doesn't mean not saying something. I know it does in English. In English it means when you conceal, you didn't say something.
In lawyer world and in the Judge's instructions in this case what it means is: You said something that was incomplete. You made a
statement, but you failed to make a full statement. That's the concealment.
So what do we have to do to answer question number two? First thing we have to look at is whether he relied on any statement.
Well, how do we figure that out? The first thing to do to rely on the statement, the first step in the process is we have got to hear one. If we don't hear it, we can't rely on it. Again, common sense. If you don't hear something, you can't rely on it.
And then if you do hear it, if you do hear it, then did you rely on it?
It's actually very, very important language. It will be in the instructions. It will also be -it's on the verdict form. Is not only did you hear it, it caused you to act differently.
Again, we're trying to put the puzzle together to figure out who Paul Baum was. Was Paul Baum the kind of guy who was changing his behavior because of something some tobacco company executive said in the newspaper?
We have to see if the puzzle pieces fit together to prove that, or if the plaintiff has failed to prove that.
When I go through this, we're going to break it up into two questions: One, did he hear it; and two, did it make a difference?
Again, I will start with Dr. Proctor, because Dr. Proctor was all about this question.
I take it back. Dr. Proctor had two things. One was that sort of general awareness stuff, we just talked about it, he spent a bunch of time on that.
The second thing Dr. Proctor was about is he has got a story to tell about this grand conspiracy. He has a story he's going to tell.
Of course, he knows nothing about Mr. Baum.
He can't say Mr. Baum heard or relied on anything, but he threw out a bunch of stuff. Right? He threw out a bunch of stuff. You have to figure out if Paul Baum had any impact -- if he heard it or had any impact on it.
What did he do with my client? He really relied on two things. The first thing is he played a rapid fire -- a rapid fire set of clips made by the British documentarians. Remember that? The guy had a British accent. It was all sort of a -smoke in the room, he had on a weird jacket. There were two different Philip Morris executives. I
think he played a dozen clips, boom, boom, boom.
Mr. Wakeham and Mr. Bowling.
He played that out there. You're thinking Well, I guess that must have been something Mr. Baum heard because why else would we play it?
So I cross-examined Dr. Proctor. I had very few issues, but this was one of them. I knew this is the issue.
So I said to Dr. Proctor, Okay, you know, sir, that that British documentary you showed later was ruled to be a fraud, in Court.
He says, Yeah, I knew that.
Then I said, Okay, put that aside. You may say the guy shouldn't have said that stuff anyway.
I told you -- I told you -- I told you during opening that no doubt you were going to hear stuff said to you -- and I knew it would be by Dr. Proctor -- from my client and I think the other defendants said the same thing -- that were simply wrong headed and that stuff fits in spades right there. Those 12 clips are like, Wow.
Can we go back to the PowerPoint.
I asked Dr. Proctor, I said, About that video you showed -- let me let you read it. I said, I wouldn't talk over it and I'll try not to.
What we learned was that video, the only time it touches great state of Florida is in a courtroom when Dr. Proctor talks about it. I'm pretty sure Paul Baum was not in the courtroom when Dr. Proctor talking about that video. Use your common sense. Use your common sense.
Okay. Dr. Proctor said one other thing about my client or spent a bunch of time -- in fact,
Mr. Sloman talked about it in his -I will need a little more time, Judge.
-- talked about it in his closing, this statement of Merrill Dow, remember that? Nicorette gum. He said, Philip Morris delayed getting it on the market for several years. You're thinking,
Wow. Now I got it. Paul Baum was trying to get the gum and he couldn't get it. It makes sense now. It has to be it. Right?
We cross-examined Dr. Proctor. What did we learn? Actually the delay in several years never happened, complete fabrication. What did he say?
It was a drug at the time, Nicorette gum. You had to get a prescription.
He said as soon as the FDA approved it, it went on the market. That's the first thing he admitted.
The second thing he admitted was during that whole time where Dow and Philip Morris are having there little corporate squabble, it's on the market. No delay.
Third thing, he admitted it has been on the market since 1984.
Fourth thing, he admitted -THE COURT: How much do you need?
MR. BRENNER: I will start working through it. Thank you, Judge.
The last part he said is that the Surgeon General talked about and said it was one of the most aggressively and popularly successfully marketed things. What does it have to do with Mr. Baum? I didn't ask Dr. Proctor because he doesn't know.
But what do we know about Mr. Baum? In 1984 when the Nicorette comes on the market, he is not looking to quit. He wasn't delayed there. Right? Even though it's there, he wasn't looking for it.
And what else do we know? When he got around to deciding it was time for him to quit a few times, what did he use? Nicorette gum.
So there is Dr. Proctor on our issue of what did Paul Baum know or what did Paul Baum hear? So
Dr. Proctor doesn't help us very much.
But, of course, the family does. Loren Baum, we will go through them. We will tick right through them. Every family member said the exact same thing: Never heard any mention of statements by tobacco companies?
Then we went through -- remember all those organizations that Dr. Proctor was like an alphabet soup of tobacco organizations? Paul Baum never heard of them or heard anything from any of them.
Next one. Same for Rachel.
Next one. Same for Irving.
This is the one. Mr. Bassett covered it.
I'm just going to ask you: This primarily statistical evidence with no clear scientific correlation, does that sound like Paul Baum or Irving Baum? Use your common sense.
Paul Baum didn't say that or say anything like it or paraphrase it. Even if he did, that's 23 years before he picks up a product by Philip Morris.
So what? We're supposed to believe that's what he thought in '64 and then he went into a cave around was never heard of from again? Come on.
Let's use our common sense.
Next slide please. So this is the second part of the question. One, he never heard anything so I don't think we need to get to the second part. But if he did, he didn't rely on it.
Family all uniform. All said the same thing in different words. Loren Baum.
Next. Irving Baum. You saw this from Mr. Bassett. He was never misled.
Next. Never said he continued smoking because what the tobacco company said.
Next. This is about advertising. They didn't show you any advertising from Philip Morris, so I don't know that even relates to the claim against us.
Next one. Rachel, you saw these again. I'm not going to go through it. She is very clear that nothing was going to change this guy's behavior.
If you think about it, you can't have it both ways for the plaintiff.
Either you are -- as the plaintiff I think has described the case, he is so addicted it didn't matter what anyone said. He can't quit. He's not defrauded. Their claim is he's so addicted.
The last one. No one could have influenced his decisions about smoking other than himself,
probably.
So the pieces of puzzle come together pretty clearly on that question. Paul Baum never heard any statement. If he did, he certainly never relied on it.
So one more question on the verdict form I just want to cover for you. That's the punitive damage question, which Mr. Bassett showed you. Let me just show you what the Judge's instructions are going to be.
Again, Mr. Sloman tells -- gives you quite a bit of story about tobacco companies. There is never any connection tied to Mr. Baum. That's what the Court is going to instruct you that you need to do for punitive damages.
There is just no claim. There is no serious claim that Philip Morris had intentional conduct that directly influenced Mr. Baum, given what we have just gone through.
So if I can return just to the puzzle to wrap up. So when you do a puzzle -- let's take a puzzle of the Mona Lisa. If you have got a puzzle of the Mona Lisa, you have the advantage of the box in front of you. You know you're building the Mona Lisa.
But you're putting that puzzle together and you're getting frustrated because you keep putting stuff together but Mona Lisa is not coming out.
Then you get to the part where you get to the Mona Lisa's eyes and you say here it is. I know what the puzzle is. I know the puzzle. I now know I see it. I see it clearly.
I submit to you there is one story in this case, one story in this case that is that piece of the puzzle. Let me tell you the story.
Loren Baum, who is in the courtroom, Loren Baum at 16 years old goes to study in Israel. He goes to a program to study in Israel for two months.
Loren Baum, before he has gone to Israel is a smoker but he has hid it from his parents because he knows they are not going to be happy about it. They don't know.
Loren comes back. On the way back, I think he says, either in Israel or in the U.S., in a duty-free store he buys a carton of Marlboro cigarettes. Remember, that's when his dad becomes a Marlboro smoker, remember?
For those of you who have kids or those who remember being teenagers, your mom always finds
what you hide under the bed. I don't know why we still choose the bed. She finds the Marlboro cigarettes under the bed and she is not happy. She is not happy with her son.
She calls a family meeting. I don't think Rena was subjected to this. They have a family meeting. It is Mrs. Baum who cares for her son, it is Mr. Baum who cares for his son and Loren Baum.
16 years old. And they say -- not they -mom. They're all sitting -- there's a dispute whether it was on the bed or at the table, it doesn't matter. Wherever it is, it is.
They are all sitting around. Mrs. Baum is being the lecturer. She is saying, Son, you shouldn't be smoking. It's bad for you. I don't want you to do this. She is giving him a lecture.
Dad is, according to the plaintiff this is when he's diagnosed with COPD, he is -- according to the plaintiff he feels he has been misled by the tobacco companies. He feels he is addicted. He feels he can't do anything about it. He should have lots of anger about his smoking according to the plaintiff's story.
What does the dad do during mom's lecture. During mom's lecture dad does two things: One, he
smokes a cigarette during the whole lecture. He smokes a cigarette during the whole lecture. Then it gets done.
After they say to him, Son, you are probably, like your dad, you aren't going to stop anyway.
But mom says, I don't want you smoking. He is smoking the whole time.
As soon as mom gets done, what does dad do?
He laughs, turns to his boy and says, Son, let's go play cards and have a smoke.
That's what Paul Baum was. Paul Baum wanted to live his life the way he wanted to live it and he thought his 16 year-old son could do that too. That's his choice.
So to wrap up, I told you at the beginning what the case is and is not about. If the case was merely about: Did the Baums love their father and husband? The pieces of the puzzle absolutely prove they did. Absolutely, no dispute. The pieces of the puzzle show this was a loving family.
Do the Baums miss their husband and father? Pieces of the puzzle, absolutely say they do.
Did Mrs. Baum take care of her husband in his latter years? Did she do -- really as Mr. Sloman said -- was she a great wife to him and took care
of him? What are the pieces of puzzle on that?
Use your common sense. Absolutely they do. The pieces of the puzzle absolutely tell us that.
But the pieces of the puzzle also tell us that when Paul Baum started smoking Philip Morris cigarettes at the age of 51 or 52, he was fully aware of the dangers of smoking. He had never and was never looking to my client for any information about those dangers and nothing we said or did made a lick of difference to him.
For that reason pieces of the puzzle tell you that, using your common sense, you should enter a verdict in favor of Philip Morris. Thank you so much for your time.



MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Thank you.
May it please the Court, counsel, Mrs. Baum, Mr. Baum, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. I am Ann St. Peter-Griffith. It's my privilege to be here representing Liggett Group, LLC.
It's been a pleasure being here before Judge Dresnick. And on behalf of my client, Liggett and
all the parties, I think I can say we thank you again for the careful attention that you have paid, and we understand that it's been a great deal of sacrifice. You have stayed late. You have waited for us. You have been very patient.
We very much appreciate it.
Now, Mr. Bassett, Mr. Hohnbaum and Mr. Brenner have done an excellent job reviewing what the evidence has shown in this case. I hope you will be relieved to know, I'm not going to go over what they have done. They have provided you with a roadmap for checking no as to each question on the verdict form for all the defendants. And we agree.
Please remember that it's the plaintiff's burden of proof as to each defendant. So I need to cover what the evidence is with respect to my client, Liggett.
You haven't heard much from me during this trial. I have been sitting over there quietly in the corner, but that doesn't mean that the facts regarding my client are not important to your evaluation today.
As you can see at the outset, this is my technology. I'm a little bit low tech. What I
have before you is the documentary evidence that my client put into evidence as well as a couple of documents that the plaintiff put into evidence.
I'm not going to put them up on the big screen because you're actually going to take them into the jury room with you. You're not going to take the big screen in.
So what I would like to do is maybe have you follow along with some of the numbers as we go through the discussion of some of the documents.
First I would like to review some of the facts regarding my client's company conduct. You will recall that the one time that I did question a witness, it was Dr. Proctor.
Dr. Proctor would have you believe that all of the companies here today since 1953 have been coconspirators who worked in concert to hide the ball from the public regarding certain facts concerning smoking and health.
Now, when I questioned Dr. Proctor, though, there were some concessions he had to make with regard to my client.
As he testified, Liggett never ammoniated its cigarettes. He conceded my client did not attend the Plaza Hotel meeting. It had nothing to do with
Hill & Knowlton, and it had nothing to do with the Frank Statement. It never belonged to the TIRC, when it was known by that name.
Liggett only belonged to the Council for Tobacco Research, or CTR, for about four years in the mid '60s.
Then after that, what did Dr. Proctor tell you? Liggett disassociated itself from the CTR.
Dr. Proctor does not contend that Liggett was responsible for any statements attributable to the CTR when Liggett did not belong to that organization.
As Dr. Proctor also concedes, while Liggett did belong to the tobacco institute, its participation was limited to minimal financial contribution.
As he told you, Liggett's total contribution to the tobacco institute was 0.3 percent of industry contributions, 0.3 percent. That's it.
Notably, for the nonadvertising clips that plaintiff showed you during Dr. Proctor's testimony, from the 1950s through to 1993 none of them included any comments from my client's representatives.
The plaintiff also did not read or show you
any video of any testimony from my client.
As the Judge has already instructed you, you may not attribute anything that Mr. Heimann, the former American Tobacco Company president said against my client, Liggett, or against Philip Morris.
That's not to say Dr. Proctor didn't say a few things about my client; he did. Mr. Sloman's repeated view of the statements.
But the curious thing, ladies and gentlemen, is that for all of the millions of documents that Dr. Proctor said he had access to review, he did not provide a single one from my client that said that it was Liggett's view that the whole health controversy should just blow over; none, not a single document.
Ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Proctor is a paid advocate. As you have already heard, as an expert witness testifying in tobacco case he has made over $2 million.
My client didn't need to pay a witness to come here to testify about its conduct. Rather, we're relying upon the actual evidence -documentary evidence in this case, including a couple of exhibits from the plaintiff.
The first one I would like to go through with you is plaintiff's Exhibit 23A. This is commonly referred to -- it actually starts here, this is referred to as the BAT Report.
What the Bat report explains is why Liggett didn't join the TIRC. It explains it didn't join the TIRC because instead it took a research route. Liggett thought the TIRC would be too unwieldy to be efficient.
Page 5 of the report also explains that Liggett, in fact, invested more funds in researching the health effects of smoking than the rest of the industry's contribution to the TIRC.
That's not to say that the other companies, including the other two defendants here, didn't do research, they did. When Mr. Bassett questioned Dr. Proctor, Dr. Proctor had to admit that TIRC members made investments in research in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
As this document explains for the '50 and early '60s time period, my client's investment alone in research was more than the rest of the industry's investment in -- TIRC investment.
The next document I would like to show you, these are -- clipped here are the Liggett documents
that we put into evidence.
The first document that we put into evidence, I would like to discuss with you, is Liggett's 235. What this document reflects is that Liggett's research wasn't a secret to the public health community.
As early as November of 1954, which is the date of this memoranda, Liggett's researchers met with the American Cancer Society.
The next document I want to show you is a big one. It's plaintiff's, Mr. Sloman actually put this in evidence. You will be relieved to know I'm not going to ask you to go through every page.
What I would like to do is highlight some of the information contained in here.
This is a compilation of 10 years of research that Liggett sponsored through Arthur D. Little.
Dr. Proctor actually said some nice things about Arthur D. Little. This was part of the Surgeon General's Report in 1964. You may recall the evidence about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
It was a very, very big deal.
It was also very public. It led to warnings on cigarette packages.
What I would like -- The first thing I would
like to highlight to you is in this research package in volume 1 on page 3, Liggett's researchers concluded, turned it over to the public health authority, that there was a gross statistical association that existed between smoking and death.
In volume 1 on pages 4 and 5 Liggett's researchers go on to say that smokers' death rates are higher because of lung cancer and other cancers.
There is an entire volume 3 that is devoted to -- it's dedicated to research concerning the carcinogenic link to harmful components in cigarette smoke.
It's kind of a fancy term. But it really means cancer smoking.
Lastly, starting on page 69 of appendix A -I know this is a lot of information I'm throwing at you -- you will see that Liggett's researcher,
Dr. Kinsler, also included an entire chapter that talked about habituation and addiction.
This chapter describes nicotine as a highly active pharmacologic agent in tobacco. Now contrary to what Dr. Proctor told you, this submission is full of information concerning the
connection to cancer and smoking and addiction.
These 700 pages of detailed research were handed over, just handed over. My client gave it to the number one public health authority in the country. Liggett wasn't hiding the ball. It certainly wasn't conspiring to do so.
Now, you have heard plaintiff's expert sort of brush off Liggett's research saying it was, essentially, meaningless. Actually the exact words he used were "no good." He said it was no good.
Well, certainly as the evidence in this case and on this table reflects, that was not the feeling of the country's leaders in the public health community.
I would like to point out Liggett's 219.
It's a letter. The print is really small. It's part of the reason I'm not putting stuff up on the board because I think we will all be wearing glasses by the end of this case.
By but I would like to read part of the letter to you. We feel that -- the letter -- I'm sorry, is from the assistant Surgeon General who wrote to Dr. Kinsler and ADL, Arthur D. Little:
We feel that simple acknowledgment of the receipt of the nine volumes which you submitted to
us is not sufficient. Please accept on behalf of Liggett and Arthur D. little our special gratitude for the tremendous time, effort and expense in the production of the materials for our use. And the "our" is the Surgeon General.
The last document that I would like to discuss with you, ladies and gentlemen, is Liggett 6965. It's a memorandum from C. F. Woodward who is the chief or top tobacco researcher with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. This memorandum -- it's quite long; I'm not going to read it to you -- it describes and praises Liggett for what he terms as 10 years of productive collaboration with the public health authority.
I would like to switch gears a little bit and I would like to review with you the evidence that Dr. Proctor didn't really know anything about and it concerns the person at the heart of this case, Paul Baum and his limited use of my client's products decades ago.
Now, you already heard Paul Baum only smoked one of my brands, Chesterfield. Dr. Irving Baum was the only witness who testified about Chesterfield use and it ended in the 1950s.
Paul Baum smoked at least two other brands in
the 1950s. During the 1950s Dr. Baum was not with his brother for the entire time. You will recall Paul Baum spent four years in the Navy.
Ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiff is required to make a causal showing as to each defendant. The use of my client's product over 60 years ago for even a 6- to 10-year time period could not have been the legal cause of Paul Baum's alleged COPD that plaintiff claims developed in the '90s.
Paul Baum continued to smoke long after he stopped smoking my client's single product in the 1950s.
Now, you have seen a lot of ads. You saw some more today. You have seen TV shows that were sponsored by my client, ads from my client, TV shows.
What did Dr. Baum tell you? His brother smoked because of his peers, not because of advertising.
The plaintiff has presented no evidence that Paul Baum saw anything that you all have seen, none of the ads you have seen, none of the programs you have seen sponsored by my client, there is no evidence it was ever seen that Paul Baum ever seen
them, none.
Dr. Baum's only statement that he attributes to his brother regarding any tobacco company sponsored representation -- you have seen it a couple of times here today -- it took place after the Surgeon General's Report was published, after the 1950s and after he put down my client's product.
Based upon Dr. Baum's testimony, the evidence is clear that my client had nothing to do -- that my client did or said nothing that caused his brother to either start smoking my client's product or continued smoking it in the '50s. I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that Liggett did not conspire to fraudulently conceal information and there is no evidence whatsoever that Liggett influenced Mr. Baum's smoking decisions.
Certainly, my client did not engage in any intentional misconduct that would support punitive damages entitlement, and plaintiff has not even come remotely close to making a clear and convincing showing of that.
As the evidence is clear, Mr. Baum knew for decades, decades, dating back well beyond the '90s about the health effects of smoking.
We ask that you check no to every question on the jury verdict form pertaining to my client and all the defendants.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, I will wrap up by saying that we all understand that Mr. Baum's passing is hard. It's hard. Loss is hard. It's hard on the family. We do.
Everyone recognizes, Mrs. Baum's tremendous love and care that she extended to Mr. Baum through his many illnesses as he lived to be 76 years of age. It's understandable to empathize.
However, despite your natural feelings or sympathy, when we began this process as jurors you took an oath. The oath was to follow the evidence and to base your decision upon the evidence.
The Judge will instruct you that in reaching your verdict, you should not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against a party influence your decision.
As every fact witness in this case has testified Paul Baum made his own decisions. We ask you to render a verdict in favor of my client and all the defendants in this case.
On behalf of Liggett, the defendants, and I would say everyone in this courtroom, I just want
to conclude by, again, saying thank you for your time, for your careful consideration of the evidence and for the sacrifices we know you have made to serve here on this jury. Thank you.
