MR. REILLY:
It's still good morning, everybody,
so good morning.
I began my opening statement by thanking you for
your service that you hadn't yet performed but you had
been selected for, so now at the beginning of my closing
argument I'm going to thank you for your service as
Mr. Smith did.
Obviously we've taken you from your homes, your
families, your normal lives, and you've spent two weeks
and two days with us.
I hope it's been informative and
interesting.
And now you're on to what we brought you
here for, and that is to resolve this civil dispute.
And as you can see in front of me, I have a stack
of boards.
And you can remember when I began my -- when
I presented my opening statement, I used lots of boards.
I'm old fashion, I use lots of boards to communicate
what I thought the evidence was going to be.
And I
predicted that I would be using many of the very same
boards when I addressed you in closing argument, because
I was confident that what I had on these boards is
exactly what the evidence was going to be.
And sure
enough, I have many of the same boards.
As you can see
they have grown, multiplied.
They've grown and
multiplied, because what I've supplemented them with are
actual passages of testimony that occurred in this case. 3313
What happens every day is the court reporter takes
down everything that occurs in this courtroom, all the
questions that are asked, all the answers that are
given.
And then at the end of every day we get what
they call a daily transcript.
So we have -- and it's
measured by page and line number, so we know exactly
what's been testified to.
And so as I go through my closing argument, I'm
going to show you some of the exact testimony that
occurred right here in this courtroom just to refresh
your recollection as to who said what.
What did they
really say?
Now, I warned you, forewarned you at the beginning
of my opening statement, that at the end of the case
Judge Tygart was going to give you pages of jury
instructions, and you are going to get pages of jury
instructions.
I think every one will get a set of
instructions, and I warned you that they will be filled
with legal terms, lots and lots of legal terms, and they
are.
And I said the same is going to apply to the
Verdict Form, you're going to get pages of the Verdict
Form.
And that too has lots of legal terms.
But I said to you what can we distill all that
down to?
What is this case -- back to my opening 3314
statement, what is this case really going to be about?
And I put up this board.
Can everybody see that?
Okay.
I'll try to not stand in the way.
I'm sorry.
And I said look, this case is going to be about
control and responsibility.
First of all, I said this is not a class action,
this is not about the American public or even the
Florida public.
This case is about one smoker and one
smoker only, and it's the decisions that that smoker
made about beginning to smoke, continuing to smoke, and
whether or not he quit.
And I said this was -- this
case is going to be about control.
Who is in control
of -- who is that?
It's William Bowden, Junior, right?
That's what you're here all about, the decisions made by
Mr. William Bowden, Junior.
Say that five times fast.
Now, I said, you know, control.
This is going to
relate to the decisions that he made about how he lived
his life, including, of course, most importantly the
decisions he made about whether he was going to begin to
smoke, continue to smoke, and either continue or quit.
And I said part of what you're going to be hearing
about in the course of this trial is whether or not
Mr. Bowden smoked because he enjoyed smoking, or did he
smoke because he became addicted and an involuntary
smoker?
So that's going to be a big part of what 3315
happens in this courtroom.
You're going to be -- people
are you're going to get asked whether or not Mr. Bowden
enjoyed smoking.
Did he smoke because he enjoyed it?
You know, it's a pleasurable thing.
Did he smoke
because he enjoyed it?
And then there was also going to be the question
of whether or not Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds
actually controlled whether or not he smoked or not.
Did they do anything more, really, in connection with
Mr. Bowden alone, because that's the smoker in this
case, other than make the cigarettes that he bought;
advertise them and make the cigarettes that he bought?
That's really what control was all about.
And then I said when you get past control, then
you'll be able to address responsibility, and that's
your guys' job, to determine whether or not, and they've
acknowledged -- of course they had to acknowledge in
this case in light of the personal history of Mr.
Bowden, they had to acknowledge that Mr. Bowden through
the choices, the decisions, the life-style decisions he
made in connection with smoking in particular, the
decisions he made about smoking caused him to develop
his lung cancer and die.
They had to admit that.
And so what's left?
What's left for you guys to
decide is whether or not Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds 3316
have responsibility as well.
Now, I told you these two words would not appear
in the Verdict Form and wouldn't appear in the
instructions, and they don't.
They don't.
And we now have -- you're going to -- when all the
opening statements -- closing arguments, I'm sorry, when
the closing arguments are done, then you're going to get
the actual Verdict Form, and it's going to ask you to
answer a series of questions, and it's up to you guys
how many questions you think need to be answered in this
case.
The first question that's going to get asked, and
this is exactly how it's going to read, is Question
Number 1, Engle class member.
Was Mr. Bowden addicted
to cigarettes containing nicotine?
And, if so, was
cigarette smoking, because of such addiction, a legal
cause of his lung cancer and death?
Well, you know that's actually truly three
questions at once.
The first question is:
Was Mr.
Bowden addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
You
can put a period right there, because that's a question
all by itself.
You're right, it should be a question
mark.
There we go.
How's that?
And the second question then is:
If he was --
that's the first questioning you have to decide for 3317
yourselves, was he addicted.
If he was, was cigarette
smoking a cause of such addiction, a legal cause of his
lung cancer and death?
So we're already into very complex legal terms
here.
And implied in this is the question of well, why
did he get his lung cancer?
Was it really caused by
cigarette smoking?
Did they actually prove that?
Well, I'm going to address the first two questions
now in my closing argument, and Mark Seiden is going to
talk to you about that third implied question.
So what was the evidence in this case about
whether or not Mr. Bowden was truly addicted?
Well,
Judge Tygart is not going to give you a definition of
addiction, and he's not going to give you a test for
determining whether or not Mr. Bowden truly was addicted
or not.
It's not going to come in the instructions.
So it is up to you guys to decide collectively
what's the definition you're going to apply, and what is
the standard you're going to use to determine whether or
not Mr. Bowden was truly addicted or not?
There were a few medical experts who came here and
addressed that subject.
One was their Dr. Hurt and our
Dr. Kaplan, and they did agree on a couple of things.
Here's one of the most important ones, and that was can 3318
you determine whether somebody is addicted to cigarettes
just by knowing if they smoked a lot of cigarettes over
a long period of time?
And they both agreed they can't
tell just based on smoking a lot of cigarettes over a
long period of time.
Here's the trial transcript page and line numbers.
This is their exact testimony.
Dr. Hurt was asked, I think by his own counsel:
"I understand, Doctor, you said that not all
smokers are not addicted?
That's correct.
Okay.
In fact, not all smokers who smoke lots of
cigarettes over a long period of time are addicted?
That's correct."
That's their expert.
Dr. Kaplan, I asked Dr. Kaplan:
"Okay.
Can people who smoke a pack or two a day
and do it a long time and still not be addicted?"
He said sure they can.
Both experts agree on that.
So, did Mr. Bowden
smoke a lot of cigarettes over a long period of time?
There's no question about that.
But does that answer the question in the opinions
of these two experts together?
No.
Now, Dr. Kaplan -- this that was interesting to 3319
listen to how he described him.
Dr. Kaplan is a board
certified psychiatrist.
Board certified.
He's the only
board certified psychiatrist that came here and talked
to you folks.
He's a diplomat of the American Board of
psychiatry and neurology.
Mr. Smith said he has only treated 1 percent of
his patients for nicotine addiction or nicotine.
That's
not right.
What he said was that he ordinarily doesn't have
people come to him solely to deal with cigarette
smoking, and that makes sense.
Most people -- during
the course of this trial you heard that 90 percent of
all folks who quit smoking quit without any medical
intervention whatsoever.
The don't ordinarily end up going to a
psychiatrist just to stop smoking.
But in his practice,
he said:
Personally in my clinical practice I've
treated thousands of patients who have come to me for
other reasons, and during the course of that care and
treatment I've diagnosed them as to whether or not they
were nicotine dependent, and whether they were dependent
or not, whether they were addicted or not, I treated
them, I assisted them if they wanted assistance in
quitting smoking if that's what they wanted to do,
thousands. 3320
In addition to that, he was the director of the
alcohol and drug treatment program.
This is what he
started back in the '90s, charter hospital, care unit,
two different hospitals in Tampa, Florida.
He's the guy that was in charge of the drug unit
and, in part, he's the guy that created smoking
cessation programs in both those hospitals.
So, yes, today he's chosen to no longer go to the
hospital, but that's a personal choice he made, not
because he's not qualified to work in hospitals.
He's the guy that created these tracks that
charter in the care unit for treating and assisting
folks in smoking cessation.
What did he say?
I forget
whether it was hundreds or thousands of patients doing
that right there in Tampa.
He said he doesn't teach anybody.
That's flat
wrong.
He told you that he voluntarily teaches at the
South Florida -- what it is, South Florida Medical
School right there in Tampa.
Volunteers.
How many doctors do you know that
volunteer their time like he does?
And what does he
teach them?
He teaches them about addiction and
nicotine dependence in particular.
That's what he
testified to.
Now, he's been -- his qualifications have been 3321
accepted 16 times to come and testify in courts in state
court and federal court here in Florida on this very
subject.
Now, Mr. Smith said that before I met him on an
airplane and used my charming personality to convince
him to come and engage in this kind of work, that he was
already a forensic medicine -- board certified in
forensic medicine, and the state of Florida hires him, a
bunch of other folks hire him to come and testify about
a variety of situations.
That is Dr. Kaplan.
Now, Dr. Kaplan explained to you how he went about
assessing whether or not Mr. Bowden is truly addicted.
And he said -- I used -- first of all, what did he do?
What did he do in this case?
He read every deposition
of every person who gave testimony pretrial so that he
could have a complete picture, as complete a picture as
could be given through this litigation process of Mr.
Bowden, and Mr. Bowden's decisions and smoking behavior.
4,000 pages.
And then what did he do?
He took that information
and he put it together with -- he used these two manuals
put out by the American Psychiatric Association, the
APA, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Roman Number
IV-TR, and the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual Number
5. 3322
And he took you through -- he took you through --
remember this page?
He put it up on the Elmo, or put it
up on the screen, and he walked you through all of these
criteria, including the second page that has to do with
withdrawal symptoms.
He walked you through each and
every element, including the over-arching requirements
of a maladaptive pattern of substance use leading to
clinically significant impairment.
He explained it all
to you in detail.
I only have an hour and a half, so I can't go
through it all with you right now, but he did it all in
detail with you guys so that you would have as good of
an understanding as we can give you in this court of law
about whether or not Mr. Bowden really met a rigorous
criteria.
What did he call this?
He called this the
gold standard.
Do you remember that?
He said this is
the gold standard for how physicians determine whether
or not someone is truly addicted.
We folks, we nonmedical people use the term
addiction all the time.
We're addicted to, you know,
we're addicted to shoes, we're addicted to exercise.
We're addicted to a variety of things, right?
We use
the term in common parlance.
The official diagnosis,
that's the test, that's the gold standard.
This is a statement by their expert.
What was his 3323
conclusion?
Before I leave this, what was his
conclusion?
His conclusion was that Mr. Bowden didn't
meet the criteria for substance dependence, in this
particular instance nicotine addiction, right?
He said
he doesn't meet the criteria.
Did anybody come here and say this isn't the gold
standard?
No.
Did anybody come here and say oh, Doctor, you've
gone through this analysis improperly?
No.
There it is.
That's the one person who went
through the gold standard with you folks in this
courtroom, the one guy.
Here's another statement by their expert,
Dr. Hurt, in describing the fact there are people who
smoke lots of cigarettes over a long period of time and
don't become addicted.
He nicknamed them Uncle Charlie.
I don't remember if you remember this part, but he
nicknamed them Uncle Charlie.
And he had some things he
said about it.
Then there's people called Uncle Charlie.
Uncle
Charlie smoked a pack and a half a day for 30 years.
These dots are -- he said he was unemployed, and he said
he was something else.
One day announces to the family
I'm going to stop smoking, and he did, no withdrawal, no
problems.
And he said this guy is not addicted, uncle 3324
Charlie is not addicted.
All right.
Then when Mr. Smith was asking him questions about
the DSM, and about how he diagnosed whether or not
Mr. Bowden was truly addicted or not.
This is his
testimony.
You can see from the question, Mr. Smith started
off by saying:
Why didn't you use, and then he
switched.
He said:
Why do you not use at the Mayo Clinic
the DSM-IV, or now the DSM-5 in making the assessment?
Well, that was wrong.
They do, because look at
the answer he gave.
Well, we do.
Of course at the Mayo Clinic do they use the gold
standard?
Of course they do.
He's ask why don't you use it?
He said, We do.
He went on to say but we don't use it only.
As
explained earlier, we use -- we talk to the patient
because it, again, is a patient-centered academic
center.
We are academics, and so we want to make sure
we get the diagnoses right.
Well, all doctors want to get the diagnoses right.
Remember, this is the guy when we're talking
about -- who came here?
Dr. Hurt is the guy that
lectures to the plaintiff's lawyers on how to 3325
successfully pursue these cases, remember that?
Do you remember he's the guy that said I lecture
about -- I never give a yes or no answer.
And he said I
always get my message in.
And do you remember there were several times I
would ask him what was, frankly, just a yes or no
question.
And then he would go on and on and on.
And I
said, Doctor, is that an example of you getting your
message in?
Yeah.
He said:
But there are many other factors that go
into this other than some of those written criteria.
Then he went on for another two or three pages.
This is what he did.
This is how he made his
decision as to whether or not Mr. Bowden was addicted.
This is exactly what he said.
This is the question from
Mr. Smith:
Is the method you used in arriving at your opinion
that Mr. Bowden was addicted to nicotine the same as you
commonly employ at the Mayo Clinic?
That's correct.
And heavy necessary of smoking -- that's what
Mr. Smith was calling the heaviness of smoking index, is
the easiest one.
So when we teach physicians on how to
do this, we say we know your busy and we know it's hard
to do, but you need to ask people about their smoking 3326
behavior.
You need to advise them to stop smoking.
By the way, if you want to know where they are on
a scale of addiction, just ask these two questions:
Time before first cigarette;
And, two was how much they smoked.
And that will give you -- that will give you a
clue as to what you're dealing with.
And if we can get
clinicians to do that, that's a pretty good deal.
So now, ladies and gentlemen, we're here in a
court of law, and Mr. Avera just asked to you award
$6 million, $6 million in this case.
And you got to ask yourselves what standard in
this court of law am I going to apply when I'm
considering a request for something like $6 million.
Are you going to use the test that's the gold
standard, or are you going to use the test that will
give you a clue?
That's undisputed testimony from the very
Dr. Hurt.
That's what he gave you.
The test he gave
you, the results he gave you, gave you nothing more, by
his own admission, a clue.
So now you folks have to decide well, what
standard am I going to apply.
What standard, what
criteria will I have to go along with my standard in
this court of law?
An important place to be. 3327
All right if after all that you've seen -- and by
the way -- by the way, using this standard:
Time before
a first cigarette and how much they smoked, could you
ever know whether the person you're dealing with is
Uncle Charlie or a truly addicted person?
Could you
ever possibly know that with this little clue test?
No
way.
There is no way to differentiate between an
addicted and a nonaddicted smoker with the little clue
test.
That's not possible.
So what's the answer to this question?
Well, if
you guys conclude that you ought to be applying the gold
standard test, I don't think there's any -- there's no
other evidence in this case other than does it meet the
gold standard?
And I don't have the burden of proof.
I didn't
have the obligation to bring you somebody and present to
you gold standard and say yes, does it meet it, or no it
doesn't, but I did.
But I did.
So now what's the answer to this question?
Well,
if you apply the gold standard then the answer is no.
If all you need to know is a clue -- each and every one
of you has to address this issue.
You have to
unanimously decide whether or not your apply the clue,
or the gold standard.
And then you really and truly
believe that they've proved their case that Mr. Bowden 3328
was addicted.
If your answer to this question is no, then you
stop there, because you don't have to answer the second
half of the question, or the third half.
I guess that's
not possible.
There's not three, sorry.
You don't have to follow up with the next two
questions.
You only stop there, answer no, and then you
do nothing further with the rest of the Verdict Form
except sign it and return it.
Now, if unanimously you all decide that you got to
go on and answer the second question, then you have to
address this question:
Was cigarette smoking because of
such addiction a legal cause for his lung cancer and
death?
Now here, it has to be because of addiction, and
it has to be a legal cause.
Now, there's that term "legal cause."
And I told
you we were -- I said law students spend three years in
law school trying to figure out what this is, and we
give it to you in two weeks and expect you to not only
understand it, but apply it, and that's a challenge.
And here it is.
This is the introductory.
That's
the same question.
So I'm just going to drop down to
the operative part, the definition of legal cause.
It's
complicated enough. 3329
It says:
Smoking because of addiction is the
legal cause of death if it directly and in natural and
continuous sequence produces -- in other words it has to
do it by itself, or contributes substantially to
producing the death so it can be said -- and here's the
most important language -- but for an addiction to
cigarettes containing nicotine, death would not have
occurred.
Now, it goes on to say -- I don't have room on
this board for everything, but it goes on to say there
can be more than one legal cause, but there doesn't have
to be.
And it doesn't reduce the obligation of proving
that addiction was a "but for" reason why Mr. Bowden
developed his lung cancer and died.
Now, in order to know why did Mr. Bowden smoke all
those years?
Long enough -- if smoking was the cause of
his lung cancer, long enough to develop lung cancer, why
did he smoke all those years?
Was he an involuntary smoker who didn't enjoy
smoking?
Was he compelled to smoke against his will?
Or was he somebody that really and truly enjoyed
smoking?
There's are folks who really and truly enjoy
smoking and smoke because it's a pleasurable thing to
do.
And so how will you know the answer to that 3330
question?
Well, don't you want to look at what people
who were there when he was around both heard him say and
watched what he did?
Don't you want to hear from them,
and don't you want to see -- don't you want to see how
he reacted when people would suggest to him that he quit
smoking?
Don't you want to see when finally when he's --
what is he, 67, 66, 67 years old, when for the very
first time in his life he makes any effort whatsoever to
quit smoking, don't you want to see what effort he put
into it?
In order to figure out whether addiction is up
here for a reason, or whether he's smoking because,
against the advice of everybody else, he enjoys it and
wants to keep doing it, you know what?
This is not a
criticism of Mr. Bowden, how he lives his life.
This is
a legal thing for people to do here in the United
States.
But don't you want to know that?
So what I did is
I pulled out the testimony of some folks.
Starting from the very beginning.
Here is Bonnie
Tillman, this is his sister.
And she's going to be
talking began him in the '40s and '50s.
What does she say?
Here's a question that was
posed: 3331
"Do you have any perception if Mr. Bowden enjoyed
smoking?
I think he really did.
Okay.
Did he seem to be enjoying himself when he
was smoking and socializing with people?
What that a
time -- was that a time he seemed to enjoy smoking to
you?
I would say yes."
That's his sister going back to the '40s and '50s.
You know that Mrs. Bowden meets him in 1953.
They
date, they marry.
You know, once they're married what
he does first thing in the morning is going to be known
to Mrs. Bowden, right?
And so there are folks who enjoy smoking with a
cup of coffee in the morning.
That's how they wake up,
right?
And it's thoroughly enjoyable.
Here's Mrs. Bowden:
"All right.
How many cups would he have in the
morning just to get started?
He probably drank two or three in the morning
before noon.
All right.
And he enjoyed having a cigarette in
the morning when he had his coffee?
Yes."
That's Mrs. Bowden, the plaintiff in this case, 3332
acknowledging Mr. Bowden enjoyed having a cup of coffee
in the morning with a cigarette.
This is -- I'm going to run out of space.
Just a
second.
That's an occupational hazard of using boards.
Okay.
Ted Bowden, we know he's born in 1951.
And
he's going to be talking about -- what is it, late 50s,
early 60s, straight on through the rest of his dad's
life.
"And he would say it was because he liked the
taste, right?
That's correct."
This is talking about why he smoked.
"He liked the taste.
And he told you he enjoyed smoking cigarettes?
Yes, he did.
That's a quote.
He told you he enjoyed smoking cigarettes?
Yes, he did.
He would say to you, I enjoy smoking cigarettes,
right?
Yes.
He would say that from early on.
And you believed he seemed to enjoy smoking
cigarettes?
That's correct."
That's from his son.
And that's -- I don't know.
Is that -- we don't 3333
have exact dates.
Is that the late '50s?
Is that the
early '60s?
Straight on through from early on.
Here's Ted again:
"From your observations, he appeared relaxed when
he smoked?
Yes, it did relax him."
Does smoking relax people?
Sure.
Does nicotine play a significant role in that?
Sure.
People have known that for 150 years.
Here's his grandson, Christopher Marvin.
"Mr. Bowden would sometimes say to you that
smoking relaxed him?
I don't know if he said it directly to me but I --
I can -- you know, you can remember hearing him say
that, though, yeah.
For example, when you observed that he was edgy or
worked up, smoking would help take his mind off the
situation?
Correct.
Correct."
Here's Mrs. Bowden again.
This is -- you know, Mr. Smith just a minute ago
in his closing argument talked about getting up at night
to smoke.
This is what Mrs. Bowden actually said:
"During your marriage were there times when 3334
Mr. Bowden would get up at night to smoke?
Yes.
How often would he do that?
Well, if he had a lot on his mind and he wasn't
sleeping well, then he would get up.
He would go out
and have a cigarette."
Now is that a very different story than what you
just heard?
Do people use cigarettes to relax?
Sure.
Did Mr. Bowden do that?
Absolutely.
And did he do it at night sometimes when he had a
lot on his mind and he wasn't sleeping well?
Sure.
Is that addiction or is that using a cigarette to
help him relax?
Here's Mrs. Bowden again.
All right.
And at the same time -- remember,
Mr. Cook married their daughter Tammy in the late '80s.
So Mr. Cook is coming over to the Bowden house, late
'80s.
I think it's '88 -- '89, '90-'91.
All right.
"At the same time Mr. Cook used to come over to
your house a lot?
Yes, he did.
And Tammy, of course, would come with him?
Yes.
All right.
So they enjoyed going out on your back 3335
patio after dinner and socializing?"
And I didn't ask her this, she volunteered it:
"And smoking with my husband.
And smoking with her your husband?
Uh-huh (affirmative).
That was a -- that was one of the things that they
truly enjoyed doing?"
I mean, look at that.
Truly enjoyed doing?
I
think so.
I think so.
That's Mrs. Bowden.
All right.
How did
Mr. Bowden respond when people would tell him to quit?
For the sake of space, I reduced this down.
Mrs. Bowden said he would shrug me off, he would ignore
me.
He was going to do whatever he wanted to do.
His daughter Tammy, he pooh-poohed her advice, he
blew her off.
Now, sometimes he would say occasionally -- I
think we had two quotes that he would say I'm addicted,
I can't stop.
Sure.
But he said -- that's what he said
most often right there.
And there are all the folks who actually talked to
him and said he enjoyed it, they observed him enjoying
it, and that's how he used the cigarette.
Can you tell somebody's attitude about whether
they really want to stop smoking by their quit efforts? 3336
Sure.
Sure.
This is another thing that Dr. Kaplan and Dr. Hurt
agreed on, and that was in the medical world if you're
evaluating a patient and you're trying to figure out
whether they're serious about quitting, you look and see
how long they quit for.
And if they don't quit for at
least 24 hours, they have not made a serious quit
attempt.
They both agreed on it.
There's Dr. Hurt:
"More people who do addiction research, addiction
specialists, they have a definition for a serious quit
attempt, don't they?
Yes.
And that's a quit attempt lasting more than a day,
that's 24 hours or longer?
Yes."
Here's Dr. Kaplan:
"And you know there's a description of attempts to
quit.
I don't think his attempts to quit would be
considered serious.
They didn't occur for 24 hours or
greater."
In fact, in this courtroom nobody said that
Mr. Bowden quit for 24 hours.
The longest anybody said
he quit for was his son -- his grandson Christopher, and 3337
he said well, he quit for eight hours but he went to bed
and woke up the next morning and smoked.
You remember that -- when did Mr. Bowden quit for
the very first time?
It was after his son-in-law,
Mr. Cook, quit in -- it's either '89 or '90.
Mr. Bowden
is at that point, what, 65 years old?
For the first time at 65, Mr. Bowden -- Mr. Cook
says I'm going to quit.
Mr. Cook is, like, 40-something
years old.
He said I've smoked long enough, I'm not
going to do this anymore.
And he quit and he used
mints.
Remember, he ate a mint instead of smoking a
cigarette.
So he recommended both to his wife Tammy and
Mr. Bowden that they both quit too, and Tammy quit.
Tammy quit cold turkey, and that was that.
Mr. Bowden didn't quit then, didn't try to quit
then.
But Christopher said he followed the example of
Mr. Cook and for a little while he would eat a Werther's
caramel candy, and he would delay smoking a cigarette
for a little while.
He said all that did was result in
eating some candies for a little while and not quitting
at all.
That's it.
Now he also used a patch.
You heard he used a
patch.
But what you heard was that he went to his 3338
doctor.
He was diagnosed with hypertension, like, in
1991 or -- it must have been '92 because the patch
didn't become available until by prescription only until
1992.
His hypertension physician said you need to stop
smoking.
I'm going to prescribe you the patch.
He prescribed the patch.
We went to the store, he
got the patch, and he put it on and he smoked, and he
smoked.
And yes, Dr. Hurt said there are some people that
need more than one patch.
But Dr. Kaplan told you, you
know what?
If you're a pack, pack and a half, two pack
a day smoker, a 21-milligram patch is more than
sufficient to take away that nicotine craving if that's
what you have.
But what Mr. Bowden did was not follow even the
most fundamental of the requirements of using the patch,
and then he didn't use it anymore.
And did he go back to his doctor and say doc, you
know what?
This didn't work.
I want to quit.
I need
some more help?
Nope.
So what else?
If you are really intent on
quitting smoking, what do you do?
It's like anything
else.
First thing you do is you get rid of whatever it
is you don't want to use, right? 3339
If you want to quit eating Dunkin' Donuts, you
stop going to the Dunkin' Donuts store, right?
Did Mr. Bowden ever throw his cigarettes away?
No.
Did he ever throw his ashtrays or lighters or
matches away so he wouldn't have all that stuff lying
around?
Never.
Mrs. Bowden said that he found that there was
someplace you could go to be hypnotized, but did he go?
Did he get in his car?
Did he call and make an
appointment?
No.
Did he ever attend a smoking cessation program?
Never.
And we put in evidence that there were smoking
cessation programs here in Jacksonville.
In fact, it
was easy to find in the paper going back to 1962.
We showed multiple -- just randomly going through
the paper, we found multiple opportunities put on by the
Latter Day Saints, I think it was, the American Cancer
Society, for free.
Did Mr. Bowden ever make an inquiry about going to
a smoking cessation program?
No.
He smoked while using a patch, never quit for more
than a day.
So is this somebody who seriously wanted to quit 3340
smoking?
You guys have to decide that based on -- this
isn't a class action, this isn't a case about smokers in
general or the American public.
This is a case about
one smoker, and one smoker only.
Did Mr. Bowden ever quit?
Well, I don't know.
I
don't know.
I know that Dr. Wolfe said that Mr. Bowden
said he did.
Mr. Bowden in 1994, when he saw Dr. Wolfe in
August said he did, and Mrs. Bowden said he didn't.
I
didn't know the answer to that.
I know that Dr. Wolfe did a physical examination
on this date, it's in the medical records.
He got close
enough to look at his teeth and listen to his heart.
So
if Mr. Bowden was still a pack and a half, two pack a
day smoker, don't you think Mr. Wolfe would smell
cigarette smoke on him?
That's just common sense.
If, in fact, he quit for two months, then all the
nicotine is out of his body.
If he had any withdrawal
symptoms, they're all gone.
If he had an up-regulation
in neuro receptors, they're either back to normal or on
their way back to normal.
But I don't know whether he quit or didn't, I
don't know.
But that is information in this case.
But
if he did, he certainly could when he was motivated to
do so. 3341
All right.
So that's the actual evidence in this
case in connection with Question 2.
Why did Mr. Bowden smoke for all those years?
Why
did he do that?
Was addiction a but-for reason why he
smoked all those years?
Would he have stopped smoking
if he hadn't been addicted?
That's the question you
have to ask yourself.
Would Mr. Bowden truly have stopped smoking if he
hadn't been addicted, if you've concluded that he was
addicted?
Because if your conclusion is no, he wouldn't
quit smoking, then addiction wasn't the but-for reason
why he smoked all those years.
If he would have continued to smoke because of
enjoyment or pleasure, then addiction isn't a but-for
reason.
Now, here you have two questions:
If some of you
folks think I don't think he was addicted, and some of
you folks think well, I think he was addicted, but I
don't think addiction was a but-for reason why he
continued to smoke, but all together, you all conclude
that for one reason or another the answer to this
question ought to be no, then your answer to that
question is no, and your work is done and don't go on
further in the Verdict Form.
That's how this works.
On the other hand, if unanimously all of you 3342
conclude that Mr. Bowden was both addicted and you
believe his addiction was a but-for reason why he
continued to smoke, then you have to proceed in the
Verdict Form, and you have to answer more questions.
Here's the second question.
You also have to
decide whether or not smoking cigarettes was a legal
cause of why he developed his cancer and died, and I'm
going to leave that to Mark Seiden to talk to you about,
because you already know about his significant family
history of cancer, you also know that he smoked a lot of
cigarettes over a long period of time, so I'm going to
let Mark talk to you about that.
I'm going to move to the third and fourth
questions on this Verdict Form.
This is where the
legal-ease gets really heavy.
State for each defendant whether the concealment
or omission of a material fact about the health effects
or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, were
a legal cause of Mr. Bowden's lung cancer and death.
This is concealment or omission of a material fact
about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking.
Health effects or addictive nature.
What does that boil down to?
Was there something
that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds failed to say about
whether or not smoking could cause health problems, or 3343
the addictiveness of cigarettes?
That was a but-for
reason on why Mr. Bowden developed his lung cancer and
died.
And here, again, is that same question again.
And
once again we have that but-for requirement for legal
cause.
Now, it's a complicated concept, but you can't
jump over it you can't ignore it.
It's the heart of
Question 3 and 4, right?
It was the heart of
Question 1.
Now it's the heart of Question 3 and 4.
And here's that but-for language.
Now, what does this boil down to?
What does it
really mean?
I put this little chart to help you
understand this concept.
Whatever it is they're complaining that Philip
Morris, R.J. Reynolds failed to say, has to have had a
direct connection with Mr. Bowden.
In other words, he
had to have been waiting to hear from them, waiting to
hear from Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds that smoking
could cause you to get sick, or smoking could be
addictive.
And then they have to show not only that he was
waiting to hear for it, but that if Philip Morris or
R.J. Reynolds had only said something, that he would
have done what?
That he would have not started smoking, 3344
or that he would have quit in time to avoid getting lung
cancer.
That's how pivotal -- that's how pivotal this
requirement of but-for is.
So they have to show not only that he's waiting to
hear for it, but that it would have had a substantial
impact on him.
How substantial?
He would have changed
his behavior.
He either wouldn't have started, or he
would have quit or quit in time to avoid developing his
lung cancer.
And if they haven't proved that, then the answer
to these two questions for each defendant is no, period.
Now, how will you know the answer to these
questions in Mr. Bowden's case?
Well, don't you have to have a review of the
evidence about Mr. Bowden?
Not simply was there some
speech given by some representative or a deposition, or
a deposition taken in a lawsuit of some former official
of the cigarette company.
Don't you have to look back at Mr. Bowden and his
life and see whether or not -- see what he knew, when he
knew it, and what he's doing about it, so that you can
fairly determine whether or not -- whatever it is
they're complaining that R.J. Reynolds or Phillip Morris
didn't say would have been so pivotal that Mr. Bowden 3345
would have either not begin smoking, or would have quit
in time to avoid getting lung cancer.
So this is where I take us back to the timeline
that I put up in the beginning of this case, because
this is Mr. Bowden's life.
And I'm going to walk you
back through it again -- not as slowly as I did the
first time, I promise, but just to hit the highlights of
not only what was going on in Mr. Bowden's life with his
friends and family, his close relatives, but also what
was Mr. Bowden being exposed to personally.
Well, why did Mr. Bowden start smoking?
Nobody
knows.
Nobody came here and told you I know why
Mr. Bowden started smoking.
Nobody.
Because Mr. Bowden
-- nobody -- if there was anybody around when he had his
first cigarette, or his 10th, or his 100th, there's
nobody here that came and told you about that, nobody.
What we did learn was that he had parents and
older brothers and sisters that smoked.
And you learned
from their expert, Dr. Burns, that when you live in a
family -- these are the questions I asked:
Now, when we
think about Mr. Bowden and beginning smoking, if your
parents smoke, that has a significant possibility of
causing you to smoke, doesn't it?
And he said:
Well, "causing" is a difficult word
to use in that context.
It's one of the forces that 3346
predict you're likely to become a cigarette smoker, yes.
And then I asked:
Another predictor is whether
your siblings, that's your brothers and sisters smoked?
That's correct.
And did you know that Mr. Bowden had an older
brother and older sister and both of them smoked?
Yes.
So that's another significant predictor in whether
or not somebody like Mr. Bowden is going to smoke?
Correct.
Correct.
They talk about advertising.
They talked about
advertising, and they brought Dr. Kyriakoudes.
Remember Dr. Kyriakoudes?
He also lectures to
plaintiffs lawyers on how to win lawsuits like this.
He's the guy that got paid $30,000, and all he
really needed to know was tell me what brands he smoked
and when he smoked them, that's all I need to know.
He was asked point blank:
"You're not here to tell this jury why Mr. Bowden
begin to smoke?
No.
I haven't mentioned that so far, and I don't
intend to.
You're not here to talk about specifically
Mr. Bowden, whether advertising influenced him
specifically or not, are you?"
I love this answer:
As distinct from the broader 3347
verse of history, no.
I don't even know what the first part means.
No.
Did anybody come here and say that Mr. Bowden was
the kind of guy that was particularly susceptible to
advertising?
No.
Did anybody come here and tell you that Mr. Bowden
ever said that he was influenced by advertising; he had
been smoking or continued smoking?
No.
Did anybody tell you -- as a matter of fact, what
was the attitude in the Bowden home when he was growing
up?
You heard it from his sister Bonnie.
She said
smoking was a no-no in our home.
I told you in my opening statement, I said, you
know, from the very earliest time, what you're going to
learn about Mr. Bowden was he was having people that he
loved and respected were telling him don't smoke,
smoking is bad from the very earliest time.
And there
it was, it came from his sister.
In our household,
smoking was a no-no.
And do we know when Mr. Bowden -- oh, by the way,
I'm not going do show you all these things right now, 3348
but we gave you samples of Reader's Digest, the
encyclopedia, all kinds of stuff, newspaper articles,
showing you that was it any secret that there was
nicotine in tobacco and cigarettes?
No.
Were they called cancer sticks?
Were they called
coffin nails?
Did people know that smoking was harmful
for you, even in the '30s and '40s?
Yes.
Did they link it to lung cancer?
No.
That didn't come until 1950 and beyond.
Did they know that -- did they call it addicting?
Absolutely.
Did they -- and you'll see it.
If you want to
take the time to look in the Reader's Digest articles
that I showed you on the Elmo and more -- that's the
Elmo -- then you're going to see that in a totally
nonsophisticated, available to the American public,
number one magazine in this country, Reader's Digest,
that they were calling cigarettes addicting and that
nicotine was why they did it and it had a
pharmacological affect, they called it a drug.
They did
everything.
Is this some secret that Philip Morris or R.J.
Reynolds was hiding from Mr. Bowden?
Absolutely not.
Was Mr. -- when did Mr. Bowden begin smoking?
We 3349
don't know.
Yeah, he had a cousin who said I think I
remember him smoking before he went in the military.
Well, she didn't remember that he was in World War II.
His sister said I don't remember him smoking
before he came home from the military.
His first wife
said -- he was married in 1946, said I don't remember
him being a smoker.
So when did he begin smoking?
Dr. Burns said, I
don't know.
He reviewed all this stuff too.
He said, I
don't know.
I don't think we'll ever know.
What we do know is -- oh, and by the way, in the
'40s are students here in Florida, right here in
Jacksonville being taught that smoking is bad for your
health and that it's addicting?
Absolutely.
Barbara Dampier, the same cousin that was talking
about her recollection -- she's the 80-year-old lady,
his cousin, and she said she remembers to this day in
her last year of high school when -- she left in the
10th grade.
She remembered that she was being taught
that smoking was bad for your health and it was
addicting in high school right here.
Now is there any way that Mr. Bowden -- she's
being taught in the 10th grade.
Is there any way that
Mr. Bowden doesn't know that?
Is somebody waiting to hear from Philip Morris or 3350
R.J. Reynolds?
No.
Let's go to the '50s.
Let's revisit Mr. Bowden's
life in the '50s.
Oh, and by the way, talking about beginning
smoking, back then in World War II, was smoking
encouraged in the military?
Sure.
You got free
cigarettes in your rations, you got very inexpensive
cigarettes in the PX.
Maybe he started smoking in the
military.
Yeah, he may have, but we don't know.
1950s, and this is when this avalanche of
information, breaking news about connecting smoking with
lung cancer is coming out, and I can tell you, we put
all this stuff in evidence for you guys just as examples
of articles that were appearing in everyday
publications.
Mrs. Bowden testified that she took Reader's
Digest; that they got Life Magazine from her parents.
I
put up -- and that they read the Jacksonville newspaper,
the Florida Times-Union.
I put these documents in as examples of what was
being published here in Jacksonville.
And Mr. Bowden
was described as an intelligent man.
He loved to read
the paper, read Reader's Digest, read LIFE Magazine,
watched the news on television.
That's why we put it in
evidence, so you would have firsthand information about 3351
what Mr. Bowden really was seeing.
All right.
Now, you know he started work at
Southern Bell in 1951.
Did he control his smoking?
Sure, he had to, because as a worker for the company you
can only smoke one smoke break in the morning and one
smoke break in the afternoon.
He meets and marries Mrs. Bowden in 1953.
Along
with Mrs. Bowden, comes what?
A mother and
father-in-law.
And what's your recollection about the position of
Mr. Horne and Mrs. Horne about smoking?
Well, let me refresh your recollection because I
promised you that there would be evidence that
Mr. Bowden would be told from the very beginning by the
people that he loved and respected don't smoke, smoking
is bad for you.
Don't smoke.
And here is the exchange I had, the questions and
answers with Mrs. Bowden about her dad.
I said:
"But your dad was very, very close to smoking,
wasn't he?
Yes.
And there was a rule in your parents' house while
you were there that no one could smoke in the house,
right?
Just an accepted thing.
You knew that dad would 3352
not have liked it.
But smoking was a bad thing -- "
This is conversations between Mr. Horne, her dad,
and Mr. Bowden.
"-- that smoking was a bad thing for him to be
doing, and your dad would have told him that straight
up, wouldn't he?
Yes, he would have.
My dad was very out spoken.
Right.
And so that remained the rule for your husband --
that remained the rule that your husband had to live by:
A father-in-law who was constantly reminding him don't
smoke, smoking is bad for you, and you can't smoke in my
house, right?"
And Mrs. Bowden said:
"Well, he didn't constantly remind him.
You know,
once it was said, that was it.
You knew.
You knew."
Now is this the story -- this is 1953.
This is
before any conspiracy they're talking about, before any
concealment.
This is "you knew."
This is Mr. Bowden's
life.
Let's go back to the timeline for just a second.
You remember Mrs. Bowden began smoking herself in 1952.
Did she begin smoking because of advertising?
No.
She told you that she began smoking against the 3353
will of her parents because she was riding too and from
work with folks that smoked, so she just took it up.
Peers.
Parents, siblings, peers.
Is that how we smoke?
Is that how we begin smoking?
In her case that's
exactly how Mrs. Bowden began smoking.
Now, when she meets Mr. Bowden, the two of them
smoke together.
They're both smoking unfiltered
cigarettes, and they enjoyed smoking together.
But now
in 1954, their first child together is born -- that's
Michael -- and what does Mrs. Bowden do?
She quits
smoking.
Now she didn't tell us in this courtroom why she
quit, but isn't it obvious?
She has a mom, she has a
dad, they're both telling her to quit smoking.
She has
this avalanche of information that she's seeing in
magazines and newspapers that she wants to read, she
gets and she reads, and she has a new baby.
So what
does she do?
She quits smoking, and here's what she
says to her husband:
"All right.
At some point you became -- I saw in
your deposition the word "harping"."
And I said:
"I don't really like that word.
You were
encouraging, let's put it that way."
And she nodded her head. 3354
And I said:
"You were encouraging your husband to stop
smoking?
Yeah.
And you did that for an awful long time in his
life, didn't you?
Yes, I did."
So now let's look at Mr. Bowden's life.
From here in the '50s he has his mother-in-law,
his father-in-law, his wife, all telling him don't
smoke, smoking is bad for you.
And what decision is
Mr. Bowden making at this point in time?
Can you really -- as you sit here right now, can
you really say to yourself gosh, if Philip Morris and
R.J. Reynolds had simply said we agree, smoking --
there's information coming out about lung cancer,
smoking may cause lung cancer, would Mr. Bowden have
changed his mind?
That's what they have to prove to you, is that
whatever it is they're complaining Philip Morris
concealed, it would have made Mr. Bowden do something he
wasn't that would have made him quit.
When his mother-in-law is telling him to quit, his
father-in-law is telling him to quit, his wife is
telling him to quit, do you think if Philip Morris had 3355
written something in the paper and said we agree, that
Mr. Bowden all of a sudden would have said okay, I quit?
He's installing phones at homes.
Can he can
control his smoking?
Of course he has to.
We showed you this survey from the Gallup Poll,
90 percent of the Americans in 1954 had heard smoking
can cause cancer.
Any reason to believe Mr. Bowden is
not one of those?
No.
See it Now.
I think this will appear on your
monitors.
This is, just a short segment from -- there
were television programs.
Here's Edward R. Murrow.
Mrs. Bowden told you in her trial testimony she knew who
Edward R. Murrow was.
He was a very famous broadcaster
of the day.
Her husband watched to watch the news.
Two nightly programs, special program by Edward R.
Murrow, and I think you're going to see -- this is --
Pardon?
See it Now.
Sorry.
It will be on your
monitors.
(Video played:)
"Good evening.
This is See it Now, produced by
the partnership of Friendly and Murrow.
Tonight, the first of two reports on cigarettes
and lung cancer.
In 1952, Drs. Hammond and Horn of the American
Cancer Society began an extended study of the smoking 3356
habits of American men.
Here is Dr. Hammond reporting on the results of
the first two years.
It is now set in my opinion beyond a reasonable
doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the
probability of developing lung cancer.
In my opinion, people should be warned of the
dangers, and they are being warned.
What they then want to do, whether they want to
smoke or not, is their own business."
(Video end.)
MR. REILLY:
There you are, ladies and gentlemen.
Here's this program telling you that people should be
warned and are being warned, and now it's up to you, and
it was up to Mr. Bowden, and what decision did
Mr. Bowden make?
You have programs like this on television.
It's
very personable communications from this man.
We don't
want you to smoke.
Don't smoke.
Smoking is bad for
you.
Let's move on to the '60s.
1962.
Remember,
Mrs. Bowden is more emphatic than simply telling him to
quit.
Now she's telling him you can't smoke in the
house, you can't smoke in the car.
Do you need more reminders than that?
Is it 3357
something that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds could say
that we believe smoking -- that you smoke for nicotine?
Is that going to make Mr. Bowden do something his wife
isn't making him do?
13 million Americans have quit smoking by the
early '60s.
Per capita consumption of cigarettes peaks
in 1963, then you have the Surgeon General's report in
1964.
Very briefly, here's the news coverage.
You know
we only had three channels then:
ABC, CBS -- what did I
say?
ABC, NBC, and CBS, thank you.
And so here's CBS's Special Report with Harry
Reasoner, a young Harry Reasoner.
(Video Played.)
"This is a CBS News Extra, on Smoking and Health:
The findings of the Surgeon General's Committee.
Almost from the moment that cigarettes were
introduced, they were attacked.
But the attack took a
new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report
by the Surgeon General's Committee.
This, in summary, is what the Committee says:
'Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in
men, and data on women smokers points the same way.
Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of
the larynx, and probably the most important cause of 3358
chronic bronchitis.
Cigarette smoking may be related to
other lung diseases.
Male smokers have a much higher death rate from
heart disease, although it's not proven that smoking is
the cause.
On the question of filters, the Committee says
there is no evidence that they do any good, but it
didn't exclude the possibility that an affective filter
might be developed.
In short, the Committee says if you smoke
cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early.
The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you
inhale, the worse your chances are.
In this kind of a country, it comes down to you
whether you like it or not.
No one is going to forbid
an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one
is going to tell him its good for him either.
The
decision is his.
The decision and the health may depend
on it.
This is Harry Reasoner.
Good night.
(Video ended.)
MR. REILLY:
You know that in the '60s Ted was
talking to his father about quitting smoking, and here
is Ted talking about his grandmother and Mrs. Bowden.
And he says: 3359
"And in the '60s you would also hear your
grandmother, Yvonne Horne, tell Mr. Bowden he shouldn't
smoke cigarettes, right?
Yes.
After you graduated high school, even though you
went away to college, you would still hear your mother
telling your father that smoking was unhealthy; is that
correct?
Correct.
And you were telling him the same thing?
That's correct."
And you've seen the public service announcements.
I'm not going to take the time to play them.
You just
saw a few more.
Yes, Bill Talman, very impactful, and running in
the '60s, and a whole bunch of other ones running in the
'60s, and Yul Brynner.
And these things keep going
straight on through right to the present day, right?
But they didn't stop at the end of 1970 or 1971
when cigarette advertising stopped.
They kept on going.
Yul Brynner is in the '80s.
Larry Hagman is in the
'80s.
Did Mr. Bowden express any interest in quitting
smoking?
Did he make any effort in quitting smoking?
Did he decide he wanted to quit smoking in the '50s, or 3360
the '60s, or the '70s, or at any time until the very,
very end of the '80s?
Did he ever say you know what, I want to give up
the pleasure that I'm getting from smoking?
No.
The warning on packs in 1966:
Caution, cigarette
smoking may be hazardous to your health.
And in the late '60s, early '70s, Ted's father
talked about the link between smoking and cancer.
This is Mrs. Bowden testimony again:
"I think you told us you would tell your husband
to quit, and he should quit smoking.
And you knew he
was going to do whatever he wanted to do, right?
Right."
About the switch to -- this is the testimony about
the switch to filters or lights.
This is the exact
testimony from Mrs. Bowden.
This was from a question
posed to her by Mr. Avera:
"Did you ever have any discussions with him,
meaning Mr. Bowden, as to why he started smoking
filtered as opposed to unfiltered cigarettes?
We had a conversation.
I don't know if it was
going to filters or going to lights.
Well, that's a difference in time."
You just heard Mr. Smith say that he thinks the
switch to filters was around 1970, and then the switch 3361
to lights is by Tammy's recollection sometime around
1990.
So Mrs. Bowden is not remembering whether it's
apparently around 1970 or around 1990, but she said:
"I don't know if it was going to filters or going
to lights.
And there was a magazine article, not an ad,
a magazine article, and I think it was in LIFE Magazine,
and I noticed the pack was different.
I said when did you change your mind?
And he said
-- and he showed me the magazine and he said it was
lower in tar and stuff like that."
Well, here is Mr. Bowden demonstrating that he has
an understanding that tar is what's bad in cigarettes,
that's the thing that causes you to get sick, not
nicotine.
And he gets an article in LIFE Magazine.
Well, there's no evidence in this case, ladies and
gentlemen, that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds ever put
an article in LIFE Magazine that switching to filters
would be any better for you or that switching to lights
would be any better for you.
But I can tell you that in this trial during the
testimony of Dr. Burns, this is what was shown to you
from the International Agency for the Research of
Cancer, the World Health Organization, their conclusion
a year ago in 2012 was that nevertheless, it was
concluded that changes in cigarette types since the 3362
1950s have probably tended to reduce the risk for lung
cancer associated with tobacco smoking.
Comparative
smokers of medium tar-filtered cigarettes, risk was
higher -- higher among men and women who smoked higher
tar, not filtered brands.
Nonfiltered brands.
So here's the International Agency for the
Research of Cancer explaining to folks -- this is the
World Health Organization saying filters have reduced,
they didn't make a safe cigarette.
Mr. Bowden didn't
think he was smoking a safe cigarette, but they have
reduced somewhat over unfiltered cigarettes the risk of
developing lung cancer.
Let's go to the '70s.
How do you know how
Mr. Bowden felt about smoking?
Just look at what he
tells his children.
He catches Tammy in 1970, when I
think she was in 7th grade, and told her don't smoke,
don't start.
I shouldn't have started, don't smoke.
And if your mother catches you she'll kill you.
That's the year that Mr. Horne dies.
For 17 years
he's been telling his son-in-law don't smoke, smoking is
bad for you, you can't smoke in the house.
His wife continues on.
She survives him for
another -- I don't remember how many years, but she
lives on into her 80's, and she keeps up that same
story. 3363
And she knows the new warnings goes on the packs:
Warning, the Surgeon General has determined that
cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health in 1970
and '71.
All the cigarette ads they talk about are
gone.
1972, warning -- this warning goes on every ad,
it's a bill board, it's a magazine.
There it is.
Why did I tell you about Michael and Tammy and
going into the program for street drugs down in Fort
Lauderdale?
Only to let you know that the Bowdens know
that if you want to quit something that you're doing and
you think you need some help, you can look it up.
You
can look up smoking cessation.
You can find these
smoking cessation programs if you want to.
They're not
hard to find, not even remotely hard to find.
They're
advertised in the paper.
So that's why I told you about
that.
And we showed you -- we put ads for these programs
both in Fort Lauderdale and right here in Jacksonville
in evidence so you could see that they're plentiful and
-- and remarkably successful.
Dr. Burns, their expert, gave a quote in 1975 that
said more people know smoking is dangerous than know the
president's name, 1975.
Any reason to believe that Mr. Bowden wasn't among 3364
those folks?
And I asked him who was the president?
I think he
said Gerald Ford.
I hope I got that right.
PSAs continue, 1964 to 1979, 30 million Americans
quit.
She says you can't smoke in my house.
You saw at various points in time members of Mr.
Bowden's family developed lung cancer, or cancers.
This
is Mrs. Bowden's testimony about cancer discussions that
she had with her husband:
"When his sister had cancer, when his mother had
cancer, did you take those opportunities and say to your
husband hey, you know what?
You really ought to quit
smoking?
I'm sure we had some discussions all the time
about he should not smoke."
And yet their burden of proof is to show you that
Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds should have done
something, when the wife is telling him all the time
don't smoke; that Mr. Bowden would have stopped taking
the pleasure he got out of smoking and quit smoking when
there's a warning on every cigarette pack?
Every cigarette pack made by Philip Morris or R.J.
Reynolds that this gentlemen smoked from 1966 on had a
warning on it.
Oh, yes.
They said we made cigarettes.
We juiced 3365
them up, I think was the phrase they used.
That was the theory that Dr. Hurt presented to
you, and I debunked it with three steps.
This is the way his theory goes:
If you use
ammonia when you manufacture cigarettes, you're going to
increase the pH, the acidity or baseness, in this case
baseness of cigarette smoke, it's a chemical status.
And that's going to create unprotonated nicotine.
Unprotonated nicotine because it has one less proton in
each nicotine molecule is going to pass across the
membrane walls of your lungs, what they call the alveoli
of your lungs, and it's going to get to your brain
faster.
And he said the faster it gets to your brain,
the more potential addictiveness of the substance,
right?
So his whole theory rests on the idea that the
cigarettes that Mr. Bowden is smoking deliver
unprotonated nicotine, that's the key, because it's
unprotonated nicotine is supposed to go faster to the
brain, right?
I realize that's a complex concept, but how do you
debunk it?
Well, the first thing you do is you go to the 1979
Surgeon General's Report, and you say well, what does
the Surgeon General say?
Was the Surgeon General 3366
unaware of this ammonia concept?
No.
He addressed it
right here.
He said since cigarettes in the United
States, and most foreign countries are made of flue-
cured tobacco, which, of course, our cigarettes are, are
blended with flue-cured tobacco is a major ingredient,
or in a few cases are blended with Turkish tobacco, the
pH of the resulting mainstream smoke is below 6.5 and
thus is essentially protonated.
There it was.
That's the end of the story.
That's the end of
Dr. Hurt's theory, right there.
And I said there it is.
He said the Surgeon General is wrong.
The Surgeon
General is wrong.
So that's the end of his theory, it
contains only protonated nicotine.
So then just to show the pH, the magic number here
was 6.5.
Then to show the pH, of Philip Morris
cigarettes, Marlboro and Marlboro Lights that Mr. Bowden
smoked were well below that 6.5, here it is from the
Massachusetts Department of Health, 6.028, 6.128, well
below -- just like the Surgeon General said.
So that was the end of that.
But, of course,
Dr. Hurt said oh, that's wrong because they used a
Canadian lab to figure these numbers out; like the
Department of Health in the state of Massachusetts can't
figure out what laboratory to hire to go do these tests.
I mean, that's ridiculous. 3367
But since it blew Mr. -- or Dr. Hurt's theory all
to smithereens, but then I went another step because --
I love kitchen chemistry.
I said, okay, Doctor.
Let's
talk about what is this major -- they said kick, or this
major -- I forget what other word was used, but kick.
What does this amount to?
What is the time differential
in delivery that we're talking about?
This was the examination that we had on that
subject.
I said:
"Oh, yeah.
You said that to have unprotonated
nicotine, unprotonated nicotine delivers to the brain
faster.
Do you remember that?"
He said it increases the speed of absorption.
That's cutting across the cell walls.
"By how much?
Well, we don't know exactly how much it does
because it depends on what the slope of the curve was to
begin with."
I said:
"Let's cut the hogwash here.
Let's get down to
the body.
We're talking about milliseconds, aren't we?"
And his answer was we're talking about a very
short time, yes.
"Tell the jury what a millisecond is.
It's a thousandth of a second." 3368
That's the time, a thousandth of a second.
And I said:
"Doctor, how long does it take to blink your eye,
a tenth of a second?
You don't even notice it."
And I noticed everybody in this room blinked.
What did it feel like?
Because it's just natural, you
know.
That's what I call kitchen chemistry.
But the whole idea that somehow getting nicotine
to your brain a thousandths of a second faster is going
to make nicotine more addictive is ridiculous.
And, in
fact, they put a document in for Philip Morris that
addresses this protonated and unprotonated nicotine
whole concept.
If you really talk the time to look at that
document, you would see that the guy who wrote it was
talking about a sensation in the back of your throat if
you drove the pH level up to, like, 8 or 11 or something
like that.
It has nothing to do with racing to the
brain.
On top of that, yes, there's some documents by the
folks at Reynolds that occurred back in the '70s, but
look at the 1996 analysis by the fella at Reynolds.
He
went back, he looked at everything and said this is just
hogwash.
This is just nonsense.
That guy was all
wrong, wrong, wrong. 3369
So let's go to the '80s.
We're about done.
Mr. Bowden worked at convenience stores.
He's
retired from Southern Bell.
Everyday he's handing cigarettes to people who are
buying them.
Do you think he really doesn't know about
the warnings on the packs or what everybody is saying
about cigarettes?
1981, this is another quote from
Dr. Burns:
95 percent of all Americans are thoroughly
aware of the health risks of smoking, and 90 percent
believe it applies to them.
That's a quote from their
expert.
I asked him about it on the stand.
He said yeah,
I said it.
1982, Mr. Bowden -- the family said Mr. Bowden
developed a smoker's cough, and they recommended he go
to the doctor to have it checked out.
Now Mr. Bowden can do what he wants to do, that's
a quote from Mrs. Bowden.
And so what did Mr. Bowden do?
Did he take their
advice and go to the doctor?
No, he didn't.
He did not
go to the doctor.
They all agreed he did not go to the
doctor.
It's not a criticism of Mr. Bowden, it's his body,
right?
It's his decision about how he's going to live
with it. 3370
We all have -- this is not a dry run, this is our
lives, right?
1985, the warnings change.
Now we have the
explicit warning that says smoking causes lung cancer,
heart disease, et cetera.
His brother Charles dies in 1989.
He doesn't make
a quit attempt in connection with that.
We already know about Gary Cook and all that, I'm
not going to repeat that.
38 million Americans quit in 1989.
Mr. Smith talked about switching to lights, and
there's a couple things you need to know about switching
to lights.
Number one, Mr. Bowden smoked lights.
Their Dr.
Dr. Kyriakoudes said lights became or began being
advertised in 1965.
Mr. Bowden switches to lights in
1990.
He's waited 25 years to be affected by the
advertising.
That's a pretty slow affect.
But what's really happening is Mr. Bowden isn't
brand loyal, he's smoking Marlboro Lights -- what did he
say, Winston Lights, Camel Lights, Marlboros, Winston,
full flavors, unfiltered cigarettes, unfiltered Camels,
and whatever is only sale.
He's not brand loyal.
He might switch back and forth between brands,
right? 3371
Yes, sir.
And on top of that, this was testimony from their
Dr. Burns:
The fact of the matter is that cancer, lung
cancer is what they call a latent disease.
By latent
disease it means that it takes a long time to develop.
And Dr. Burns here is telling you that
Mr. Bowden's lung cancer was already in his body by
1985.
So whatever he smoked, whether it was filtered,
unfiltered, et cetera in 1989, 1990, it didn't matter,
and that's exactly what Dr. Burns said.
I asked him:
"When he switched to lights, did it matter?"
He said:
"No, it didn't matter.
It's too late.
So yes,
had he quit in the mid '80s it would have -- it wouldn't
have been large enough to allow us to say that he
wouldn't have developed his lung cancer when he did."
They have to show that Mr. Bowden relied to his
detriment -- they have to say -- they have to prove that
Mr. Bowden would have relied on something Philip Morris
or R.J. Reynolds failed to say, and that his reliance
caused him to get his lung cancer.
So if Mr. Bowden, when he switches and begins to
smoke some light cigarettes, if that was some act of
reliance, it came to late to avoid his lung cancer 3372
anyway.
But can you really say that Mr. Bowden was truly
trying to reduce his risk when he continues to smoke
Marlboro Reds, Winston full flavors, and anything else
people are selling because it's on sale?
I mean, really
and truly?
So let's go to the '90s.
Remember, we talked Gary and Tammy quitting, we
talked about the patch, we talked about PSAs continuing.
Unfortunately, Mr. Bowden is diagnosed with cancer and
dies.
And yes, he smoked after his doctor diagnosed him
with lung cancer.
You remember the conversation that
Mrs. Bowden had?
The conversation was doctor, he's
smoking again.
And the doctor said look, he only has so
many -- so much time left.
Let him do what he wants to
do.
Let him do what he enjoys to do.
And yes, I saw that Mr. Smith did this when -- he
doesn't know what he's doing, he's talking to people
that aren't in the room.
And Dr. Kaplan explained
that's just a motor movement that did over and over
again.
All right.
So now what's the answer to these
questions?
In light of what you all know now, what
you've been reminded of now from the very testimony that 3373
occurred in this case, have they proved to you that this
concealment, whatever it is they're complaining about
that had to do with the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking, that Mr. Bowden would have quit, and
quit in time to avoid getting his lung cancer?
Truly,
with all those people telling him all that time, and all
that information, isn't the answer to all four of those
questions no?
Now, you have to go on if you've gotten this far,
and I don't think you'll ever get this far in this.
I
think question number one is going to stop you.
But if
unanimously you get this far in the Verdict Form, you
have to address comparative fault.
And I heard Mr. Avera say that he thought that
when he looked in the mirror with Mr. Bowden, that he
saw Mr. Bowden in about a third of the mirror.
Less
than Philip Morris and less than R.J. Reynolds.
And I asked him in light of Mrs. Bowden saying
Mr. Bowden was going to do whatever he wanted to do, and
in light of all that you have seen and the exact
testimony in this case, really and truly is anybody else
in the mirror when Mr. Bowden gets up in the morning and
goes and has his coffee and smokes his cigarette, really
and truly?
Is he less than 90 percent of the person
that's in the mirror. 3374
I leave that to your sound discretion.
I'm not
going to offer you a number, because I think you guys
can apply your common sense.
You didn't leave it when
you came in the courthouse.
I leave that -- if you get this far, I leave that
to your sound discretion.
And as for the damages, if you get this far, then
the only thing I would say to you, I realize Mr. Avera
put up an enormous number, but I would just remind you
look, any time whenever there's a marriage, one spouse
is going to outlive the other one, unless you die
simultaneously somehow, every spouse -- some spouses
always are going to survive the other, and it's always
going to be sad, always; not possible to be otherwise.
But one of the very first questions that I asked
each one of you was when you hear this lawsuit, can you
set aside feelings of sympathy that are only natural for
any human being when one spouse loses another?
And each
one of you said you could.
And I said there's going to be an instruction from
the Judge that asks you to do that.
And I know after I sit down plaintiff's counsel is
going to get back up and he's going to say we're not
asking for sympathy, we're asking for fairness and
justice and all of that, and I understand that.
All I'm 3375
really asking you is this:
If anybody mentions
something that you construe to be sympathy, just remind
them look, that has no business in our deliberations if
you get this far in the case.
All right.
Again, only if you answer these
questions yes do you go on to Question Number 7.
So
after all of that evidence I, frankly, think there's no
way that unanimously you get to Question Number 7, but I
have to cover it just on the chance that I'm wrong, that
you see this completely different.
Under the circumstances of this case, state
whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive
damages awarded against each defendant.
What's clear
and convincing evidence?
Clear and convincing evidence differs from the
greater weight of the evidence in that it is more
compelling than persuasive.
Greater weight of the
evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force
and affect of the entire evidence in the case.
In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is
evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm
belief or conviction about the matter at issue.
And this instruction tells you that it has to be a
firm conviction about Mr. Bowden having been impacted by 3376
something that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds failed to
say or do.
In other words, you have to be firm in your belief
that Mr. Bowden would have done something else than what
he did do in the face of all that information he had,
all those people recommending to him that he quit
smoking in order to answer Question Number 7 yes.
Well, guess what?
I'm out of boards.
I greatly
appreciate your attention.
You guys have been fabulous
throughout my closing argument and Mr. Smith's and
Mr. Avera's, and I know you're going to give Mark Seiden
the same level of attention, no question about it.
Thank you very much.
And by the way, I'm going to sit down.
I don't
address you again.
Mr. Seiden is going to get up.
He's
going to talk and he won't address you again, but the
plaintiff gets to get back up again.
They have another,
I think, another 30 minutes to talk to you again.
Why?
Because they have the burden of proof, and I don't know
what they're going to say.
I don't know whether they're
going to say here's some more documents, here's some
more stuff, here's more videotapes.
I don't know what
they're going to say.
All I would ask you is I don't get to get back up
and say hey, wait a minute.
Just ask yourself where is 3377
Mr. Bowden in that picture.
Thanks.


MR. SEIDEN:
Good afternoon, ladies and
gentlemen.
So I don't know if it was a month or two
ago you got an invitation in the mail, and it said,
Please come down to this courthouse on March 10th,
probably around 8:00, 8:30.
All of you did.
We 3385
thank you for that.
I suspect at the time you never dreamed or
suspected that you'd spend at least 12 days here.
Twelve days out of your life.
So when Counsel talk
about the sacrifice that you've made that we all
recognize, we do.
It's an incredible service,
incredible burden, incredible obligation that
you-all have done; and for that, we thank you.
So, again, I'm third.
I cut and slashed a
little.
I may repeat a couple of things Mr. Reilly
said, but I'll try not to.
I'll try my best when I
get there to move quickly if Mr. Reilly's already
covered the point.
But to be clear so no one mistakes it, I agree
with all the points Mr. Reilly was just making and,
particularly, that when it comes to the issue of
class membership, when it comes to all of those
claims, the plaintiff has the burden of proof.
And in this case, this case about Mr. Bowden
and the reasons he smoked, the plaintiff has failed
to meet her burden of proof.
At the end of two weeks of evidence, a week and
a half of evidence, it's clear Mr. Bowden smoked for
pleasure.
Mr. Reilly ran you through the testimony,
put up a slide that shows various elements with it. 3386
You heard he enjoyed to smoke with his coffee.
He
liked to smoke after dinner.
We heard about after
dinner, and then we heard about the apple pie.
He
liked that.
He liked that smoke.
He liked to have
apple pie.
And he loved to have the two of them
together.
He loved to socialize and smoke.
And you heard
it from several witnesses.
Maybe it wouldn't be
what you would think, but he enjoyed the taste of
cigarettes.
That was clear.
Mr. Bowden enjoyed
smoking.
And that's the reason why for a period of
nearly 50 years -- whether it's 49, whether it's
53 -- that's the reason why, during that entire
period of time, Mr. Bowden never had one serious
quit attempt.
You heard Mr. Reilly talk about where that
definition comes from, the Surgeon General's Report.
You heard Dr. Hurt accepts it as accurate.
Eight hours.
That was the most you heard about in
this case, was an eight-hour quit attempt.
Unless,
of course, that August 17th, 1994, medical record is
correct.
And I agree we don't know if it is or it
isn't.
But if it is, then you know that when
Mr. Bowden wanted to quit, he could quit.
Because 3387
that record indicates a quit period of two months.
That's what the evidence is.
Mr. Bowden, no matter what you think about
whether or not he quit for the two months, the
picture of him is someone who enjoys smoking, who
wants to smoke.
There's no evidence of a desperate
man, who, year after year after year, is struggling
with addiction; who can't stop smoking.
That's not
the picture.
This is a picture of a man who never even tried
to quit until at least the mid-'80s, probably the
late '80s.
This isn't a man who is struggling with
addiction.
This is a man who wants to smoke, and he
does just that.
And, again, that might not be your choice.
It
might not be my choice.
That was Mr. Bowden's
choice, and we ask that you respect it.
You heard that -- you've heard it from
witnesses, "Stop smoking, Dad."
He pooh-poohed
them.
He brushes it off.
And, ultimately, as
Mr. Reilly showed you on that slide, it was agreed
Mr. Bowden would do what Mr. Bowden wanted to do.
That's the individual he was.
That's the man he
was.
I want to talk about some of the points that 3388
the experts for the plaintiffs made.
Where I want
to start is freebase nicotine because, to me, that
was Dr. Hurt's big point.
It was the freebase
nicotine.
And you know what?
He used a bunch of
documents from my client to try to make that point.
What he didn't tell you on direct exam, though, is
he didn't show you what Mr. Reilly just showed you
from the Surgeon General; that there's only pronated
nicotine, essentially below 6.5.
He didn't talk
about that.
And do you know what?
Those documents that he
showed you from my client you saw on direct, those
documents, they had the p- -- the smoke pH levels in
them.
Remember I asked him, "Did you look at these
before your testimony, Dr. Hurt?
Did you review
them"?
He said he didn't remember.
He remembered
looking at the documents up there, but he didn't
remember looking at the very things, the smoke pH
levels of the documents.
Can you imagine?
He's telling you that we're going to freebase
nicotine, and he doesn't even look at the levels to
see if they're above 6.5.
And you saw I showed him
the documents.
"Let's look through the charts."
Ultimately, he agreed he had no evidence that 3389
the smoke pH of Camel cigarettes was ever at 6.5 or
above.
He had no evidence that the smoke pH of
Lucky Strikes was ever at 6.5 or above.
And when it
came to Winstons, he had no evidence that the smoke
pH was ever above 6.5, except I showed him that the
documents showed that Winston Lights in 1978 and
1979, it was above 6.5.
And do you know what?
Two things to remember
about that:
One, there's no evidence here and
there's no claim that Mr. Bowden ever smoked a light
cigarette before the mid to late 19- -- 1989, 1990.
There's no evidence of that, so the Winston Lights
is irrelevant.
But after the Surgeon General's report came
out, what happened to the Winston Lights?
They
dropped below 6.5 and never came above.
So when
you're going to tell a jury about freebasing
nicotine, don't you think you should come with some
evidence that they actually did it, not just that
they were looking at smoke pH; but they actually
raised it to the level where there'd be freebase
nicotine?
You didn't get that from Dr. Hurt.
You
didn't get that at all.
Now, one of the things that Mr. Smith showed
you during his op- -- his closing presentation was 3390
an instruction regarding expert witnesses and how
you should try to evaluate them.
Well, I want to
show you another instruction you're going to get
which is about witnesses generally and relates to
expert witnesses as well.
And it's -- can I have
the envelope, please? -- it's an instruction on
believability of witnesses.
This is something I ask you to think about when
you're thinking about the expert witness testimony.
Okay.
Instruction Number 4.
"In determining the
believability of any witness, the weight to be given
to testimony of any witness, you may properly
consider the demeanor of the witness while
testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of
the testimony."
Well, when you think about demeanor, would they
answer the questions that were asked, or did they
make speeches to try to make points?
Did they come
up -- did they answer questions by talking about
things that weren't responsive to the question?
That's demeanor.
And when you get to frankness, were they saying
things that made sense, that seemed true?
When
they're telling you that their advertisements for
cigarettes in Stars and Stripes -- and now you've 3391
seen them -- are they being frank with you?
When on
direct exam they're telling you about The
Flintstones and we get to it and they don't tell you
the full story, are they being frank with you?
When Dr. Burns tell you about the memo from
Dr. Rodgman in 1956 and doesn't -- and tells you on
direct that the Surgeon General didn't know about
the constituents identified in there, and then on
cross, he says they did.
Then it came out through
the TIRC, and they've been published in the Reader's
Digest.
Is he being frank with you?
That's Instruction Number 4.
That goes hand in
hand with the witness's qualification, the
reasonableness of his testimony considered in light
of all the evidence in the case.
Are you getting
the full story?
That's something to think about,
Instruction Number 4.
So I want to turn to the marketing evidence.
At the end, the plaintiff failed again their burden
of proof -- or her -- Mrs. Bowden's burden of proof.
Plaintiff failed to produce evidence that any of
Reynolds' or Philip Morris's advertising or
marketing contributed to Mr. Bowden's development of
lung cancer.
Now, you heard testimony -- think about who 3392
testified here in terms of fact witnesses.
You
heard from Mrs. Bowden.
You heard from three of her
children.
You heard from Tammy.
You heard from
Nancy.
You heard from Ted, and you heard from her
grandchild, Chris.
And then you heard from -- by
deposition, you heard from Yvonne Tillman,
Mr. Bowden's sister; and you heard from a cousin or
second cousin -- cousin removed, Barbara Dampier.
Think about it.
No fact witness testified that
Mr. Bowden -- whoops.
You're out of focus.
Okay.
I don't know if it's okay on the screens -- no?
Okay.
We'll go -- there it is.
Okay.
No fact witness in this case.
All these fact
witnesses plaintiff, who has the burden of proof,
brought to you.
You had all this expert testimony
about marketing.
Was there any fact witness who
testified that Mr. Bowden started smoking about an
ad?
Was there any fact witness that Mr. Bowden
purchased any product -- forget about cigarettes --
but he purchased any product at all based on a
product ad?
Was there any fact witness who
testified about Mr. Bowden's attitude about ads?
Did he believe ads?
Was he skeptical of ads?
What
was his reaction to ads? 3393
And how about cigarette ads?
Plaintiff's
burden of proof.
All this testimony about the
marketing, marketing, marketing; this generic
testimony because Dr. Kyriakoudes wasn't there to
give you opinions about Mr. Bowden.
Why didn't the fact witnesses tell you about
how ads impacted Mr. Bowden, what they meant to him?
It's plaintiff's burden of proof.
So much focus on
marketing generically with no mention of Mr. Bowden
and marketing.
Did any witness tell you that he
chose a brand of cigarettes based on an ad?
They
didn't.
They didn't.
You simply didn't hear it.
The evidence suggests it wasn't advertising
that drove Mr. Bowden's selection of cigarettes.
It
was taste.
It was price and availability; right?
He looked for what was the lowest.
He bummed from a
friend.
He enjoyed the taste.
That's what you
heard from the fact witnesses.
You didn't hear a
single thing about advertising.
That's what drove
Mr. Bowden's decisions about what to smoke and when.
Can I have Demonstrative 7, please?
Ultimately, when it comes to quitting and
marketing, you're told about reassurance.
There
wasn't a single fact witness that testified -- who
testified that cigarette advertising influenced 3394
Mr. Bowden's choices not to try to quit smoking in
the '40s, the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, or the '80s.
Undisputed.
At least up through the mid-'80s, if
not later, he never tried to quit.
Did anyone tell you he didn't try to quit
because of an advertisement?
Did anyone ever tell
you that he didn't try to quit because of something
Philip Morris said or R.J. Reynolds said?
You
didn't hear that from a single fact witness.
No.
All that testimony about marketing generically and
nothing about Mr. Bowden in a case that is all about
Mr. Bowden.
Let's go on to the specifics they did show you:
Puck.
The Sunday comments.
You all remember that;
right?
I had a good run-through with
Dr. Kyriakoudes, Rinso soap and Lysol Disinfectant
and Cudahy.
And you had to hear about how he would
purchase Mr. Clean once or twice.
I'm sure you-all
remember that testimony.
You know what you didn't hear, the Sunday
comics.
Did anyone ask any of those fact witnesses,
Mr. Bowden read the Sunday comics?
Was that
something he was interested in?
All that testimony.
You're going to tie it to Mr. Bowden at all?
I
didn't hear it. 3395
Let's turn to The Flintstones.
So you were
shown The Flintstones by plaintiff during opening
statements.
They said something about youth
marketing, and they put that Flintstones'
sponsorship up there for you to see; right?
All right.
First impressions.
It was put up
there to make you mad.
You weren't told anything
about it by -- during plaintiff's opening.
You were
just shown, This is how they marketed to youth.
That's what they showed you.
They didn't even tell
you the year it was on -- 1960.
Mr. Bowden was
35 -- they just showed it to you.
Now you know.
You know the full story, and you
didn't even get the full story when Dr. Kyriakoudes
showed it to you.
It didn't come out until direct.
Remember that instruction?
Frankness?
Reasonableness of the evidence?
You didn't get that.
You didn't get it on
direct exam from Dr. Kyriakoudes.
No matter how
hard Dr. Kyriakoudes tried to fight it, you know
Alka Seltzer is an adult product.
Anyone who's
thinking One A Day Vitamins and Alka Seltzer in
1960s?
They're spending their money on advertising
because they thought it was a youth show.
Come on.
Common sense.
You heard plaintiff's counsel and 3396
Mr. Reilly say it.
You don't leave your common
sense at the door.
You know better.
You know now that the network ABC, they
marketed that as an adult show.
And, finally, you
know -- or at least after cross-examination --
maybe the most important part.
You know that in the
second season, ABC moved it to Saturday morning, and
Reynolds' sponsorship stopped.
How does someone who's telling you he's a
historian professor who follows the historical
method to give the complete story -- how do you
leave that out of your direct testimony?
You think that's frank?
You think that's
reasonable?
Winston stops.
Reynolds stops
sponsoring it when they moved it to the morning.
And he omits that fact from his testimony?
On the issue of reliance, they showed you the
clip from Mr. Heimann in his deposition testimony
that Mr. Burns agreed Mr. Bowden would never see.
Well, the testimony was could someone be justified
in relying?
And he said, Yes.
But remember this:
The fact that they could be
justified in relying doesn't prove that Mr. Bowden
relied.
It doesn't prove that he wasn't aware of
the dangers of smoking, and it doesn't prove he 3397
wasn't aware that cigarettes could be addictive.
All it proves -- it -- it doesn't prove any of those
things as relates to Mr. Bowden.
So I want to take a few minutes now to talk
about medical-cause issue in this case.
I'm going to start where I started two weeks
ago in my opening statement and say, "Is it possible
that cigarettes were the cause?"
I told you then
yes, and I'm going to tell you again the answer's
yes.
But the question for you-all to answer is
whether plaintiff has proved it, whether it --
whether Mrs. Bowden has met her burden of proof.
Because that's where it lies.
She needs to prove
that smoking was the legal cause.
So you've heard plaintiffs.
They're resting on
statistical data that's -- that 99.5 percent of the
cases are caused by smoking.
I want to look at the
bigger picture, all of the evidence.
And I'm going
to submit to you that on this issue, you haven't
heard from two doctors; you've actually heard from
three doctors.
And so as I get through this, I'm
going to tell you what those three doctors said.
First, there's Dr. Wolfe.
He was the treating
physician.
His deposition was read to you, and 3398
you've seen his medical record.
Let's just go back
and look at his medical record for a minute.
This
is what he noted back in 1994:
"Two siblings have
died of lung cancer, and the third has active lung
cancer at the time."
Next slide.
"The patient's mother died of cancer and
cardiac disease.
"Seven siblings with cancer history, as listed
in HPI."
And, finally, "strong family history of
lung cancer."
That's what was noted in 1994 when no one was
thinking about a lawsuit, and all they were thinking
about is the treatment of Mr. Bowden.
You'll have that document.
It has other
evidence about smoking history and cardiac disease.
It will be back in the jury room with you.
It's
part of ANS-8081.
Take a look at it for yourself.
So you saw Dr. Wolfe's record.
Let's look at
some of his trial testimony.
Let's start with his
recognition that 5 percent of squamous cell lung
cancers are related to genetic predisposition --
this is what he testified to -- and the other
5 percent are made up of what, please?
It can also
relate to genetic predisposition. 3399
So you can say to yourself, Well, that's just
5 percent.
That's a small number.
You know, it's
just 5 percent.
Forget about it.
You could say
that.
But some group of people are contained in
that 5 percent.
For some, it's the 5 percent.
So
the question is, does it make sense to conclude that
Mr. Bowden and his family was among the 5 percent?
Let's see the next testimony from Dr. Wolfe.
"And when you reference -- when you reference
the strong family history of lung cancer here, what
do you mean?
"More than one member.
"Okay."
Answer:
"More than one other member."
So he's talking about two.
Dr. Wolfe is
saying, if there's two members with lung cancer,
that's a strong family history.
Well, let's look at the Bowden family again.
Siblings with lung cancer, it's not two.
It's four
of them.
Four out of eight.
That's half.
Four out
of eight.
Siblings with other cancer, there's two.
Parents with cancers, there's both of them.
It's
four out of eight here.
Let's look at the next piece of testimony from 3400
Dr. Wolfe, please.
"And, based upon your understanding in that
regard, given the history that you've discussed or
you've related here from the chart would" -- "in
your estimation, would" -- "in your estimation
would" -- lot of "would"s -- "Mr. Bowden's family
history of cancer have increased the risk of his
developing, for example, carcinoma of the lung, a
twofold increase in that risk, based upon what you
know about his family history?
"Yes, sir."
He acknowledges Mr. Bowden's risk was known
from the family history.
Next slide, please.
And can you say that his smoking history, that
that risk factor was the predominant risk factor in
his developing -- oh, I'm sorry.
I misread it.
"And you can't say" -- cannot say -- "that his
smoking history, that that risk factor was the
predominant risk factor in him developing that
disease; correct?"
He says, "Correct."
He can't say -- it may be 95 to 5, but he can't
say -- Dr. Wolfe, the treating physician -- that
smoking was the predominant risk factor.
That's 3401
Dr. Wolfe's testimony.
So let's turn to Yvonne Tillman.
That's
Mr. Bowden's sister.
Her deposition was read to
you.
And I know sometimes it can be harder to
follow read deposition testimony, but it was her
third question and answer where it immediately came
out.
"Tell me about this."
She had mentioned her medical problems.
She said, "I just recently had a lobe of my
lung removed."
So let's see what she said about that later on
as the deposition was read.
It was towards the end.
"What was the reason for the lower lobe of your
lung being removed?
"Answer:
They took a CAT scan.
They took an
MRI and they did a PET scan and all of it came back
inconclusive."
Let's stop for a second.
Inconclusive; they
don't know if she has cancer.
"It showed a shadow.
So the doctor suggested,
since it was in the very lower spot of the lung, it
was best to go ahead, since my family had such a
history of lung cancer."
That's her doctor.
That's her doctor talking 3402
about the family history of lung cancer.
Just
suspicious, who's not even doing a biopsy.
"Okay.
So I agreed to it.
"Question:
So there wasn't a definite
diagnosis of lung cancer but the doctor was
suspicious it could be lung cancer?
"Answer:
Yes.
"And as a precautionary" -- manner -- "measure,
recommended that surgery that you underwent?
"Answer:
Yes."
That's how real the genetic predisposition is
in the Bowden family.
It's not just four because
Yvonne wasn't on that list.
It's not just four
siblings out of eight having lung cancer.
It's a
woman, Mr. Bowden's sister, having something
suspicious.
They don't even biopsy, they remove a
lobe of the -- of the lung.
Think about it.
We talked about common sense.
Is that something that ordinarily would happen, that
a person -- a lobe of someone's lung is removed?
That's the medical.
That's what's going on in this
family.
So I said you heard from three doctors.
You
heard from Dr. Burns -- and by the way, with Dr.
Burns, he didn't touch Yvonne Tillman's -- what 3403
happened to her.
He didn't talk about it.
He
didn't review any of the medical records of the
sibling.
He's just ruled out genetic predisposition
as the cause.
Maybe you'll agree.
But he didn't
consider those things.
If he did, he didn't talk
about them.
So I think you've heard, really, from three
doctors:
You've heard from Dr. Burns; you've heard
from Dr. Wolfe and I just showed you his testimony;
and, I think in the realest way possible, you've
heard from Yvonne Tillman's doctor.
You don't know
his name, but he wasn't testifying in a courtroom.
He was caring for a patient.
He was trying to save
the patient's life.
He was concerned she had lung
cancer.
He was acting on his experience, knowledge,
skill, and training.
He didn't say it for a
lawsuit.
It's just how he treated a patient with
this history.
So if Dr. Burns suggests there's no real proof
that family history is a risk, let him explain
Yvonne Tillman to you.
Let him explain how it's
four out of eight.
And when Dr. Wolfe testifies
that 5 percent of lung cancers are related to
genetics, ask yourself, if the Bowden family is not
among the 5 percent with four lung cancers -- two 3404
other siblings with cancer, two parents with
cancer -- if the Bowden family is not among the 5
percent, then whose family is?
Ask yourself those
questions.
Consider that when you consider --
consider the medical case.
So Mr. Reilly showed you, with his boards, that
issue on the medical case is really going to come in
two places.
On the issue of class membership,
Mr. Reilly showed you how there's three questions.
The third question was whether smoking caused the
lung cancer.
That's the third question.
But you
also have to answer --
And if I can have the Elmo, please.
-- so you'll have to answer it here in the
first question on class membership.
For the reasons
Mr. Reilly said or the reasons that I've given you,
we suggest that you answer the question "no," but
you'll decide.
And if you get past the question,
we -- we don't believe you should, but if you get to
the second question here, negligence and strict
liability, we think, for both defendants, you should
check "No."
Because they need to demonstrate that
smoking cig- -- cigarettes containing nicotine was a
legal cause of Mr. Bowden's lung cancer and death.
And if you look at the instruction on legal 3405
cause, this is the instruction for negligence and
strict liability.
Again, you have to show
cigarettes were a legal cause of his death.
And
let's look at that following instruction.
And
again, you're going to have these back there.
You
don't have to take notes on it or try to write it
down quickly.
This is Instruction 13.
"Smoking Philip
Morris' and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's
cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of
Mr. Bowden's death if it directly and in a natural
and continuous sequence produced or contributed
substantially to producing Mr. Bowden's death so
that it can reasonably be said that, but for that
smoking, his death would [sic] have occurred."
That's the question you're going to have to
answer.
Was it -- but for his smoking, can you say,
given his genetic predisposition, that if he didn't
smoke he wasn't going to develop the cancer and die?
Was he among the 5 percent, given all the evidence
you have?
And has plaintiff proved that it was the
smoking and, but for the smoking, he wouldn't have
developed the disease.
That's the medical cause
question that you have to answer on these facts.
Before I move from medical cause, I want to 3406
discuss a very specific part of Dr. Burns'
testimony.
Dr. Burns testified that if Mr. Bowden had
stopped smoking 15 years before his lung cancer
diagnosis -- that is by 1979 -- more likely than
not, he wouldn't have developed lung cancer in 1994.
It's a very important point.
I'm going to try to --
I'm going to say it once more because I think it
bears repeating.
Dr. Burns testified that if
Mr. Bowden had stopped smoking 15 years before his
lung cancer -- so that's by 1979 -- more likely than
not, he wouldn't have developed his lung cancer in
1994.
So I'm going to highlight for you -- given that
testimony from Dr. Burns, I want to highlight for
you some of the specific knowledge regarding the
dangers of smoke- -- smoking that Mr. Bowden
possessed by 1979.
And just for context, make sure we're all in
the same place, 1979, Mr. Bowden was already a
50-year -- a 54-year-old man.
I think, in fact, he
was already a grandfather by 1979.
Ted had already
had children.
So let's look at this demonstrative.
You
have -- I know you've heard about some of this from 3407
Mr. Reilly, but I now want to put it in -- into
context of Dr. Burns' testimony about what would
have happened or what, more specifically, from
Dr. Burns' perspective, what wouldn't have happened
if he had stopped by 1979.
So you've heard from Mrs. Bowden that around
the time she stopped smoking in 1954 she was talking
all the time to Mr. Bowden to stop smoking.
So
that's 25 years of that.
By 1975 -- '-9, 25 years
of his best friend telling him, "Stop smoking for
your health."
You know that cigarette packs started with
these warnings in 1966.
That's 13 years of warnings
and not a single quit attempt by 1979.
You know that Ted Bowden, born in 1951, he
got -- in the mid-'60s, he's learning about the
dangers of smoking from his football coach and he
testified he shared that information with his dad.
You know from Ted's perspective, in terms of
when Ted is aware, that his dad is aware of the
risks.
He testified that, by the late '60s, the
early 1970s Ted certainly thought that Mr. Bowden
knew that cigarettes caused cancer.
That's as many
as ten years before, if he had stopped, he wouldn't
have gotten the disease. 3408
In 1970, you know Tammy gets caught smoking and
Mr. Bowden tells her that cigarettes are dangerous.
By the 1970s, Ted is encouraging his dad to
quit for health reasons.
Now, no witness, not a single fact witness in
this case, has told you that Mr. Bowden was unaware
of the risks in the '60s and the '70s.
You haven't
heard that from anyone.
They could have brought you
a witness to tell you that.
You didn't hear it from
anyone.
Yet all of that time, he's getting all of
this information, everything I just showed you on
the board, and he never once tried to quit during
that period.
Instead, he just did what he wanted to
do.
And you heard from Mrs. Bowden herself, that's
who he was.
He didn't want to be fussed with.
And
again, I'm not criticizing.
That was his choice and
his right.
He was allowed to do that.
But had he quit by 1979, according to
Dr. Burns, he's medically -- more likely than not,
he wouldn't have developed his lung cancer.
Mr. Bowden is, I submit, a hundred percent
responsible for not even trying to quit smoking
before 1979.
Therefore, Mr. Bowden alone is a
hundred percent responsible for his injuries.
So let's spend a few minutes now talking about 3409
brand history and the brands that Mr. Bowden smoked.
The first thing I want to address is
Dr. Kyriakoudes, who spent 30 hours reviewing
deposition testimonies, apparently -- and I think if
you multiply that out by the rate, he probably
earned more than $12,000 to do it.
I hope it's
clear by now, now that you've heard the fact
witnesses since he testified, that he wasn't even
close when it came to brand history.
So I want to review it.
I'll try to do it
quickly.
Let's start with the 1940s.
For most of
the 1940s, Mr. Bowden is in the military and you
heard that you get what you get.
You don't choose.
And, in fact, we don't know what brands he smoked in
the military.
We do know that around 1946, for a
period less than a year, Yvonne Tillman said she saw
him smoking Lucky Strikes and occasionally Pall
Mall.
So you do know that.
But we don't know -- he
then goes back into the military.
He smokes.
He
gets what he gets.
And the next thing we know is
1953 and that's when he meets Mrs. Bowden.
And you
heard from Mrs. Bowden that he was smoking Camels
and Lucky Strikes.
Okay?
And Mrs. Bowden said, at some point, he
switches.
But she, in her testimony, never told you 3410
when he switched.
So where does the next testimony come?
I think
if you look at the witnesses in terms of their age,
it's Ted Bowden.
He was born in 1951.
And Ted
Bowden testified about brand history, and he never
mentioned Camels or Lucky Strikes.
What he
remembered were Marlboros and Winstons.
So -- and
I'm going to get to that -- but what does that mean?
He's born in 1951.
We don't know when his memory
starts.
Is it as a six-year old in '57?
Is it as
an eight-year old in '59?
Ten-year old in '61?
We
don't know.
Okay?
What we do know, he's not seeing Camels and
Lucky Strikes.
So unless Mr. Bowden switched on the
first day he remembers, sometime, let's say nine --
before 1959 -- you'll decide what the year is --
sometime before 1959, Mr. Bowden switched and he
wasn't smoking Camels and Lucky Strikes.
And then what did you hear from Ted Bowden?
He
said -- I want to focus on Winston now.
That's one
of the first two brands he remembers.
He talked about Winston all the way through
1977.
And what he said was Winston was never his
father's primary brand.
Okay?
Winston was never
his father's primary brand. 3411
And think about Mrs. Bowden's testimony.
Remember, I showed her the deposition cheat sheet
and I asked her about Marlboro and Winston, and what
did she say?
She really said, "You know what?
Other people mentioned Winston.
I don't really
remember Winston at all."
Then she asked me about
the packs and finally she said, "I think there were
some Winstons in the 1980s."
Well, I know it's confusing.
What does it all
really mean?
I'll give you my perspective; you can
form your own judgments.
I think it means that, in
1946, for some period of time, some part of the
year, he was smoking Lucky Strike and Pall Mall.
Then in 1953, he's smoking Camel and Lucky Strike.
And I think sometime, we don't know when, in the
1950s, he stops.
What that really means is that
sometime after -- in the 1950s till the end of his
smoking history, RJR cigarettes are no longer his
main brand.
Does he smoke some of them throughout
the time?
Does he switch around?
Absolutely.
The
testimony is clear; he's not brand loyal.
But after the 1950s, is there evidence that RJR
was ever his main brand?
I think the record is,
there isn't.
So what does all this mean?
I think in terms 3412
of class membership, you never have to get to that
issue.
You never have to think about it.
But on the verdict sheet --
Can I have the Elmo, please?
We don't think -- let me be clear, and this is
Question 5, we don't think you ever need to reach
Question 5.
We think you should say "no" to class
membership.
But if you say "yes," we think, as to
questions 2, 3 and 4, which relate to claims in the
case and legal theories, we think you say "no" to
those on both defendants and you never get to it.
But if you get to the question of comparative
fault, ultimately, I think that's where you think
about brand history.
And if you ultimately agree
Reynolds wasn't his main brand, I think that's where
you can account for it.
So that's brand history.
Okay.
I want to now talk to you about punitive
damages a little bit and some of the issues of
concealment.
And I hope, by now, it's clear:
I don't think
you should get to the fault question.
I certainly
don't think you should ever get to the question of
punitive damages.
But as Mr. Reilly mentioned, we
can't know what you -- what you're thinking.
We --
we don't know how you're going to answer it, so I 3413
have to address it.
So let me address it.
This is the question where you have to decide
whether you had clear and convincing evidence.
So
that's a different standard that Mr. --
See if you can straighten that out.
Clear and convincing evidence is going to be
the standard.
It's no longer greater weight of the
evidence.
Mr. Reilly read you the standard.
It's
clear and convincing evidence.
It's that firm
belief.
It's not, well, maybe there were a lot of
people.
It's that firm belief that this is harm
caused to Mr. Bowden.
Clear and convince- -- convincing evidence
differs from greater weight of the evidence and it's
more compelling and persuasive.
Greater weight of
the evidence means the more persuasive and
convincing force and effect of the entire evidence
in the case.
In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is
evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in
confusion, and of such weight that it produces a
firm belief or conviction about the matters at
issue.
Frankly, given all the things I've mentioned
about what the fact witnesses didn't say in this 3414
case, about marketing and other issues, I'd submit
there won't be clear and convincing evidence that
would allow you to find an entitlement to punitive
damages.
But you'll ultimately have to decide that
question.
There are a few important things you should
know about punitive damages.
First, if you decide
there's an entitlement, it's an entitlement for
Mrs. Bowden.
It's not for the American Cancer
Society.
It's not for an anti-smoking group.
Punitive damages, in this case, are damages that are
awarded to Mrs. Bowden.
And they're damages --
again, this is only if you get there.
If you get to
this point, you will already have decided the amount
of compensatory damages.
And, as Mr. Avera said,
that would be the amount entitled to make
Mrs. Bowden whole to the extent money can do that;
right?
So punitive damages are not compensatory.
They're money on top of compensatory damages.
They're additional monies.
And again, they don't go
to the American Cancer Society.
They would go to
Mrs. Bowden.
So in talking about punitive damages, the thing
that I'd ask you to understand, it's in the 3415
instructions, they're supposed to be there to punish
and deter.
So I want to talk about the allegations
of conduct a little bit, which, they believe --
which plaintiff submits -- justified punishment and
deterrence and ask whether those allegations really
have anything to do about Mr. Bowden and what
happened here.
Let's talk about evidence that relates to
concealment.
I referred to this a little bit.
Dr. Burns talked on direct about that 1956 memo from
Dr. Rodgman which identified carcin- -- carcinogens
in smoke.
And on direct exam, he suggested the Surgeon
General didn't know about it.
He admitted on cross
all of those carcinogens had been reported by TIRC,
and Reynolds was a member of TIRC.
And you can't
just be responsible for their bad acts; you get
their good acts, too.
TIRC had reported all those
constituents to the Surgeon General, all of them.
There was no secret.
Dr. Burns acknowledged
directly that the Surgeon General was aware of every
single one of them that was in Dr. Rodgman's memo.
So there was no concealment of that.
And you also learned, separate and apart from
what Reynolds knew, that eight or nine of those 3416
carcinogens had been published about in two
different Reader's Digests in the 1950s.
This
wasn't a great big secret at all.
But that's what
you were led to believe on direct examination.
Dr. Burns suggested that the TIRC or CTR was a
big public relations gesture.
That's what he told
you.
But they funded 300 -- this is what you
learned on cross -- they funded $300 million of
research.
Over 190 different institutions received
that funding, including several institutions right
here in the state of Florida.
They funded -- Dr. Burns admitted they funded
excellent scientists, some of whom would even go on
to win the Nobel Prize.
And if it was a research -- if it was just a
publicity gesture, why, year after year after year,
in over 30-plus Surgeon General's Reports, are these
articles that CTR's funding, why are they being
cited?
Surgeon General's Reports, it's everything
about smoking and health.
If this -- this research
that was funded had nothing to do with smoking and
health, why is it repeatedly being cited by the
Surgeon General?
Does that make sense?
It's not a
public relations gesture.
They funded $300 million
in research. 3417
Let's talk about the green monster for a
second.
Dr. Burns acknowledged -- Dr. Burns
acknowledged, with respect to the green monster, it
was funded by tobacco companies and it ended up in
the publication in 1961.
This is what Dr. Burns
said about the green monster.
He said, "Everything that's been published,
good, bad, and ugly on tobacco in the world's
literature."
It's not concealment.
Everything
that's been published, the good, the bad, and the
ugly, funded by the tobacco companies.
And he said, "...in the world's literature."
I
want to make one point about that.
There was a
document, a Reynolds' document in 1953 by Claude
Teague, it was a survey of literature about smoking
and health in the world.
And you know what
Dr. Burns -- when I said to Dr. Burns, "Well, this
is just publicly available information."
He said,
"Well, yes.
Some of it was in foreign language and
it would be difficult for people to know."
1961,
they're supplying the Surgeon General's Committee
with everything that's known in the world.
So if it
was hard to find in 1953, thanks to the tobacco
companies, by 1961 it wasn't, and the Surgeon 3418
General had that resource.
And ultimately as relates to the green monster,
this is what Dr. Burns said.
He said it was
certainly a very valuable resource and it was
acknowledged as such in the Surgeon General's
Report.
That's not concealment.
That's disclosure.
Dr. Burns told you about A Frank Statement in
1954, three or four years before there was even a
consensus, according to Dr. Burns, that smoking
caused lung cancer.
Let me ask you another question about the Frank
Statement and witnesses in this case.
Did you ever hear from any witness in this case
that Mr. Bowden saw A Frank Statement, talked about
A Frank Statement, relied on it?
Did you ever hear
from a fact witness that Mr. Bowden was waiting for
information from a tobacco company?
Did you ever
hear from a witness Mr. Bowden said, "They'll" --
"They won't" -- "They'll stop selling this when they
know it's dangerous"?
I didn't hear any of that.
He didn't know
anything about A Frank Statement.
If he did, you
can be sure they would have asked the fact witnesses
about it.
He never heard about any single statement
from a tobacco company, from TI, from CTR, from 3419
anyone that a fact witness told you Mr. Bowden
heard, relied upon, considered.
There was nothing.
There was no such statement.
There was no evidence
of it.
Can I have the next demonstrative?
None of the fact witnesses testified that
Mr. Bowden had any doubts about the health risks of
smoking.
You simply didn't hear that from any of
the fact witnesses.
No fact witness testified that Mr. Bowden was
aware of the tobacco industry's position on whether
smoking caused disease.
You didn't hear it from a single witness.
How could he be misled?
He hadn't heard
anything.
No witness testified that Mr. Bowden was aware
of the tobacco industry's position on whether
cigarettes was addictive.
In fact, let's go back to the first one.
No
witness testified Mr. Bowden had any doubt about the
health risks of cigarette smoking.
It's the
opposite.
He was calling cigarettes "cancer
sticks."
He knew.
Did he know they were addictive?
You heard
from fact witnesses, he was saying, I'm addicted. 3420
He didn't need any statement from a tobacco company
to know that.
He said, I'm addicted.
Now, when it comes to information, the
defendants shouldn't be published [sic] for not
publish- -- not publicizing risks that were already
being well publicized; especially when it had no
effect on the smoker, in this case, Mr. Bowden.
It
had no effect.
Let's look.
Dr. Burns acknowledged that
throughout the 1950s the message regarding the
dangers of smoking was getting out to the public.
I asked him this towards the end of my
cross-examination.
He acknowledged the public
health community was getting out the message.
Public health organizations, the American Cancer
Society, the American Lung Association, the U.S.
Public Health Service, state health organizations,
and Surgeon General Burney, all in the 1950s,
getting out the message.
Mr. Reilly showed you, but it's worth looking
at once more, what Dr. Horn said in 1968.
"You
could stand on a rooftop and shout, 'Smoking is
dangerous' at the top of your lungs, and you
wouldn't be telling anyone anything they didn't
already know." 3421
That's what Dr. Horn said in 1968.
1975, Dr. Burns said he personally agreed with
Dr. Horn.
And then there's the statement from 1981
from Dr. Burns.
This is what Dr. Burns was saying in 1981, not
when he was getting ready to testify in a tobacco
trial saying, We didn't know the risks.
This is
what he was saying contemporaneously in 1981.
He said, "95 percent of the people are
thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking, and
90 percent of them realize their own health could be
affected."
That's just the plain facts, and it came from
Dr. Burns himself.
Despite what Dr. Burns and Dr. Hurt have told
you, Reynolds has contributed to the scientific
knowledge of the risks of smoking.
Showed you about
CTR on the slide.
We talked about the green
monster.
And then in more recent times, 1988, it
published publicly -- for anyone who wanted to see
it, it published this monograph on technology and
research it had done on a cigarette that heats
rather than burns tobacco.
Dr. Burns agreed it's possible that heating, 3422
rather than burning, tobacco could lead to a less
hazardous cigarettes -- cigarette.
Reynolds published it for the world to see so
they could help develop a safer cigarette -- or a
less hazardous cigarette.
I asked Dr. Hurt about this book.
I showed it
to you yesterday.
Dr. Hurt was telling you that all
the way through 1994 Reynolds never said a thing
about nicotine.
He didn't even read a book that two
of his science -- scientists edited.
He knew about
the book.
He never read it.
How does he know what Reynolds shared?
He
hasn't even tried to find out.
Eleven different
Reynolds scientists are authors of chapters in this
book.
1982.
That was the Biology of Nicotine.
You heard Dr. Burns tell you whatever he may
have thought of the Tobacco Institute.
You heard
that by the year 2000, the Tobacco Institute was
dissolved.
You heard that TIRC, CTR dissolved in 2000.
And you've heard that smoking rates have
decreased.
And Dr. Hurt told you -- in terms of today, he
told you that starting three years ago, the FDA is 3423
regulating tobacco products.
That's today.
So I covered a lot.
I tried not to repeat too
much of what Mr. Reilly said.
For all those reasons, I suggest that if you
reach the issue of the punitive damages and the
question of entitlement on your verdict form -- I
submit, for all these reasons, you ought to check
"No."
And, more importantly, I don't think you should
ever get to that question.
I think you should say
no to class membership.
I think you should say
no -- if you get past that, I think you should say
no on the issue of claims.
I think your verdict
should be for Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.
So like Mr. Reilly said, Mr. Smith gets to go
next.
Scribbling a lot of notes.
I'm sure he's
going to have a lot of things he wants to say.
One thing I'd ask you to remember is
Mr. Reilly -- we don't get a chance to respond.
Plaintiff gets to have the last word.
What I'd ask you to do -- Mr. Reilly and I have
given you our thinking about it, our thoughts, our
arguments.
What I'd ask you to do when Mr. Smith
gets to have the last word, and he'll get to rebut,
think to yourselves, What would Reilly and Seiden 3424
say in response to this?
Think to yourself, What does it have to do with
Mr. Bowden?
Again, I want to thank you for your service and
your time and your attention.
I know it's been a
long morning.
Thank you all very much.
