                   CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. SHIELDS:  Good morning.
          Michael Bowman was just 12 years old when he
     first started to smoke.  Most smokers then and now
     start as teenagers and probably for essentially the
     same reasons, peer pressure, wanting to appear to
     be an adult, rebellion, wanting to be cool.  But in
     the 1950s it was a different time and a different
     culture in America, smoking was everywhere, it was
     pervasive.  Most of the ads on television were
     smoking commercials, billboards were covered with
     smoking commercials, all the print media,
     newspapers and magazines, were filled with smoking
     commercials and everybody from celebrities to major
     athletes to doctors to politicians endorsed smoking
     and advertised smoking for specific companies.
          By the time Michael Bowman joined the Navy in
     1959, he also entered another culture where smoking
     was persuasive.  He spent six to eight months a
     year at sea and one of the principal pastimes was
     smoking.  They had their own smoke shop on board
     ship.  They their signaling for when it was 6 permissible to smoke, which was most of the time
     under the smoking law.  And consequently his
     smoking started at about a pack a day and by the
     time he finished his Navy career and went into
     civilian life, he moved up to about two-and-a-half
     to three packs a day.
          He left the Navy, went into civilian life.
     But in a short period of time decided he needed to
     change some things about his life, and you've heard
     them about them and we'll talk more about them in
     this closing argument.  And he did, in a relatively
     short time.  He quit drinking in early 1984; he
     quit smoking on New Year's Eve of 1985.
          But despite doing all of those helpful things
     and what he's been advised to do, within ten years
     he got esophageal cancer, terminal esophageal
     cancer at the young age of 56, and three years
     later, at age 59, died of cancer.
          John Kalil and I are proud to be representing
     Pat Bowman in this action against R.J. Reynolds
     Company for their role in the death of her husband,
     Mike Bowman.  We thank you for your attention and
     your participation.  We know this has been a long
     trial and you probably never -- when you came to
     court that first day thought I would be involved in
     as much time and in such a complicated matter, and
     your task is just beginning.  You have a lot of
     documents with a lot of evidence that you need to
     look at in order to reach conclusions in this case.
     So we thank you for your efforts and your time and
     your attention.
          In this closing argument, I intend to go
     through the major issues in this case and discuss
     the evidence as we believe we've presented it to
     you.  Of course, it's your decision as jurors as to
     what the evidence proves, and it's your collective
     judgment as to what the evidence proves.
          Let me give you an overview of the case.  As I
     told you in opening statement, there are four major
     issues to be decided.  There is the question of
     class membership, the judge gave you some
     instructions on that a moment ago.  There's a
     question of specific causation, the judge gave you
     instructions on that.  There's the question of
     comparative fault, that is, allocating fault
     between the parties, if any.  And, finally,
     damages, both compensatory and punitive damages.
          And what we contend the evidence shows in
     regard to each of these issues is that Mike Bowman
     was a member of the Engle class because he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.  And
     his smoking, as a result of that addiction, was a
     cause of his esophageal cancer.  Not only was his
     smoking a cause of his esophageal cancer, but
     Defendant R.J. Reynolds' misconduct, as found in
     the Engle findings, also was a substantial
     contributing factor in causing his esophageal
     cancer.
          So we accept as we said from the very
     beginning of the case that Mike may bear some
     responsibility for not quitting sooner, but that
     has to be compared to the misconduct of R.J.
     Reynolds over 50 years in which they concealed the
     evidence regarding smoking, in which they
     manipulated the levels of nicotine to create and
     sustain addiction among smokers, in which they
     denied the evidence and attempted to overwhelm the
     contrary public health message.
          So we suggest to you that the evidence
     establishes that the major responsibility is the
     responsibility of Defendant R.J. Reynolds.
          And, finally, we'll talk to you about damages,
     what would be the appropriate amount of
     compensatory damages, and what would be the
     entitlement to punitive damages.
          So let's begin with the first issue, the issue
     of class membership.  I assumed from the beginning
     of this case that everybody understood what a class
     action was.  But let me tell you a little bit about
     class action and the Engle class action.  A class
     action is a suit on behalf of a larger group,
     brought by a few people in which they bring the
     claim on behalf of every member of the class.  And
     so in connection with this, this action was brought
     on behalf of Florida smokers who were addicted to
     smoking cigarettes.  And as a result of that
     addiction, their smoking caused certain
     smoking-related diseases.
          So the first issue you have to decide is
     whether or not Mike Bowman was a member of the
     Engle class; that is, was Mike Bowman addicted to
     smoking cigarettes and did his smoking, as a result
     of that addiction, cause or contribute to causing
     his esophageal cancer.
          And what is the evidence on those two issues?
     Let's begin with the first issue, the addiction
     issue.  One of your determinations is going to be
     whether or not Michael Bowman was addicted to
     smoking cigarettes because of the nicotine
     contained in them.  We've already told you and 7 you've heard extensively about when he started
     smoking cigarettes at the relatively young age of
     12.  80 to 90 percent of regular smokers start
     smoking at the age of teenagers and that fact has
     been known to Defendant R.J. Reynolds and the other
     tobacco companies for years and years and decades
     and decades.
          Dr. Werner told you about the developing brain
     and the impact of nicotine on the developing brain
     of a teenager and how it has more impact than it
     would for an adult.  The result is that a teenager
     is more likely to become addicted and more likely
     to become addicted quickly as a result of nicotine
     than an adult would.  The evidence, of course, is
     that Mike Bowman went to college for one year, had
     an appendectomy and could no longer afford to
     remain in college so he joined the Navy.
          He originally started smoking and worked up to
     a pack a day.  And when Pat first met him in 1960,
     he was smoking about a pack a day.  But that
     quickly expanded to a pack and a half and then two
     packs.  And as Mr. Coyle told you, ultimately,
     two-and-a-half packs to three packs when he was in
     the Navy.  And when he quit the Navy, testimony of
     the family was that he was smoking up to three
     packs a day.
          He smoked Pall Mall, he smoked Camels, he
     smoked Lucky Strike.  As the Court has indicated,
     all three of those brands were manufactured,
     distributed, and sold by R.J. Reynolds or one of
     the predecessor companies for whom they are liable
     and responsible in this action.
          Now, what do we know about addiction
     generally?  First, as the 1988 Surgeon General's
     Report noted, addiction is the result of nicotine.
     Nicotine is a potent drug found in tobacco.  This
     potent drug has an affect on the brain, and we'll
     talk about that affect in more detail in a moment.
     The affect on the brain is similar and the
     addictive affects of nicotine are similar to those
     of heroin and cocaine.  And although R.J. Reynolds
     denied that its cigarettes were addictive and that
     nicotine was addictive for 45 or 50 years, they
     ultimately admitted that fact after the first Engle
     trial in 2000.
          The most recent report of the Surgeon General,
     the 2010 Surgeon General's Report, has a chapter on
     addiction.  You will have that in evidence.  You
     will have a copy of the 2010 Surgeon General's
     Report.  And the important point out of the 2010 Surgeon General's Report is the beginning of the
     chapter on addiction.  "Nicotine addiction is the
     fundamental reason that individuals persist in
     using tobacco products and this persistent tobacco
     use contributes to many of the diseases described
     in the report."  What does that mean?  What it
     means is that the reason people smoke is because of
     nicotine.  Without nicotine in cigarettes, people
     would not smoke.
          The evidence, and perhaps the best evidence of
     that, as you saw early in the trial from Dr. Figlar
     and Dr. Cook, was that when they took the nicotine
     out or brought nicotine low, nobody would buy their
     cigarettes, because that's why people smoke.  And
     that's why people continue to smoke.
          And as the second half of the sentence
     indicates, "It is continuing to smoke that causes
     cancer and the other diseases associated with
     smoking."  Because it takes a long time for those
     diseases to develop, what we called the latency
     period yesterday in the cross-examination of
     Dr. Harris.  It is that continuing to smoke as a
     result of the nicotine in the product, that is the
     reason we are here.  That is the statement of the
     case here.
          All right.  Let's look now at the evidence,
     particularly, of Michael Bowman.  You've got
     testimony of two experts and a lot of testimony of
     family and friends about Michael Bowman's
     addiction.  The first is Dr. Werner.  Dr. Werner is
     a professor at the University of Florida.  She has
     spent a lot of time dealing with addiction issues.
     She told you about the number of cases of addiction
     to nicotine that she has diagnosed and the amount
     of time she has spent dealing with that issue.  And
     what she told you about addiction to nicotine was
     that the nicotine addiction is explained by what
     happens in the brain as a result of nicotine.
          There is this dopamine reward pathway system
     in the brain that results in activity at the brain
     with neurotransmitters, that is, what causes people
     to become addicted to nicotine.  And she showed you
     this diagram of what happens to an addicted smoker
     in the neurons in the brain and how they act as a
     little key binding together.  When you take away
     that nicotine, withdrawal symptoms occur as a
     result of the removal of those neuron transmitters.
     That slide is from the National Institute of Drug
     Abuse, which describes what happens with nicotine
     addiction. 8 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com      If we go to the next slide, Dr. Werner also
     said to you that what nicotine addiction means is
     that smoking cigarettes which contains nicotine
     becomes a fundamental part of the smoker's life and
     the addicted person's life, that nicotine is one of
     the most addicted substances in existence.  More
     addictive than heroin, it's more addictive than
     cocaine, it has more impact.  And, third, and,
     finally, that nicotine addiction is one of the most
     difficult addictions to break.
          Now, you have heard from defense counsel that
     people can quit smoking.  Well, obviously, they
     can.  Mike Bowman quit smoking here.  But what does
     that mean in terms of addiction?  People quit
     cocaine, people quit heroin.  The fact that you can
     quit doesn't mean that you weren't addicted.  It
     doesn't mean it wasn't extremely difficult to quit
     smoking.  It simply means that it is possible to
     quit.  It doesn't change the question of whether or
     not Michael Bowman was addicted and, thus, whether
     or not he is a member of the Engle class.
          Now, Dr. Werner said you diagnose addiction in
     a couple of ways, one way is to use what's called
     the DSM, the diagnostic statistical manual, and she
     brought up for you the DSM's manual criteria for
     substance dependence and how it's applied to
     nicotine.  What it provides is that if you meet
     three or more of the seven criteria, then that's
     regarded as clinically significant impairment and
     distress and you are diagnosed as addicted.  And
     she walked you through those seven criteria, and
     the evidence of meeting the seven criteria here.
          There's little dispute about some of them.
     First, there's no dispute that he met the criteria
     of tolerance, all that means in the context of
     nicotine addiction is that the amount he ultimately
     smoked, he became tolerant to, because if he had
     started smoking that amount in the very beginning,
     it would have resulted in symptoms of toxicity and
     both experts agree on that, he met that
     requirement.  So one of the three is already met.
          The second requirement is withdrawal symptoms.
     And there's a separate section of the DSM that sets
     forth what the withdrawal symptoms are.  There are
     eight of them.  And the requirement is that you
     meet four of the eight within a 24-hour period of
     time from cessation, and then you've met with the
     withdrawal symptoms.  There is testimony from
     family to support each of those.  Depressed mood,
     two of the daughters and Pat described the fact that he was depressed having quit.
          Secondly, insomnia.  Two of the daughters
     described the fact that he had difficulty sleeping,
     insomnia.
          Third, irritability, frustration, anger.  All
     of the family members described that in connection
     when he quit smoking.
          Fourth, anxiety.  That was described both as
     restlessness and anxiety.  You recall the
     description of him sitting in a chair and his legs
     were twitching, he couldn't sit still, he was
     constantly moving around.  It's both an indication
     of restlessness and anxiety.
          And, finally, the most important, there was
     undisputed evidence that he gained 35 pounds when
     he quit smoking.  That is a classic withdrawal
     symptom.  He gained it because without the
     neurotransmitters in his brain hooked up to
     nicotine, he had to substitute with candy and
     sweets and constant eating to try and substitute
     for what was happening.  And as a result he gained
     35 pounds from quitting smoking.
          He clearly met the requirements for withdrawal
     symptoms, that's two of the three.
          Third requirement is that he would take it in
     larger amounts over time.  The evidence is
     undisputed there as well.  He started out smoking
     less than a pack, ended up smoking about three
     packs.  There is evidence from Mr. Coyle that he
     tried to cut back both because of financial reasons
     and because of attempts to quit, all of which
     indicates that he ended up smoking more than he
     ever intended to smoke and, thus, you've already
     met three of the requirements.  That alone results
     in a diagnosis of addiction.
          But the other requirements, there's evidence
     to meet them as well.  The requirement that there
     is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to
     cut down.  You remember the testimony of Mr. Coyle,
     one of his shipmates for a four-year period,
     describing how they would try and quit and they
     could rarely make it over a day or so.  So there's
     evidence to support that as well.  There's also
     evidence to support that he continued to smoke
     despite having knowledge of a consistent or
     recurrent physical problem.
          You heard in opening statement defense counsel
     say that he had a terrible cough, that it sounded
     like he was coughing up his lungs, that it reached
     the point of him almost vomiting, yet he continued
9 www.veritext.com 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 to smoke.  That meets the requirement of number
     seven.  There is no doubt that the minimum
     requirements of three of the seven requirements are
     met under DSM.
          RJR's expert, Dr. Hoge, disagrees.  And in
     evaluating whether you're going to believe him or
     Dr. Werner, let me bring a couple of points to your
     attention.  First, he's not an expert on nicotine
     addiction.  He works in a correctional facility at
     Columbia.  He teaches as part of a fellowship
     program there, forensic psychiatry, that has almost
     nothing to do with nicotine addiction.  What did he
     say, over the entire course of his career he has
     diagnosed maybe six people with nicotine addiction,
     and that was only incidental to other things he was
     dealing with in the correctional context.  He
     clearly is not on par with Dr. Werner as an expert
     on nicotine addiction.
          But, more importantly, although he told you on
     direct that -- that Michael Bowman didn't meet the
     requirements of DSM, he never went through them.
     He never walked you through them and even discussed
     them.  He just told you the conclusion.  It had to
     come on cross for us to walk through them and get
     admissions from him about how he met the various
     requirements.  And his way around admitting that
     Mike Bowman was addicted was to change the wording
     of the requirements, by claiming that this wording
     at the top about clinical significance meant that
     you had to go see a doctor or the need to go see a
     doctor for each of those symptoms before it would
     be clinically significant.  That's not what it
     says.
          And Dr. Werner explained to you that that
     interpretation was, in her words, ridiculous.  What
     it says is that -- it defines clinical significance
     as manifested by three or more of the following.
     If you meet three or more of the following, it says
     it's clinically significant.  If it meant what
     Dr. Hoge wanted it to say, it wouldn't be worded
     that way.  Instead, it would be worded by saying
     with each of them, that they had to result in
     clinically significant results.
          Would that make any sense?  What's clinically
     significant about tolerance?  What are the symptoms
     of tolerance that would require you to go to a
     doctor?  Or look at the other requirements,
     clinically significance, if you are interpreting
     the way Dr. Hoge was trying to interpret, makes
     little or no sense.  But you don't have to look just at the DSM.  There's another prominent
     instrument, as the Surgeon General's Report in 2010
     says, that is used to diagnose nicotine addiction.
          That's the Fagerstrom test.  And the
     Fagerstrom test is a simple test that deals with
     the likelihood of relapse and when you start to
     smoke and why you smoke and how much.  I walked
     Dr. Hoge through this.  And using the Fagerstrom
     test, Mike Bowman comes out as highly addictive.
          Now, Dr. Hoge tries to dismiss that by saying,
     Oh, that's just a test that researchers use.  I
     don't understand.  What's wrong with researchers
     using it?  Researchers are the ones that know the
     most about this issue.  They're the scientists with
     the greatest acknowledge.  You're not going rely on
     those with the greatest knowledge for determining
     addiction?  And this is the instrument they use.
     This is the instrument Dr. Werner said is also used
     to screen for nicotine addiction and that Dr. Hoge
     has to admit would result in Michael Bowman being
     regarded as addicted.
          The question here is not whether Michael
     Bowman had a diagnosis of nicotine addiction.  The
     question is whether he is a member of the Engle
     class.  And there's no requirement part of the
     Engle class that you receive a diagnosis from the
     doctor.  And, thus, the testimony of family and
     friends is equally important here.  Each of the
     family members described him as addicted to
     cigarettes.  I don't think there's any question
     that he met the addiction requirement.
          The second major issue that comes out of this
     case and the second requirement for being a member
     of the Engle class, is whether smoking caused his
     esophageal cancer.  That is also tied up with the
     second issue of specific causation.  So let's go to
     that fundamental issue.
          Is cigarette smoking a cause, not the sole
     cause, but a cause of his esophageal cancer?  Now,
     the Court has instructed you that this causation
     requirement does not mean that it's the only cause.
     One of the instructions dealt with what was called
     concurrent cause, that two or more things can come
     together.  And the specific instruction that the
     Court gave you is that cigarettes need not be the
     only cause, smoking R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes may
     be a legal cause of death, even though it operates
     in combination with the act of another or some
     other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same
     time as smoking and that smoking substantially --
10 www.veritext.com 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84
     contributes substantially to producing the death.
     That's the legal cause standard.  Substantial
     factor.
          And we know this from everyday life.  Think
     about things that happen.  Many things rarely are
     the result of one and one only cause.  Driving down
     the highway, rain-slick highway, and there's a
     puddle in the middle of the road, someone who's
     speeding reaches that puddle and hydroplanes out of
     control, and said, Wait a minute, it's not my fault
     that I lost the control, it's the fault of that
     puddle.  Well, it's the combination of speeding and
     coming into a puddle of water that results in the
     loss of the control.  It is the concurrence of
     those events that caused the result.
          And that's exactly what the evidence is here.
     The evidence is here that he smoked cigarettes for
     33 years, up to three packs a day, but he also
     drank beer on occasion in excess, and we don't deny
     that, although there has been an attempt to make
     that sound much greater than it was.  He spent long
     periods of time at sea, six to eight months a year
     during a 20-year period of time in which there's no
     alcohol on board the vessel, and so you know he
     can't be drinking six packs a day, day in and day
     out, year in and year out.  It's for occasional
     periods of time, and there is no doubt that on
     those occasional periods of time his drinking was
     and could be to excess.
          So our testimony, our evidence is that it is
     the combination of the two.  And the evidence to
     support that is as follows:  Remember the
     videotaped deposition of Dr. Langfitt.
     Dr. Langfitt was his attending physician.  He's the
     doctor that diagnosed him as having esophageal
     cancer in the first place.  Somebody that deals day
     in and day out with esophageal cancer.  And he was
     just unequivocal, the smoking was the predominant
     cause of his esophageal cancer, according to
     Dr. Langfitt.  And why?  Based on his training,
     based upon his knowledge of the literature, based
     on the fact that in all his years of being a
     gastroenterologist he's never seen anybody with
     esophageal cancer who was not a smoker.
          And that, of course, is consistent with the
     statistical evidence we showed you and we'll get to
     in a moment with Dr. Levy.  Dr. Levy was the second
     person that gave you evidence that smoking was a
     cause, in combination with drinking, of his
     esophageal cancer.      Now, the fact that smoking is a cause of
     esophageal cancer is beyond dispute in this case.
     It is a fact conceded by the defendant.  It's part
     of the Engle findings in the case.  It's been known
     since at least 1964 in the first Surgeon General's
     Report.  And by 1979 it was undeniable as the
     report from the Surgeon General said that cigarette
     smoking is a causal factor in the development of
     cancer of the esophagus and the risk of it
     increases with the amount.  Undenied.
          And Dr. Levy said to you that if you look at
     all the studies across the board, literally
     hundreds of them, that Dr. Harris admitted
     yesterday, instead of trying to cherry pick one
     here and there, you see that the chance of getting
     esophageal cancer from smoking alone is about four
     to ninefold higher than somebody that never smoked.
     That's how epidemiologists like Dr. Levy determined
     the likelihood of causation.  Four to nine
     increased risk.
          But he also said that when it's combined with
     a consumption of alcohol, that the risk multiplies,
     it's what's called as synergism.  And I think he
     showed that you not only 78 percent of all causes
     of esophageal cancer, statistically, are the result
     of smoking, when you combine it with drinking, it's
     about 90 percent.  And he gave you the risk data in
     the form of a bar graph of when you combine the
     two.  And this bar graph really represents what the
     evidence amounts to on causation; that is, the
     average of this four to nine range for smoking is
     about five or so, conservatively, increased
     probability as a result of smoking.  Well, what
     that means is that your chance of getting
     esophageal cancer is five times higher than a
     nonsmoker.
          Similarly, with drinking it's in the same
     general range, although a little bit lower, with an
     average of about four.  But when you combine the
     two, it's at least 20.  And as we saw yesterday in
     talking to Dr. Harris, there are studies out there
     that say it's 50 times higher, that it's 100 times
     higher, that it's a 150 times higher when you
     combine the two.  That synergistic effect, Dr. Levy
     said, it's absolutely clear under these
     circumstances, to say that the two, smoking in
     combination with some drinking at a heavy level,
     was the cause.
          Now, not all drinking is associated with
     esophageal cancer.  It's only heavy drinking and 11 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com it's primarily hard liquor.  There are studies as
     pointed out both on my cross-examination of
     Dr. Harris and Dr. Levy's testimony that don't show
     that beer has any affect whatsoever.  But, in any
     event, even if you assume it has an affect, it
     would be a combined affect between the two.
          Now, Dr. Harris, the defendant's expert, also
     yesterday appeared to say he disagreed.  Dr. Harris
     is not an epidemiologist like Dr. Levy.  He is not
     someone that's done studies in the area.  He is not
     someone who has written, as Dr. Levy has, about
     these issues.  And the studies that he picked and
     told you about didn't even support what he was
     claiming.
          Now, I quoted to you and read to him from the
     various studies he was quoting and we walked you
     through them.  Take those examples and each of
     those studies, the authors of the studies, as
     opposed to Dr. Harris trying to manipulate the
     data, concluded that smoking was the predominant
     cause of esophageal cancer, although the
     combination of the two dramatically increased the
     risk.
          I think it's absolutely clear from the
     testimony, even of Dr. Harris, that it's the
     combination of the two that caused his esophageal
     cancer.  The question is was one more predominant
     than the other?  Dr. Levy and I think that the
     evidence establishes here that smoking was more
     predominant as Dr. Langfitt said.  Even Dr. Harris
     had to admit that they both contributed, although
     he thought alcohol was more predominant.
          But there's one important factor that came out
     yesterday and that is the following:  Recall when I
     was walking him through the damage to the cell and
     it goes to the next generation and how long of a
     time period it takes?  The ultimate point of all
     that was to say to you, as he admitted, that the
     cause of his esophageal cancer had to occur while
     he was still smoking and drinking.  The damage
     occurred while he was being exposed, not later.
     It's consequently irrelevant what happens after you
     quit, the damage has already occurred.
          He's not one of those who quit and avoided it.
     Whatever caused it had already occurred by the time
     he quit and, thus, as Dr. Harris, himself,
     admitted, if you looked at the evidence at the time
     he quit, you would have to conclude that both of
     them contributed.
          So, ladies and gentlemen, I don't think there's any question that as a result of addiction
     and specific causation, that Michael Bowman was a
     member of the Engle class and is entitled to the
     Engle findings.
          That's going to lead us to the third issue of
     comparative fault.  And let's talk about the Engle
     findings and comparative fault.  The judge has
     instructed you on the Engle findings, and I told
     you about them in opening statement.  Let's cover
     them again.
          The Engle jury found the following, and most
     importantly you, this jury, is bound as the court
     instructed you by those findings if you find that
     Mike Bowman was a member of the Engle class.  What
     it comes down to is these issues have already been
     tried for members of the Engle class and they lost.
     They denied all of this at the Engle trial and they
     lost.  They don't get to come in to a new jury and
     now claim that they're not true.  You are bound by
     these results.
          And what they are is that, first, smoking
     cigarettes causes esophageal cancer.  Finding one
     called "general causation," you are bound by that
     result; two, nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
     Finding two, the addictiveness of cigarettes.
     Three, that all defendants, and that included R.J.
     Reynolds in the Engle trial, placed cigarettes on
     the market that were defective and unreasonably
     dangerous.  Now, let's stop for a moment.
          That's what's called a strict liability claim,
     and you will see on the verdict form that there is
     a count for strict liability.  What strict
     liability means is that if a product is placed on
     the market which is defective and unreasonably
     dangerous, the defendant is strictly liable for the
     damage that it causes.  Now, it's already been
     found that their products were defective and
     unreasonably dangerous, and the evidence that you
     have seen is that the reason they were defective
     and unreasonably dangerous is really twofold:  One
     is they contain carcinogens, cancer-causing
     substances and two was that because of the nicotine
     they were addictive.  That's what made them
     defective and unreasonably dangerous, and it is the
     presence of nicotine which causes people to start
     smoking, continue smoking.  And it's the presence
     of the carcinogens which causes the cancer.
          So that finding, along with the clear,
     causative relationship between the presence of
     carcinogens and nicotine, establishes the strict
12 liability account and makes them strictly liable
     for Michael Bowman's death.
          The next finding is that all defendants
     concealed or omitted material information not
     otherwise known or available, knowing that the
     material was false or misleading or failed to
     disclose a material fact telling the health effects
     or the addictive nature smoking cigarettes or both.
     That's what was called the fraud by concealment
     count in Engle.
          And we've covered a lot of that evidence, and
     I'm going to talk about it in a moment in this
     case.  And I'll tell you why even though you're
     bound by it and even though it's already been
     determined, why we brought that evidence out to you
     again.  But there's abundant evidence that you have
     seen of the fraud by concealment.
          The next finding was that all the defendants
     agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the
     health effects of cigarettes or their addictive
     nature.  The civil conspiracy to fraud --
     fraudulently conceal the information is what this
     finding deals with.
          And, finally, there's the negligence finding,
     that the defendants were negligent.  That R.J.
     Reynolds was negligent.  It was negligent because
     they manufactured, distributed, and sold products
     that were addictive, products that contained
     cancer-causing substances and made no attempt to
     see if it could remove the addictive nature of it.
     You recall Dr. Figlar's testimony, they have never
     researched and they're still not researching how to
     make a less-addictive cigarette because they know
     if it's less addictive, people won't smoke.  That's
     what it comes down to.
          All right.  Those are the Engle findings,
     you're bound by those findings.
          Let's talk about comparative fault.  That's
     the third major issue here.  Fault is not an
     all-or-nothing proposition.  Rather, under Florida
     law somebody can be at fault and still recover
     against a defendant who was also at fault.  You
     allow the recovery under Florida law, as Judge
     Arnold instructed you.  What you do, however, is
     allocate the fault of the two parties.  That's what
     is known as comparative fault.  You compare the
     fault of one to the fault of the other.
          Now, in order to compare the fault, you have
     to look at the conduct of both.  And so let's start
     by looking at the conduct of R.J. Reynolds because we need to compare that to the conduct of Michael
     Bowman.  We spent a lot of time at the beginning of
     this case talking about the conduct of R.J.
     Reynolds.  We started with a videotaped deposition
     of two of their principal executives, Dr. Figlar
     and Dr. Cook.  The purpose of doing that was to
     walk you through what the historic documents show
     about their conduct and to put them in the context
     of what is demonstrated.
          We followed that by the testimony of a
     nationally prominent historian who has written
     about tobacco and the conduct of the industry for
     years, long before he was ever involved in any
     litigation, has published extensively on it and is
     clearly one of the leading authorities in the
     country, Dr. Proctor.  What he told you in overview
     and what was confirmed out of the mouths of their
     own executives, Dr. Figlar and Dr. Cook, was, one,
     that they knew by at least the mid to late '50s
     that cigarette smoking was a major cause of death
     and disease.  440,000 people in this country alone
     die every year as a result of this defective
     product.  And the documents and the testimony show
     they knew that going back to the mid to late '50s.
          Secondly, Dr. Proctor said that despite that
     knowledge, they entered into an elaborate and
     coordinated campaign to deny the truth of that, to
     conceal the information about the hazards of their
     products, and to misrepresent in an attempt to
     continue to sell their product.
          Third, and, finally, he told you that they
     knew for decades before they admitted it in 2000
     that their products were addictive.  And that what
     they did with their addiction, was that they
     designed their cigarettes so that they created an
     addiction in the first place in those teenagers
     that started to smoke and that thereafter they
     sustained the addiction by manipulating the level
     of nicotine in cigarettes to begin with.
          Those conclusions were also confirmed by
     Dr. Burns.  And Dr. Burns truly is the leading
     authority on these issues.  He is the author of,
     what did he say, 19 or 20 of the Surgeon General's
     reports.  He has spent his entire career dealing
     with these issues, and you saw him by videotape
     testifying much like Dr. Proctor did about when the
     scientific evidence became available, what was
     known and what they did.
          Finally, we had the testimony of Dr. Goldberg,
     who also started writing about these issues long 13 before anybody brought him into litigation.  You
     have seen on cross-examination a lot of attempts to
     say, Well, you're doing this for the money of
     testifying.
          The reality is each of these experts became
     experts on the subject and then were hired to
     testify because they were experts.  That's why they
     were brought in here.  Unlike the defendant's
     experts, who have no background, no knowledge, and
     no expertise and were simply hired to come in here
     and give you an opinion to support the defendant's
     claim.
          What Dr. Goldberg told you was that there was
     an extensive advertising and marketing campaign
     that created a kind of acceptance for smoking that
     assuaged the fears of smokers and sustained
     continued smoking over the years and that
     counterbalanced whatever effort was being made
     publicly to say to the contrary by the public
     health community.
          All right.  What's the evidence, then, of
     their misconduct?  Well, we've talked about this in
     opening statement and I walked Dr. Figlar and
     Dr. Cook through it, but it starts before 1950,
     when there were developing evidence that cigarette
     smoking was related to an epidemic of lung cancer,
     and there were studies going back into the '20s,
     and '30s and '40s in which doctors looked at that
     and said, It looks to us like it's related to
     smoking.
          But the major breakthrough came in 1950.  In
     1950 there were four studies published in major
     medical journals, in the Journal of the American
     Medical Association, the British Medical Journal,
     and another Journal of the American Medical
     Association, and in the cancer journal, Cancer
     Research.
          Those four systematic studies were the first
     attempts to put together large amounts of
     information to show that cigarette smoking was
     related to cancer causation.  They were followed
     shortly thereafter by another study in which the
     experimenters looked at what smoking did to
     animals, whether they produced cancer in animals,
     and the simple study and experimental study was
     taking smoking condensate and paint it on the skin
     of the animal to see if a tumor resulted.  And they
     found that it did that, that that is exactly what
     happened, much like what's happening to your lungs
     when you smoke cigarettes, literally that smoking condensate gets painted on your lungs and over time
     will produce tumors just like it did in the
     animals.  But the result of that, of those studies,
     was it created a panic in the industry.
          They were concerned with this information out
     there, that people were all going to quit smoking
     immediately, and they needed to do something about
     it.  So the president of the American Tobacco
     Company, a company that later became part of R.J.
     Reynolds, called a meeting of all of the presidents
     of the other tobacco companies, what we refer to as
     the Plaza Hotel meeting in New York City in
     December of 1953.
          And at that meeting, instead of saying, Gee,
     we manufacture products that may be killing people,
     what are we going to do about that?  We need to get
     some researchers, we need to get some doctors, we
     need to figure out something to do about it.  That
     wasn't something they came together to do.  What
     they came together to do was, How do we persuade
     the people who buy our products not to believe what
     the scientists are saying?  And so they decided to
     hire public relations counsel to claim that the
     scientific evidence was invalid, to claim that it
     was insufficient, and to assert that there were
     other causes of cancer totally unrelated to
     cigarette smoking and that people should continue
     to smoke.
          So they hired the most prominent, biggest
     public relations firm in the country, Hill &
     Knowlton, to undergo the campaign.  You can see
     from the notes of their meeting that that's all
     they were interested in.  They weren't talking
     about, What are we going to do to protect our
     customers?  They were talking about:  How do we
     persuade our customers to continue smoking in light
     of this new information that's coming out?  And the
     first thing they did was they issued what has
     become known as The Frank Statement.
          Now, we can argue a lot about how truthful
     this statement is, whether it's accurate and
     misleading.  Dr. Proctor told you it was misleading
     in several respects, it did not accurately set
     forth what the scientific evidence was but, mainly,
     it was misleading in its attempt to create doubt
     that there was a scientific issue here and what
     they were going to do about it.  Don't get caught
     up in the details of whether The Frank Statement is
     true or false or how much of it's true or false.
     The point of all this is, and the point of the 14 Plaza meeting is, it was the beginning of a 50-year
     conspiracy to deny that cigarettes caused disease.
     It was the beginning of a 50-year conspiracy to try
     to persuade smokers to continue to smoke because
     of, quote, open controversy, doubt, insufficient
     scientific evidence, and, most importantly, the
     theme they had throughout that entire 50 years that
     we saw over and over again was the following:  If
     there's anything in cigarettes that are harmful,
     we'll take them out.
          Now, think about that for a minute.  What does
     that mean, If there's anything in cigarettes that
     are harmful, we'll take it out?  It's saying,
     first, that there's nothing in cigarettes that's
     harmful that we know about, which we'll see in a
     moment that's an out-and-out lie.
          It's saying, secondly, Whatever's in there, we
     can remove it so there's no reason for you to
     continue to be concerned about it.
          And, third, and perhaps most importantly, what
     it's saying to smokers is, Continue smoking,
     because we'll solve the problem before you ever get
     any disease as a result of it.  So you should
     continue smoking.  And that was the theme for the
     next 50 years.
          Now, what happened after the issuance of The
     Frank Statement was that they then created two
     front organizations to institute this campaign.
     One was called the Tobacco Industry Research
     Committee, which is supposedly a scientific group
     doing fundamental, important research to answer the
     question.  Dr. Proctor tells you they spent a vast
     fortune.  They did a lot of good scientific
     research.  But none of it was directed at trying to
     determine that cigarettes cause cancer.
          Now, there is one fundamental concept of
     science, and particularly of epidemiology, and that
     fundamental concept is, if there's a study that
     comes out and it says, It appears that this
     substance causes this problem, and you want to know
     whether that study is right or not, you want to ask
     a question whether it, in fact, does, what
     scientists do is replicate the study to see if they
     get the same result.  What does that mean?  They do
     it again.  They do a similar study to see if they
     keep getting the same results, because one of the
     principles that Dr. Levy told you of epidemiology
     is you look at the consistency of the results to
     see if you get them from the same studies time in
     and time out.      The Tobacco Industry Research Committee, up
     until it was required to be disbanded in 1999,
     never attempted to replicate any of the studies
     from which the conclusions by the scientists were
     being reached that cigarettes cause cancer.  They
     didn't attempt to replicate the studies done by
     Wynder.  They didn't attempt to replicate the
     studies by Doll and Hill.  They didn't attempt to
     replicate the studies of the American Cancer
     Society.
          They spent all of that money over all of those
     years and never once directly addressed the
     fundamental issue.  Instead, they created a smoke
     screen in which they spent hundreds of millions of
     dollars addressing all these other scientific
     questions so they could say, We can't find the
     answer, without ever looking for the answer in the
     fundamental research in the first place.
          The second thing they did was create a group
     called The Tobacco Institute, which was basically a
     lobbying group, a group designed to deny whenever
     anybody said there was something caused by
     cigarettes, that it was truthful (sic) and to
     attack the scientists that said it and to attack
     the people that made the message.
          Now, over the next few years after The Frank
     Statement, after this initial controversy, after
     the commencement of this conspiracy, what occurred
     was the development of the scientific evidence.
     And as Dr. Proctor told you, there was little or no
     doubt by the mid to late '50s that cigarette
     smoking caused cancer.  There are major new
     studies, the evidence kept growing, the medical
     publications kept developing during that time.  And
     that's what Dr. Burns told you as well.  He told
     you that by the mid to late '50s it was absolutely
     clear, the Surgeon General of the United States
     issued a statement.  The American Cancer Society
     issued a statement.  Statements from the health
     organizations around the world by that point in
     time concluded that the weight of the evidence was
     that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer.
          And that was known to R.J. Reynolds.  One of
     the most important documents you will see is a
     document by Claude Teague.  It's important because
     it occurred right in the middle of all this and, in
     fact, before they even issued The Frank Statement.
     In February of 1953, Claude Teague, as part of the
     formation of the new research and development group
     at R.J. Reynolds, was assigned the task of 15 researching what the scientific evidence was and he
     created this report.
          Now, Mr. Reid told you in opening statement
     that Claude Teague was just some student that had
     some student assignment.  There is absolutely no
     evidence to support that.  To the contrary,
     Dr. Figlar on that videotaped deposition on the
     first day of trial, specifically testified that
     Claude Teague was a scientist in the research and
     development department who was assigned the task of
     doing this research and prepared this report for
     distribution in a newly created department at R.J.
     Reynolds that dealt with the issue to begin with.
          What did this report do?  It walked through
     the various scientific evidence for cigarette
     smoking causing cancer.  And you've heard the
     evidence.  It's basically, one, what does the
     epidemiological study show, like Hill and Doll and
     other studies?  Secondly, what does the
     experimental animal studies show, like the skin
     painting that was going on in that study.  Third,
     what does the pathology show?  That is, when you
     look on autopsy at lungs of smokers, what do you
     see?  And, fourth, and, finally, what chemicals are
     in these compound -- in smoking that we already
     know cause cancer?  That fourth one is probably the
     most important issue.
          If you already know something causes cancer
     and you do the research and find it's in your
     product, that ought to be awfully strong evidence
     that your product will cause cancer.  And that is
     exactly what Claude Teague did.  He walked through
     all the chemical carcinogens, he looked at the
     scientific evidence in total, and he reached the
     conclusion, from his review, that the studies,
     clinical data tend to confirm the relationship
     between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and the
     incidents of cancer of the lung.
          That's February of 1953, before they ever had
     the meeting at the Plaza Hotel, before they ever
     issued The Frank Statement saying that there was no
     evidence that cigarettes caused lung cancer, before
     they started issuing all their press releases and
     other documents saying that there was no evidence
     that cigarettes cause lung cancer, their internal
     scientific research department had already
     concluded to the contrary.
          And, most importantly, think about that
     chemical-constituent thing we talked a moment ago
     in which Claude Teague identified the carcinogens
25 known to be in cigarette smoke as of that point in
     time and compare that to their statement time and
     time again.  If there's anything in our product
     that is hazardous, we'll take it out.  They already
     knew there were things in their product that were
     hazardous.  There were carcinogens in their
     product.  They already knew you couldn't take them
     out, but they were making that statement to keep
     people smoking, to keep selling their product.
          That's not the only evidence.  The next
     evidence that confirms what they really knew comes
     from an internal document previously secret as to a
     meeting with various researchers from around the
     country done by the British American Tobacco
     Company, then the owner of Brown & Williamson,
     which is now part of R.J. Reynolds.  And what that
     report showed was that in 1958 they went to all of
     the American tobacco companies and talked to their
     top scientists.  They went to R.J. Reynolds and
     talked to their top scientists.  They went to the
     American Tobacco Company.  They went to all the
     companies and talked to them.  And they went back
     to England and reported on what they were told.
          And what they reported, that was with one
     exception, HSN Greene, who was at Yale, not, in
     fact, employed by the tobacco companies, "The
     individuals whom we met believed that smoking
     causes lung cancer.  If by causation we mean a
     chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer
     in which involves smoking as an indispensable
     link."  You know that has a remarkable similarity
     to what the judge instructed you causation meant.
     A chain of events that ultimately leads to cancer.
          And then they point out that the -- in the
     United States only Berkson actually contested the
     statistical information.  And you heard Dr. Figlar
     and Dr. Cook reference Dr. Berkson on several
     occasions.  But as this document indicates, nobody
     believed Berkson, everybody at the time thought he
     was wrong about it.  They thought he was wrong
     about it.
          Consequently, it's another important piece of
     evidence of what they actually knew.
          There's a third important piece of evidence,
     another previously secret document and that comes
     from Dr. Rodgman, another one of their top
     executives, who in 1959 -- 1962 was again assigned
     the task, according to Dr. Figlar, to look in the
     scientific evidence and report back to the company
     as to what the scientific evidence showed at that
16 point.
          And like Dr. Teague before him, he walked
     through all the evidence, the epidemiological
     evidence, the experimental animal evidence, the
     chemical constituents, the pathology, and then he
     summarized at the end by saying, "Obviously, the
     amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette
     smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming.  The
     evidence challenging this indictment is scant."
     That's what they truly believed.  And perhaps the
     best evidence of what they truly believed is what
     they were doing secretly internally.
          They were spending tens of millions of dollars
     seeing if they could reduce the carcinogens that
     they had already identified in cigarette smoke.
     Why do you do that?  You do that only if you
     recognize that they're hazardous and that it will
     likely cause lung cancer.  They spent all of that
     money at the same time that they were publicly
     saying to everybody, If there's anything hazardous
     in our products, we'll take it out.
          Not once did they say, We know, customers,
     that our product is full of carcinogens and that
     the evidence indicates that they cause lung cancer.
     Not once did they say, We've researched trying to
     take them out and it's not possible.  Not once did
     they say to their customers during that 50-year
     time period, You shouldn't be smoking our products.
     They said to the contrary for close to 50 years.
          If there was any doubt about what the
     scientific evidence was, it was resolved in the
     1964 Surgeon General's Report.
          Now, remember what you heard about the '64
     Surgeon General's Report, President Kennedy who,
     incidentally, was a smoker, and in 1962 was asked
     at a press conference about this, and he was taken
     aback.  He didn't even know what they were talking
     about, and yet Michael Bowman is supposed to.  And
     the president, as a result of being embarrassed at
     that news conference, created -- and asked the
     Surgeon General to create a special committee to
     look into this issue.
          So this first report is not actually a report
     of the Surgeon General, it's a report of a special
     committee of experts to the Surgeon General.  A
     committee that they had the right to veto any
     member on.  So the members of that committee were
     acceptable to the tobacco industry, had no prior
     commitments or statements about the issue, and
     spent close to two years researching, hearing from people, gathering the data before they ultimately
     issued a report in 1964 that said, first and
     foremost, cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
          It also said it's associated with causing
     esophageal cancer and certain other cancers and
     disease.  1964.  Any doubt gone by that point in
     time.  What did they do to respond?
          They sent out their spokesman to the news
     programs to assert the position that the evidence
     was insufficient.  And you saw one of those news
     programs, "CBS News."  And it was Mr. Cullman on
     behalf the Tobacco Institute came out and said, You
     know, the evidence isn't there, the Surgeon
     General's wrong, and he repeated that mantra that
     they said over and over again, You know, if there's
     anything harmful in cigarettes, I am confident
     we'll take out.
          The point of all of that was, keep smoking.
     And for the next 35 to 40 years they continued.
     Surgeon General report after Surgeon General report
     they attacked the reports and denied the
     information.  They continued to issue press release
     after press release denying the information and
     asserting there was no causation.
          Now, Dr. Proctor told you, for example, that
     in one year alone, 1975, the American Tobacco
     Company alone issued over 700 press releases
     denying that cigarette smoking caused disease.
     Year in and year out.  And Hill & Knowlton's job
     was to make sure those press releases resulted in
     news stories, was to make sure that those press
     releases were reported on in magazines, to make
     sure those press releases got on television so that
     the atmosphere of smoking continued.
          In addition to issuing press release after
     press release during that period of time, they
     continued to issue phony white papers that appeared
     to be scientific journals.  We've shown you some of
     those.  You'll have some of those out in evidence.
     Let's bring up a couple of them to show you an
     example.
          The first was called "A Scientific Perspective
     on Cigarette Smoking," in which they asserted that
     the science didn't establish that cigarette smoking
     caused any disease.  Thereafter in the years from
     '70s on through the '80s they issued white paper
     after white paper, making the claim that there was
     not adequate evidence to prove that cigarettes
     caused any harm or disease.
          And they distributed those white papers to all 17 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com the doctors in the country to the deans of the
     medical schools, to editorial writers, to magazine
     publishers, to all the members of the United States
     House of Representatives and Senators and to other
     opinion leaders.  Now, why did they do that?  Why
     did they send them to the doctors?  Because doctors
     were the frontline in dealing with patients who
     were smokers.  They were trying to convince the
     doctors not to tell the patients to quit smoking.
     And for years they succeeded.
          The American Medical Association wouldn't
     issue a statement that said that cigarettes caused
     cancer.  You saw one of the documents in which
     their representative, Dr. Hoge, from the Medical
     College of Virginia made sure that the committee of
     the American Medical Association that was to deal
     with the issue, didn't pass a resolution by telling
     them that he had spent his life researching this
     and the evidence just wasn't there.
          It was very, very, very late before the
     American Medical Association finally got around to
     telling doctors that there really was a
     relationship between cigarette smoking and causing
     cancer.  And the reason that was so important to
     them is because when all of us went to the doctor,
     if your doctor continued to smoke, if your doctor
     didn't think cigarette smoking caused lung cancer,
     he was less likely to say anything to you and less
     likely you would quit smoking and quit buying their
     product.
          In addition to all of those phony white
     papers, medically appearing journals, they
     continued their massive expenditures on
     advertising.  And Dr. Goldberg told you about how
     much money they spent on advertising, what the
     advertising was designed to do.  We showed you some
     of the commercials from the early '50s and we
     showed you some of the ads from later periods of
     time.  The purpose of those ads was to keep people
     smoking despite their knowledge.
          Now, let's also talk about what R.J. Reynolds
     knew about addiction because, fundamentally, this
     case is about addiction because that's the reason
     people smoke, continuing to smoke is what causes
     injury.
          R.J. Reynolds knew and understood about
     addiction very early on.  Going back to the '50s,
     '60s and the '70s, they studied addiction.  And
     what they discovered was, and what we now know,
     most smokers start as teenagers.  Fundamental fact known to them throughout that time period.
          Secondly, what they knew, in addition to the
     fact that most smokers start as teenagers, is that
     they knew the reasons they started smoking had
     nothing to do with nicotine.  They're what's called
     psychosocial reasons, peer pressure, wanting to fit
     in, wanting to be rebellious, wanting to be more
     adultlike, wanting to be cool.  Those are the
     reasons that a teenager first picks up a cigarette.
     But they continue to smoke because they quickly
     become addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
          And R.J. Reynolds knew that.  You will see a
     document from Claude Teague, we keep hearing about
     Claude Teague, because he was one of the principal
     scientists they had had, and this document perhaps
     is one of the crucial ones that you'll see.  It is
     a confidential document written by Mr. Teague on
     the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial
     role of nicotine in the tobacco business.
          And in that document Dr. Teague recognizes, to
     begin with, that the tobacco industry is a highly
     specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment
     of the pharmaceutical industry.  It's a drug
     company is the truth of the matter.  It's selling
     nicotine.  And Dr. Teague recognized that tobacco
     products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a
     potent drug with a variety of physiological
     effects.
          Dr. Teague then noted that a tobacco product
     is, in essence, a vehicle for the delivery of
     nicotine, designed to deliver nicotine in a
     generally accepted and attractive form.  Our
     industry then is based upon the design,
     manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of
     nicotine.  It was, as he recognized, in the
     business of selling a drug.
          But it denied throughout all those years that
     nicotine was addictive because there were
     implications if you were selling a drug, including
     regulations and what you could do.  These documents
     that you will see recognize from their studies that
     nicotine was the fundamental reason people smoked
     and without it people wouldn't smoke, and it
     recognized that the principal way of dealing with
     the hazard, would be to deal with nicotine, whether
     it's Dr. Figlar, Dr. Cook, both conceded in the
     first two days of this trial, they have never done
     anything to try and make cigarettes less addictive.
     They haven't researched it, they're not currently
     researching, they've made no attempt to deal with
18 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com the fundamental problem of nicotine.
          Instead, they deny that cigarettes were
     addictive.  Instead, they attempted to create an
     issue about whether there was any problem.  The
     Surgeon General's Report in 1964 didn't conclude
     that nicotine was addictive because they didn't
     have the evidence that the companies had.  One of
     the documents you will see is a document in which a
     fundamental study called the HIPPO Study, which is
     a document in which they studied the addictiveness
     of nicotine, was withheld from the Surgeon General.
     And you will see a table which said, "Don't
     disclose this document to the Surgeon General."  So
     it was no surprise then that that first report
     didn't understand, as the company did, the truly
     addictive nature of cigarettes.
          What the evidence is is that they have
     manipulated the levels of nicotine in their
     cigarettes for this entire period of time.  And
     what is that evidence?  We showed you the evidence
     that despite the fact that the levels in nicotine
     naturally in tobacco vary from crop to crop to
     location to location, if you just make a cigarette,
     you will not have the same amount of nicotine.
     Yet, remarkably, all of their products have
     essentially the same amount of nicotine.  Why is
     that?  Why is it that cigarettes across the board
     have the amount of nicotine that the research shows
     is the amount necessary to keep people addicted?
     Because they have designed their cigarettes,
     they've manipulated the nicotine levels in
     cigarettes to create addiction in the first place
     and to sustain an addiction over time.
          All of this conduct was intentional.  It was
     on purpose.  It was knowing.  It was motivated by
     the desire to continue to sell cigarettes.
          Now, that's their conduct.  Compare that to
     Mike Bowman.  Mike Bowman started smoking as a kid.
     He didn't know anything about cigarettes at that
     point in time.  None of us did back then and when
     we were 12, 13 years of age.  We were doing it,
     peer pressure, to be more like an adult, to be
     cool.  He didn't understand that he would quickly
     become addicted and that his developing brain would
     want him to continue to sustain that addiction by
     continuing to smoke.
          And when he joined the Navy and spent 20 years
     in the Navy, he was saturated in a culture of
     smoking in which everybody around him smoked.  They
     had a separate smoke shop on the ship, in which the smoking light came on the minute you got up and you
     put your feet on the floor and started to smoke,
     and it continued throughout the day except on
     certain occasions like when you were refueling,
     when you weren't supposed to be able to smoke, and
     the light would go out.  That was the culture he
     grew up in.
          So if you want to judge Mike Bowman, judge him
     in the context of that culture.  A culture in which
     it was totally acceptable for him to smoke, all the
     way up through when he retired from the Navy in
     1979.  His conduct, unlike theirs, was not fully
     informed, not known, not motivated by money, and so
     that's what you need to be comparing between their
     conduct and his.
          You also need to think about the information
     climate, and that was the whole point of putting
     Dr. Goldberg on.  It was kind of nice to look at
     some of the old commercials and to see some of the
     print ads and so forth, but the point of
     Dr. Goldberg was the fulcrum that he showed you, in
     which he said, Let's look at the balance of
     information about smoking in this time period.
     It's like a seesaw.
          Understand tobacco industry's heavy,
     sophisticated advertising and promotion program,
     pushing down in one direction.  And you'll have
     some documents, not just from us, but documents
     that are consensus documents of the experts in the
     field on this issue of their sophisticated program.
     You will have the 1967 Report of the Federal Trade
     Commission that deals with their heavy expenditures
     on advertising, how persuasive it was.  You'll have
     the 1981 Report of the Federal Trade Commission
     that goes into that even more detail in the effects
     of it.
          You'll have the 1994 Report of the Surgeon
     General that talks about youth marketing.  A major
     part of that, is how much money they were spending
     and how their ads were directed at young people.
     We'll talk about that in a moment.
          And, finally, you'll have the report of the
     National Cancer Institute in 2008 dealing with
     their heavy expenditures and sophisticated
     advertising and promotion program.  Dr. Goldberg
     was one of the authors of that National Cancer
     Institute publication in 2008, and he showed you a
     chart that showed how much money they spent over
     the period of time, hundreds and hundreds of
     millions of dollars.  Over the entire period of
19 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 www.veritext.com time, billions of dollars, on comprehensive
     advertising from back in the '50s in which they
     saturated the airwaves on television with their
     commercials in prime time, to all of their ads in
     all of the newspapers and magazines and so forth
     during that time period.
          Now, Dr. Goldberg said, Well, you have to
     compare that with the public health community's
     reports, and he included in this, not just the
     reports them-self, because there are not that many
     of them.  But what the reports do, are they
     reported in the newspaper, are they reported in
     magazines, are they on the news?  He put all of
     that in this category over here.
          And Mr. Reid could try and slice and dice by
     putting up a bunch stickies all over, but the
     reality is he was talking about all of that
     together.
          And what did he say about all of that
     together?  Well, to begin with, it was infrequent,
     not very expensive, and, most importantly, as a
     result of the work of Hill & Knowlton, every time
     somebody said in a magazine or newspaper article
     that cigarettes caused cancer, Hill & Knowlton made
     sure that the journal said, But there's a dispute
     and there's this other evidence that says they
     don't.  It's an open controversy.
          That played right into their argument, their
     argument to assuage smokers to continue smoking by
     saying the evidence isn't conclusive, it's not
     adequate.  You should continue smoking while we try
     and figure all of this out.
          Now, you were shown and probably will have in
     the evidence various documents, reports from
     newspapers, from magazines during the time period
     that said something about smoking.  Ask yourself
     when you see those, one, How many ads were in that
     newspaper and magazine for smoking, in addition to
     this one little article?  Two, what was the overall
     culture at the time as to whether this is a news
     item or whether somebody is believing at the time
     and, particularly, in Michael Bowman's case, was it
     during the six to eight months he was out to sea,
     in which everybody around him was smoking and the
     smoking lamp was constantly on?
          And, three, ask yourself, Is there any
     evidence to show the frequency of this sort of
     information?  Dr. Goldberg told you that there was
     a brief period of time under the Fairness Doctrine
     in which these messages were more frequent.  But then when cigarette ads were banned from
     television, the Fairness Doctrine no longer
     required that they be shown, even in the middle of
     the night.  And as a result, all of those ads
     essentially disappeared from television.  Well,
     they were occasionally out there, but it's only
     been in recent times as a result of a lot of events
     that have occurred in the Engle trial, in which
     television has again started showing public service
     announcements and billboards that show public
     service announcements, and the culture has now
     changed.
          Put yourself back at the time, not in 2011,
     when you're judging Michael Bowman.
          So that even when the public health commission
     community's efforts, you have to weigh that against
     the tobacco industry's public relations
     disinformation campaign.  But there are also
     warnings on the pack starting in the late '60s, on
     every pack.  One of the documents you will have is
     the Federal Trade Commission Report from 1967 in
     which they conducted scientific surveys to see the
     effectiveness of the warnings and concluded and
     that the warnings were totally ineffective.
          They literally blended into the packs and very
     seldom would people even notice.  They had
     absolutely no impact on what smokers thought or
     did.
          So you need to compare, you need to compare
     their conduct with Michael Bowman's conduct.
     That's what comparative fault is all about.  And we
     suggest to you that when you make that comparison
     between the knowing misconduct of the industry,
     between the intentional conduct of the industry,
     conduct motivated by the desire to continue selling
     cigarettes, with the conduct of Michael Bowman,
     that up until the late '70s and early '80s the
     balance is heavily on their side in terms of fault.
          We admit, we've said from the beginning, that
     after he gets out of the Navy, then probably should
     have tried to quit smoking sooner.  But he quit
     relatively early.  1984 he first quit drinking,
     1985 he quit smoking.  That's part of the
     comparative fault.
          Finally, let's turn to the damages.  The
     fourth issue, the damage, it's two things really,
     compensatory damages and punitive damages.  Now,
     compensatory damages means what amount of money
     that you, as a jury, think would be fair and
     appropriate to award Pat for the loss of Michael
20 Bowman based upon the instructions of the court as
     to what the measure of damages table.
          And you heard the instructions.  Basically
     it's an instruction that deals with her pain and
     suffering for the loss of her husband.  To
     understand that you have to understand their life
     together.  It had its highs, it had its lows.  The
     lows, obviously, were related to drinking issues
     and he resolved those.  He quit drinking.  For
     that, we should give him a lot of credit.  And
     after he quit drinking and after he quit smoking,
     their lives together were mostly highs, not lows.
     And you saw some photographs of them and the family
     talked about those that give you some indication of
     their life together, their 25th wedding
     anniversary, that's after he quit smoking, their
     trips.  There was discussion of all of that.  As
     Pat said, he was the love of her life.
          Now, they were separated from time to time
     related to drinking issues on two occasions, and he
     stepped up, quit drinking, they got back together
     and stayed together.
          But you need to determine what amount of money
     would be fair to compensate.  We suggest to you
     that the range is millions of dollars, that in the
     circumstances of this case, any compensatory damage
     verdict that does not amount to several million
     dollars is understating her loss and understating
     in the context of the facts of this case.  But it's
     your determination as to what that amount should
     be.
          You also need to determine whether there's an
     entitlement to punitive damages.  And I'm going to
     spend the remaining time of my first argument
     dealing with that question.  You'll be given a jury
     verdict form that has you determine whether or not
     there's entitlement to punitive damages.
          I want to focus on three things.  The
     entitlement to punitive damages is essentially the
     result of three different strong points.  One is
     addiction.  That's the theme throughout all of
     this.  The reality is that they do not produce a
     less-addictive cigarette even though a
     less-addictive cigarette would reduce substantially
     the likelihood of people getting cancer, because if
     they did, people wouldn't continue to smoke.  You
     wouldn't have 440,000 people dying every year in
     this country if they produced a less-addictive
     cigarette.  And that is a principal basis for
     punitive damages.
25      The second basis, we've talked about at
     length, was their 50-year campaign of concealing
     both the addictive nature of their product and how
     hazardous it was.  You've heard a lot, for example,
     about the dramatic increase in hazard if you smoke
     and drink together in terms of getting esophageal
     cancer.  Not once during the entire 50-year time
     period did R.J. Reynolds ever reveal that
     scientific fact.  Most people who smoke also drink,
     not once did they say, If you smoke and drink
     together, your risk may be 20, 50, or 150 times
     greater of getting certain cancers.  That's the
     basis for punitive damages as well.
          But, finally, and, most importantly, because
     it's a theme from beginning to end, from when he
     started smoking through his entire career in which
     he smoked, of youth marketing.
          The truth is that R.J. Reynolds has always
     targeted children as their principal clients for
     starting smoking.  At about the time Mike was
     starting to smoke, their ads clearly were focused
     on kids.  We showed you one of them.  Bring that
     up.
          This is an ad on the very year that he started
     to smoke.  That ad clearly shows a teenager, not an
     adult smoker, it is obvious from the prom ticket
     that's being held, she looks to be maybe 15 or 16
     years of age.  It is focused on getting teenagers
     to start smoking in the first place by glamorizing
     it, by creating buzz and peer pressure, by getting
     someone to first pick up the cigarette and for
     their developing brain to quickly get hooked and
     become addicted.
          That's evident not only looking at those kind
     of ads as Dr. Goldberg showed you but also from
     their own internal documents.  We showed you a
     document going as far back as 1927, a long time
     ago, in which they said, "School days are here and
     that's good for tobacco business," and they talked
     about going to the local preparatory school and
     finding the student leaders and attempting to get
     them to smoke because that's peer pressure that
     creates other children to smoking.
          But it's recognized more recently by a
     strategic research memorandum.  You will have in
     evidence a strategic research report written in
     1984, about the time just before he quit smoking.
     And in that strategic memorandum dealing with
     younger, quote, adult smokers, they recognize that
     they have been the critical factor in the growth
21 and decline of every major brand and company over
     the last 50 years.  They will continue to be just
     as important.
          Now, there's a great amount of cynicism in
     that point because they know and this document
     shows that almost all new smokers are teenagers,
     not adults.  They know when they refer to younger
     adults as beginning smokers who they're really
     referring to are 12-year-olds and 14-years-olds and
     16-year-olds.  As the charts in attachment B show,
     they're not talking about 21-year-olds or
     25-year-olds.  And if there's any doubt about that,
     look at the memorandum written by Claude Teague on
     the market, once again, another confidential
     memorandum from Dr. Teague on thoughts about new
     brands of cigarettes for the youth market in which
     he uncategorically recognizes that if our company
     is to survive and prosper over the long run, we
     must get our share of the youth market.  It will
     require new brands tailored to the youth market."
          And some of the documents we will show you are
     documents in which they discuss creating new brands
     which they make sure have enough nicotine in them
     to get people addicted and what would appear and
     appeal to children to get them to smoke in the
     first place.
          Even more important is a document from their
     board of directors.  We're not talking about some
     scientist which is what Mr. Reid would prefer to
     call Dr. Teague even though he was one of the
     principal scientists in the company.  But here is a
     document you will have that is a presentation by
     the director of marketing for the entire company to
     the board of directors of R.J. Reynolds in 1974 at
     the meeting in Hilton, in which they again use that
     cynical language about a young adult franchise, but
     throughout the document they make it clear that
     what they're talking about is a range in age that
     goes down to 14 years age.  The 14- to 24-year-old
     age group throughout that document.  Every time
     they reference a young adult franchise, they
     qualify it by the reference to 14 to 24 year olds.
          But, finally, and, most importantly, in terms
     of punitive damages is what is called the
     replacement smoker.  People quit smoking.  A lot of
     the customers die from smoking, 440,000 a year.  If
     their market is going to continue they have to
     replace them.  How do you replace the people that
     quit and the people that die?  One principal
     source, teenagers, because they know that's the
25 market, the only way they're going to replace them
     is to replace them with the age group.  And that
     strategic response memo that we saw specifically
     discusses replacement smokers for the smokers they
     are losing because they quit, because of the
     smokers who are dying.
          If there was any basis for punitive damages,
     any entitlement for punitive damages as there is
     here, it is based on that fact and that fact alone,
     that this company, as late as the '80s, if not
     today, specifically recognized that to continue its
     business, it had to replace the people who were
     quitting, it had to replace those who were dying by
     getting children to smoke.  And, thus, you had
     campaigns like the Joe Camel cartoon character.
          Let me conclude this introductory section by
     walking through with you the verdict form that
     you'll have to deal with and I'll reserve some of
     my time to talk to you after Mr. Reid to respond
     what he has to say.
          You'll have a verdict form which pretty much
     follows what I have just told you were the issues
     in the case.  The first thing on the verdict form
     that you're going to have to deal with is whether
     Mr. Michael Bowman was a member of the Engle class.
     And that first question deals with his membership
     in the Engle class; that is, was he addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine?  And, if so, was
     cigarette smoking, because of his addiction, the
     legal cause of his esophageal cancer?  Two issues I
     talked to you about at the beginning.
          And then when you go from that question, the
     next question deals with the negligence issue and,
     that is, whether R.J. Reynolds' negligence was a
     legal cause of Michael Bowman's death.  Now, think
     about that for a moment.  It's not asking you
     whether they were negligent, because that's already
     been determined in the Engle findings.  He was a
     member of the class, then you've already determined
     under legal finding they were negligent.  So that
     the only remaining issue is whether smoking caused
     his esophageal cancer so that the carcinogens that
     they negligently allowed to remain in their
     product, so that the nicotine that they negligently
     allowed to remain and addicted the smokers is
     related to his death.  That's all that means.
          Similarly, you will be asked whether under the
     strict liability count of whether the defective or
     unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the
     market by R.J. Reynolds were a legal cause of his
22 www.veritext.com 53ac8064-af58-480c-ac8c-a433addb1c84 death.  That is the easiest question to answer
     here.  The evidence is unequivocal that the
     unreasonably dangerous part of cigarettes, the
     defective part of cigarettes, which results in
     strict liability, is the presence of cancer-causing
     substances and nicotine that causes addiction.
     That's what makes them defective, that's what makes
     them unreasonably dangerous.
          Obviously, those two factors are a legal cause
     of Michael Bowman's death because, regardless of
     his motivation for smoking, had there not been
     carcinogens in those cigarettes, he wouldn't have
     gotten cancer.  Had there not been nicotine in
     those cigarettes, he wouldn't have been addicted.
     And as the evidence shows, without nicotine people
     don't smoke, he wouldn't smoke.  It is the presence
     of that defect, nicotine carcinogens, which clearly
     is the cause of his death, regardless of reasons he
     smoked or didn't smoke or whether he couldn't quit,
     and they are strictly liable under the law for
     causing his death as a result.
          Similarly, you'll have to answer questions
     about fraudulent concealment.  We've discussed that
     at length.  And you'll have to answer questions
     regarding their civil conspiracy to fraudulently
     conceal.  And the only question with both, since
     you're bound by the legal finding -- the findings
     in the Engle case, is the relationship between
     those events and him continuing to smoke.
          And there's more than enough evidence to
     support that conclusion.  So having made those
     determinations, you'll then need to determine on
     the verdict form the fault to be assigned each.  We
     have told you we believe the principal fault lies
     with R.J. Reynolds, although we recognize that you
     can assign some fault and we accept some fault on
     behalf of Michael Bowman, which will then lead you
     to a determination of damages.
          Let me conclude this section by simply saying,
     we have said from the very beginning that we accept
     that Michael Bowman bears some responsibility for
     not quitting sooner.  We are here because they
     refuse to accept any responsibility.  They may talk
     about we made some admission that he's at fault.
     We have not made an admission other than the fact
     that we recognize he should have quit sooner, but
     the injury is the result of their product.  It is
     the result of their misconduct.  And his
     contribution is minor in comparison to theirs.
          So at the end of this case, we're going to ask you to return a verdict for the Estate of Michael
     Bowman, in a significant amount of compensatory
     damages, and we're going to seek to have you return
     a verdict that will entitle to punitive damages, to
     punish them and deter them from their conduct over
     the last 50 years.
          Thank you.  And I'm pretty much on schedule.
     I've reserved some of my time, because I want to
     have the opportunity to respond to Mr. Reid and
     tell you what we would have to say instead of
     having to speculate as to what we might have to say
     about what Mr. Reid says, and I will turn it over
     to him.


         MR. SHIELDS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         I know it's been a long trial.  You've been
    here I guess in total more than two weeks at this
    point in time.  I suspect you are anxious to get on
    with it to make a decision.  So I'm not going to try
    and go through and respond to everything that
    Mr. Reid said.  I think we've done that throughout
    the trial.  You've heard what we've got to say.
         What I do want to do is address some
    fundamental things which I think I'm compelled to
    respond to because, quite candidly, I think Mr. Reid
    misstates the issues in many respects.  He certainly
    misstates what our position is on the issues.  And
    he's not entirely candid with you about what the
    evidence is.  Of course, it's your responsibility as
    the jurors to take your collective memory and
    determine what the evidence happened to be.
         But there are certain fundamental facts,
    certain fundamental truths that seem to me are
    beyond dispute at this point in time, and they're
    overriding in terms of the overall case.
         They include the fact that the fundamental
    reason people continue to smoke is because of
    addiction to nicotine.  The conclusion of the
    Surgeon General, the conclusion of their internal
    documents as well.  And the best evidence of it is
    if they don't have sufficient nicotine in the
    cigarettes, people won't smoke them.  Without
    nicotine, people do not continue to smoke.
         The second fundamental fact is that, yes, it's
    true smokers can quit smoking, but that doesn't mean
    they weren't addicted.  If it did, then the
    estimates of addiction by the Surgeon General of the
    United States and every other expert would be
    totally wrong, and they're not.  The undisputed
    evidence from all of those sources is that 80 to 90
    percent of smokers are addicted.  Yes, they may be
    able to quit, but that doesn't change the fact that
    they were addicted.
         And the issue in this case on addiction is not,
    as Mr. Reid says, was he compelled to smoke.  The
    issue is whether he was a member of the Engle class,
    and addiction is the question of whether he was a
    member of the Engle class.
         The third fundamental fact that really cannot
    be disputed, and that is that cigarette smoking
    causes esophogeal cancer.  It's been known since the     early '60s.  It is beyond dispute at this point in
    time that it is the leading cause of esophogeal
    cancer.  78 percent of all esophogeal cancers are
    the result of smoking.
         You heard the testimony of Dr. Langfitt and
    Dr. Harris as well.  Of the cases of esophogeal
    cancer they see, they're all smokers, because it is
    the principal predominant cause of esophogeal
    cancer.
         Fourth, it is beyond dispute that they engaged
    in a conspiracy for almost 50 years to deny that
    cigarettes caused cancer, to deny that cigarettes
    were addictive.
         Fifth, that is, although they engaged in that
    conspiracy, they now admit, as you saw in the
    testimony of Dr. Figlar and Dr. Cook, that it was
    perfectly reasonable for their customers to rely on
    their representations and to continue to smoke.
    They could hardly contend otherwise.  If they think
    it was appropriate for them to make the statements
    they made, how can they turn around and say, "It was
    inappropriate for our customers to believe the
    statements we made"?
         And finally, and perhaps most importantly as we
    get to the punitive damages, another issue is, this
    is the one product that, when it is used as intended
    and directed, as Dr. Burns testified to earlier in
    this case, will kill 40 percent of its customers.
         Think about that.  40 percent of smokers are
    going to die as a result of smoking, a fact that has
    been known to them for decades.
         Now, with those fundamental facts in mind, I
    want to talk about some of their overriding themes
    and respond to them.
         Obviously the most overriding theme is this
    choice versus responsibility issue.  I said from the
    beginning of this case we don't deny that choice is
    an issue.  But there's an important point to be made
    here.
         Choice in and of itself is not a defense.  You
    couldn't say, if you bought an automobile and it had
    defective brakes, that you chose to drive and,
    therefore, that's a defense to the product defect.
    Of course it's not a defense.  For it to be a
    defense it has to amount to what is called
    comparative fault, and the conduct in comparison to
    the party -- other party at fault has to be
    unreasonable.
         Well, that's what you need to do.  You need to
    compare the conduct of both. 212-279-9424
Veritext Reporting Company
www.veritext.com
2 df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419     And here's the comparison.  First of all, they
    made a knowing, fully informed and willing choice to
    misrepresent the scientific evidence, to deny that
    cigarettes caused cancer, to deny that cigarettes
    were addictive, to make public statements which they
    know are untrue and to conceal what they internally
    knew about the number of carcinogens, the addictive
    nature and what they were internally doing.  That
    was a knowing, fully informed choice they made on
    purpose, motivated by wanting to continue to sell
    cigarettes and continue to have their customers buy
    their cigarettes.
         In comparing the choices as well, it is
    important to know that they made the choice to
    design their cigarettes to create and sustain
    addiction by maintaining a nicotine level that they
    knew would do that.  And even more importantly, they
    made that choice knowing that most new smokers are
    children, so that they knew that in making the
    choice they were going to be addicting a new
    generation of smokers.  That's the only way they can
    replace the smokers that are quitting and the
    smokers that are dying.
         Yet despite all of that, they come into court
    and deny any responsibility for the death of this
    smoker or any other smoker.  Instead, they continue
    to defend it, say it's all the smoker's fault; it's
    their choice.
         Well, Michael did make certain choices.  But
    keep in mind, when he started to smoke he was
    12 years old.  He started to smoke at a time when
    the culture was of acceptance of smoking, when
    smoking was everywhere, when everyone around him
    appeared to be smoking, when the ads were like
    wallpaper, on television, magazines, newspapers and
    everything else.
         Keep in mind that he started to smoke and
    became addicted to smoking before there were
    warnings on the package, before there was public
    knowledge.  There may have been knowledge that the
    defendants had, but it was before the public
    knowledge.
         He did not make a fully informed, knowing
    choice.  He did not on purpose, as they did,
    undertake the misconduct that they contend.  But
    despite that we are here and saying we accept some
    responsibility, when you compare the two, something
    they simply refuse to do.
         Next let's talk about the Engle findings.  Now,
    you were told by Mr. Reid in regard to the Engle     findings that they didn't decide anything in
    connection with this case.  That's absolutely
    untrue.
         If you decide that Mr. Bowman was a member of
    this class, the Court has instructed you you are
    bound by those findings.  They have decided the
    conduct elements in this case.
         They have decided that R.J. Reynolds was
    negligent.  They have decided that R.J. Reynolds
    sold a defective, unreasonably dangerous product.
    They have decided that R.J. Reynolds engaged in a
    civil conspiracy to defraud.  They have decided that
    R.J. Reynolds in fact is responsible for having
    committed fraud by concealment.
         Those conduct elements have been decided, and
    they are applicable to this case as a member of the
    class.
         But also keep in mind something you heard on
    the first day of this case when we played the
    videotaped deposition of Dr. Figlar, and that was
    his admission that those findings were correct.  You
    recall I walked him through each and every one of
    the Engle findings and said, "Do you dispute that?"
    "Do you dispute that?"
         And time after time he agreed R.J. Reynolds --
    because he was speaking on behalf of
    R.J. Reynolds -- did not dispute that they were
    negligent, did not dispute that they were engaged in
    a civil conspiracy, did not dispute that they had
    committed fraud by concealment, did not dispute that
    their product was defective and unreasonably
    dangerous.  So those findings have great
    applicability here.
         Of course, the issues here amount to two
    principal ones and a third very important one.
         The first one, of course, is class membership.
    We've talked a great deal about addiction.  I'm not
    going to continue to go through it and respond point
    by point to everything Mr. Reid said, but I would
    point out to you that he misstated what the issue is
    on the jury verdict.  The issue, unlike what he
    said, is not whether addiction caused the disease.
    It is not whether addiction compelled Mr. Bowman to
    smoke.  Read the clause that you're asked to begin
    with.  What it says is whether he was addicted to
    the cigarettes containing nicotine and smoking
    caused by that addiction was the cause of his
    disease.
         Now, it doesn't mean he was compelled to smoke.
    It means that the reason he smoked because -- was www.veritext.com
3 df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419
    because he was addicted and that smoking is the
    cause of the disease.  And I don't think there's any
    evidence whatsoever that realistically can be
    believed that smoking was not a cause, a
    contributing factor to his disease.
         In terms of whether or not he was addicted,
    you're going to have to decide whether you believe
    Dr. Werner or whether you believe Dr. Hoge.
         Dr. Werner walked you through the DSM.  You
    heard the testimony about each of the elements and
    how they were met.  But I think most importantly in
    making that decision, keep in mind that it's not
    just the DSM.  It was also this other prominent test
    that even Dr. Hoge admitted under which Michael
    Bowman would have been classified as highly
    addicted.
         Now, beyond question of then class membership
    is the question of comparative fault and causation.
    We've talked a great deal about smoking versus
    alcohol in terms of causation, and let me just
    summarize that for you one last time.
         The position is our assertion that it's the
    result of both versus their assertion that it's only
    alcohol.  Not only do you have the fact that
    78 percent of all esophogeal cancers are caused by
    smoking, not only do you have the fact that the
    Surgeon General says smoking causes esophogeal
    cancer, but you have the data that all the experts
    agree to, and that is that the risk of alcohol
    versus the combination of alcohol and smoking is the
    difference between 4 and at least 20 but more likely
    50 to a hundred.
         Just think about that.  If you took the mid
    range of 50 and said the increased risk from the
    combination of the two is fifty-fold, which study
    after study has found, and you compare that only to
    alcohol, that says to you that there's over a
    90 percent chance that it's the combination of the
    two and not just alcohol.  Over a 90 percent chance.
         That's why Dr. Levy and that's why Dr. Langfitt
    said smoking is the predominant cause under these
    facts.
         Now, Mr. Reid says, well, you have all of this
    alcohol and you have to keep that in mind, and he
    talked at length about how many beers a day he
    drank.  He ignored one important fact, and that is
    from Mr. Coyle's testimony, from the past testimony,
    six to eight months a year during the 20 years he
    was in the Navy he was out to sea.  There's no
    alcohol allowed on board those vessels.     That doesn't mean he didn't come in from time
    to time and have a drink when they were at shore,
    but it meant the vast majority of that time he
    wasn't able to drink anything.
         So that in comparing smoking levels for those
    33 years, as the number of packs increased from one
    to three packs a day, to alcohol consumption, think
    about the fact that that alcohol consumption was
    primarily in the later years and there were large
    points in time in which there could have been very
    little, if any, alcohol consumption.
         In terms of comparative fault, we've talked a
    lot about comparing the two.  We've talked about
    choice versus responsibility and the choices that
    each made.  I just want to say this about it.
         Basically their argument on comparative fault
    and choice comes down to the question of whether
    Mike was aware.  Ask yourself one question:  Was he
    aware to the same extent that they were of what they
    internally knew?  Do you realistically think that
    Mike understood that, as they internally knew, there
    were 40 to 60 carcinogens, cancer-causing
    substances, in cigarettes, particularly going back
    in the '50s, '60s and '70s up to the point in time
    he quit?
         Do you realistically think that he understood
    what it was doing to his brain?  Do you
    realistically think that he knew, as they knew, that
    they were misrepresenting the scientific evidence
    when they claimed that there was this continuing
    controversy?
         The fundamental fact here is they claim it was
    reasonable for them to make all these assertions
    over the time period but it was unreasonable for him
    to believe them because he should have been aware
    from other things that were being said not to
    believe them.
         I think it comes down to this:  There are some
    inherent contradictions in their arguments.  There's
    the contradiction between, on the one hand, them
    saying, "There really wasn't adequate proof.
    Therefore, it was reasonable for us to say that
    cigarette smoking didn't cause cancer," and then
    turn around and say, "He knew, and therefore it's
    his fault because he was aware."  Both cannot be
    true.
         It's inherently contradictory for them to say
    it really wasn't understood that it was addictive
    and to turn around and say that he should have
    understood that, or to point to a 1948 article in 212-279-9424
Veritext Reporting Company
www.veritext.com
4 df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419
    Lancet magazine when some scientist in Britain
    called it an addictive drug.
         The fact of the matter is that the arguments
    they make throughout this case fall over themselves
    and contradict each other from one witness to the
    next, but it doesn't prevent them from continuing to
    assert this.
         It comes down, I think, to one fundamental
    fact, best summarized by the Surgeon General in
    1979.  I showed this to you early in the case.  Let
    me show it to you again.
         In 1979, in the introduction to the Surgeon
    General's Report on Smoking and Health, the
    following was written:  "This document is
    significant for another reason.  It demolishes the
    claims made by cigarette manufacturers and a few
    others 15 years ago today" -- that's when the
    Surgeon General's Report of 1964 first came out --
    "that scientific evidence was sketchy, that no link
    between smoking and cancer was proven.  Those
    claims, empty then, are utterly vacuous now.
    Fifteen years of additional research overwhelmingly
    ratify the original scientific indictment of smoking
    as a contributor to disease and premature death."
         Overwhelmingly ratify it.  That was 1979.  They
    did not admit it until 2000, 21 years later.  After
    they lost the Engle trial and the jury found to the
    contrary was the first time they ultimately admitted
    the truth of what cigarettes do.
         Let's turn, finally, to the punitive damage
    issue.  You were shown a demonstrative where they
    listed what they claim the charge on punitive
    damages required us to prove, and it made it appear
    like there was this long list of things that we had
    to prove before you could award punitive damages.
    It's a misrepresentation of the charge.  You'll have
    the charge out with you, so you can see what it
    says.
         But what it says is, "Here are a list of things
    that would justify punitive damages," and there's an
    "or" in between each of them.  Unlike what Mr. Reid
    contended, it's not that we have to prove each and
    every element.  You just have to find one of them.
    And the evidence is overwhelming, is clear and
    convincing, that punitive damages are justified
    here.
         Mr. Reid told you that they had changed, that
    they had not the same company.  Really?  They're
    making the same arguments in this trial in 2011 --
         MR. REID:  Objection, Your Honor.     THE COURT:  Wait a minute.  Don't say what
    you're fixing to say.
         MR. SHIELDS:  They continue to assert that they
    made no misrepresentations in the 1950s.  They
    continue to assert that they -- their conduct in the
    '60s was reasonable and that they did not
    misrepresent the evidence.  They continue to assert
    that their conduct in the '70s was reasonable and
    appropriate.  And you heard it in the closing
    argument.
         They continue to manipulate the levels of
    nicotine.  The evidence in this case is they have
    done nothing to reduce the addictiveness of smoking
    cigarettes.
         They continue to assert that nicotine, while it
    may be addictive, is of no public health
    significance.  Think about that.
         The Surgeon General says the fundamental reason
    people continue to smoke is nicotine addiction and
    that that continuing to smoke causes the diseases,
    diseases which will kill 40 percent of smokers.  No
    public health significance?  If there was ever a
    justification for punitive damages, that alone is
    the justification.
         I want to conclude by showing you one final
    thing, which you need to think about when you're
    thinking about what they said and did and whether
    Michael Bowman or anyone else could reasonably rely
    on it over the time period.  This is the video of
    the president of RJR on Nightline, a couple of years
    before Michael Bowman quit smoking.
         (A video clip was played and transcribed by the
court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
         TED KOPPEL:  "... does not cause cancer, yes or
    no?"
         MR. HORRIGAN:  "It is not known whether
    cigarettes cause cancer."
         TED KOPPEL:  "All right, sir."
         MR. HORRIGAN:  "It has not been causally
    established."
         TED KOPPEL:  "Cigarette smoking -- no causal
    relationship between cigarette smoking and
    emphysema?"
         MR. HORRIGAN:  "Despite all of the research to
    date, there has been no causal link established."
         TED KOPPEL:  "No causal relationship between
    cigarette smoking and heart disease?"
         MR. HORRIGAN:  "No.  As a matter of fact, there
    are studies that -- while we are accused of being
    associated with heart disease, there have been 212-279-9424
Veritext Reporting Company
www.veritext.com
5 df31a72a-8bbd-4246-9af9-9ee8ff8b8419     studies conducted over ten years that would say
    again that science is still puzzled over these
    forces."
         TED KOPPEL:  "Does it stain your teeth?"
         MR. HORRIGAN:  "There are people who say it
    does.  I guess, depending on the human being's own,
    let's say, physical makeup, it may well stain your
    teeth."
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. SHIELDS:  That was in the early 1980s.
    That's the justification for punitive damages in
    this case.
         Thank you for your attention.
         THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Shields.
         Anything before I give final instructions to
    the jury?
         MR. REID:  No, sir.
         THE COURT:  Members of the jury, you have now
    heard all of the evidence, my instructions on the
    law and the arguments of the attorneys.  You will
    shortly retire to the jury room to decide this case,
    and before you do so I have a few last-minute
    instructions.
         During deliberations, you must not communicate
    about the case to anyone outside of the jury room.
    You only communicate with each other.
         You will have in the jury room all of the
    evidence in this case.  And, in fact, there were
    some DVDs shown, and there will be a -- something to
    play it on set up in there, which I'm sure you'll be
    able to figure out if you have any problem with it,
    if you'd like to look at any of the DVDs that will
    be in evidence.
         In reaching your decision, do not do any
    research on your own; that is, don't use
    dictionaries, the Internet or any kind of reference
    materials or -- you must also see and hear the
    evidence together at the same time; that is, when we
    take recesses, you will stop your deliberations at
    recess and then come back and deliberate together.
         You're not to communicate with any person
    outside the jury room about the case until you've
    reached your verdict.  You must not talk about the
    case in person or through use of your telephone or
    any kind of electronic communication with anybody
    about the case.  Do not contact anyone to assist
    you, such as a family accountant, doctor or lawyer.
    And these rules, of course, will continue to apply
    until you've reached a verdict.
         And of course if anyone becomes aware of a     violation of those rules, let me know.
         Now, your notes that you've taken you may take
    to the jury room with you and use them during your
    deliberations.  The notes are simply an aid to your
    own memory, and neither your notes nor those of
    other members of the jury are binding on you.  Your
    notes are not a substitute for your own memory.
    Instead, your verdict must be the result of the
    collective memory and judgment of all jurors based
    on the evidence you have heard.  And as I told you
    at the conclusion of your deliberations, we'll
    collect your notes and tear them up and throw them
    away.
         Now, in reaching your verdict, do not let bias,
    sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any sentiment
    for or against any party influence your decision.
    Your verdict must be based on the evidence that has
    been received and the law that I have instructed you
    on.
         Now, reaching a verdict is exclusively your
    job.  I cannot participate in your decision in any
    way, and you should not guess what I think your
    verdict should be from something that I may have
    said or done during the trial.  You should not think
    that I prefer one verdict over another.  Therefore,
    in reaching your verdict you should not consider
    anything I have said or done except for the specific
    instructions of law that you will take back to the
    jury room with you.
         Of course, pay careful attention to the
    instructions, for that is the law that you must
    follow.  All of the instructions are important and
    you should consider them all together.  There are no
    other laws that apply to this case.  And even if you
    do not like the laws, you must use them in reaching
    your decision.
         After you've decided what the facts are, you
    may find that some of the instructions simply do not
    apply.  That's not unusual.  In that case, follow
    the instructions that do apply; then use them,
    together with the facts, to reach your verdict.
         Now, when you go to the jury room, the first
    thing you should do is select one of your number to
    preside over your deliberations like a chairperson
    at a meeting.  And we call that person the
    foreperson.  And it will be the foreperson's job to
    sign and date the verdict form once you have reached
    your verdict.
         Now, it is your duty to talk with one another
    in the jury room and consider the views of all of