                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. GERSON:  Good morning.
          THE PANEL:  Good morning.
          MR. GERSON:  May it please the Court,
     Mrs. Brown, gentlemen, co-counsel.
          THE COURT:  By the way, that podium, if
     you all want it that far back, that's fine.
     But you can -- as long as you stay on this side
     of the jury box you can put it wherever you
     want.
          MR. GERSON:  Okay.  Well, I did take a
     shower this morning.
          THE COURT:  Thank you for that.
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  You just ran over your
BROWN VOL15
1607 photographs.
          MR. GERSON:  So I will get a little
     closer.
          I'm sure I speak for everyone when I say
     thank you, again, for giving up two weeks of
     your life to sit in those chairs and to serve
     as jurors in this case.  Without good people
     like you, this system wouldn't work.  And the
     jury system was part of the real brilliance of
     the founding fathers of this country.
          If we asked one person, any one person, no
     matter how smart that person may be, no matter
     how fair that person may be, no one person
     could do what a jury could do because a jury
     has six brains, 12 eyes, 12 ears, six different
     lifetimes of experience, education, training,
     and background.  And all of that is brought
     together to make the decision by what we call a
     jury.  You are it and it is you.  And that's
     why the system works as well as it does.
     Because we have a broad spectrum of
     observation, of understanding, of background.
     All from people who two weeks ago did not know
     any of us, two weeks ago did not know each
     other, but have stayed on track,
BROWN VOL15
1608 collaboratively, with everyone, to understand
     what the evidence is in this case and to apply
     the law to it.
          Now, like I told you the very first time I
     spoke to you, a jury's decision -- the next
     decision that you will make, in this case
     included, is not a time for you to decide what
     your personal views are on lawsuits in general
     or on tobacco companies or any other subject.
     You're charged with the responsibility of
     simply answering certain questions, based on
     the law, based on the evidence you give the
     answers to the questions.  No more, no less.
          The rules of the game are the same as they
     were for Phase I.  That is, that our burden of
     proof is only to prove our case by the more
     convincing force and effect of the entire
     evidence in the case.
          In other words, is it more likely that
     we're right than wrong.  The final score in
     last night's game, if you watched, was 106 to
     103.  Pretty close game, even though there were
     several points that divided the two teams.  But
     the difference was just a percent or two.  And
     that's why I used that analogy when I gave you
BROWN VOL15
1609 the closing argument earlier in the week that
     it's just 51 percent.
          And the judge is the gatekeeper.  And he's
     given these questions for you to decide based
     on the evidence and information and the
     background and experience and the intelligence
     that each of you brings individually, and that
     knitted together constitutes a jury that will
     get it right.
          So, what are the questions that you have
     to answer?  They're, again, on this verdict
     form.  You will be given a verdict form that's
     a little different than the one -- what am I
     doing wrong here?
          Thank you very much.
          Okay.  So let me just zoom in.
          Now, starting right here, Jimmie Lee
     Brown, personal representative of the estate of
     Roger Brown.  What that means is that there's
     only one person who can recover any money in
     this case, and that's Jimmie Lee Brown.  You've
     met other members of her family and none of
     them have any claims, nor does anybody else in
     this case.  It's only Jimmie Lee Brown's case.
          And so these are the specific questions
BROWN VOL15
1610 that you'll have to answer:  Was the negligence
     on the part of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company a
     legal cause of Mr. Brown's death?  And were the
     defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes
     manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company a
     legal cause of Mr. Brown's death?
          You were instructed at the beginning of
     Phase II that these findings had already been
     made in proceedings in this case that started
     even before Phase I, that started and concluded
     before any of you were asked to participate at
     all.  Those determinations are final.  Those
     determination are binding.  And we have relied
     on those determinations in this trial, and
     that's quite simply, as I told you in the
     opening statement yesterday morning, why our
     presentation would be so short.  Because the
     important decisions had already been made and
     they were binding on the jury and that's why we
     provided no evidence to explain what the
     negligence was or what the unreasonably
     dangerous defects in the product were.  We
     weren't required to present any evidence on
     that.  Nor were we allowed to.  And the same
     goes for Reynolds.  And neither one of us did.
BROWN VOL15
1611 So you must follow those instructions,
     Reynolds was negligent and the product was
     unreasonably dangerous and defective and you
     have no option to disagree.
          Well, if that's so why then is there any
     question on the form at all?  And the answer to
     that is because Reynolds claims that its
     negligence and its defective products were not
     the cause of Roger Brown's illness and death.
          I don't know what else it might be, but
     they are going to have an opportunity to tell
     you in their closing argument.  But given the
     decisions that were already made in Phase I of
     this trial, it's difficult for me to imagine
     that there could be any other explanation
     besides the negligence of Reynolds and
     unreasonably dangerous and defective product
     that they sold that Roger Brown became addicted
     to and that Roger Brown smoked until it led to
     his death.
          So what is Phase II really about?
          The answer to these questions simply
     should be yes.
          What Phase II is really about, what I told
     you yesterday morning was that Phase II is
BROWN VOL15
1612 about apportionment of fault.  That under
     Florida law we have comparative fault, that the
     fault of Reynolds, the negligence, and the
     unreasonably dangerous and defective product
     have already been established.  There really
     was no need for any proof on the fault of Roger
     Brown because we admitted that to you as well
     and have never denied at any point in this
     lawsuit that Roger Brown deserves some of the
     blame.  So why are you as jurors asked to
     answer this question?
          Well, you're asked to answer this question
     so that you can make an allocation of fault
     between the two parties.
          Now, we're -- we have two ladies as
     alternates, but all six of our jurors are going
     to decide this case I expect.  You're six grown
     men, you're all experienced in life.  Each of
     you in your own way brings an understanding of
     modern American history and culture and so we
     simply ask you to just use your common sense
     and good judgment in making the allocation of
     fault between the two parties, based on who
     knew what.
          If there was a last person in America to
BROWN VOL15
1613 find out that cigarette smoking could have been
     harmful to your health, it might have been
     Roger Brown.  I'm not saying that it was.  But
     I'm just using that phrase to describe to you
     what you have heard in two weeks of trial about
     this man and what he knew and what opportunity
     he had to know.
          Now, remember that I started the trial
     with these references to a time period that
     runs 80 years in this case.  And for you to
     make this decision about the allocation of
     blame, you need to look at it in the
     perspective of the timeline.
          1927, Calvin Coolidge is president and
     Roger Brown is born.  Twelve years later in the
     first term of president Franklin Delano
     Roosevelt, Roger Brown starts smoking.  It's
     1939.  Does anybody know anything about the
     health risks of cigarette smoking?  Probably
     not.  If anybody does know anything, it would
     probably be the companies that make the
     cigarettes.
          1950, Roger comes to Florida and starts
     living with Jimmie Lee.  She's 17.  He's 21 or
     22.  In 1950 there was still no public
BROWN VOL15
1614 information about the harms of cigarette
     smoking.
          Now, Dr. Benowitz said, yeah, he knew that
     for 100 years or so that people had information
     about how it was difficult to give up cigarette
     smoking.  But Dr. Benowitz is a scholar.  He
     was doing research.  He had that information
     merely because of his role as a researcher.
     Surely Roger Brown didn't have it and maybe
     even the tobacco companies didn't have it.
          Well, what happens next is what's in these
     studies.  I introduced the studies themselves
     and you can read them.  The tobacco companies
     introduced these and Sherry is still working on
     a lot more, but a big stack of newspaper
     articles about how the information was
     unfolding.
          The first real evidence of it came in 1953
     when Dr. Wynder and Graham painted the backs of
     mice with cigarette smoking condensate and
     found that those mice that got the condensate
     painted on their backs got cancer, and the mice
     that didn't get the condensate didn't get
     cancer.
          Then the American Cancer Society and
BROWN VOL15
1615 American Medical Association, all of those
     things that were explained to us by
     Dr. Martinez yesterday, did their own studies
     on an epidemiological level and they found that
     the statistical correlation was overwhelming.
          And then by 1964 when Lyndon Johnson was
     president the Surgeon General's Report comes
     out and it says that there's a link.
          Now, did anybody really understand just
     what the link was or why?  Probably not.  But
     the research continued.  The research went on.
     There were more Surgeon General's Report.
          One of the studies that I put in evidence
     was the Homburger study, Bernfeld and
     Homburger, says DRE [sic.] Coggins on top.
     What they did in that study was they had
     hamsters actually smoke.  So instead of
     painting the stuff on the backs of animals,
     they figured out a way to force these hamsters
     to smoke and guess what, the hamsters got
     cancer.  We couldn't do tests on human beings,
     it would be cruel and evil and we never have.
     So that's why all of the studies of the harmful
     effects of this product have been done on
     animals.  But by now the analogy has been made
BROWN VOL15
1616 clear.
          So over time everyone has come to know.
     The defense took a whole day of our time
     yesterday to present evidence that we didn't
     really dispute.  I had to cross-examine
     Dr. Martinez or -- Dr. Martinez, I think is
     correct, because I had to show that he was only
     presenting one side of the story, that he
     wasn't showing the newspaper accounts of the
     tobacco company's denials over that length of
     time about the health risks.  I had to
     cross-examine him, secondly, to show that he
     overlooked or omitted from his presentation the
     powerful effect of advertising in newspapers,
     magazines, and TV.
          Obviously big corporations don't spend
     money on advertising because it doesn't work.
     They spend money on advertising because it does
     work.  And every one of those newspapers,
     magazines and television programs from that
     time era that he told us about had
     advertisements glamorizing cigarette smoking.
          I had to cross-examine Dr. Martinez to
     point out that Reynolds was very careful not to
     give him any of its company documents.  Because
BROWN VOL15
1617 if he had any of their company documents, he
     would have been able to tell us specifically
     and exactly what they knew, when they knew it,
     so that you could compare the unfolding of
     information available to them the way that he
     asked you to find the unfolding of the
     information available to Roger.
          Finally, I had to cross-examine
     Dr. Martinez just to show that he's not really
     an expert historian on the tobacco industry,
     that his fields of interest lie elsewhere, and
     that he simply has this ongoing project that's
     paid him more than $300,000 to the present time
     to read these newspaper articles and to try and
     develop this case to show that people who
     smoked should have been aware.
          THE CLERK:  You've used 20 minutes,
     counsel.
          MR. GERSON:  Thank you.
          So, you have to answer that question by
     percentages.  And you could put the ball on the
     1 yard line, or could you put the ball on the
     50-yard line, or you could put the ball
     somewhere in between.
          I say that the percentage of fault is not
BROWN VOL15
1618 equal.  I say that the percentage of fault is
     greatly disparage and that the much greater
     fault belongs to Reynolds, not to Roger Brown.
          Finally, you notice there's a line there
     for other cigarette manufacturers.  This is
     simply because they insist that it's possible
     that Roger Brown smoked some other kind of
     cigarette before he came to Florida in 1950.
     And it's possible that they were not the
     manufacturers of that type of cigarette.  And
     it is simply a request for you to reduce the
     cost of what the amount is that they will have
     to pay in this case by assigning some
     percentage of blame to some unknown party for
     something we don't know anything about.  And I
     ask you to rely, again, on what the court tells
     you in the instructions about not speculating
     concerning things that are not in the evidence.
     So on this line you should write zero.
          The final question is what is the amount
     of damages that Mrs. Brown suffered.  What is
     the amount of money that is needed to
     compensate her for the illness and death of her
     husband.
          The sum that you decide upon should be
BROWN VOL15
1619 fair and the sum that you decide upon will be
     reduced by whatever percentage of the blame you
     attribute to Roger Brown.  You don't make that
     reduction yourself.  The judge does it after
     the trial.  But if you were to decide that
     Roger Brown was 10 percent at fault -- and I'm
     not suggesting that number to you, I'm only
     using that number as an illustration -- and
     that Mrs. Brown's damages were one dollar, then
     Mrs. Brown would receive 90 cents based upon
     the reduction for Mr. Brown's negligence or any
     reduction you might speculate about for another
     cigarette manufacturer.
          So let's review what some of the evidence
     was about Mrs. Brown's loss.  The first part of
     it was how she suffered with her husband's
     illness, how she tearfully, even though it's 16
     years later, how she tearfully told us how she
     remembers him sitting in the corner crying
     because he couldn't eat.
          Now, the damages are about her, not him.
     So we're not asking you to include in your
     verdict any money for what he was experiencing.
     But what for -- for what she was experiencing,
     witnessing, living out that last seven or eight
BROWN VOL15
1620 months of his life.  Trying to get baby food
     down his throat, which he couldn't tolerate.
     Watching the only man in her life waste away
     until there was nothing left, and finally dying
     in bed next to her.
          I realize that this is emotional.  We are
     not asking for sympathy.  Believe me,
     Mrs. Brown has been given all of the sympathy
     that she needs from the surviving people in the
     world who still love her.
          We are only asking you to give her
     compensation for this experience, not sympathy.
          We ask you to remember that you are
     entitled to consider the value of a dollar
     looking back over the years that Mrs. Brown has
     been widowed.
          I never really showed it to you during the
     trial but here is some pictures of them
     together.  Look at that wedding picture and see
     what a beautiful woman she was when Roger
     Brown, a fairly ordinary looking man, married
     her.  It's no wonder that he chose her when she
     was 17 and that he stayed with her for the rest
     of his life.
          Other photos are just a few, just to put
BROWN VOL15
1621 some context to his life, to show him doing
     different things at different times and
     different places, mostly around his house.  You
     look at them carefully and see the things in
     the background.  They'll tell you something
     about his -- what the witness yesterday
     referred to as, quote, "his community."  You'll
     see a little bit of what his lifestyle was and
     what was important to him.  His children, his
     grandchildren, his backyard where his garden
     was.
          So 43 years with the same person, who you
     lose when you're almost 60 years old yourself,
     it's really too late to start up another
     lifetime relationship, even though there were
     still a lot of life that they could have and
     should have had to enjoy together.  And I
     introduced those mortality tables so that you
     would see that there was but for the cancer, a
     life expectancy for Roger Brown of at least 15
     more years after he died, which would have
     taken us just until about last year.  Now, of
     course those tables are only an indicator.
     Some people live longer.  Some people don't
     live as long.  But that's the official
BROWN VOL15
1622 statistic that is used by the government.
          Now, let me say something about my
     client's socioeconomic circumstances and how
     you should value her loss.
          These are people I think you will clearly
     see who had very little.  They were poor.  He
     wasn't able to work for the last 23 years of
     his life.  He depended on himself to put food
     on the table for his family.  They had 12
     children.  He cooked three meals a day for that
     family.  Of course, when you have 12 children
     the range of ages is such so you don't probably
     have them all in the house all at any one time.
     But when you do have 12 children and a wife
     who's working every day to bring money into the
     family, it's quite a bit of work to grow the
     food, cook the food, take care of the house, do
     the cleaning, and this was the lifestyle that
     they had.
          And looking back historically, we have to
     remember that much of this was in an earlier
     time.  And this is probably not similar at all
     to the life experiences that you have in your
     lives, because I dare say that each of you is
     more fortunate in other ways in terms of
BROWN VOL15
1623 material possessions and financial success.
          But Brown's humble lifestyle is not a
     reason to discount the value of the loss of her
     husband.  In fact, just the opposite is true
     because when she lost him she lost everything
     she had.  She lost the only thing she had.
          She's lonely.  She has no one to talk to.
     She has no one to cook for her.  She has no one
     to watch television with.  She has no one to
     barbecue in the backyard for the grandchildren
     or what now must certainly be the great
     grandchildren.  She lost everything she had
     when Roger Brown died.
          I am not going to tell you that this or
     that number is the correct amount of money for
     you to award in this case.  I am going to trust
     your collective experience and judgment and
     intelligence and understanding of the world
     around you to decide on an amount of money
     which is fair and which is just to compensate
     Mrs. Brown for the loss of her husband, for
     suffering through his last illness, and for his
     loss and his absence over all of these years.
          If you give a small amount of money, you
     will have trivialized her loss.  If you give a
BROWN VOL15
1624 substantial sum, you would have recognized and
     acknowledged the magnitude of her loss.
          As the Judge has said, I will have a
     chance to rebut the arguments that are made by
     the defendant's lawyers in just a few minutes.
     And so that's all that I'll have to say to you
     now.


                 REBUTTAL STATEMENT
          MR. GERSON:  May it please the court.
     Ladies and gentlemen.
          In 1967 when I started law school there
     was a story told about a famous case.  I don't
     know if it was folklore or it was true but it
     has some applicable here.
          It was a case about a lawsuit that had
     taken place back in England before the common
     law system was even brought here, where one
     farmer sued another farmer and the reason he
     sued him was he said that the farmer's goat had
     eaten the plaintiff farmer's oats.  So the
     defendant in the case came to court, and this
     is what he said.  He said, No. 1, you didn't
     have any oats.  No. 2, if you did have oats
     they weren't eaten.  No. 3, if they were eaten,
     they weren't eaten by a goat.  No. 4, if they
     were eaten by a goat, they weren't eaten by my
     goat.  No. 5, if they were eaten by my goat,
     then he was crazy, didn't know what he was
     doing, and I shouldn't be responsible.
          And that's kind of what Reynolds has done
     in the last two weeks of this trial.  They
BROWN VOL15
1653 start off by saying, No. 1, he wasn't addicted.
     No. 2, if he was addicted it was -- he was
     addicted to cigarettes that somebody else made,
     not our cigarettes.  No. 3, if he was addicted
     to our cigarettes, then smoking our cigarettes
     wasn't the cause of cancer.  No. 4, if smoking
     was -- our cigarettes that he was addicted to
     was the cause of his cancer, nothing that
     Reynolds did caused him any harm, they just
     manufactured and sold a legal product.  No. 5,
     they say he should have known even -- all this
     information even though he couldn't read.
     No. 6, he should have quit; anybody can.  And
     so it's the same kind of a story.
          What you saw in Phase II from
     Dr. Martinez, with all of those articles, was
     the exact opposite of what they told you in
     Phase I.  Why didn't they call Dr. Martinez to
     testify in Phase I of the trial and tell us all
     of those things about how well established,
     beyond dispute, scientifically accepted,
     well-known by everyone that cigarette smoking
     was so addictive, and that cigarette smoking is
     a direct and almost always a cause of these
     kinds of cancers that were involved in this
BROWN VOL15
1654 case?
          They talk about Roger Brown's
     responsibility over and over again.  There's
     another part to that.  We admit Roger Brown had
     some responsibility.  There's some corporate
     responsibility, too.  And they don't admit or
     own up to any corporate responsibility in this
     case.
          They actually tell us that the negligently
     manufactured cigarettes, the defective and
     unreasonably dangerous cigarettes were not the
     cause of Roger Brown's death.  What else was?
     What else could there possibly have been in
     this case that we heard about, sitting in this
     courtroom for two weeks, other than the
     unreasonably dangerous defective cigarettes?
     And those facts have already been decided
     conclusively, that they were unreasonably
     dangerous; that they were defective.
          Somehow the railroad tracks don't cross,
     they say.  They tell us, look at all this
     information that was out in the public arena
     about cigarette smoking.  And even though they
     concede that Roger Brown wasn't reading one
     word of it, they say, well, it was out in the
BROWN VOL15
1655 neighborhood.
          And do you really think for a minute that
     if you went down to a street corner in Pompano
     right now and talked to some of the people
     standing on the corner that they'd be talking
     about the health risks of cigarette smoking?
     Or would they be talking about Kobe Bryant,
     Lebron James, whatever the latest piece of
     gossip is about a movie star, or a singer, or
     the winner of American Idol.
          According to this company, this is what
     everybody was reading every day in the
     newspaper and watching every day on television.
     I saw those clips again and I've seen them
     before, like you have.  Do you think that's
     what Roger Brown was watching on the news?  Or
     do you think he was probably trying to find out
     what the weather forecast was so he knew
     whether or not his vegetables were going to get
     rain the next day?  Do you think he was trying
     to find out who won the ball game?  I don't
     think there were any Marlins back in 1993 and
     before, but there were plenty of other teams.
          And they actually come in here like the
     farmer with the goat, and try and persuade you
BROWN VOL15
1656 to believe that this is what everybody in
     America was talking about for 40 years and
     Roger Brown fully understood it.
          When the much better test of what he
     really understood and what he really knew was
     Mrs. Brown.  Mrs. Brown was more educated than
     Roger.  And when she was asked on the witness
     stand about her own knowledge of the health
     risks of cigarette smoking, she was unable to
     explain what they were or what it was about
     cigarette smoking that even was harmful.  She
     basically said, well, when I started seeing
     signs in public places that said no smoking, I
     figured out that there must be something bad
     about cigarette smoking.
          And the fact is, that the evidence was
     there in the scientific journals, the evidence
     was there in the offices of the R.J. Reynolds
     Tobacco Company, but the public has had a very
     slow evolutionary understanding of the harms,
     risks, dangers and mortality of cigarette
     smoking.
          And we've come to understand that in 2009.
     And that's one of the reasons that I wanted us
     to have some people on this jury who were old
BROWN VOL15
1657 enough to remember what things were like in the
     '50s, in the '60s, in the '70s, in those
     critical years when Roger Brown was a smoker.
     When the tobacco companies were denying the
     link between smoking and cancer, when they were
     denying that nicotine was addictive and
     harmful, as their expert admitted they were
     doing, but then rationalized by saying that the
     press was objective and the press was reporting
     in the truth.  But they were also reporting the
     denials.
          So if you were to follow this -- this
     railroad track kind of reasoning of
     Mr. Kaczynski, all we would have needed was
     that 1955 clip, the one you just saw again
     during the defense closing argument.  I mean,
     after all, there it is.  It's on TV.  What more
     do you need?
          The truth is, the reality is, what you all
     know in your hearts and in your minds is that
     the advertising message is more powerful than
     the public service was.  We still see them on
     TV.
          If you watch Marlin's baseball you will
     see the baseball players saying they are smoke
BROWN VOL15
1658 free.  I don't smoke.  I don't chew.  I don't
     dip.  You see that we are still doing that and
     we are winning the war against smoking because
     less people smoke in this country now than did
     back in the '40s and the '50s.  But the
     advertising message is very powerful.  And when
     you turn on the NASCAR races --
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor,
     it's not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  I don't recall that.
          MR. GERSON:  It wasn't in evidence but I'm
     just talking about --
          THE COURT:  So move on.
          MR. GERSON:  When you look in the print
     media, the television and radio, media of the
     past, the advertising is still there and it
     worked.  And public service messages are still
     needed today because people don't just
     automatically understand all of this the way
     that Mr. Kaczynski presented it to you.
          Just like I said at the very beginning of
     the trial, the very first time I spoke to you,
     why do people smoke?  What is it about
     cigarettes that makes people want them?  Well,
     I won't answer that question anymore because
BROWN VOL15
1659 I've answered it many times in this trial as
     did the witnesses.
          But putting all of the blame on Roger
     Brown is totally, totally unfair.  Not what the
     evidence in this case proved.
          We accept our share of the responsibility
     for Mr. Brown in whatever numerical value you
     decide it should be.  They have refused to
     accept any responsibility for anything they've
     done in the history of their company and
     they've denied it in this trial just like the
     farmer with the goat.
          They didn't say much about damages so
     there's very little for me to rebut.  The only
     comments were that Mrs. Brown did lose her
     soulmate and that's exactly what I've told you.
     And exactly why I've said that you should not
     trivialize the amount of her damages.
          They said that you should not award money
     for sympathy.  And we agree.  We're not here
     for sympathy.  Mrs. Brown has had all of the
     sympathy that she needs over the loss of her
     husband.  But the way our judicial system works
     is that we can't undo the harm.  The only way
     that we can compensate somebody is by awarding
BROWN VOL15
1660 money.  If there was a verdict store that
     Mrs. Brown could take the verdict you bring
     back into this courtroom to, if she could go
     down the street to Broward Boulevard and say
     here is the verdict that the jury gave me in
     Judge Streitfeld's courtroom, give me back my
     husband, she surely would do it.  But she
     can't.  And so the case is not a case about
     sympathy.  It is a case about compensation.
     And we're asking you to decide on an amount of
     compensation which is fair and just in light of
     all of the evidence and all of your experience
     and common sense that you bring in to the
     courtroom.
          Return a verdict that you can be proud of.
     There will be no other day in court for
     Mrs. Brown.  No other jury will ever hear this
     case.  Your decision will be final.  The
     verdict that you bring back into court when you
     finish your deliberations should be a verdict
     that you can look back on in six months, in a
     year, in five years, in ten years and say to
     yourself, you know, I did the right thing.  And
     I'm proud of myself for doing it.
