                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. GERSON:  May it please the court.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. GERSON:  Mrs. Brown, I know it's hard
     to see you back there but I want to acknowledge
     you.  And defense counsel and of course ladies
     and gentlemen of the jury.
          I would be remiss in I didn't begin by
     saying thank you to each and every one of you
     for giving up your time to do this civic duty
     to sit here for the better part of two weeks to
     help decide the outcome of this lawsuit.
          I'm sure that you'll be thanked by the
     defendants as well.  And I won't dwell on that
     any longer than I need to.  So let's start
     talking now about what the case is about.
          This, as you've been told, is a Phase I
     trial.  This case is part or a growth out of a
     previous class action that the judge explained
     at the very beginning of the trial.  Your job
BROWN VOL11
1178 today will be to decide whether or not my
     client is a member of the class.  If she is not
     a member of the class, then the case is over,
     the verdict is for the defendant, and everybody
     goes home.
          If she is a member of the class, we will
     go on to Phase II.  Phase II will be done in a
     very short time, probably one day, and will
     only involve the questions of what is the
     comparative fault or blame as between Roger
     Brown and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and
     what is the amount of damages.
          So if we get to a Phase II you're not
     going to be here another two weeks.  We are
     going to finish the Phase II part of the trial
     before the end of the week.  That's really all
     I want to tell you now about Phase II.  I do
     want to talk for the balance of my time about
     Phase I.
          And in Phase I, to decide whether or not
     Mrs. Brown is a member of the class, you really
     have to answer one very simple question,
     whether Roger Brown was addicted to Reynolds
     cigarettes containing nicotine and if so,
     whether such addiction caused his death.
BROWN VOL11
1179 That's what the judge's jury instruction will
     be.  We know that because he's explained to us
     exactly while you were out of the room what his
     instructions will be.  And we know it will be
     exactly that.  So you don't have to write it
     down.  You're going to see it over and over
     again, whether Roger Brown was addicted to
     Reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine and if
     so, whether such addiction caused his death.
          Well, you might think that this is so
     simple that the tobacco company would just
     agree that this evidence is so obvious in this
     case, but they haven't.  They have challenged
     both of the sub facts on that very simple
     issue.  They have denied that he was addicted.
     They have denied that cigarette smoking -- that
     addiction to the nicotine in the cigarettes led
     to or caused his death.  I'll talk more in a
     little while about what cause means.
          So -- do I have a cup of water here?
          So, we begin with the basic question that
     I told you about last week, why is it that
     people smoke cigarettes?  Well, I think what
     you've learned in this trial is there is a
     one-word answer to that, and it's nicotine.
BROWN VOL11
1180 Nicotine is a powerful drug and nicotine is the
     reason that people smoke cigarettes.
          Now, what makes them start may be peer
     pressure, may be some sort of an attempt to
     reach social status, may be some form of
     teenage rebellion.  We don't really know in
     Roger Brown's case or for that matter
     necessarily in anybody else's case.  But what
     keeps people smoking is this drug, nicotine.
          Now, this lawsuit is a search for the
     truth.  In exchange for your participation as
     jurors, your giving your time to be here with
     us, what we owe you is honesty and candor in
     finding the truth.  And in doing your job to
     find the truth, it's not about who had the most
     witnesses, who had the smartest witnesses, who
     had the best prepared witnesses, it's about
     what you think the truth is using your own
     experience, judgment, common sense, and overall
     understanding of life applied to what has been
     presented in this courtroom.
          Now, even though you probably came into
     the courtroom last week knowing that many
     people were addicted to cigarette smoking, I
     think you probably learned a great deal more
BROWN VOL11
1181 about cigarette smoking addiction than you knew
     before you got here.  I say that because you
     all answered questionnaires and on those
     questionnaires there were inquiries about your
     own understanding of that concept.  And we had
     a lot of different answers.
          The real evidence on this came from the
     Surgeon General's report in 1988.  And you can
     see it's the size of the Yellow Pages and I
     really don't expect you to read it all, but you
     can.  I've referenced the pages that I've cited
     here, and I know this might be a little hard to
     read, so let me just read it to you.  "The
     issue of tobacco addiction has been addressed
     in previous Surgeon General reports and in the
     medical literature beginning in the early
     1900s.  Because of the recent expansion of
     research in this area, a thorough review of
     this topic is warranted.  Despite the
     significant health" use -- "health risks of
     tobacco use outlined in previous reports, many
     smokers have a great difficulty in quitting.
     This report concludes that such difficulty is
     in large part due to the addicting properties
     of nicotine, which is present in all forms of
BROWN VOL11
1182 tobacco.  The report further concludes that the
     processes that determine addiction are similar
     to those that determine addiction to other
     drugs such as heroin and cocaine.  Scientists
     in the field of drug addiction now agree that
     nicotine, the principle pharmacologic agent
     that is common to all forms of tobacco, is a
     powerful addicting drug.  Tobacco use as an
     addiction standard" -- "as an addiction
     standard definitions of drug addiction have
     been adopted by various organizations,
     including the World Health Organization, and
     the American Psychiatric Association.  Although
     these definitions are not identical, they have
     in common several criteria for establishing a
     drug as addicting.  This report demonstrates in
     detail that tobacco use and nicotine in
     particular meet all these criteria.  The term
     drug addiction and term drug dependence are
     scientifically equivalent".
          Then there is a heading called major
     conclusions.  And there are three of them.
          "Cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are
     addicting.  Nicotine is the drug in tobacco
     that causes addiction.  The pharmacologic and
BROWN VOL11
1183 behavioral processes that determine tobacco
     addiction are similar to those that determine
     addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine".
          To help amplify and explain these findings
     of the Surgeon General, we brought you the
     videotape depositions of the two leading
     experts in the world on nicotine and its
     addictive properties.
          Dr. Neal Benowitz, and I won't repeat all
     of his background since you all heard it when
     we played the videotape, has studied this
     longer and written more about it than anyone
     else in the world.  And what are some of the
     important things that he said which you should
     keep in mind when you measure whether or not
     Roger Brown was addicted?
          Well, one of the things that he said was
     that the cigarette smoker undertakes or reaches
     a consistent amount of nicotine for his
     addiction.  So when he reaches that threshold
     level, whatever it is for him, he stays with
     it.  And for Roger Brown, obviously that the
     evidence is completely 100 percent consistent,
     that level was about a pack or a pack and a
     half a day.  It wasn't something that was
BROWN VOL11
1184 escalating from one to two to three to four to
     five to six or some other number as might be
     the case with other drugs of addiction, such as
     heroin or cocaine or pain killing pills or
     things like that.
          Dr. Benowitz said that the evidence is
     compelling that the earlier you start the more
     addicted you become and the harder it is to
     quit.  He said that daily -- that the vast
     majority of daily smoker young people become
     addicted.  That the addiction is to nicotine,
     the cigarette is just the delivery mechanism of
     nicotine.
          Like I told you in the opening statement,
     no one would stand behind the back of a bus to
     inhale the smoke from burned diesel fumes or
     stand in front of a camp fire to inhale the
     smoke from burning logs.  But people will and
     do get addicted to inhaling the smoke from
     cigarettes because the cigarettes contained
     nicotine.
          Nicotine has an effect on the brain reward
     centers.  Dr. Benowitz and to a lesser extent
     Dr. Cummings explained that that effect is more
     powerful than the logical reason that those of
BROWN VOL11
1185 us who don't smoke would think should influence
     everyone not to smoke.
          Why is it that anybody smokes?  Even now
     in 2009, as much as we all know about the harm
     of cigarette smoking people are still doing it.
     And what is the reason?  Is it what the tobacco
     companies say, that people just like to smoke,
     they just enjoy it?  There's just something
     inherently useful and beneficial about it that
     motivates them to do it?  Or is it really what
     the scientists say, what the Surgeon General,
     the number -- the leading doctor selected by
     the president of the United States says about
     this product?  And there are other Surgeon
     General reports in evidence, too.  We are going
     to talk about that.
          Dr. Benowitz went farther than just to say
     that it effects the brain reward centers.  He
     told you about the actual hormonal interactions
     between the nicotine in cigarette smoke and the
     human brain.  One of those was acetylcholine.
     And he said that nicotine mimics acetylcholine.
     And that causes the receptors in the brain to
     unlock and to open and then to release
     chemicals like Dopamine, serotonin and others.
BROWN VOL11
1186 All of this has a scientific basis.  This
     is not just a bad habit that people do because
     they want to do it.  The brain undergoes
     structural changes.  The brain circuits and
     pathways are altered by taking in nicotine,
     particularly in very young people.  That may
     have something to do with the very common sense
     observation, I'm sure that all of you have
     made, which is that for some reason it's
     basically young people who start to smoke.
          Who here knows somebody 40 or 50 years old
     who goes out and says, you know, I think I'd
     like to take up cigarette smoking?  That almost
     never happens.  What happens is that
     impressible young people start smoking
     cigarettes when they're teenagers, as
     Dr. Cummings said, almost all of them begin
     before age 20.
          And what happens is that the nicotine in
     the cigarettes creates new memory tracks,
     neuroplasticity was the technical word,
     neuropathways.  And so once an addict, always
     an addict because these changes have been made.
          Now, the effects on the body of the
     addiction to nicotine have been analogized to
BROWN VOL11
1187 cocaine and heroin.  Of course, smoking
     cigarettes and taking in the nicotine that's in
     the cigarettes does not affect our behaviors or
     our experiential feelings the way that heroin
     and cocaine do.  And we never meant to try to
     communicate anything like that to you.  All of
     these drugs are very different in many ways.
     However, they are very similar, almost
     identical, in very -- in one very important
     way, and that very important way is the way in
     which they affect the human brain so as to
     create this phenomena that we all commonly
     understand to be addiction.
          That's how they are the same.
          So was Roger Brown addicted?  Well, if
     Roger Brown wasn't addicted to nicotine,
     probably nobody was.  We have the overview that
     Dr. Benowitz gives us where he says that ten
     cigarettes a day for ten years, that's the
     threshold.  Once you're passed that threshold
     you're probably addicted.
          Even though Dr. Tucker this morning picked
     and chose what he liked and what he didn't like
     from the DSM-IV, the DSM-IV said that, I
     believe, 70 to 80 or 80 to 90 percent of
BROWN VOL11
1188 cigarette smokers are addicted.  What other
     explanation would there be?  Why would all of
     these people continue smoking cigarettes
     through their lifetime if they weren't
     addicted?
          So, what are the facts about Roger Brown
     and his addiction?  He started at a very young
     age, which according to the experts is one of
     the classic indicators of who's going to become
     addicted.  He smoked for maybe more than 50
     years.  We know for sure more than 40 years.
     And he did it every day, seven days a week.  He
     took that dose of nicotine.  No days off.  Even
     when he was sick.  Even when he was dying, he
     continued to smoke every single day to take in
     that dose.
          Well, at night when he wasn't smoking his
     body was going through a physical withdrawal
     from the very effects, the pharmacological
     effects on the brain that nicotine had.  So
     what did he do?  He got up in the morning and
     he smoked a cigarette right away.  Was it
     before or after he brushed his teeth, I don't
     know.  I don't think that matters.  Certainly
     by that first cup of coffee he had a cigarette.
BROWN VOL11
1189 Now, that was not something unique or
     distinctive that we tried to prove to you about
     Roger Brown.  I would suggest that the 80 or
     90 percent of cigarette regular -- long-term
     cigarette smokers all do it the same way
     because they're all experiencing the same
     thing.
          What were some of the other factors that
     were involved?  Well, did he use the drug
     regularly according to a pattern on a long term
     period of time?  Yes.  He did.  In fact, if you
     go by the DSM factors then he meets the three
     of the four criteria.
          Now, why didn't we bring in an
     80,000-dollar psychiatrist?  Because the real
     science is right here.  You're intelligent
     people who can connect the dots once you're
     given the background.  You know what the
     scientific background is.  You know what the
     experts say is needed for someone to be
     addicted.  You know what the government and the
     Surgeon General's report says is needed to be
     addicted.  And you know the way that Roger
     Brown lived his life.  It would be an insult to
     your intelligence for us to hire a cheerleader
BROWN VOL11
1190 like this witness this morning to come in and
     tell you that addiction to nicotine requires
     someone having a diagnosable mental illness or
     disorder.  That's just what Reynolds wants
     people to believe when they look at their use
     of their product.  They want people to think
     that nobody's really addicted to cigarettes.
     It's just a choice.  It's just something that
     they want to do because they like to do it.  So
     that's the decision that you will have to make.
          One of the interesting things I thought
     was that little video clip that we were allowed
     to play yesterday of the president and CEO of
     Reynolds who was testifying before Congress in
     1994, a year after Roger Brown died, and what
     he said that was interesting was that back in
     the 1940s when Roger Brown started to smoke
     cigarettes, the nicotine content was three to
     400 percent of what it was in 1994 when he was
     giving his testimony.
          So, we didn't need a psychiatrist,
     especially not one who doesn't even know any
     background about the subject that he's
     testifying on, especially not one who never did
     any research, like Dr. Benowitz or
BROWN VOL11
1191 Dr. Cummings, one who just comes in and reads
     the medical records and some of the testimony
     that you heard in this courtroom, in this
     trial, and says, well, based on all of that I
     can tell you that Roger Brown wasn't addicted
     to smoking cigarettes, but he never gave any
     reason.  He never gave any explanation.  He
     just said, well, that's my opinion and you
     should believe it because I gave it.
          So, on this first question, we rely on
     your common sense, your experience and
     judgment.  To look at scientific evidence, to
     look at the history of this man's life, and to
     put the two of them together and decide whether
     or not Roger Brown, like almost everybody else,
     was addicted to nicotine in the R.J. Reynolds
     cigarettes that he smoked.  The Camels, the
     Pall Malls, and Winstons.
          Now, they made an issue of the second part
     of class membership too.  They said, don't let
     Roger Brown in this class, exclude him from
     this class because his addiction to nicotine
     was not the cause of his death.
          Why?  Well, assuming his addiction to
     nicotine was what made him smoke cigarettes,
BROWN VOL11
1192 according to them smoking cigarettes didn't
     cause his death.
          Now, if you hadn't been in this courtroom
     for two weeks to hear this, you probably would
     have just been able to make a gut judgment.
     From the gross facts that here we have a guy
     who was healthy his whole life, never had
     anything else going on in his life, and the one
     thing about his life that stands out the most
     is that he smoked cigarettes every day for 50
     years.  That ought to be enough.
          But what Reynolds does is hire a bunch of
     paid witnesses who come to court and tell you
     that cigarette smoking wasn't the cause of
     Roger Brown's death.  And it's a pretty
     interesting roust.
          You can look behind the evidence and use
     your common sense to understand the motivations
     and what people have to gain or lose by the
     outcome of this lawsuit, and by what means the
     parties to this lawsuit go about selecting the
     evidence that they're going to present for you
     to hear.
          They don't want Roger Brown to be a member
     of the class because if he is a member of the
BROWN VOL11
1193 class then they may have to pay his widow.
     They want a way out.  They want a bailout.  Not
     from the government, but from you.  Reynolds
     wants you to bail them out of the liability
     that may arise if we get to Phase II.
          So can they come in here with a straight
     face and say, cigarette smoking was not the
     cause of lung cancer in Roger Brown?  Not in
     2009.  No one can do that now.  Twenty years
     ago, 30 years ago, even 10 or 15 years ago they
     might have gotten away with it.  But today
     nobody is going to believe that cigarette
     smoking in a 50-year smoking lifetime was not
     the cause of lung cancer in the smoker.
          So what they do -- in fact, I think it was
     Dr. Nichols yesterday admitted that the data
     was somewhere at least 85 percent of all lung
     cancers are cigarette smoking related.  So,
     because there was a finding that there was
     esophageal cancer, they decide that they can
     defend this case by trying to convince you that
     Roger Brown never had lung cancer.  Roger Brown
     instead they say had esophageal cancer.
          Now, more than 50 percent of esophageal
     cancer is caused by smoking, too.  But not
BROWN VOL11
1194 everybody knows that in their gut like they
     know that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
          So, Reynolds decides that if they can
     convince the jury that it was only esophageal
     cancer and not lung cancer there's a chance the
     jury will bail them out by agreeing with a
     group of paid experts who will say that
     esophageal cancer has many risk factors.  And
     perhaps one of the others besides smoking is
     the real cause.  And they list 25 different
     things hoping that one or more of them will
     tempt you to bail them out.  But 21 of the 25
     are so remote in association, that they then
     decide, well, we're going to highlight four and
     we are going to say that these are the major
     ones.  And so let's discuss what the evidence
     was about those risk factors for esophageal
     cancer, knowing from the very beginning that
     more than 50 percent of esophageal cancers are
     cigarette smoking related.
          THE CLERK:  You've used 30 minutes.
          MR. GERSON:  Thirty.  Thank you.
          Okay.  They say first, let's look at the
     four sort of in reverse order.  HPV, human
     papillomavirus.  Is there any evidence in the
BROWN VOL11
1195 case that Roger Brown had the human
     papillomavirus?  Nothing.  Reynolds says, well,
     how do we know that he didn't have it?  Well,
     we don't know that either because he wasn't
     tested.  They are right.  We don't have any
     evidence one way or the other.  So how could
     they ask you to decide that that was a likely
     cause when there's no evidence at all that
     Mr. Brown had that.
          Now, there's no reason to test for
     something that the doctors aren't suspicious
     about in the first place, and the doctors who
     were taking care of Roger Brown never
     considered this a possible cause.  These
     doctors, 16 years ago, weren't forensic
     doctors.  They were just medical doctors who
     were trained to do what they do, not trained
     and actually certified -- two of their
     witnesses, the Dr. Tucker this morning and
     Dr. Nichols yesterday and I'm not sure about
     Dr. Bertino, but they actually received a
     certification in forensic pathology and in
     forensic psychiatry so that they have been
     trained and schooled in how to come to court
     and to present in court.
BROWN VOL11
1196 And we had Dr. Patel, who has never been
     in court.  Dr. Patel was here to explain what
     he did, when he did it, not for forensic
     purposes but for medical purposes.  And since
     no one ever thought there was any reason to
     consider HPV as a cause of Mr. Brown's cancer,
     no one tested for it back in 1993 when he was
     sick.  There's no evidence of it.  And frankly,
     it would be wrong for you to even speculate or
     give that any serious consideration in your
     deliberations.
          You will want to turn that on in just a
     minute or two.
          Okay.  What was the next risk factor of
     the four.  It was GERD, G-E-R-D,
     gastroesophageal reflux syndrome.
          Now, Mrs. Brown and her daughter both
     testified that Roger Brown never had any
     problem with indigestion.  What does the
     tobacco company tell you?  They say well, you
     know, there's evidence in the record that he
     had stomachaches, that he took over-the-counter
     medications, that he used Alka Seltzer, but
     that doesn't mean that he had GERD.
          GERD or reflux is a symptom-driven
BROWN VOL11
1197 process.  In fact, it's pretty understandable
     and logical as to why it could give you cancer
     because if over a long period of time you've
     got acid from your stomach going back up your
     esophagus the wrong way, that this would
     irritate and annoy the tissues in your
     esophagus probably in much the same way that
     cigarette smoke when it comes down from the
     other direction does the same thing.
          But the evidence is that Roger Brown
     didn't have GERD.  The fact that they gave him
     Zantac when he was in the hospital didn't mean
     that he had GERD.  Dr. Patel said that if you
     come in with a complaint that's related to your
     stomach, we give you Zantac routinely.  It's
     just a standard protocol.  And the only
     evidence that he ever had any Zantac was then.
     There's no medical -- there's no medical
     evidence that this was ever used before and
     there's no evidence in the case that giving
     somebody Zantac is diagnostic for their having
     GERD.
          What was the medical evidence?  What did
     the medical literature say?  Remember
     Dr. Bertino, he was here last week and I got
BROWN VOL11
1198 the articles out of his file.  And I read to
     him from the article that appeared in the
     Journal of the American Medical Association in
     April of 2002, entitled Gastroesophageal Reflux
     Barrett esophagus and esophageal cancer.  And I
     read him this one little sentence, no
     association was found between reflux symptoms
     and squamous cell carcinoma risk.
          Now, there is association between GERD and
     other types of cancer cells.  But according to
     this study, there was no association with
     squamous, which was the type that Roger had in
     his esophagus.  And what did Dr. Bertino say,
     well, I disagree with that article in the
     journal of the American Medical Association
     even though it was in my file.
          So, let's go to the next piece of
     evidence.  That's what the medical literature
     said.  What did they do in this case?  They
     gave him a scan.  Now, this was January 25th.
     And this was a doctor who wasn't here
     forensically trying to convince you of anything
     at all.  This was a doctor who was trying to
     figure out what was wrong with Mr. Brown.  And
     he said, the esophagus is suspicious for
BROWN VOL11
1199 neoplastic change, which means cancer.  There
     was no evidence of gastroesophageal reflux.
          I don't know what more I can say about
     this.  Mr. Upshaw and Mr. Kaczynski must think
     if they say it enough times somebody will start
     to believe it, even though there's no evidence.
          MR. UPSHAW:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  No more arguments
     like that.
          MR. GERSON:  Even if there's no evidence
     of it and the test that was done to find it was
     negative.
          All right.  Let's go to No. 2.  What is
     No. 2?  No. 2 is alcohol.  Dr. Patel and
     Dr. Nichols agreed that for alcohol to be a
     factor there must be heavy, excessive,
     more-than-moderate drinking.
          Dr. Bertino disagreed.  Dr. Bertino said,
     even occasional drinking was enough.  A couple
     of beers on the weekend was enough, according
     to Dr. Bertino.  The records show that the very
     same history was given to four or five
     different doctors about the amount that
     Mr. Brown drank.  The testimony of the family
     members was consistent with what was in the
BROWN VOL11
1200 medical records.
          You saw that Dr. Tucker gave us a list of
     depositions of family members and friends that
     he read, any one of those witnesses could have
     been subpoenaed and brought into court to
     testify if they had something different to say.
          Now, what did the literature say about
     this.  The American Cancer Society said, "Using
     any form of tobacco raises the risk of this
     cancer", the title of the article was What
     Causes Cancer of the Esophagus.  The longer a
     person uses tobacco the greater the risk.  More
     than half of all squamous cell esophageal
     cancer is linked to smoking.  That's the
     American Cancer Society.  That was in
     Dr. Bertino's file.  When I told him about that
     he said, I don't agree with that.  This is just
     some dumbed down, those were his exact words,
     "this is just some dumbed down explanation for
     the public, that the American Cancer Society
     puts on their website."
          What did the American Cancer Society say
     about drinking?  They said, alcohol, long term,
     heavy drinking is a major risk factor for
     cancer of the esophagus.  For people who both
BROWN VOL11
1201 smoke and drink, the risk is further increased.
          That was the American Cancer Society.
          We went through several others.  We went
     through the American Journal of Epidemiology,
     which was another one of the articles that
     Dr. Bertino brought in his file.  And what did
     it say?  It said that alcohol only counted as a
     risk factor for people who had more than eight
     drinks per week.  And when I asked Dr. Bertino
     about that, he said, that even though he
     considered the journal to be authoritative in
     general, even though it was part of his
     reliance materials, he disagreed with that and
     he didn't think that there was any minimal
     threshold and any drinking was enough to be the
     cause.
          The article said that the dose dependence
     relationships that were found between
     esophageal cancer and drinking ranged with the
     eight to 14 drinks per week group and was
     highest among the 36-plus drinks per week
     group.  That heavy alcoholic use meant 35 or
     more drinks per week.
          That's what the science is on the
     association between drinking and esophageal
BROWN VOL11
1202 cancer.  But there's one more thing.  Roger
     Brown had an enlarged liver.  His liver was
     enlarged by some -- actually exactly unmeasured
     amount.  They did a liver scan and they did
     labs.  And this is what the labs were.  And
     Dr. Patel explained yesterday that this
     particular finding of 137 was slightly elevated
     over the normal range of 126, but they found
     nothing specific in the liver study that was
     diagnostic of anything.
          Now, it's -- just as it's widely known
     that cigarette smoking causes cancer, it's also
     widely known that excessive alcohol drinking
     causes liver disease.  But the doctors who were
     there at the time, not forensic doctors,
     treating doctors who were there to make him
     better, never did anything to work up or
     develop any liver disease.
          Dr. Patel ruled that out as something that
     they didn't consider important, even though
     they did a scan, and they looked for disease in
     the scan, and they didn't find any, he ruled
     that out as unimportant.
          So, when you balance the evidence, what is
     the most likely explanation for the esophageal
BROWN VOL11
1203 cancer?  This is what the Surgeon General said
     in 1982, this year 8300 deaths due to cancer of
     the esophagus are expected.  It is one of the
     poorest survival rates of cancer.  And only
     4 percent of the esophageal cancer patients
     live five years after diagnosis.  Most die
     within six months.  Cigarette smoking is
     estimated to be a factor in over half of
     esophageal cancer deaths.  Smokers have a
     mortality ratio of four to five times higher
     than nonsmokers.  The use of alcohol has a
     synergistic interaction with smoking that
     greatly increases the risk.
          Cigarette smoking is a major cause of
     esophageal cancer in the United States.  The
     risk of esophageal cancer increases with
     increased smoke exposure as measured by the
     number of cigarettes smoked daily and is
     diminished by discontinuing the habit.
          Use of alcohol in combination with smoking
     acts synergistically to greatly increase the
     risk for esophageal cancer.
          It goes on and says that there have been
     numerous studies about the synergism between
     alcohol consumption and esophageal cancer.
BROWN VOL11
1204 Now, I think the weight of the evidence,
     the greater weight of the evidence is that the
     cause of both cancers was cigarette smoking,
     not alcohol or anything else.
          The judge will instruct you that in
     determining cause that we don't have to prove
     that cigarette smoking was the only cause, that
     addiction may be a legal cause even though it
     operates in combination with some other cause,
     if the other cause occurs at the same time as
     the addiction and if the addiction contributes
     substantially to producing the loss.
          THE CLERK:  You've used 45.
          MR. GERSON:  Forty-five?  Okay.
          So, like I said at very beginning, we
     can't prove this case 100 percent.  We'd like
     to have an autopsy, too.  We'd like to have the
     tissue because we would want you to have as
     much evidence as you possibly could.  But we
     don't have it.  It's not our fault that we
     don't have it.  You have to decide the case
     based on what we do have and what we do have is
     the evidence from the government, from the
     studies, and from the medical records that the
     most probable cause of both cancers was
BROWN VOL11
1205 cigarette smoking.
          Now, remember these in opening statement,
     lung mass, probably malignancy, possible
     metastatic disease; metastatic carcinoma, lung
     and abdomen, probable metastatic carcinoma.  I
     warned you in opening statement that things
     would be taken out of context to try and
     suggest that Roger Brown had a metastatic
     cancer relationship between his esophagus and
     his lung cancer.  But that's not what the
     doctors said.
          And that's why I took Dr. Patel through
     the records one by one to show you those notes
     and to prove to you that what those doctors
     were thinking at that time was not that there
     was anything going on between the lung and the
     esophagus, but that the metastatic process they
     were thinking about was whether or not the lung
     cancer had metastasized to the adrenal gland.
     Because if it has metastasized to the adrenal
     gland, then it was already in his lymphatic
     system and it was going to spread to lots of
     other places around his body.
          And the court reporter typed up the
     testimony for me last night and I just want to
BROWN VOL11
1206 reread to you now the things that Dr. Patel
     said about that that puts it in context.
          At Page 29, and the radiologist says
     suspicious for metastatic spread of disease.
     As a pulmonologist, when you read that what
     does that mean to you?
          "Answer:  Well, it means that if you are
     seeing a mass in the lung, there's a high
     probability we are dealing with cancer.  And
     when you have an enlargement of the adrenal,
     there is a high probability that the cancer has
     gone to the adrenal gland.
          "Question:  That's what metastasis means?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          That's what the doctors were talking
     about.  Not about metastasis between the
     esophageal cancer and the lung cancer like
     Dr. Bertino suggested.
          Page 46.
          "Question:  Let me stop you for a moment.
     When you say possible metastatic disease what
     are you referring to?"
          This is all Dr. Patel's testimony from
     yesterday morning.
          "Answer:  The finding on the CAT scan.
BROWN VOL11
1207 "Question:  And you're suggesting that
     what cancer was primary?
          "Answer:  The lung cancer.
          "Question:  And you're suggesting that you
     think it may have metastasized to?
          "Answer:  To the adrenal gland."
          Any other reading of these medical records
     is a distortion.
          Page 40.
          "Question:  And what does Dr. Schwartz's
     note say?
          "Answer:  Pathology report positive for
     large cell cancer.  CT with apparent adrenal
     involvement.
          "Question:  AP means what?
          "Answer:  AP means assessment and plan.
          "Question:  Okay.  So he's noted there
     there's a large cell cancer with apparent
     adrenal involvement and what's the assessment
     and plan?
          "Answer:  Probably metastatic carcinoma,
     questionable primary.  Questionable GI versus
     bronchogenic.  Needs oncology evaluation and
     full metastatic workup.  Patient not a
     candidate for resection.
BROWN VOL11
1208 "Question:  Now, the reference to probable
     metastatic carcinoma is relating to metastasis
     from what organ to what organ?
          "Answer:  His answer, his reference is
     metastatic from lung.  His reference is in
     reference to the adrenal metastatic disease."
          Now, because the notes are very hard to
     read we asked Dr. Patel to interpret what
     Dr. Singh, the gastroenterologist said.  And he
     said at Page 41, Line 23.
          "Question:  And just look at the signature
     and tell me who this is?
          "Answer:  This is a note from Dr. Singh
     the gastroenterologist."
          THE COURT:  Slow down, Mr. Gerson, please.
     Slow down.
          MR. GERSON:  Yes, sir.
          "Question:  And let me try and just read
     this.  Let's get down to the impression next.
          "Answer:  Endoscopy done.  Findings, large
     ulcerated mass in the mid-esophagus.  Biopsy
     brushings washings done.  Compatible with the
     esophageal malignancy."
          And then he gives his impression.  If I
     can get it on the screen.  There we go.
BROWN VOL11
1209 What is Dr. Singh -- Dr. Singh has now
     diagnosed the cancer of the esophagus based on
     the esophagram, correct?
          "Answer:  On the basis of endoscopy he
     thinks the finding compatible with malignance.
          "Question:  What is his impression?
          "Answer:  His impression is A, secondary
     primaries."
          I think that's a misprint, I think it's
     second primary.
          "Esophageal cancer.  And B is lung primary
     and radiating into the esophagus.
          "Question:  Is his impression that there
     was a cancer in the esophagus that metastasized
     to the lung?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  His impression is that there
     were two primaries."
          There was an objection that was sustained.
          "Question:  What is his impression about
     whether or not there are two primaries?
          "Answer:  His impression is that there's a
     possibility of two primaries as far as first
     notation.
          "Question:  And are there any other
BROWN VOL11
1210 possibilities that he identifies there?
          "Answer:  In his notation he says that the
     lung primary was invading the esophagus.  So
     from the lung to the esophagus that's what he
     was considering."
          Now, finally, I'll make this the last --
     well, the next to the last one I read at
     Page 45 at the bottom.
          "Question:  Will you read what Dr. Singh
     writes on the 29th, the day after the note we
     just looked at from Dr. Schwartz?
          "Answer:  Noting in the stages esophageal
     biopsy squamous cell cancer.  Patient has two
     malignancies.  That is two primaries, lung and
     esophagus.  Not a candidate for surgical
     intervention."
          And finally on Page 47.
          "Question:  But what is Dr. Singh noting
     in this record about whether or not these two
     cancers are related by metastasis or whether
     they're separate an independent primaries?
          "Answer:  Well, his impression is that
     they are independent primaries.  There are two
     primaries here."
          Now, you probably remembered that
BROWN VOL11
1211 testimony even without my reading it to you.
     But it is such an important part of what we're
     dealing with today that I wanted to reinforce
     that these are not forensic doctors.  Dr. Singh
     and Dr. Patel are doing these things to take
     care of Mr. Brown in 1993.  They have no idea
     that you will be sitting in those chairs today
     unlike the witnesses who were called for the
     tobacco companies to suggest to you that the
     probabilities can't be determined on the
     relationship between cigarette smoking and
     cancer
          I'm going to save some time, the rest of
     my time.  It's about lunchtime and I know you
     all are probably hungry and I've talked long
     enough.
          At the end of the day, I'm going to ask
     you not to leave Jimmie Lee Brown out of the
     class.  I'm going to tell you that she's a
     member of the class and that she's entitled to
     participate just like everyone else.  And that
     both her husband's life and her husband's death
     met all of the criteria.  That concludes what I
     wanted to say before lunch


                 REBUTTAL ARGUMENT
          MR. GERSON:  May it please the court --
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. GERSON:  -- and all those who still
     have enough patience left to continue
     listening.  The good news is that this will be
     the last time that you'll be addressed by the
BROWN VOL12
1281 lawyers in this phase of the trial.
          So let me talk first about what's really
     in the big picture.  And then I'll address the
     specific points that were made by the
     defendants' lawyers.
          The big picture, the burden of proof is
     whether or not it's more likely than not that
     Roger Brown was addicted to Reynolds cigarettes
     containing nicotine and whether that addiction
     resulted in his death.
          Just more likely than not.  Another way to
     put it is 51 percent.  I don't know if any of
     you saw the basketball game last night.  I was
     busy reading Dr. Patel's testimony.  But I
     turned it on at the end and the final score was
     the Lakers 105 and the Nuggets 103.  Well,
     that's the burden of proof.  That's all we
     need.
          Another way that --
          THE COURT:  Are you saying you need Kobe
     Bryant?  Is that what you're saying?
          MR. GERSON:  What?
          THE COURT:  Are you saying you need Kobe
     Bryant?
          MR. GERSON:  No, I'm saying we have 105.
BROWN VOL12
1282 COURT:  Oh, oh, okay.
          MR. GERSON:  Another way that some lawyers
     have put it is if you took the scales of
     justice and they were perfectly balanced at the
     beginning of the trial, and if after hearing
     all of the evidence you put a feather on one
     side so that the scales tipped ever so slightly
     in favor of one side or the other, that would
     be the burden of proof.
          Now, I think it's clear that there has
     been a strategy here on the part of Reynolds to
     simply raise doubt about things which most
     likely are true.  And let me just begin where
     Mr. Kaczynski began.  What was the doubt that
     he tried to raise?  He said, well, you know, no
     one knew Roger Brown in this courtroom in the
     '40s so we don't know what kind of cigarettes
     he was smoking in the '40s and maybe they
     weren't Reynolds cigarettes.
          Now, that just asks you to speculate in
     the first place.  But what's the question?  Was
     he addicted to Reynolds cigarettes containing
     nicotine and if so was such addiction a legal
     cause of his death?
          It doesn't matter if he was also addicted
BROWN VOL12
1283 to other cigarettes made by other
     manufacturers.  It only matters whether he was
     addicted to Reynolds cigarettes containing
     nicotine and if so whether such addiction was a
     legal cause of his death.
          And that is just one example of how they
     have tried to raise doubt.
          What is the most likely inference that you
     can draw from this evidence?  That would be
     that he was smoking Camels because what we do
     know about Mr. Brown is that he was brand
     loyal.  Over a smoking career that is known
     exceeding 40 years, he only smoked three
     brands.  So if you had to make a judgment one
     way or the other, wouldn't it be more likely
     than not that he was smoking Camels back in the
     '40s?  And as you've seen from looking at the
     verdict form, it doesn't really matter anyway.
     It's just an attempt to raise doubt.
          Now, I don't want to go into all of the
     specific evidence any more than I have to.  I
     will in a few instances here.  But summing up
     what Mr. Kaczynski had to say, essentially what
     he did was attack Mr. Brown because Mr. Brown
     did not try to quit.  The question in Phase I
BROWN VOL12
1284 is not whether or not Mr. Brown was at fault
     for not trying harder to quit.  That question
     will come up in Phase II.  And we will address
     it in Phase II.
          But Mr. Kaczynski has argued that because
     he didn't try harder to quit, that that must
     mean that he wasn't addicted in the first
     place.  Perhaps you understand that logic but
     it just doesn't make any sense to me to think
     that because somebody didn't quit or try to
     quit that they weren't addicted in the first
     place.  I think those are just two separate
     ideas and the idea of whether or not he
     deserves some of the blame for what happened to
     him in this case is what we're going to do in
     Phase II tomorrow and is not a reason to decide
     that he wasn't addicted here.
          Now, he goes through -- Mr. Kaczynski goes
     through all of these so-called factors, and
     I've got the list here somewhere I think.  If I
     didn't lose it.  Well, I don't know what I did
     with it.  It was the seven factors.
          Well, let me just comment on them.  Some
     of those factors -- two of the seven Dr. Tucker
     conceded.  Some of the others just obviously
BROWN VOL12
1285 had no relevance to a cigarette smoking kind of
     addiction.  Would somebody go to extraordinary
     lengths in order to obtain the substance, that
     was what -- oh, here we go.  Thank you.  Let me
     just put this here.  And then I'll talk about
     this.  Okay.
          A maladaptive pattern of substance abuse,
     the clinically significant impairment, three or
     more of the same in any 12 month period.  Well,
     we certainly got the 12 months covered, don't
     we.
          No. 1, he concedes so I won't talk about
     it.
          No. 2, withdrawal.  There was withdrawal
     every night when he stopped smoking while he
     slept and then he ramped up his smoking again
     the next day.  That's the only way that you
     could apply this to a cigarette smoker.
          No. 3, substance is taken in larger
     amounts over a longer period of time than was
     intended.
          That is not in there because of cigarette
     smoking.  That's in there for people who abuse
     pain pills.  And that's why I wrote pain pills
     in there.  People who are taking medications
BROWN VOL12
1286 that they're given for prescribed limited use
     and they abuse it by overusing them and as they
     become more addicted, that escalates and that's
     what that's talking about.  And by saying Roger
     Brown didn't meet that criteria doesn't
     disqualify him from the addiction definition
     that's given in the DSM.
          The same is true for No. 5, a great deal
     of time is spent trying to obtain a substance.
     That's not applicable because it doesn't take
     any time to obtain cigarettes.  What's meant by
     that is somebody who's a heroin or cocaine
     addict who spends a lot of their time trying to
     make connections with people who can supply
     them with the drug.  And it's just a distortion
     of the intent of the manual itself to say, we,
     for the cigarette smoker there was no evidence
     that he spent a lot of time trying to obtain it
     because anybody can obtain it.
          The same thing, activities are given up or
     reduced because of substance abuse.  Well,
     there's no evidence in the case that Roger
     Brown did anything different in his activities
     because of his addiction to nicotine.  But why
     would there be based upon his life and based
BROWN VOL12
1287 upon the general freedom that there is in this
     country to smoke, no matter what the
     circumstances are.  I don't know about you, but
     every day when I go to lunch, I find death row
     right down there in front of the building with
     all those people--
          MR. UPSHAW:  Objection, your honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GERSON:  I find many people lined up
     alongside the outside of the courthouse smoking
     cigarettes there because they are not allowed
     to smoke in the building.  So it doesn't
     require that.
          Now, there is no magic definition for
     addiction.  The judge will not tell you in the
     instructions that you have to accept or apply
     the DSM, the Fagerstrom Test, the definitions
     given by Dr. Benowitz or anyone else.  It's
     simply up to your collective judgment and
     common sense.
          And, yes, we believe that there are
     certain things in the DSM that are relevant,
     and things that you should think about when you
     evaluate this.  There are things in the
     Fagerstrom Test.  There are things in
BROWN VOL12
1288 Dr. Benowitz's testimony and Dr. Cummings'
     testimony.  And all of that together adds up to
     only one conclusion.  It's more likely than not
     that Roger Brown was addicted to cigarettes.
     The first thing he did in the morning was smoke
     a cigarette.  He started smoking when he was a
     young teenager, maybe as young as 12.
          The length of time he smoked was also
     relevant according to Benowitz, and that was 40
     to 50 years.  He smoked a consistent level.  He
     had his daily dose of a pack or a pack
     and-a-half over the course of a day.
          That's what it means.  Does it really mean
     that he had a mental illness?  Is everybody who
     smokes cigarettes mentally ill?  Is that what
     we're required to find?  That's what they would
     like you to see this as being, as a case where
     you have -- where addicted people are so
     narrowly defined that they have to be people
     who have a mental illness.
          Now, the DSM-IV says 80 to 90 percent of
     daily cigarette smokers are addicted.
     Dr. Tucker says -- oh, well, he thinks that's
     wrong.  And that's just one example of the
     dangers of dealing with these forensic
BROWN VOL12
1289 witnesses.  Because what helps their case that
     they're advocating for is right, and what
     doesn't help their case they just say, well, I
     disagree with that part of it.  And the author
     of that disagrees, too.  And the real number is
     a lower number.  Even though the very source
     that he's referring to, the book that he pins
     all of his opinions on, says 80 to 90 percent
     are addicted.
          Now, if that's so, even if the percentage
     is lower, why is Roger Brown different?  What
     was there about his life that makes him any
     different from any other cigarette smoker who
     did all of the things that he did smoking
     cigarettes literally down to his dying day?
          Now, they make a crude attempt at
     epidemiology of their own by saying, well,
     according to Dr. Bertino the esophageal cancer
     is up and smoking is down; therefore, they're
     not related.  They say, well, there was four
     times as much nicotine in cigarettes in the
     '40s as there is today; therefore, he wasn't
     addicted because he smoked a level amount.
          This is not scientific.  The science --
     the science is here.  I mean, our government
BROWN VOL12
1290 spent millions of your dollars and mine to
     develop the science about these diseases and to
     put it in peer-reviewed official reports of the
     government and that's what's in evidence.  Not
     these offhand kind of things that they thought
     up or made up on the airplane riding here to
     come to testify.
          What does Mr. Upshaw say at the end of the
     day, his sort of final argument, is the best
     person to look back and to give you an opinion
     about whether cigarette smoking is the cause of
     this man's cancers was Dr. Nichols.  And what
     did Dr. Nichols say in the deposition that I
     read to you that was given on April the 29th of
     this year?
          "Question:  Wouldn't you agree based upon
     the limited information that's available to you
     that the most likely cause of Roger Brown's
     lung cancer was cigarette smoking?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  Now, three weeks ago based
     upon all of the data that you've seen, all of
     your experience as a physician, and the limited
     information that's available in this case is
     you wouldn't agree with me that the most likely
BROWN VOL12
1291 cause of Mr. Brown's esophageal cancer was
     cigarette smoking?
          "Answer:  Of what we know with our limited
     amount of knowledge, yes."
          Now, in a perfect world we would have a
     videotape of everything.  Every criminal trial
     would require no judgment or decision-making by
     a jury, because in a perfect world we'd have
     everything that happened on videotape with
     picture and sound.  And we wouldn't have to put
     the responsibility on the shoulders of jurors
     to make important and difficult decisions.
          The gatekeeper for whether or not there is
     enough evidence for the jury to make a decision
     in this case is the court.  Not me, not them,
     but the court.  You will be given this case to
     decide.  That does not mean that the court is
     telling you that it has one feeling one way or
     the other about how you should decide it.  It
     only means that the court is the gatekeeper.
     And that you will be given the decision to make
     based upon the evidence, is it more likely that
     we're right than that we're wrong about what
     happened?
          Just a couple other technical little
BROWN VOL12
1292 points.  Dr. Bertino says, it's less than a
     1 percent chance of esophageal cancer being
     synchronous, existing as a second primary, with
     an independent lung cancer.  Did he have any
     data to back it up?  No, he didn't.  But you
     know who did?  Dr. Nichols did.  Dr. Nichols
     had a study that I questioned him about.  You
     remember this yesterday.  From 1979 to 1992
     1,294 patients with esophageal squamous cell
     cancer and 3.2 percent had associated primary
     lung carcinoma.
          Now 3.2 percent is still a fairly low
     incidence, but you know, it happens.  And
     according to the doctors who were involved in
     the care in this case, that's what did happen
     in this case.
          And what it says about Dr. Bertino is that
     he's willing to just make up a number off the
     top of his head to support the conclusion that
     he's here to advocate for.  When we look back,
     the real doctors who were just as subject of
     subpoenas from Reynolds as they were from us,
     the real doctors, Dr. Singh -- Dr. Bass left
     the country as Patel told us yesterday so we
     couldn't get him -- but Dr. Singh,
BROWN VOL12
1293 Dr. Schwartz, all these doctors who were taking
     care of Roger Brown back in 1993, who had no
     idea there would ever be a lawsuit in this
     case, who are not forensic evaluators, who were
     simply doing their job and making the call in
     the way that they saw it.  Every one of those
     medical umpires said it was two primaries.  I
     read a lot of that to you in my first opening.
     And the reason I read those parts was because
     the handwriting is so difficult to interpret.
     But I didn't read to you the typewritten stuff
     or the rather legible handwriting from Dr. Bass
     where he agrees with all of the colleagues and
     says there are two separate diagnoses, lung
     cancer and esophageal cancer
          THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, Mr. Gerson.
          MR. GERSON:  Thank you.
          Now, let me just say a few more words
     about the risk factors.  This has been very
     interesting.
          Mr. Upshaw tells you that, well, there are
     21 possible risk factors but we agree that most
     of them don't really apply.  Well, if they
     don't apply, why did he tell us about them in
     the first place?  What do they have to do with
BROWN VOL12
1294 this case if they are things that don't apply?
          Isn't it stretching your credibility to
     suggest that because Mrs. Brown worked as a
     presser in a dry cleaners that somehow she got
     chemicals on her clothes or her body that she
     brought home, and then somehow transferred
     those chemicals to Mr. Brown and that somehow
     those unidentified chemicals are actually what
     caused the cancers that occurred in this case,
     not the 40 to 50 year history of cigarette
     smoking?
          I suggest that strategy, that argument is
     just one more way of trying to raise doubt and
     challenge and question what reasonable people
     hearing all of this evidence must necessarily
     know in their hearts and minds, that this man
     had cancer caused by his lifetime of cigarette
     smoking and that his lifetime of cigarette
     smoking proved that he was addicted to
     cigarette smoking.
          Now, they've talked about the jury
     instructions, and I agree with everything they
     said about those jury instructions.  Let me
     just point out one thing that was left out.
     And I highlighted it.  This was the instruction
BROWN VOL12
1295 that Mr. Upshaw showed you.  And the last
     sentence is, you should not speculate on any
     matters outside the evidence.
          And by that we mean HPV.  We don't have
     any evidence of HPV.  Chemicals from the dry
     cleaner, we don't have any evidence of that.
     What we have is evidence of cigarette smoking
     for a lifetime, which the government says,
     which the experts say is the usual and most
     common cause, which the doctor in this case
     says is probable cause.
          Finally, one more instruction that I want
     to show you if I can get it on here.  And that
     is all this argument about alcohol.  Liver
     disease is much more complicated than they make
     it sound.  If you would believe them, you'd
     think that all you need to do is find an
     enlarged liver and then you've got an
     alcoholic.  Doctors don't need to do anything
     more than that.  There's no such thing as
     hepatitis or any other disease process that
     could be involved in somebody having an
     enlarged liver.  They weren't limited in what
     experts they could bring us.  And if they had
     one that was actually going to say something
BROWN VOL12
1296 about that liver, really meaning that Roger
     Brown drank one drop more than his family
     testified to or that he told every single
     doctor separately and independently while he
     was in the hospital, they could have done that.
          But if somehow you were willing to agree
     that other risk factors played any role at all
     in this case, you should still answer that
     question yes because the legal cause need not
     be the only cause so long as it acts in
     combination with other causes such as any of
     the things they've listed.  It's still a legal
     cause.
          So, there's more than I could say -- that
     I could say.  There are going to be some
     stipulated facts in the instructions.  Make
     sure you look at those very carefully.  They
     say a lot about what the truth in this case is.
     And at the end of the day, I thank you again
     for your service to this community.  I ask you
     not to exclude Mrs. Brown from this class --
     for you to find that she is a member of this
     class and that she is entitled to the benefits
     of membership in this class.