CLOSING ARGUMENT
MR. SHIELDS: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURY: Good morning.
MR. SHIELDS: This case is about addiction, as our first witness David Burns told you, and is confirmed by the 2010 report of the Surgeon General. Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason smokers continue to smoke, and continuing to smoke is what causes lung cancer and the other fatal diseases.
But it's also about Philip Morris knowingly targeting kids as their new smokers.
Rayfield Brown was just in his mid-teens when he
started to smoke in the early 1950s, buying four loose cigarettes for a nickel from the corner store.
Almost all smokers then and now start to smoke as teenagers and probably for the same reasons; peer pressure, wanting to appear cool, wanting to appear like an adult, rebellion.
But back in the early 1950s, it was a different time and a different culture. America was different. Most men smoked. More and more women smoked. Smoking was everywhere. As Kaiser Thomas told you about Rayfield Brown, all the adult males around them smoked.
Advertising of cigarettes was everywhere. It was like wallpaper. Celebrities, athletes, politicians, even doctors promoted smoking.
Virtually all television programs in prime time were sponsored by tobacco companies, with often the principal characters like Lucille Ball,
Lucille Ball in I Love Lucy promoting a particular brand of cigarette.
By the time Rayfield Brown graduated from high school and joined the Army, he was a regular daily smoker. Like all soldiers at the time, he got free cigarettes in the Army and you could buy
them at a reduced rate.
When he came out of the Army, he continued to smoke. And as he started his career at the Postal Service, he continued to smoke for over two decades. He, like most smokers, was addicted. He struggled to quit for the last ten years, almost ten years of life.
As far as we know from the evidence, he did quit at one or more times, but like most smokers, almost 95 percent, he relapsed and could not stop smoking even after he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
He was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1993, underwent surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, but died just before his 59th birthday in July of 1995, leaving Mary as his widow and two children.
John and I are proud to represent Mary Brown in this action. We thank you for your service as jurors. I know when you reported for jury service a couple of weeks, you were not expecting to be at a trial for two to three weeks.
So we thank you for your service. You've been very attentive juror. There's just a little bit more to do and that is this closing argument. As the judge told you, the closing argument is our
opportunity to give you our last presentation, to tell you what we think the evidence is, how it fits together, what it proves, what it means in connection with the instructions that you got from the Court.
But ultimately, it's not the lawyers that determine what the evidence is. It's you, as jurors, your collective wisdom and collective recollection determines what you believe the evidence has proved.
And I emphasize that particularly here because as I was listening yesterday to Dr. Rosman testify,
I hardly recognized his summary of Rayfield Brown's smoking history, given the testimony that we heard from Mary Brown and from Michael Brown and from Kaiser Thomas.
If you listen to him, you thought Rayfield Brown hardly smoked at all. You'll recall the testimony of the family, which we'll discuss in greater detail, he smoked all the time. He smoked everywhere. He got up in the morning and smoked first thing. He smoked in the car.
He smoked throughout the house until in the mid-'80s when Mary asked him not to smoke in the bedroom and then he smoked in his den. He smoked
all around at whatever he did. And that certainly wasn't the picture you heard yesterday.
But it's your collective recollection of what the evidence is that will determine what you think his smoking history and what you think the other facts in the case are as well.
I thought that one way we could look at the case and give it an overview would be to discuss the issues that remain. I told you at the very beginning, this case, as the Court told you, grows out of a class action of injured Florida smokers called the Engle class action, a case tried to the jury in 1999.
A jury, as the Court told you, that found after listening to extensive evidence, that Philip Morris and the other defendants had engaged in a civil conspiracy to commit fraud, had committed fraud by concealing material information about smoking, that were strictly liable for manufacturing and selling unreasonably dangerous defective products, and were negligent.
Those findings, as the Court told you, will apply in this case that Mr. Brown was a member of the Engle class. And we contend he was a member of the Engle class.
And there are four issues that we're going to have to address in making a decision in this case.
The first issue indicated class membership. Was he a member of the Engle class? And I will tell you again what the jury instruction was about what that requires and what the evidence is for being class membership. It's principally about whether or not he was addicted.
And if you determine he was a member of the Engle class, you are bound, as the Court instructed you, to apply the Engle findings in this case.
The second is a specific causation. Specific causation is a matter of whether or not Philip Morris' misconduct, which we're going to discuss in great detail, was a contributing cause to the injuries suffered here.
The third issue you're going to have to address is comparative fault. Comparative fault is simply whether you're going to allocate responsibility, not only to Philip Morris, but to the plaintiffs that Rayfield Brown through his estate as well and to determine what allocation it will be.
And finally, you will need to determine damages, the amount of damages, both compensatory
and punitive damages.
So let's go through each of those issues starting first with class membership.
Class membership is the fundamental issue in this case. All of the discussion about addiction you heard, all the testimony from the first witness to the last witness about addiction was essentially a question about class membership and the importances, of course, determines whether Mary Brown gets the benefit of the Engle findings that are in this case.
The Court will have that as the first question on the verdict form because your answer to that question determines everything else that you do on the verdict form.
The Court will instruct you as follows as to what the class membership means, and you have that in the instructions that were handed out to you.
It essentially has three components.
First, you must determine whether or not Rayfield Brown was addicted to cigarettes. That's what all the testimony about addiction was. First, whether he was addicted to cigarettes.
Second, you must determine whether cigarette smoking was the cause of his lung cancer, and we
think the evidence of that is just absolutely clear. In fact, the defendant has stipulated that smoking was the medical cause. It doesn't have to be the only cause. It just has to be a cause and a substantial contributing factor.
And the third element is that the smoking must be because of his addiction. And so you -- when you put them together it essentially comes down to a question for you: Was he addicted and did he continue to smoke in part because of that addiction? If you answer those two questions yes, then he is a member of the Engle class.
Let's then talk about the addiction issue.
There is compelling evidence that Rayfield Brown was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
And let me start this by saying one really important consideration you need to keep in mind because it was totally obscured yesterday when you heard Dr. Rosman.
The issue of whether Rayfield Brown was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine is a question of whether he was addicted at a time when it made a difference.
Do you recall the testimony from Dr. Burns at the very beginning, he had to quit a certain number
of years before he got lung cancer for it to make a difference because lung cancer is this multi-stage process.
Do you recall the slides that Dr. Burns had where he described what happened to cigarette smoking on the lungs where it paralyzed the cilia, it allowed the toxic chemicals to get into the membrane, it causes change to the DNA, and it's a result of that multi-stage process over a long period of years, ultimately cancer is manifested.
So you have to quit smoking in advance of when it's ultimately diagnosed. Doesn't do any good to quit smoking five years. It's a little too late for that. All of that was explained to you by Dr. Burns.
So the issue, ladies and gentlemen, is whether he was addicted back when it made a difference, not whether he was addicted as Dr. Rosman tried to talk yesterday in 1993 to 1995. Too late then. He's already got cancer. It's not whether he was addicted in 1988. Too late.
The question of addiction is whether he was addicted back in the '60s and in the '70s, not whether he was addicted in 1987.
All of Dr. Rosman's testimony dealt with the
wrong period of time, and why? Because if you used the smoking history from the earlier periods of time, there was absolutely no question that he was addicted. He manipulated the evidence and the time period so that he could draw the conclusion that he wanted to draw.
Let's talk about addiction, generally. You heard first from Dr. Burns, our very first witness.
If anything, Dr. Burns is Mr. Tobacco. He knows everything about -- has spent his entire career reading, writing, researching on smoking and health.
Starting in 1975, he's been an author, editor, contributor, reviewer of every report from the Surgeon General through the current report.
He's authored and published more than 400 peer-reviewed articles that deal with the subject.
He's written chapters in books. There are two principal textbooks of medicine and he wrote the chapter on nicotine addiction in both of those textbooks. The textbooks that every medical student in the country is required to use in medical school. That's how preeminent an expert he is.
What he told you is significant for every
issue in this case. He said, first of all, addiction is a disease, that's why it's in this Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of diseases. Addiction is a disease. It's not just a matter of choice.
Secondly, cigarettes and cigarette smoking are addictive.
Third, nicotine is the drug in cigarette smoking that is the reason they are addictive.
Next, that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason almost all regular daily smokers continue to smoke. We're not talking about the occasional social smoker, the chipper, as they were called. But for regular daily smokers, the evidence from all the literature is that fully 80 to 90 percent of all regular daily smokers are addicted to nicotine and that's why they continue to smoke.
He also told you how difficult it was to quit, and he showed you the data, the most recent data that indicates precisely how difficult it is to quit.
And that is that around 70 percent of all daily smokers say they want to quit, that over 52 percent try to quit during each year, and that
only 6.2 percent of those who try to quit are successful in six months, and at the end of a full year, only 3 percent are ultimately successful.
The relapse rates are just astronomical because of how incredibly addictive this product is.
He also described to you that almost 90 percent of all smokers start as teenagers, that the teenage brain is more susceptible to addiction, and as a result, teenagers quickly become addicted.
And finally, and most importantly, what he said was it's really easy to determine if someone is addicted. You don't require these complicated formulas and criteria and so forth. You know it when you see it as a clinician.
If they want to quit, try to quit, find it difficult, quit and then relapse, make numerous attempts to quit and don't succeed, then there is no question that they are addicted to nicotine.
Now, all of that is also confirmed by the most recent report of the Surgeon General of the United States that addresses addiction. You will have as one of the documents that Surgeon General's report.
"How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease," Chapter 4 of that report is exclusively dedicated to nicotine
addiction. And it sets out the fundamental knowledge that is known about addiction currently.
And I want to remind you how these reports are generated. They are under law required to provide the consensus of current scientific thought. And in order to do that, they gather together the experts on the subject matter, and they write the report. Then they send it to another group of experts to review it and make comments on it and suggest changes.
And then when they've gone through all of that process, they send it out to peer review for all of the different federal agencies that have any involvement from the public health service, FFA, to the other agencies, for further review and comment.
The process takes several years to develop and ultimately results in publishing a document, which by act of Congress is required to present the consensus of current scientific thought.
And what the document in 2010 said was that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, just as Dr. Burns told you, and this persistent tobacco use causes or contributes to many diseases in this
And it went further and gave you a definition of nicotine addiction. It discussed the various approaches from DSM to Fagerstrom, the Wisconsin program. There are about eight or ten different approaches to determine whether someone is addicted, and they're all laid out in the report and criticized in the report.
And the report says, in fact, the National Cancer Institute gathered together a group of scientists to evaluate whether DSM really was any good at projecting who was and who was not addicted and concluded it was a very unreliable instrument.
And as a result, the 2010 Surgeon General's Report takes a slightly different approach and says here are the core features that need to be looked at, essentially exactly what Dr. Burns told you.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor also told you that cigarettes are designed for addiction, that Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies engineered their products to create and sustain addiction. We're going to talk more about that later.
Finally, you heard from Dr. Sandra Frazier.
She also described and confirmed the fundamental principles of addiction when she advised you that
cigarette and nicotine addiction operates on the brain. And she showed you this diagram. You may recall her saying: In effect, nicotine highjacks that process of the brain that makes the decision about smoking or not smoking.
And she indicated to you that we can now see through the use of PET scans, the latest technology, the effect of nicotine on the brain.
And what this diagram shows is what happened first with one puff and then a few puffs and then a cigarette, and you see the brain being flooded with nicotine as it turns from green to blue.
It causes changes. It causes effects in the brain. And Dr. Frazier told you that the latest evidence is that the changes it caused may be permanent.
So that's the backdrop of addiction that you have. How do you apply that to the evidence on smoking history? Let's go back to what the evidence was. Kaiser Thomas told you that he and Rayfield first started to smoke somewhere between age 13 and 15. They started experimenting by buying four loose cigarettes for a nickel at the corner store.
And ultimately, by the time they were in their
junior year, although Rayfield Brown was a star center on the basketball team, they were buying them by the pack, although it took them maybe three, four days at that point in time to smoke a pack of cigarettes.
And by the time of their senior year, the time period that they'd smoke that had been reduced, so that when they went into the Army, they continued to smoke, got free cigarettes, and could buy them at lower prices.
When he came back from the Army and Mary met him and married him, what she described for you -and I went back and looked through the transcript and looked through the notes because what I heard from Dr. Rosman was so different from what she described. What Mary described was, first, he smoked everywhere.
He smoked first thing in the morning, when he got up. He smoked after he had his coffee. He smoked throughout the house. He smoked when he did his chores around the house. He smoked, to her knowledge, at work. He smoked when they went out. He smoked when he played cards. He smoked when they socialized. She said specifically: He smoked everywhere.
And although, as a nonsmoker, she couldn't say exactly how much that amounted to, what we do know is that she bought cigarettes for him, so we know how much he smoked. She bought a carton a week at Publix, as she described. That's ten packages a week. That's a pack and a half a day that he was smoking.
And in addition to that carton a week she was buying, his friend Kaiser Brown -- or Kaiser Thomas would come down from South Carolina in the '70s and go by the military base and buy cartons of Benson & Hedges for him as well. So he had additional cartons of cigarette he could smoke, and so they described it as smoking all the time.
Michael described it the same way. He described him as smoking all the time. Now, it is true that Jennifer saw it a little differently.
But keep in mind, Jennifer was a small child. Her ability to remember what her daddy smoked and how much I don't think is nearly as good as Mary and Michael, particularly when you see some of the evidence like the picture.
Look at the picture, and there were several of these pictures, a pack of cigarettes in each pocket. In addition, Mary said not only did he
have a pack in each pocket, he would have a third pack rolled up in the sleeves of his shirt.
Now, use your commonsense. People who carry around two or three packs of cigarettes with them at all times so that they don't run out aren't just occasionally smoking. They are smoking all the time, just as Mary described, just as Michael described.
Mary, in the early '80s, perhaps 1984, perhaps
1985,	asked that he not smoke in the bedroom. She was sensitive to smoke, and she requested that he not be -- that he not smoke in the bedroom.
And as Dr. Rosman correctly pointed out, he was considerate. He agreed, and thereafter he smoked in the den away from her and he smoked on the porch, and he smoked outside. That doesn't mean he wasn't addicted because he accommodated the request of his loved one.
Then we begin to have the evidence of his attempts to quit. Kaiser described in his videotaped deposition that you saw that in 1985 he knows that he attempted to quit by switching from cigarettes to cigars as a way of trying to cut down and be able to quit.
He also described what he said two or three
other times where they decided to quit and he thought that Rayfield tried to quit as well in that 1985 time period.
And then according to Kaiser, they quit in 1986. You've heard the defendant throughout this case refer to it as 1987, and they had their experts refer to it as 1987. You're going to have to decide whether you think it's '86 or '87.
But here is what I submit to you:
Kaiser Thomas was absolutely positive about when he quit smoking. It was an important date to him because it corresponded to his anniversary and he proudly proclaimed, "We quit on October 10 th,
1986."
Someone that is that certain about the date, is more likely to be correct than people who say it's '86 or '87 general time period.
The medical record the defendant has from
1987,	nobody has connected up to his quit. We don't know if that has anything to do with the incident in which he went to the hospital having turned blue and needing, as Kaiser explained, a trach. so that he didn't die from his throat closing up on him.
Now, you're going to have to determine what
you believe the history is. But what I think the evidence shows is that he, in fact, did quit smoking, and he quit smoking in that 1986 period when he and his best friend for life made a pact that they were going to quit smoking.
Also, I think the evidence is he relapsed, just as 97 percent of those people who try to quit smoking each year do. They relapse. They go back to smoking despite their attempts to quit smoking.
But he couldn't admit to his wife that he had failed. And although she smelled smoke on him, on his clothes, and although his son found packages of cigarettes in his car, he couldn't admit that he had failed and relapsed and gone back to smoking.
But we know he did. He may have quit several times and relapsed several times. We know he went back to smoking. First, we know it because Michael said, "I was in the Army, stationed in California from 1985 to 1988, and then in 1988 my dad flew to California when I got out. Got in the car with me right out of the airport and drove the three days, 3,000 miles back to Jacksonville with me, and he smoked the entire trip in the car."
We also know that he relapsed and continued to smoke because of Sammy Jones. Mr. Jones didn't
meet him until 1988 when he came down here from Pennsylvania. And after he met Rayfield Brown because they were both in management, they became close friends and did a lot of things together several times a week.
He would go see Rayfield at the Post Office, and they would go out on the back dock and smoke. He would see Rayfield after work at social hours and gatherings for the management employees and they would smoke.
They would bowl together and they would go out and smoke. They would play cards together and they would go out and smoke. They would play golf together, and they smoked all the time as they played golf together.
That doesn't sound much like a chipper, an occasional smoker, a, quote, recreational smoker.
That sounds relapse of an addicted smoker. And that is exactly what Dr. Frazier's diagnosis was.
She told you that diagnosis was essentially a clinical judgment. She walked you through the DSM criteria, but she said as well, there's some core criteria that the 2010 Surgeon General's Report had developed and that's essentially what I'm looking at.
And with those core criteria, she concluded that Rayfield Brown both met the DSM criteria and the core criteria of the 2010 Surgeon General's Report and concluded that he was an addicted smoker.
You're going to have to determine whether she's more credible than Dr. Rosman. She's a professor at the University of Alabama-Birmingham Medical School where she teaches, lectures on nicotine addiction, has run smoking cessation clinics, is the doctor to the doctors in the medical school, is board certified in addiction medicine, is a member of the principal academies dealing with addiction medicine and has written on the subject.
And you contrast that with Dr. Rosman. I submit to you Dr. Rosman may be a qualified psychiatrist, but he knows almost nothing about nicotine addiction.
He spends -- he principally spends his occupation working for the Colorado Correctional Department in which some 1500 a year prisoners flood through to him and he does an evaluation of them. And based on that evaluation and the evaluation of other people, then they are sent off
to particular prisons where they're going to serve their term.
None of them are smokers because they've been in jail and in prison for a long enough time in a smoke-free environment that they cannot smoke and could not possibly continue to be addicted. So he doesn't deal with nicotine addiction. He doesn't treat it. And he never has treated it.
The truth of the matter is, as he admitted, people come to him and have come to him his entire practice for other things; cocaine addiction, heroin, lots of other issues, and they may also smoke, and he may tell them to quit smoking, but that's really all he has ever done, tell people to quit smoking.
He's never published anything in connection with nicotine addiction. He's never lectured on it. He's never taught on it. He's never served on any of these committees like Dr. Burns. He has absolutely no knowledge.
And as you saw when you compare the kinds of things with what was said in the 2010 Surgeon General's Report, he disagreed with most of it.
Just lack of knowledge.
He even looked at the DSM and he would have to
disagree with most of the points from the DSM.
It's a lack of knowledge regarding nicotine addiction.
He is not an expert in the field. He's, instead, a litigation expert hired by Philip Morris starting in 2004 to bring in these cases and render the kinds of opinion that they need. Unlike Dr. Burns, unlike Dr. Proctor that spent years researching and writing before they ever testified in any of these cases.
But, you know, even if you use Dr. Rosman's DSM criteria, surely he met three of the seven. Clearly, he had tolerance. He went from a few cigarettes to a half a pack to a pack and a half, and, ladies and gentlemen, I will show you later there is even a medical record from 1995 shortly before his death after he's long been diagnosed with lung cancer that says he was smoking two packs a day of cigarettes at that time.
That's clearly evidence under the DSM for tolerance. There's every indication that he smoked in order to avoid withdrawal symptoms. That's what smoking first thing in the morning is all about.
During the relevant time periods, that's the evidence of what he did.
He clearly had unsuccessful attempts to quit. They were described by Mr. Brown. They were described, of course, in terms of Kaiser Thomas and Mary and Michael. And he continued to smoke. Despite the knowledge that it caused harm, he continued to smoke and relapse after he had lung cancer.
Dr. Rosman's control argument is nothing more than an attempt to obfuscate what the real issue is, and that is, was he addicted in the '60s, was he addicted in the '70s, when it really made a difference? We think you'll conclude from the evidence that he was.
It comes down to a simple proposition: Do you think that Rayfield Brown smoked for 40 years up to two packs a day, quitting and then going back, quitting and then going back, quitting and then going back, hiding it from his family and from his best friend, and continuing, even after he's diagnosed with lung cancer, just because he's a recreational smoker?
That term invented by Dr. Rosman,
"recreational smoker," you won't find anywhere in the DSM. You won't find it anywhere in the Surgeon General's report because no reliable expert in the
field thinks of smokers as recreational smokers like you might think of someone who used marijuana. It just doesn't apply to smoking.
So clearly he was addicted. The second requirement is also met. Smoking cigarettes, obviously, was the cause of his lung cancer.
Philip Morris doesn't even dispute that.
And there's also no issue here that the brands he smoked were entirely Philip Morris. There is that issue about Mary being confused early on as to what he had smoked. But everybody else, including Mary after she thought about it and thought about the instance in which they were given the multi-filter Philip Morris brand by a Philip Morris representative at a social gathering, and the literature relating to it, it refreshed her recollection as to what cigarettes she was buying.
And then unequivocal testimony. You didn't hear anything from the contrary to that. They can't dispute it, that he smoked Philip Morris and he smoked Benson & Hedges.
We don't know the precise time period for either or both, but we know he smoked both over the course of his career. Both are manufactured by Philip Morris, the defendant in this action.
And finally, the evidence I believe is unequivocal that Mr. Brown continued to smoke because of his addiction. Now, Dr. -- you recall that that is the third element of the charge, that smoking because of addiction was the cause.
The evidence here is that, according to Dr. Burns and all of the other evidence, there is an addiction cycle that makes it incredibly difficult to quit.
And Dr. Burns gave you a couple of papers.
This one is where he showed you the process that smokers go through in deciding to quit and why they fail, from smoking won't hurt me to recognizing that it might, to recognizing that they should quit, and to then actually making a quit attempt.
But the their failures are the result of doubt, denial, and controversy of which we'll show in a little bit is a direct result of the Philip Morris and other defendants' 45-year campaign and conspiracy to deny and conceal the evidence.
And what Dr. Burns then described before going to Figure 18, I believe it is, is an addiction cycle in which there is this circular problem that addicted smokers face from contemplating quitting, to trying to quit, to failing, to then saying they_
can't, and it just goes around in a circle. And that's why only 3 percent of those who try to quit each year succeed during that year.
The question to me on whether he continued to smoke because of addiction is a simple one. Ask yourself this question: Would Rayfield Brown have continued to smoke despite the fact his family didn't want him to, despite the fact that his -- he made a pact with his best friend, despite the fact that he got lung cancer, would he have continued to smoke if he wasn't addicted to nicotine?
Nobody smokes if there isn't nicotine in cigarettes. Nobody. They know that. They try and sell a cigarette without nicotine, nobody will smoke them. That's the only reason anybody smokes, is for the nicotine. If you're not addicted to it, you won't smoke. And that's the simple answer to the question.
All of the argument about choice and addiction is an attempt to obfuscate the real issue, and they know it. They have secretly acknowledged internally in their own documents that they can't defend their argument about free choice if the person was addicted.
One of the documents you will have is a
memorandum between two executives of The Tobacco Institute discussing their argument about free choice and addiction.
And there's another document as well that repeats that, which we'll look at later, which is they simply cannot defend if there is addiction.
All right. Mr. Brown was a member of the Engle class, what does that mean? It means you're bound to apply the Engle findings. What the Engle findings show is that smoking causes lung cancer.
Of course, that's not disputed here, but it was in Engle and the jury found you're bound by it, that it causes lung cancer.
Two, that nicotine is addictive. They say they don't dispute that here, but they don't acknowledge anybody is addicted. The Engle findings was that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive.
Three, that they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, what's called "strict liability." We're going to talk about that a little later.
Four, that they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false or misleading
or failed to disclose a material fact covering the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both, what is called the fraud by concealment count. That's what the jury found.
You will be bound to apply that here.
Next, the jury also found that they entered into an agreement to conceal or omit the information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, what is called the civil conspiracy count.
And finally, that the defendants were negligent.
Let's turn, then, from the class action and apply the Engle findings to specific causation. There's no dispute that smoking caused his death. The question really is the relationship between those findings and Mr. Brown's death.
And to understand that, let's go back through what the evidence shows that they did in connection with those findings. And we start with the beginning of the conspiracy, the beginning of the agreement. It starts in the early 1950s around the time that Rayfield Brown was first starting to smoke.
There was a growing recognition among
scientists from an epidemic of lung cancer that there was a relationship between smoking cigarettes and lung cancer. And Dr. Burns showed you the chart of how the growth of lung cancer parallelled the increase in smoking.
We have gone from a nation in which back when cigarettes weren't smoked so extensively, lung cancer was simply unheard of. It was totally a rare disease. It is now an epidemic in this country and throughout the world. And it's the result of the consumption of cigarettes.
The evidence connecting cigarette smoking with lung cancer first started to appear in the early 1950s when prominent scientists began to do studies and publish those studies. And Dr. Proctor explained those studies to you. Dr. Burns referenced the principal studies as well.
And both concluded that Philip Morris and the tobacco industry knew that cigarettes were a major cause of death and disease by the 1950s. It was a consensus among medical scientists by the mid-1950s and Philip Morris was well aware of that.
You saw the videotaped deposition I took of Dr. Lipowicz, someone they chose to be their representative so that I could examine him and have
that testimony to present to you in court.
And Dr. Lipowicz acknowledged and agreed they were well aware of the medical information that came out in the early '50s. And we know not only that they were aware of it but what they really believed.
For example, we have this document from a visit to the United States from the scientists at the British American Tobacco Company in which they visited Philip Morris and all the other major tobacco companies in order to discuss this issue:
Do you believe that cigarettes, in fact, cause lung cancer?
And with one exception, you have nothing to do with Philip Morris, they all agreed that they believed that cigarettes caused lung cancer.
That's what they internally believe.
This is one of those secret documents that was never disclosed back then because they were telling the world just the reverse. It was only disclosed in the last decade or so when all of these new documents were required to be publically disclosed.
You have other documents that show that as well. One of the examples that we gave you was from Dr. Wakeham who was the principal scientist,
high up in the chain of command at the Philip Morris Company, and he wrote this extensive report in 1961 in which he found that carcinogens, that is cancer-causing substances, are found in virtually every class of compounds in smoke.
And he lists what they are in detail. He sets out this list of all the carcinogens that are in smoke. And he talks about what the statistical evidence is and what the other evidence is that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
There's no question from that memo that they all internally knew and understood that cigarettes caused lung cancer despite what they were saying publically.
And these are only a couple of documents. They're representative samples of what they internally knew but did not disclose.
We turn then from what they internally knew to the fact that they entered into a conspiracy to conceal that information, to hide what they internally knew, to tell the public just the reverse.
And it starts with the fact that the president of the American Tobacco Company called the presidents of all the tobacco companies together
for this meeting at the Plaza Hotel in New York City in 1953.
And we have the documents from that meeting so we know what happened at that meeting. In December of 1953, they got together and at that meeting they decided that they were going to deal with the problem, not as a medical problem. They never asked themselves: "How are we going to protect our customers?"
They never asked themselves: "Do we need to do something medically about our customers regarding lung cancer." What they said is, "Let's get public relations counsel and do a campaign to respond to and disagree with what the medical evidence shows.
So you have the tobacco industry meeting at the Plaza Hotel in which they agreed to hire Hill & Knowlton for that very purpose. And then we have a series of memos that you have in evidence as to what they decided in the meetings the rest of December leading up to January.
And basically what they decided in those meetings is in interviewing the executives and research directors of each of the companies, they acknowledged both the addictive nature of
cigarettes and the fact that they cause cancer, and the impact on them economically of that fact.
As a result of those meetings, they entered into an agreement as to what they were going to do. And as this document and other documents will reveal, the components of the agreement essentially came down to three items.
First, they wanted to create doubt by denying that cigarettes caused lung cancer. They wanted to secondly reassure their customers by telling them that, "We don't know of anything harmful in cigarettes," despite the fact that they internally did, "and if we ever find anything harmful, we'll take it out so you might as well just continue smoking."
That was their theme for the next 45 years. Despite the fact that they knew to the contrary, as shown by all the internal documents. We'll go through them.
And third and finally was a campaign of reinforcement. And this is more subtle. This is the use of all their image advertising. Up to that point in time, they have made affirmative representations ads with doctors and athletes and celebrities that cigarette smoking was good for
you.
And what Hill & Knowlton tells them, "You can't do that anymore. You need to switch to more subtle image advertising that has healthy vigorous people doing active, pleasurable things so that we assuage the anxiety of smoking about smoking and create these images that smoking is, in fact, healthy and not harmful for you."
The problem, of course, is that that public relations story of doubt and reassurance and reinforcement simply wasn't true but was a cynical manipulation.
The first thing they did as part of that campaign of doubt was issue the Frank Statement in January of 1954. And Dr. Proctor discussed the Frank Statement in detail with you.
Despite the fact that they internally knew of all this medical evidence, the Frank Statement simply affirms that there's no proof that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
It asserts that they're going to accept the interests of the public above all other interests. When, in fact, their internal documents showed just the reverse, that the principal concern was how to continue to sell cigarettes.
They wanted to reassure the public of the issue. Let me be clear on this because defense counsel may say something about -- I am not saying that Rayfield Brown saw the Frank Statement.
That's not the point. There are two points.
The first point is the Frank Statement is the beginning of a 45-year conspiracy or agreement.
And one of the issues you're going to have to decide is whether there was a civil conspiracy.
It's the beginning point in which they entered into that agreement.
And the second thing that the Frank Statement shows is the beginning of a campaign of doubt, reassurance and reinforcement which they continued during that entire 45-year period of time.
It doesn't make any difference whether Rayfield Brown saw it. The fact is that all Americans and all smokers were subject to what occurred for the next 45 years. It reassured the public and it changed the discussion.
As part of their campaign they created two front organizations. First, Tobacco Industry Research Committee, TIRC, was created by this document.
It's a front organization in that it purported
to be a research organization that was, quote, going to find out the truth about cigarette smoking. But as Dr. Proctor told you, it was a smoke screen. All it did was distraction science.
It never looked at the real issue. It spent hundreds of millions of dollars, rather than looking at the real issue, looking at all these tangential issues.
Why would you do that? Why would you spend hundreds of million of dollars researching other than the real question? Well, they did it essentially for three reasons.
One, it enabled them to tell the public for the next 45 years that we have spent all this money researching the question of whether cigarettes cause cancer, and we haven't been able to find an answer, therefore there's a doubt. There's an open controversy. Even though they haven't spent any money for it. That's the principal reason they did it.
And they did it secondly because it enabled them to go out and hire some reputable scientists and get them working for them on something else and thus ensure they were less likely to come out and tell the public the truth about cigarette smoking.
And third, it used those scientists and witnesses in litigation and Congress to further their campaign of doubt. And we've got some examples of all of that. We will see them in a moment as we go through.
There is a second front organization they created, the Tobacco Institute. It was a lobby organization created in the 1950s just down the street from the White House. And it funded by Philip Morris, run by Philip Morris, Philip Morris served on its executive committee. It undertook the real responsibility of heading up the campaign for the years that follow.
And they pursued this public relations program as a way of molding the story, of keeping articles from being printed in the newspaper, of giving the impression that there was a serious issue when there was an issue [sic].
And Dr. Goldberg went through the papers of John Hill at Hill & Knowlton to show how successful he was at doing that, at how he was able to kill stories in magazines and newspapers, how he was able to change the story so as to create this continuing campaign of doubt.
All of this leads up to the 1964 Surgeon_
General's Report which should have put an end to everything. It should have put an end to any discussion about whether cigarettes caused cancer because unequivocally, through this panel of experts, said cigarettes cause lung cancer in men.
But rather than decide to change and comply with what the evidence was, Philip Morris decided to continue their campaign. And what they did was they sent out their representative on the day the report came out to dispute what had been said.
And you saw that one of the reports from the CBS Evening News included an interview with one of the Cullmans, one of the directors at the Philip Morris Company, in which he repeated these things about there's nothing harmful and if there's anything ever found in cigarettes, we'll take them out.
And play that?
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. SHIELDS: Thank you, Your Honor.
We were up to the point where I was about to show you how they responded to the Surgeon General's
Report in 1964 and this is one example. It's when they went on the networks and what they said. So let's play the CBS evening news.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: This is a CBS news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General committee.
"In our studio this afternoon, following the Surgeon General's news conference, CBS news correspondent Richard C. Hottelet put some questions to one of the leading spokesmen of the industry, Howard Cullman, president of the Tobacco Merchants Association and a long-time director of the Philip Morris Company. Mr. Cullman, prominent in the New York theater and civil affairs, is a third-generation member of the tobacco family.
"MR. HOTTELET: Mr. Cullman, the conclusions are pretty stark and they're pretty solid. They say, quite flatly, the -- express the judgment that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate, and they have a rate ten that's times as high for smokers in the case of lung cancer and rather higher in other cases.
"MR. CULLMAN: Well, it's awful hard to define
the word 'substantial.' I don't believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. We are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. We eat more carefully. We have cholesterol habits. We have drinking habits of lighter whiskey. We have smoking habits, which incidentally are today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters.
"Now, I was surprised at the beginning of the conference when Dr. Terry is supposed to have said that there's very little evidence, if any, on the effect, if any, of filter cigarettes. So when we have today 60 percent of the business in the filter field compared to 3 percent ten years ago, I think we need a little more research.
I'm convinced that eventually they will find some element, through a filter or through leaf-growing or a special of seed-growing to eliminate the mysterious thing they're looking for.
We want to be the detectives just as much as the Surgeon General, as the AMA. And we will cooperate in every way.
"MR. HOTTELET: Are you saying, then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco, which are removable by filter?
"MR. CULLMAN: Well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar, nicotine. I don't think the industry admits that there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed, but at this point, we do not know."
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. SHIELDS: That public statement, despite the fact that years earlier, the top scientist wrote an internal memo in which he identified all the carcinogens in cigarette smoke and said they were in every part of smoking.
There's also an internal memo from this time in which the two top executives of the company are discussing what to do about the Surgeon General's Report. And their answer is -- we'll bring up the next demonstrative -- that "We must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking."
This campaign that they conducted for the next 45 years wasn't about trying to convince scientists that cigarettes didn't cause cancer. It wasn't
about even trying to convince the general American public. It was directed at smokers. It knew addicted smokers wanted to continue to smoke and that the nicotine made it extraordinary difficult to quit. This campaign is all about providing a way of keeping them smoking so that they could continue to sell cigarettes.
And let me show you another couple of examples of that of videos you have seen, which sort of epitomize what they did for all those years. Let's look at the interviews of the other top executives of the company, starting with Face the Nation and the president of the company in the '70s.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: We are also very concerned about the charges leveled against our product, and we're very anxious to do whatever we can to clear the air in this thing. We happen to be optimistic about the future, and we happen to feel that this is a great industry and that this industry can face the future with confidence because when and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient."
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. SHIELDS: In other words, keep smoking.
Let's go to the Philip.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: We are also -- is it possible that your refusal to accept the evidence may become habit you make cigarettes?
"Is that possible? Of course, that's possible,
Peter. I think I'm a fairly reasonable human being and not -- I wouldn't be in the business if I thought cigarettes were harmful to people. I think it's important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. I think the real dishonesty is telling people things that are not so.
"Are you saying that cigarettes are harmless?
"I don't know that. I don't know that they're harmful or harmless. What I'm saying is someone should find out."
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. SHIELDS: Do you know that whenever they give these interviews on smoking, do you think that happens just by chance? That's part of the image they're trying to create in telling the American people.
Now, at the time the executive vice president
of Philip Morris is quoted as saying, "I think somebody should find out." There are all these internal documents which say the knowledge carcinogens in cigarettes cause cancer and what they're trying to do to deal with it. It's all part of keeping smokers smoking.
Now, let's look next at this video.
(Video clip was played as follows:)
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: None of the things which have been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful.
"But the components themselves can be considered harmful, can they not?
"Anything can be considered harmful. Apple sauce is harmful if you get too much of it.
"I don't think many people are dying from apple sauce.
"They're not eating that much.
"People are smoking less cigarettes.
"Well, let's say the people who eat apple sauce die; the people who eat sugar die; the people who smoke cigarettes die. Does the fact that people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause?"
(Video clip was stopped.)
MR. SHIELDS: I chose those examples because they represent what those things said for all of those decades. Remember, when Dr. Proctor testified, we walked through, in detail, all the topics. We showed you the examples of white papers in which they distributed to doctors and editorialists and medical schools and so forth of stating why that cigarettes cause cancer. We showed you their press releases. We showed you the speeches of the president of the company. We showed you all these things. These just are examples of what was a massive campaign of denial of the cigarette for all those years.
And remember what Dr. Proctor said. They even went so far -- and we saw it on this from the start.
They even went so far as to say to people, "keep smoking," that if we ever find anything harmful in cigarettes, we'll go out of business. We'll quit making cigarettes. At the same time, all their internal documents show they knew exactly what carcinogens were in it, and they knew that it caused cancer.
Ultimately what this is all about is a campaign of doubt. And in a document, Plaintiffs Exhibit 305, they specifically set out their campaign of
doubt in unequivocal terms. And you'll have that document in evidence in which they brag about their brilliant strategy of doubt, of denying that cigarettes were harmful, of creating doubt about the health charge. That's what it was all about. You have numerous other documents that we've shown as well. Not only they denied that there was anything harmful in it; they denied that it was addictive, despite the fact that internally, they recognized that it was addictive.
You will have, as Exhibit 238, an internal document in which they unequivocally recognize that "Nicotine is addictive, and we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms." And they also recognize that it has some unpleasant side effects, like it causes cancer, and definite disease.
There are numerous other documents that show their internal recognition that it was addictive, but they continued to argue with the Attorney General that it wasn't until in 1988 when -- the Surgeon General -- until in 1988 the Surgeon General issued a major report on nicotine addiction and unequivocally concluded that nicotine in cigarettes
was addictive. And they responded by attacking the Surgeon General, by claiming it was all scare tactics, by ridiculing the Surgeon General's conclusions, even though internally they acknowledged that cigarettes were addictive.
Why did they do that? Why did they deny that it was addictive, including the president of Philip Morris as late as 1994, appearing before Congress and testifying under oath that cigarettes were not addictive? They did it because they realized they could not defend their position if they recognized and publicly acknowledged that cigarettes were addictive.
You will have with you Plaintiffs 373, in which you know -- counsel reminds us -- that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as free choice, which is exactly what they tried to do in this case, if the person is addicted. That's why they denied it when they knew internally that it was addictive. It was all about keeping smokers addicted.
Part of it also -- the claims that they made about filters and low-tar cigarettes, you saw that a
moment ago with some of the videos we saw in which there's the inference that low-tars and filters somehow are changing any problems.
The one example that we have specifically in this case is the Multifilter. Rayfield Brown smoked the Philip Morris Multifilter. We showed you the ads for the Multifilter in which it's claimed to be lower in tar and nicotine than 95 percent of the cigarettes out there. The purpose is to imply that it's safer, that it's healthier, and Rayfield Brown, in fact, switched to the Multifilter.
Dr. Burns told you in detail, in fact, the evidence is just the contrary. Filters and low-tar/low-nicotine are no safer than regular cigarettes. In fact, they may be more dangerous.
And they may be more dangerous for one simple proposition; it's called "compensation." An addicted smoker needs a given dose of nicotine. If you poke holes in the filter so that you reduce the level of nicotine in the air that's coming through when you have the sheathing that measures it, it doesn't give the addicted smoker what he needs. So in order to get what he needs, he has to smoke harder; he has to puff deeper; he has to smoke more cigarettes, and in turn, he gets more of the
carcinogens. So, in fact, they not only are not safer; they're more dangerous than regular cigarettes, and that's the state of the knowledge.
And what Dr. Burns told you was if we would have known back in the '60s and the '70s that that was true, we would have told people, "Don't think you should be switching to low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes. They're no safer at all. They're just as bad as unfiltered cigarettes."
But we didn't know it. But Philip Morris did.
We put into evidence documents that are internal, secret documents where they knew that was what had happened with their low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes, it's called "compensation."
But the campaign also included another major component that's important in this case. They've targeted kids. Evidence that we put in is that they knowingly targeted kids. It wasn't just by chance that you had this culture back in the '50s of smoking. It was the result of massive advertising. Cigarette advertising was pervasive. They spent a fortunate on it. They advertised on the radio, television, magazines, newspapers, billboards. Anything you could to do advertise, they did it and more than anybody else. And they did it to
normalize smoking and normalize it primarily because they knew almost all new smokers, some 90 percent, are in the mid teens or late teens. They knew that and they did it in order to be able to get people to smoke to replace old people that were dying and quitting smoking.
There are four major governmental reports that reach that conclusion. And we walked through those with Dr. Goldberg. You're going to have them out with you. You're going to look at them.
The first is the report for Congress by the Federal Trade Commission in 1967, which walks through how much money they spent on cigarette advertising and its impact on youth.
The second is a 1981 report of the Federal Trade Commission in which they do the same thing and they say it hasn't changed. They've continued to spend more money than anybody else on advertising, and they also look at the impact of their advertising by noting that most smokers still don't know how hazardous it is. And if you'll look at the conclusions of the report, you'll see specifically the conclusions of the Federal Trade Commission dealt with the fact that people don't know how hazardous it is, that they don't think it applies to
them, that they have no idea as to fully the fact that almost half of all smokers will die from smoking-related diseases. And they seem to think that if they smoke low-tar and filtered cigarettes, it somehow is safer for them.
And then you next go to the 1994 Surgeon General's Report, which specifically addressed youth smoking. It was preventing tobacco use among young people. And what that report did is walk through all of the evidence that shows that the cigarette companies targeted young people as replacement smokers. Review that report. If all you do is look at the conclusions -- these reports are set up so that they have an executive summary at the very beginning, and it summarizes the major conclusions of each chapter. If all you do is look at that summary and look at those major conclusions, you will see that it supports exactly what we're saying.
And finally, then there's the National Cancer Institute report from 2008, which had some major conclusions. It's perhaps the most important document in connection with our argument because it goes through in great detail exactly what they did.
That report walks through what ads Philip Morris had
on radio, the fact that it advertised on Ham radio, the fact that it advertised in magazines specifically designed for teenagers. It goes through what they were attempting to do with it, the fact that they knew and understood that they were targeting teenagers and that their ads specifically were designed for that purpose.
And it concludes -- and perhaps the most important part -Let's go to the fourth major conclusion.
-- "The total weight of the evidence, from the multiple types of studies conducted by investigators from different disciplines and using data from many countries, demonstrates a causal relationship between tobacco advertising and promotional and increased tobacco use."
In other words, if you'll read the chapter, what it says is that this advertising, and despite all the board-eyed questions that were asked to you about whether you started smoking because of advertising, the evidence from thousands of studies now demonstrates that all of the advertising results in the kids starting to smoke and it results in the people continuing to smoke. That's why they spent $13.5 billion in 2005 on advertising, to keep people
smoking and to get our kids smoking.
It's also important to know how all of this fits together in terms of legal causation. You have Engle findings. You have all the abundant evidence from Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns and others, and you have the instructions from the judge that are on the causation. What does all this prove about causation? Let's look at the strict liability claim. It's the best example of what it proves.
The strict liability claim, you start with the fact that Engle is already determined that the product is unreasonably dangerous and that they suffered. How is it unreasonably dangerous? You had the testimony of Dr. Proctor. You had the testimony of Dr. Burns. It's because it contains all of these cancer-causing substances. It's because it has nicotine at levels that will get people addicted and, thus, keep them smoking. That's what's unreasonably dangerous about it. And you combine that with the fact that fully almost half of all smokers will die prematurely from smoking cigarettes. That's what makes it unreasonably dangerous.
How does that relate to Rayfield Brown? Because he smoked the cigarettes. Smoking the
cigarettes was the cause of his lung cancer. The legal cause is established between their conduct and his death because the connection is he continued smoking cigarettes.
The same is true with the fraudulent concealment claim. What was fraudulently concealed? You know, we walked through all of that in detail.
It wasn't the fact that people out there were claiming cigarettes were harmful. Nobody's denied that that was concealed. What was concealed was that they knew it was true. What was concealed was that filters didn't reduce the risks. What was concealed was the low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes were just as dangerous. What was concealed was that there was really no sign of any controversy at all. All of these things are what was concealed and what kept smokers smoking.
And so the question you have to ask yourself in terms of causation of Rayfield Brown is if the whole culture was different, would he have continued to smoke?
Let's go back to the 1950s, and let's assume in the 1950s when the evidence became unequivocal, the president of Philip Morris says, "We're going to do what's right," and he admits that cigarettes cause
lung cancer, and he admits that cigarettes are addictive. What would have happened is essentially what we have today. It would have avoided delay of decades for restrictions on smoking. It would have avoided delay of decades on keeping kids from getting cigarettes. It would have created a totally different atmosphere so that the likelihood of people smoking would have dropped dramatically, just as is done today. And the chances are that Rayfield Brown would not have continued to smoke and would not have died from lung cancer prematurely.
Let's go then from fault to the third major issue, comparative fault. The Court's instructed you that fault is just not an all-or-nothing proposition; that is, even if the plaintiff or the smoker had some fault, the estate may still recover.
It's what's called "comparative fault." Your job will be to determine whether you think Rayfield Brown had some fault as well and compare that with the fault of the defendant, Philip Morris, and then enter that on the verdict form.
As the Court instructed you, you determine the total amount of damages, and you determine what the fault is. You don't reduce the damages for fault.
That's what the Court will do in connection with the
matter. If there's to be a reduction, the Court will make it. You don't need to make it and you'll see that in the instructions.
Now, of course, there's evidence that allows you to say that Rayfield Brown may have some fault, but there's also evidence that explains his conduct and says that the fault is primarily, if not exclusively, Philip Morris. He started smoking as a kid, just as they targeted him and other kids.
Yes, it's true; his mom said don't smoke and his aunts said don't smoke and his coaches said don't smoke. But it is a total misrepresentation to imply from that that they were telling him not to smoke because they thought it would give him a fatal disease decades later. They were telling him not to smoke because he was a kid, just as his mom said don't drink Coca-Cola. That's what she told him as well. Just as she didn't want him to drink beer.
He wasn't an adult then. And when he became an adult, as Mary told you, he smoked in his mother's house, in front of her and there wasn't any problem. Those instructions as a kid deal with you're a kid, not with knowledge of the dangerous consequences of smoking.
Look at those ads about celebrities, athletes,
doctors, so forth. That was the culture of the time. Don't be misled to think that, oh, everybody knew that cigarettes caused lung cancer and it was understood and consequently nothing was being fraudulently concealed.
You know, there's this interesting kind of approach they take to these cases, and that is all the evidence we've put on about their conduct -wait and see if defense counsel even mentions it, let alone tries to refute it. They didn't offer any evidence whatsoever to refute anything that Dr. Proctor said or Dr. Goldberg said, nothing whatsoever. And they probably won't discuss it, or if they discuss it, it'll only be in passing.
Instead they try and say, well, everybody knew. Well, apparently everybody knew except them because they were the ones that were saying publicly, it's not true; it's a doubt; there's a controversy. If there's any problem, we'll take it out. Continue to smoke. There's no real reason to quit. That's what this case is about. Don't be diverted into thinking because his mom told him at age 14 don't smoke, because the coach said you shouldn't smoke if you're going to be on the basketball team, that that means he knew and understood or that the public knew and
understood how harmful cigarettes were.
In fact, you have the survey in evidence in front of you. You will see it in these reports about how little the public knew and understood in the '50s, '60s, '70s and even going into the '80s.
Look at the Federal Trade Commission report surveys and what they demonstrate about the lack of knowledge.
So what you need to do then is compare what you think his fault was, what's their fault and enter that on the verdict form.
The final thing you need to determine is damages. Now, there are two issues of damages. One is the question of compensatory damages, and one is the question of entitlement to punitive damages.
Now, we have an instruction. You'll have those instructions with you about compensatory damages. I'm not going to go through those in detail, but you have those to read. And what the instructions will tell you is that you're going to decide -- you'll have a verdict form in which you do decide on the damages to be given for mental pain and suffering to Mary Brown, the damages for her loss of her husband's protection and companionship and the damages for her loss of her husband's future
services.
Now, as to the last amount, there's an agreed-upon amount of $123,240. For the first two, you're going to have to fill in the amount. You're going to have to determine what amount of damages you think is fair and appropriate for her pain and suffering as a result of her husband's death.
You're going to have to determine what amount of damages you think is appropriate for the loss of her husband's protection.
And in doing that, let me simply say, remember what she testified to; remember what Jennifer testified to; remember what Michael testified to, about how devastating the loss was, the impact on her, how she stayed with him night and day. Kaiser Thomas came down to relieve her so that she could get away from the hospital. She talked about what it means every day of her life to have lost her husband when he was only 59 years old.
Now, the evidence is he would have lived, under the life chart, another 22, almost 23 years. That's 23 years of his companionship that she's been deprived of. It's 23 years of pain and suffering that she could have avoided had he not suffered from lung cancer.
So you need to then determine the amount of pain and suffering. There are lots of ways to do this. You could say what's a reasonable amount and look at each day during those 23 years and multiply out the reasonable amount to come up with a total figure. You could do it by saying what's a fair annual figure for her current pain and suffering? What's a fair annual figure for the loss of his protection and companionship? Or you could just use your collective wisdom to arrive at some overall figures.
Let me suggest some figures to you. Ultimately it's your decision.
But let me suggest to you that for her mental pain and suffering, it is reasonable and appropriate for over 23 years of loss that she receive no less than $4 million.
For the loss of her husband's protection and companionship, let me suggest to you, it is reasonable and appropriate that she receive no less than $3 million.
You also need to award damages for Jennifer Brown. Now, you may wonder why the verdict form only lists Jennifer and not Michael and that's a matter of age. She was at an age that the law
provides that she can recover as a survivor for her loss, for her amount of pain and suffering and for the loss of her father's companionship, instruction and knowledge. And she described to you the loss in which she has faced, the fact that he wasn't there at crucial periods in her life, that he hasn't been there to provide guidance and discussion with him. And you could tell how close they were. She talked about everything with him. He was incredibly close to her and she has been deprived of that and deprived of it for what would have been almost 23 years of her life.
So you need to award damages to her as well for her mental pain and suffering and for the loss of her father's companionship. And I suggest to you that a reasonable and appropriate figure to Jennifer for her mental pain and suffering as a result of her father's injury and death is no less than $2 million. And that a reasonable figure for the loss of her father's companionship, instruction and guidance is no less than $1 million.
Finally, you're going to have to award damages to the estate itself, but that's the easy part because the damages to the estate amount to things that the parties have agreed to.
First, the value of his past lost wages and earnings, there's an agreement that that figure is $137,750, and that figure is in your instructions that you have so you'll be able to see that.
And there's an agreement that the amount of medical bills and the expenses that are recoverable for his injury are $114,287.41. And -- and that's in the form so that you can see that as well.
So the verdict form and you'll need to look at it and fill out those figures. You have a series of questions to answer on the verdict form, starting with class membership, working through specific causation, working through comparative fault and then ultimately to the issue of damage, just as I've talked with you about in this case.
But the final issue you're going to need to determine, if you determine that they are guilty of fraudulent concealment -- and there's absolutely no question that they are -- and if you determine that they engaged in a civil conspiracy starting with that Plaza meeting in 1953, then you move to the final question, and that is the entitlement of punitive damages.
Punitive damages are based on punishing and deterring them from future conduct. If ever there
was a case that justified the award of punitive damages, this is it. And the Court will instruct you, although you can't use harm to others to determine the amount of damages, in answering the question of entitlement to punitive damages, you can consider the harm to others and consider this: Smoking cigarettes kills almost 440,000 Americans every year, 440,000 Americans. If you add up the number of deaths during the time that they engaged in this conspiracy, it approaches almost 20 million people who died prematurely because they continued to smoke cigarettes.
And you should consider in that as well that they targeted kids as the only source of replacement smokers for the smokers that were dying and quitting, that they designed their cigarettes to make people addicted and to keep them addicted, that they pursued a campaign to lie to people about the real risks and to keep -- keep them smoking. And that most importantly, in order to keep people smoking, they assured smokers that if they found anything harmful, they would take it out so keep smoking, despite the fact that they knew that they were tens of carcinogens in their smoke and that there were all of these hazardous substances in
their smoke and that it would cause cancer. All of that justifies you finding that there's entitlement to punitive damages here.
Let me turn the podium over to Mr. Reilly. I will come back, after he's discussed his, with a few concluding comments. Thank you very much.



MR. SHIELDS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon, everyone.
THE JURY PANEL: Good afternoon.
MR. SHIELDS: One thing certainly is clear and that is that Philip Morris simply does not want to address the fact that from 1953 to at least 2000 it engaged in its elaborate conspiracy to defraud and conceal the information about cigarette smoking and addictive nature of cigarette smoking.
From the beginning of this case right through closing argument they totally ignored the massive evidence of their misconduct. Specifically,
Dr. Proctor told you that Philip Morris knew by the mid 1950s that cigarette smoking was a major cause of death and disease. No evidence to contradict that.
Dr. Proctor told you that they then engaged in an elaborate conspiracy to deny the true effects of cigarette smoking; mainly that it would kill almost
half of regular smokers. No evidence to contradict it. Won't even discuss it in closing argument.
Three: Dr. Proctor told you that despite the fact that they designed their cigarettes to be addictive, they denied that they were addictive until 2000. No evidence to contradict it. Won't even discuss it in closing argument.
And four: Dr. Proctor told you that this elaborate campaign of fraudulent concealment impacted the public so that the public did not know and understand the true risks of smoking.
Not a word from Philip Morris through closing to contradict what Dr. Proctor had to say.
Both Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns also told you that cigarettes were designed for addiction.
Now, tobacco companies want to make you think that cigarettes are just tobacco rolled up in paper. They are not. They are elaborately engineered and designed products, designed to create and sustain an addiction. How are they designed to create and sustain addiction?
Well, first of all, they add all of these chemicals to them to make them inhaleable because the only way you get addicted is if you can inhale it. If you can inhale it and it gets to the lining
of your lungs, it hits your brain 10 to 20 seconds later, binds with the receptors and that's the whole process of addiction.
Not one word from the Defendant denying that. Didn't even discuss it in closing argument.
They're not only designed for addiction by making them inhaleable, they're designed for addiction by adding chemicals to make them more addictive.
Dr. Proctor told you, for example, they add ammonia to their cigarettes so that the nicotine in it is more addictive when it hits your brain. Biologically it has more effect on your brain if there's ammonia in the cigarette that changes the pH of the cigarette.
Not one word to contradict it. Not even discuss it in closing argument.
Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns told you that cigarettes have to be engineered to have the minimum amount of nicotine necessary to addict people, because if you just take cigarette leafs off of tobacco, you have nicotine levels all over the map.
Each brand of cigarette has a specific amount of nicotine that that brand has in it. A multi filter, it has a specific specification for how much
nicotine is supposed to be in it. And you'll have the document that shows you how much they designed and specified the nicotine to be in Philip Morris multi filter.
Why do they do that? Because that's the amount of nicotine necessary to addict smokers and make sure that they continue smoking.
And how do they achieve those levels of nicotine? Well, the first thing they do is they blend tobaccos to make sure that they are getting that precise amount of nicotine in each cigarette for that brand.
But secondly, they add nicotine to it. They add it to the tobacco. They add it to the filler, they add it to the filter so that the product meets the specification of having enough nicotine to cause addiction.
No denying. No evidence. Won't even discuss it in closing argument.
We also offered you abundant evidence about how they targeted children as the next generation of smokers. Remember that whole add, the documentary we saw about Marlboro?
Philip Morris went from being the seventh largest tobacco company to number one. They went
from having unheard of brands to being number one on the strength of Marlboro, and they did that, and you saw their own president and all their people bragging about it on the documentary because of their massive advertising campaign of Marlboro Country, and their jingle and all of the stuff they put together and the massive amount of money they spent.
And what happened? The sales of Marlboro went through the roof. But who was buying all those Marlboros? 15-year olds. 15-year olds, about 70 to 80 percent of them, smoked Marlboros during that time period.
And they knew it. The documents you will have, show that they knew it. And so ten years later when it looked like the number of 15-year olds might be changing, they send out this panic memorandum, which you'll have in evidence as well, about what it's going to do to their sales of cigarettes that they can no longer count on the supply of 15-year olds.
Why do they need 15-year olds? Why do they target children to sell their cigarettes? Because older smokers are dying from lung cancer and related disease and no longer buying cigarettes. Because older smokers, when you get a certain age, you're
more likely to quit are quitting smoking.
They had to replace all of those lost smokers and there is only one source of replacement. And Dr. Goldberg walked you through that. It's teenagers. They know it. They spent millions and billions of dollars focusing on teenagers and that helps explain everything that has happened since early '50s through today.
Not one word denying all of that. No evidence even addressing it. Won't even discuss it in closing argument.
In order to have any evidence from them we had to go take a deposition of their corporate representative. The law allows me to assure that they had someone here I can cross examine, to go take a videotaped deposition, but they get to chose who it is that I'm deposing.
And so it was that I went up and took the videotaped deposition of Dr. Lipowicz, and we played that for you. That was the only reason there was any evidence in this case from Philip Morris at all is because we went up, took the deposition and played it for you so you could see what kinds of things they said and did.
He didn't deny any of this. He admitted they
knew all of this back in the '50s. What he did, however, is refuse to admit that they were negligent or their products were defective or that they engaged in this elaborate conspiracy despite the fact -MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor. This is the subject of pretrial argument.
THE COURT: I don't think it's crossed the line yet. Overruled.
MR. SHIELDS: -- despite the fact that the evidence is just overwhelming of what they did.
And you will also, according to the Court's instructions, have Engle findings dealing with that issue if you find -MR. REILLY: Same objection.
MR. SHIELDS: -- that Mr. Brown was a member of the class. So it's clear that -- if anything is clear, that Philip Morris doesn't want this case to be about them at all. They want to make it totally about Rayfield Brown.
Well, we think it's about Rayfield Brown but we also think it's about Philip Morris. It's about Rayfield's responsibility, but it's also about Philip Morris's responsibility and their refusal to acknowledge and accept what they have done in this
elaborate conspiracy.
So let's talk about Mr. Brown. And it occurred to me in listening to Mr. Reilly in closing that what I was hearing about the evidence didn't square at all with my recollection of what the evidence was.
Two things were happening.
One, he was cherry-picking certain testimony and implying that the witness said something entirely different than he said. Then he pulled, for example, questions from Dr. Burns. Well, you heard Dr. Burns.
Dr. Burns, the implication of what he was saying was nothing like what they were cherry-picking him to say. And the same was done with a couple of other examples. They cherry-picked some little portion out to imply a greater meaning, but I'm going to have to rely on you. You heard the testimony. You heard the witnesses. You know what they had to say. Your collective wisdom and your collective memory will allow you to determine what the real evidence was.
Secondly, in addition to cherry-picking, they just ignore him. Vast amount of evidence. His entire argument about control and ability to smoke
and controlled smoking is built on the recollections of an 11-year old. Jennifer in 1983 was 11 and she thought they are father quit smoking in 1983. I
think she was wrong. All the evidence is to the contrary. But you're going to have to determine how you weigh the evidence.
But what Mr. Reilly did was ignore all the other evidence. He ignored the fact that Mary said he smoked all the time, he smoked first thing when he got up in the morning, he smoked when he had a cup of coffee, he smoked when he came home in the evening, he smoked when he engaged in activities outside, he smoked when he played cards.
It ignores the testimony of Kaiser Thomas about how they smoked together.
It ignores the testimony of Michael about he seemed to smoke everywhere.
And it ignores specifically perhaps the best evidence of how much he was smoking, the pack in this pocket, a pack in this pocket, a pack rolled up in the sleeve.
And an occasional smoker doesn't carry around three packs of cigarettes to make sure they always have enough cigarettes.
But Mr. Reilly built his entire argument on
what happens after he quit smoking. Whether it was 1983 or 1986 or 1987, the evidence is that at some point he quit smoking and then relapsed. And so what he does is he says, well, let's look after that period and see how many cigarettes we know he smoked and, therefore, we'll say he wasn't addicted.
The issue for you, as I told you when I talked this morning, the issue is whether he was addicted when it made a difference -- back in the '60s and back in the '70s -- and whether he continued to smoke in those times because he was addicted. Not the only reason he smoked but a reason that he continued to smoke during that period of time.
That's the issue. Not after he has quit.
Think about the reasoning or logic here. We know from all the experts that anyone who's addicted can quit, whether it's cocaine, heroin, alcohol, cigarettes. Fundamental principle of addiction medicine is it is possible to quit.
Now, that means that people do quit. Using Mr. Reilly's reasoning then you'd look at how much they did after they quit, in a sense it wasn't a lot. You would then say, well, they weren't addicted to begin with.
The fact that they were able to quit doesn't
mean they weren't addicted. Dr. Burns told you that. Dr. Frazier told you that. Even Dr. Rosman told you that. The question is whether he was addicted before then, not whether he was addicted after.
Dr. Frazier said from her standpoint you're always addicted, you're just in remission. And Mr. Reilly quoted to you from her saying, you're always addicted. He forgot to tell you that she went on to say, what I say is that they are, quote, in remission.
Well, in fact, if you look at the DSM that's exactly the position, as Dr. Frazier told you, that is set out in DSM. If you're able to quit, doesn't mean you weren't addicted beforehand, doesn't mean you're still categorized as addicted, it means that you're in remission.
The other interesting thing Mr. Reilly did was he assumed that the only time that Mr. Brown smoked after he relapsed was when he was with Sam Jones.
And Sam Jones described how they always smoked when they got together. They come, they go out on the back dock and smoke. They would go out to a social and smoke. They'd play golf and smoke. They'd play cards and smoke. Even when Sam Jones came over to
the Brown house there would have been an excuse to leave and smoke.
And Mr. Reilly wants you to believe that the only time he smoked was on those occasions. You got some common sense. Do you think if somebody has relapsed that that's the only time they're smoking?
Or do you draw the conclusion that if whenever somebody sees them they are smoking? They're also probably smoking in between the times that they see them and that you just can't count up the cigarettes from a particular time the people are together, but it's more reasonable to say he's gone back to smoking.
Well, does it mean that he wasn't addicted, that he wasn't still smoking at home or around his family?
Dr. Burns specifically addressed that and their cherry-picked testimony just ignored it. What Dr. Burns told you was that the world has changed.
We now have limitations on where we can smoke and when we can smoke. You can't smoke in restaurants anymore. Most buildings are smoke-free. All of that has changed; how much and where and when people can smoke.
So does the fact that an addicted smoker can't
smoke at work mean he's not addicted? Of course not. If you use that reason nobody's addicted anymore. That's absolutely untrue.
Does the fact that someone can't smoke in a restaurant or a theater or all the things that are prohibited now mean he's not addicted? Well, according to Mr. Reilly it does. Well, that means nobody's addicted these days. Well, of course that's not true.
The estimates are still that 80 to 90 percent of smokers are addicted. What that means, and Dr. Burns specifically told you this, it means that smokers have had to learn to adjust their intake of the necessary levels of nicotine to deal with the fact that there are now these restrictions on when and where you can smoke. It does not mean they were not addicted. And that is the exact answer to Mr. Reilly's argument.
What Mr. Brown could and did do after 1986 or
1987	or even later doesn't mean he wasn't addicted beforehand. It means that he adjusted, as smokers do today, how he got his intake of nicotine.
Now, you're going to have to decide on the question of addiction, do you believe the testimony of Dr. Burns, do you believe the testimony of
Dr. Frazier or do you believe the testimony of Dr. Rossman.
Dr. Rossman who has never found that anyone was addicted, who has testified in every other case that people were just recreational smokers. They may have smoked for 45 years, four packs a day, but according to Dr. Rossman they were just recreational smokers doing it because they enjoyed it or for 40 years, two packs a day, but they were just recreational smokers who enjoyed it.
And it is true that Mr. Reilly asked Dr. Frazier and Dr. Burns whether it was possible to smoke a couple packs of day and not be addicted and they said it's possible.
And then they went on, and Mr. Reilly didn't quote you from this, and said, but I've never seen anyone who fit that description. And they made a big point with Dr. Frazier about she had never seen a regular daily smoker who smoked that amount that was not addicted. And that's true. That's because at those levels and over that time period, the reason someone is continuing to smoke is because of addiction.
Now, let's turn next to the question of legal cause and the relationship between their misconduct
and Mr. Brown's injury.
I talked with you earlier about strict liability, the fact that the crop was unreasonably dangerous because it contains carcinogens and nicotine. Without carcinogens Mr. Brown wouldn't have got lung cancer. Without the nicotine he wouldn't have been addicted. If it wasn't unreasonably dangerous, he would not have died of lung cancer. That is what legal cause is.
The question of legal cause is the question of the relationship between smoking and his injury. One of the charges you have on page 11, look specifically at that page when you get your instructions, deals with what legal cause is and tells you what it means in this case.
It not only tells you it's the relationship between smoking cigarettes and whether he got lung cancer, but it also goes on to say there can be more than one cause. It doesn't have to be the sole cause. It merely has to be a cause. Two or more things may come together, and as long as, according to the instruction, smoking Philip Morris cigarettes operated in combination with acts of the other, it can still be a cause. It merely has to be a substantial contributing cause.
So look specifically at that instruction when you are considering all of those questions regarding legal cause.
Let's turn next to the question of knowledge.
Mr. Reilly spent a good deal of time talking about knowledge and what Mr. Brown knew during that period.
And I'll say this, ladies and gentlemen: No one has said that Mr. Brown never heard that cigarettes might cause cancer. Of course he was a bright, educated man. He read the newspaper. He listened to the television, he had magazines.
The point is not that he didn't hear it. There would have been no need for this elaborate conspiracy or fraud if people weren't out there saying it. It's rather incredulous to say, well, people knew it because it was being said. Well, of course, it was being said. That's the reason you engaged in this big campaign denying it, because it was being said. If nobody was saying it, you wouldn't have to be denying it, you would not have had to engage in this massive campaign.
So what you need to think about is not just all the material from them denying it, but what really was in the press and in newspaper, on television
about it.
They put in a lot of argument, newspaper articles, the New York Times and so forth, the Jacksonville paper as well. What they didn't put in is what else was in the newspaper, what ads were in that newspaper and what other articles were in there defining it.
So we put those in. You will also have a series of articles from us from the same papers that show the denials of the cigarette companies and those papers, that show the ads in those papers, that show what Dr. Goldberg told you is the truth; that the whole point of it was to say there were two sides to it, that there was a controversy and create doubt so that people could continue to smoke.
And I want to give you an example of that. You saw from the beginning of this Life magazine article, Mr. Reilly used it on several occasions, even referred to it in closing argument. It's an interesting cover on it. This is a typical example of what was happening.
Here's the article he's referring to. And yes, it starts off by talking about the latest study that came out showing that when you paint tar on the back of mice it causes cancer. But as we have told you,
then what it says is that the American Tobacco Company denies it.
And it sets out the position of the American Tobacco Company and the tobacco industry, that this doesn't prove anything, and that it may be particular to mice, that it doesn't apply to people, and nobody should quit smoking because they think it causes cancer. You'll have that article.
And when you look at these articles that they have provided to you, look for where the article it also denies it, because that was the whole point. Create doubt by saying there was a controversy even when you knew there wasn't a controversy.
And when you look at the other articles, see all of the other articles coming out at the same time in which the tobacco -- the position of the tobacco industry was being set out.
So when you say, what is it that Mr. Brown knew, what he knew was there was a controversy. Some said it caused it. Tobacco industry and others said it didn't cause it. They claimed there was an open controversy, and as a result people continued to smoke.
Take a good example of that, and an example of how they have cherry-picked what evidence they put
in.
You remember that CBS news extra that Mr. Reilly showed you in closing. It starts with one point and then there's a little niching to it and it ends with another. You saw this earlier in the case. They cut out what was in between which gives a totally different impression of what it is that Harry Reasoner was saying.
And so once again, I want to play for you what Harry Reasoner actually said as opposed to what Mr. Reilly implied that he's saying.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
HARRY REASONER: There's no question but what smoking has meant a great deal to a great many people. An old smoker never forgets how he started. And through the lifetimes of a lot of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. The familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. It's like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. In a case like that you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told and maybe even then you give him a
chance to reform.
In this kind of a country it comes down to you whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Good night.
(Video stopped.)
MR. SHIELDS: Did Rayfield Brown continue to smoke because he enjoyed smoking? Of course he did. That's what addiction is. Enjoyment is what's happening in your brain and what is happening in your brain is what addiction is all about.
Every time they talk about, oh, they enjoyed smoking, that is just proof of how addictive that is to the brain and what impact it is having on the brain.
Did he give his old friend every benefit of the doubt? Well, like most smokers in his generation he did and like most smokers in his generation he didn't start quitting until the late '70s or '80s.
And by those standards Mr. Brown, I would suggest to you, he quit relatively early, and you want to consider that when you're comparing fault and
responsibility.
We certainly agree this is about the responsibility. It's about the decision making of both sides. And I will candidly say to you that we accept Mr. Brown can have some responsibility for not quitting sooner. We certainly accept that he can have some responsibility for what attempts he made. But that's not the end of it.
The question also is what responsibility do they have, whether they accept any responsibility and whether you as the jury are going to make them accept responsibility by this verdict.
You'll have to decide how you allocate the fault, and that's your decision and your decision alone.
But in making that decision, also ask yourself the question Mr. Reilly keeps wanting to ask about whose decision was it.
Whose decision was it when Mr. Cullman went to be on national television in Face The Nation and denied that there was anything harmful in cigarettes while having in his file all of these memorandums about cigarettes causing lung cancer and they contain all these carcinogens and other toxic substances?
Whose decision was it to go on national television and lie about it?
Whose decision was it when the vice president of Philip Morris, Mr. Bowling, cigarette in hand, goes on television for an interview and says, there's nothing harmful in it, if we ever find anything harmful in it we'll take it out, and the real damage here is all misstatements about the harm in cigarettes?
Who looked in the mirror that morning and made a decision to go lie about it?
It was the executive vice president of Philip Morris.
Who made the decision to say, Oh, it's like applesauce; eat enough of it, it will kill you, but it's not harmful?
It was the very author of the memorandum we showed you that said it caused cancer and it contained all these carcinogens. Dr. Wakeham, he wrote that article almost 20 years earlier. Secret internal document.
Whose decision was it to go on television and just lie about it?
So it's not just a question of what Mr. Brown decided to do. It's a question about what they
decided to do. It's a question about whether you're going to hold them accountable for what they decided to do.
And the way you do that is to return a verdict in favor of Mary Brown. And the way you do that is to answer that question on punitive damages that says that there's an entitlement to punitive damages and you're going to punish them and deter them from continuing the conduct.
And you need to ask yourselves on continuing conduct, was this just something that happened decades ago. You saw Dr. Lipowicz' testimony. Was there any change in his attitude? Think about that when you reach question 8.
We suggest when you consider all the evidence and you put together all of the real testimony instead of cherry-picking and misstate it, then your verdict should be obvious, you should return a verdict in favor of the Plaintiff.
Thank you.