                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  May it please the court.
     Mrs. Brown.  Counsel.
          Good afternoon.
          I'm going to start off by doing something
     very unusual for this trial.  I'm going to
     start off by agreeing with something Mr. Gerson
     said.  And that is, I want to take this
     opportunity as well to thank you for your
     service on this jury.
          I'm especially taking this opportunity
     because I'm kind of hoping that this is the
     last time I speak to you from this podium.
BROWN VOL12
1218 Because if you check no on the verdict form,
     then Phase I is over; the case is over.  If you
     were to check yes, we'll be back for Phase II
     for the end of this week and as the judge told
     you, possibly into the beginning of next.
          But not just for showing up.  We've
     remarked amongst ourselves about how attentive
     you've been, both to the live witnesses, the
     videos, everything.  My client and Mrs. Brown
     could ask for no more.  So I take this
     opportunity to express my appreciation and that
     of my client.
          I'm going to speak to you on the issue of
     addiction and Mr. Upshaw will speak to you on
     the medical issues in this case.
          And the first issue is actually kind of
     upfront and kind of -- could be case
     dispositive, and that's this:  The judge is
     going to instruct you that the plaintiffs must
     prove by the greater weight of the evidence
     that Mr. Brown's injuries were caused by his
     addiction to Reynolds cigarettes which
     contained nicotine.
          Now, you've heard over and over again in
     this trial, both in argument and from the
BROWN VOL12
1219 witness, that Mr. Brown began smoking at age of
     12.  Now, I've called that family folklore.
     Witnesses have treated it as if it's family
     history.
          MR. GERSON:  Objection, Your Honor, there
     is a stipulation I believe that covers this.
          THE COURT:  Folks, step into the jury
     room, please.
          [#DELETED PROCEEDINGS#]
          THE COURT:  Thank you.  Be seated.
          Thank you for championing your cause, sir.
     Thank you for that.  You may continue with your
     argument.
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. KACZYNSKI:  Good afternoon again, and
     take two.
          Ladies and gentlemen, as I said before, we
     all heard that what I call the family folklore,
     what they treat as family history, that
     Mr. Brown began smoking at age 12.  No one in
     this trial testified about the circumstances of
     his smoking at age 12.  Or quite frankly from
BROWN VOL12
1225 age 12 to 21 when he met Mrs. Brown.  We don't
     know what he smoked for those nine years.  We
     don't know why he smoked.  We don't know what
     manufacturer's brand he smoked for those nine
     years.  There's no evidence in this record at
     all.
          You may recall the testimony of a
     Dr. Benowitz.  We heard a lot about him earlier
     from Mr. Gerson.  Among the things you saw up
     on the screen, this is in the transcript at
     Page 55, Dr. Benowitz was asked and he told --
     he was asked, and then the final stages,
     nicotine addiction.  And when does that occur?
          And the answer was, well, that's when
     they're smoking daily.  And especially if
     they're smoking daily in the absence of friends
     or social context, where they're really smoking
     in the context for the effects of nicotine.
          So let's connect the dots here.  By the
     time he met Mrs. Brown, Mr. Brown was smoking
     daily.  She told us that.  By the time he met
     Mrs. Brown, he'd been smoking for nine years.
     We don't know what he was smoking for those
     nine years.
          So I would argue to you that it's a pretty
BROWN VOL12
1226 easy route to checking no on that verdict form
     because the plaintiffs have failed to produce
     any evidence whatsoever, not the greater weight
     of the evidence, any evidence whatsoever that
     Mr. Brown became addicted to a Reynolds
     product.
          We've heard a lot of "we just don't knows"
     in this trial.  That's a fundamental one.  And
     that's a fundamental one that ought to effect,
     in our opinion, how you decide this phase of
     the trial.
          Now, I could also save a lot of words by
     calling your attention to the testimony of
     Dr. Cummings.  Dr. Cummings was the man from
     Buffalo who testified, he said, against my
     client about 50 times.  This man works for free
     for plaintiffs' lawyers, writes articles and
     teaches seminars about how they should try
     their cases.  Even he admitted that some people
     enjoy smoking.
          "Question:  There are some smokers who for
     whatever reason enjoy smoking and don't want to
     quit.  Do you agree with that?
          "Answer:  There is a segment of the
     population of smokers that say they enjoy
BROWN VOL12
1227 smoking and don't give it up."
          I heard the argument this morning from
     Mr. Gerson, and if I'm accurately paraphrasing
     it, it's sort of in this day and age of the
     year 2009, how could anybody be smoking unless
     they were addicted to nicotine?  And I guess
     this is one fundamental difference between the
     parties.  Between the parties, apparently, and
     Dr. Cummings.
          Because there are people, and we would
     contend Roger Brown was one of them, who smoked
     and enjoyed it and were not addicted, smoked
     because they enjoy it.  We all know them.
     People like that sometimes infuriate family
     members, as Mr. Brown infuriated or frustrated
     Mrs. Brown who didn't like the smell of smoke.
     Or the way he frustrated his daughter Catherine
     who was worried about his health.  And I
     suppose it was especially frustrating in a
     family like the Brown's where Mr. Brown was
     sort of the undisputed Lord of the Manor.  Look
     what we heard from Mrs. Brown:
          "Question:  But you didn't tell Mr. Brown
     he can't smoke in the house; did you?
          "Answer:  No, I would never tell him that.
BROWN VOL12
1228 "Question:  That's right, because it's his
     house, too?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  And he wouldn't listen to you
     anyway, would he?
          "Answer:  No."
          Or Catherine.
          "Question:  And the reason you didn't tell
     him was because he wasn't going to listen to
     you about smoking?
          "Answer:  I didn't say that, sir.
          "Question:  I'm asking you right now,
     Ms. Ceasar?
          "Answer:  No, I didn't.
          "Question:  Do you know why you didn't
     tell him, do you?
          "Answer:  It really wasn't my business,
     you know.  My dad was a grown man.  You know, I
     wouldn't disparage my father like that.
          "Question:  And none of you felt it was
     your place to tell your father what to do,
     whether it came to smoking or anything else,
     isn't that right?
          "Answer:  My dad was a grown man and we
     respect him.
BROWN VOL12
1229 "Question:  You respected your father.
     You didn't feel it was your place to tell him
     whether or not he should stop smoking, right?
          "Answer:  Right."
          And it must have really been incredibly
     frustrating when they finally got up the nerve
     to talk to him about smoking.  And what did he
     do?  You heard it here.  He ignored them.
          "Question:  But when you told your husband
     to quit smoking that one time --
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  And he didn't pay any
     attention to you, did he?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  You asked him to quit smoking
     but he ignored you, right?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          Catherine remembered that he promised her,
     saying he would try to quit.  And Dr. Cummings
     tells us he's seen people like that, too, as he
     testified before you.
          "Question:  And some people promise to
     quit smoking because a loved one is nagging
     them, right?
          "Answer:  That's right."
BROWN VOL12
1230 And we all know people like that too.
     Now, whether it's smoking or dieting or
     drinking or something else.  Sometimes we want
     a loved one to do something, and they just
     won't do it and it frustrates us.  And in this
     case I contend to you that Mr. Brown was like
     one of those people who wanted to smoke and he
     did and who promised his loved ones he would
     try and quit and he didn't.
          Make no mistake about it.  Mr. Brown never
     really quit smoking.  As you were told.
          "Question:  He actually did chew some gum
     for two days, two or three days?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  But he didn't really stop, did
     he?
          "Answer:  No.  No."
          Frustration of his family is
     understandable.  The frustration of his family
     might be justifiable.  It was probably a
     reflection of the love and concern that they
     had for this man.  And it's pretty clear that
     if Mrs. Brown and Catherine could have made the
     choice for Mr. Brown, that choice would be that
     he would quit smoking, but it wasn't their
BROWN VOL12
1231 choice to make.  It was his.
          Mrs. Brown pretty much summed up
     Mr. Brown's choices in her testimony.
          "Question:  Very good.  Now, Mr. Brown
     smoked cigarettes whenever he wanted to, isn't
     that right?
          "Whenever he wanted to?
          "Question:  Right.
          "Answer:  Yes.  He did."
          That was his choice.
          And although now we hear words like
     addiction being thrown around for purposes of
     this lawsuit, it was a perfectly logical
     conclusion for Mrs. Brown to make that he
     enjoyed cigarettes and she did make that
     conclusion.  Let's take a look.
          "Question:  You never talked about -- with
     him about whether he liked cigarettes, did you?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  You just assumed he liked
     cigarettes, right?
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  I mean, that's what he wanted
     to do.  He wanted to smoke them so --
          "Answer:  Yes.
BROWN VOL12
1232 "Question:  So you figured he liked them,
     right?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          And she figured he liked them right up
     until this lawsuit when the liking became an
     addiction.  But it was perfectly logical for
     her to think that he liked to smoke.  Just as,
     based on the evidence before you, it would be
     perfectly logical for you to think that he
     liked to smoke.
          Because from the time he made that first
     choice to smoke, which is really at an unknown
     time for an unknown reason with an unknown
     brand made by an unknown manufacturer, his
     entire life he never said he wanted to quit.
     For his entire life he never told anybody that
     he was addicted or hooked.  And for his entire
     life he never really did anything that would
     suggest he wanted to quit smoking.  And that
     includes that one time, that one time in 40
     years when he was spoken to by his daughter and
     wife, and Mrs. Brown told us what happened.
          "Question:  At no time did Mr. Brown quit
     smoking the whole time you knew him, did he?
          "Answer:  No.
BROWN VOL12
1233 "Question:  Now, he never went to classes
     to try to quit smoking?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  He never did any of that
     hypnosis stuff?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  He never went to a doctor to
     quit smoking, did he?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  He never tried anything like
     that patch or that nicotine gum that you buy at
     the drugstore?
          "Answer:  No.
          "Question:  He really never did anything
     to try to quit smoking the whole time you were
     with him, did he?
          "Answer:  No."
          We heard a little bit about how he
     continued to smoke after his cancer diagnosis.
     And we heard why he did that from his daughter.
          "Question:  In fact, when you were with
     Mr. Brown at the doctor, the doctor told him
     really no reason for you to stop at this point.
     Do you recall that?
          "Answer:  Correct.
BROWN VOL12
1234 "Question:  And so he just continued to
     smoke, right?
          "Answer:  He did.
          "Question:  And that doctor was Dr. Bass
     that you went to see, wasn't it?
          "Answer:  Correct."
          Now, Dr. Cummings, Dr. Benowitz told you
     both that the key to quitting is motivation.
     And as common sense tells you, you don't have a
     lot of motivation to quit when your own doctor,
     your treating physician, Dr. Bass tells you,
     "Don't bother, it's too late."  Common sense.
          Now, common sense ought to be the real
     test in this case, and I'm going to get to what
     I call the common sense test in a bit.  But you
     heard from some experts and from some other
     tests -- about some other tests.  And I want to
     talk to those -- talk with those -- with you
     about those.
          But let me pause here and say a word about
     our experts because between the
     cross-examination and some of the remarks that
     you heard in opening and again in closings, it
     appears that they're being belittled or their
     reputations are being challenged.
BROWN VOL12
1235 Now, it began in opening when you heard
     that these individuals, all three of them, had
     been usual testifiers for Reynolds.  And it's
     gone on.  Remember Dr. Bertino?  You were told
     in opening that he was a usual testifier for
     Reynolds and you found out that was completely
     false.  This is his first trial.  The first
     time on the witness stand for any tobacco
     company.
          You remember that in opening we heard that
     Dr. Bertino was something like a plastic
     surgeon who did facelifts and eye jobs.  And
     you learned that that was false.  That
     Dr. Bertino treats all diseases of the head and
     neck including esophageal cancer, which is at
     issue in this case.  And apparently Dr. Bertino
     is also being criticized for testifying at
     trials.  Now, in doing that, of course, we
     ignore the fact that Dr. Bertino also works at
     the Audie Murphy Veterans Hospital in San
     Antonio and is affiliated with the Brooke Army
     Medical Center in San Antonio.  And I would be
     willing to bet that at both those facilities,
     whether it's for injured service members or
     sick veterans, that Dr. Bertino doesn't do a
BROWN VOL12
1236 lot of eye jobs in those jobs.
          Then there's Dr. Nichols.  We heard about
     how he is a regular testifier for Reynolds and
     you learned that was not true.  This is his
     first trial.  He's given one deposition.  This
     case.  Now, he was ridiculed because he has a
     forensic practice where he now testifies on
     behalf of both plaintiffs and defendants and he
     said more often plaintiffs than defendants.
          What's forgotten about Dr. Nichols is
     before that he was a public servant for the
     state of Kentucky for 20 years.  He set up the
     state medical examiners office.  He built it
     from scratch.  Made it work.  And at the end of
     20 years he retired with a job well done, which
     is something I think in our heart of hearts all
     of us would like to do.  Now he testifies to
     make a living.
          And finally Dr. Tucker, who you just heard
     a few moments ago was a cheerleader, but who
     also was accused of regularly testifying for
     Reynolds.  You learned that was false.  You
     were told that he regularly finds people
     nicotine -- or not dependent on nicotine when
     he does testify.  You learned that was false.
BROWN VOL12
1237 And he was criticized, too, for his
     forensic practice.  Forgetting that Dr. Tucker
     treats patients, patients with serious
     substance abuse problems, above and beyond
     cigarettes.  It ignores his service in Mexico
     where he was teaching.  And it ignores the fact
     that he too set up and ran for years a
     substance abuse treatment program for veterans
     in the VA Hospital in Los Angeles.
          He currently treats patients.  He
     currently assists the State Medical Board of
     California, the State Bar of California, and is
     called upon by courts to serve as an expert.
     This is not a cheerleader.  This is a man of
     substance.
          Now, I mention this because I am not going
     to belittle plaintiffs' experts in my closing.
     I'm not going to do that.  They've admitted
     forthrightly that they are anti-tobacco
     crusaders.  But these are serious men.  These
     are distinguished men.  And these are men who
     had to concede certain truths of this trial and
     did.
          And let's start with Dr. Benowitz.
     Dr. Benowitz gave you a science lesson.  But
BROWN VOL12
1238 when you cut through the science lesson, there
     is some things that he told you.  Now, this
     ought to look familiar to you because I told
     you in the beginning of the trial you were
     going to hear these things from Dr. Benowitz.
     And you did.
          Nicotine occurs naturally in the tobacco
     plant.  Mother Nature put nicotine in tobacco,
     not R.J. Reynolds.  It's been known for over
     100 years that nicotine was in tobacco.  It's
     been known for 100 years that nicotine has a
     pharmacological effect on the human body.  It's
     been known for over a hundred years that
     smoking could be difficult to quit.  60 million
     smokers have quit, including heavily addicted
     smokers.  3,000 smokers quit every day.
          Dr. Benowitz also told you 90 percent of
     smokers have quit without help of any kind.
     Without nicotine gum, without the nicotine
     patch, without joining a smoking cessation
     program, without medical assistance, without
     hypnosis, without medications of any kind.
          So however powerful this drug called
     nicotine is, it's clearly possible to beat it
     if you want to.
BROWN VOL12
1239 Dr. Benowitz added a few things.  The
     characteristics of smoking behavior have
     changed over the years.  It used to be called a
     habit.  Now it's an addiction or a dependence.
     The behavior did not change, just the
     definition.  He tells all his patients to quit
     smoking.  It takes motivation, and persistence.
          Any changes in the brain made by nicotine
     return to normal in a few weeks after quitting.
          Remember you heard before:  Once an
     addict, always an addict.  Not true.  Not true.
     Per Dr. Benowitz.
          Dopamine.  You heard about dopamine being
     released in the brain.  It's released by
     smoking; it's released by any pleasurable
     activity.  He told us playing, watching sports,
     drinking soda, eating chocolate, anything
     pleasurable releases Dopamine.  That's not
     unique to smoking.
          Withdrawal from nicotine, lasting a few
     days to a week or two.  And then you're over
     it.  That's what Dr. Benowitz told us.
          Now, you also heard from Dr. Cummings.  As
     I said, he's testified about 50 times against
     tobacco companies.  But Dr. Cummings told us
BROWN VOL12
1240 some things that you ought to know as well.
          The Surgeon General has called smoking an
     addictive behavior, but the Surgeon General who
     you heard cited earlier, he said the individual
     smoker must decide whether or not to continue
     that behavior.  That sounds like a choice.  And
     Dr. Cummings agrees.  Dr. Cummings tells his
     patients the success rate for smokers who want
     to quit is 100 percent.  Anybody can quit who
     makes up their mind to do it.
          And notwithstanding what the Surgeon
     General's report says about cigarette smoking
     and nicotine being like cocaine and heroin,
     Dr. Cummings says pharmacological effects of
     nicotine are not comparable to the euphoria
     caused by heroin and cocaine.
          And finally, the body begins to repair
     itself as soon as you stop smoking.
          Dr. Cummings, as you heard, treats people
     for smoking cessation.  And he told us in the
     video, a slide that -- about a slide he shows
     his patients when they first walk in the door.
     This is the slide.  What it takes to quit
     smoking.  And I'm just going to stop at one:  A
     sincere desire to quit smoking.  Dr. Cummings
BROWN VOL12
1241 says it requires a sincere desire to quit
     smoking.
          In the evidence in this case, on the
     whole, did you ever, ever see a desire to quit
     smoking on the part of Mr. Brown?  I contend
     you didn't.
          So, forget the Fagerstrom Test.  Forget
     DSM-IV.  Under the Cummings test, the
     plaintiffs' expert's test, Mr. Brown is not
     addicted.  He never had a sincere desire to
     quit smoking, and he certainly never wanted to
     quit smoking.
          Now, you heard about some other tests.
     You heard about the Fagerstrom Test and you
     remember how Drs. Benowitz and Cummings both
     talked about how they were good buddies with
     Dr. -- with Mr. Carl Fagerstrom who dreamed up
     this test.  And apparently plaintiffs are going
     to ask you to sort of serve as either a
     psychologist or a psychiatrist or a smoking
     cessation counselor and you're going to decide
     the diagnosis, based on the Fagerstrom test,
     whether or not Mr. Brown was addicted.
          But Dr. Benowitz says if you did that,,
     you would be making a mistake.  Because
BROWN VOL12
1242 Dr. Benowitz says that he, well, here it is.
          "You testified specifically about the
     Fagerstrom Test for nicotine dependence.  Yes.
     Okay.
          "Question:  It's not typically used as a
     test to determine whether the person is or is
     not addicted, right?
          "Answer:  Yes."
          Dr. Tucker told you it's the wrong test,
     but forget Dr. Tucker.  Plaintiffs' expert,
     Dr. Benowitz, says it's the wrong test.  That's
     not what it's used for.  If you used it, if you
     were to use it you would be using the wrong
     test.
          And this kind of makes sense.  Because you
     heard what some of the elements of the test
     are.  And for example, if you -- what
     difference does it make when you smoke your
     first cigarette, if you smoke it because you
     want to rather than because you have to?  If
     you do it because you want to, you're blowing
     the Fagerstrom Test but you're not addicted.
     You're just doing what you want.  It tells us
     nothing about addiction.
          Now, Dr. Tucker is the only psychiatrist
BROWN VOL12
1243 you heard from in this trial.  The only one.
     Dr. Benowitz is a cardiologist.  Dr. Cummings
     is not even a medical doctor or even a
     psychologist.  Dr. Tucker is the only expert in
     human behavior that you heard from in this
     trial.  And let's not forget that Dr. Tucker is
     the only substance abuse professional you heard
     from in this trial who uttered the words Roger
     Brown.  You didn't hear if from Dr. Benowitz;
     you didn't hear it from Dr. Cummings.  For
     them, Mr. Brown was a forgotten man.  Carl
     Fagerstrom got mentioned twice but Roger Brown
     never got mentioned at all.
          And Dr. Tucker used the DSM-IV just
     this -- or yesterday afternoon to diagnose
     Mr. Brown; he's not nicotine addicted, not
     nicotine dependent.
          Now, it's important to realize that
     DSM-IV, that book, is not something that was
     dreamed up by Dr. Tucker for purposes of this
     trial.  It was not dreamed up by Dr. Tucker at
     all.  This was a serious volume arrived at by
     serious people, psychiatrists from all over the
     United States, meeting under the auspices of
     the American Psychiatric Association.  They put
BROWN VOL12
1244 this book together.  And I learn now not to
     call it the Bible of the psychiatric
     profession.  But it's a very important volume.
     It's a very serious volume.  And Dr. Tucker
     told you that to be diagnosed as nicotine
     dependent is a serious thing.  Because that
     volume diagnoses mental illnesses.  To call
     somebody nicotine dependent or addicted is to
     say they are suffering from a brand of mental
     illness.  That's serious business.
          So when you diagnose somebody as nicotine
     dependent or addicted, it's not the same as
     telling, say, oh, I'm addicted to video games
     or American Idol or chocolate or jogging or
     whatever.  It's serious.  And these people,
     these professionals that put it together, the
     men and women of the American Psychiatric
     Association took it seriously when they put
     together the criteria that determined whether
     or not someone is nicotine dependent.
          It uses medical and scientific terms, but
     the bottom line it basically codifies or
     embodies common sense.
          Let's take a look at factors.  Dr. Tucker
     took you through these yesterday.  And he
BROWN VOL12
1245 applied them to Roger Brown, again the only
     person who did that.  And he diagnosed
     Mr. Brown as not nicotine dependent.  He looked
     you in the eye and told you why.
          And as we look at factors to be reminded,
     first of all, a key to the diagnosis -- before
     you go any further, if you're going to label
     somebody nicotine dependent or addicted, they
     have to have clinically significant impairment
     or distress.  And as you heard from Dr. Tucker,
     Mr. Brown had none.  Smoking was simply not a
     problem for him.
          A key to the diagnosis is withdrawal.
     Mr. Brown had none.  A key to the diagnosis is
     losing control over your smoking, smoking more
     than you want to over a longer period of time.
     And he never did.
          A key to the diagnosis, a persistent
     desire to quit smoking.  And I think we can all
     agree Mr. Brown never had any desire to quit
     smoking.
          A key to the diagnosis is whether there
     are unsuccessful attempts to quit or cut down,
     and the best we got here was one that you heard
     in opening from plaintiffs' counsel was
BROWN VOL12
1246 halfhearted.
          And in that attempt Mr. Brown wasn't
     unsuccessful because we now know he never even
     tried.  He never stopped smoking because he
     never wanted to.
          A key to the diagnosis is whether he was a
     chain smoker, and in a pack to slightly more
     than a pack a day, he wasn't.  Now, bear in
     mind, Mr. Brown, the life he led, he could
     smoke anywhere he wanted to.  He didn't work in
     a building or in a facility that -- where he
     couldn't smoke, such that he could only smoke
     on breaks or before work or after work.  He
     smoked in his house.  He smoked when he did his
     farming.  He smoked when he visited with his
     friends on weekends.  He could smoke any time
     he wanted as much as he wanted.  But this man
     throughout his entire life only smoked about a
     pack a day.  For a man with Mr. Brown's
     lifestyle, that does not make him a chain
     smoker.
          A key to the diagnosis is whether your
     activities are affected by your smoking, and in
     Mr. Brown's case they were not.  Didn't affect
     his marriage.  Didn't affect his relationship
BROWN VOL12
1247 with his children.  Didn't affect his jobs.
     And of course, the last one when he smoked
     despite his cancer diagnosis.  We know why --
     we heard from his family -- his doctors told
     him it was okay.
          This is it.  This is the only test you
     heard of in this whole trial that was designed
     by professionals, that's used by professionals
     everyday to determine whether or not someone is
     addicted or dependent on nicotine.  And from
     the only professional on that subject who took
     the stand and talked about it regarding Roger
     Brown, you were told that he was not addicted
     to cigarettes; he was not nicotine dependent.
     So again, when you get that verdict form, you
     should check no.
          You know, there's another piece to this
     puzzle, and oddly enough it was introduced by
     the plaintiff.  Let's listen again --
     Mr. Gerson made reference to this earlier --
     let's listen again to Jim Johnston, the CEO of
     R.J. Reynolds in 1994.
          (Thereupon, the videoclip was played and
     taken down to the best of the reporter's
     ability:)
BROWN VOL12
1248 "CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Johnston, if you will pull
     the microphone in front of you.
          "Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members of
     the subcommittee.  Again, I am Jim Johnston,
     chairman and chief executive officer of R.J.
     Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          "Much of the recent controversy
     surrounding our products has focused on our use
     of various techniques that help us reduce the
     tar and nicotine yields of our products.  Let
     me be clear.  We could stop using those
     techniques.  We could chop up the tobacco and
     roll it in paper, but the consequence of doing
     that would be a return to the 1940s when the
     average cigarette yielded 40 milligrams of tar,
     2.8 milligrams of nicotine.  That would
     increase the tar and nicotine in our cigarettes
     by three to 400 percent.  I trust this
     committee would not endorse such an effort as a
     matter of public policy."
          Okay.  There's two sides of that.  It
     tells you the tar and nicotine levels were a
     lot higher in the 1940s than they were in 1994
     when Mr. Johnston was here testifying.  It also
     tells you that the tar and nicotine levels, if
BROWN VOL12
1249 they were 400 percent higher in the 1940s, were
     one quarter of the level of the 1940s in the
     1950s.  Tar and nicotine levels over the years
     went down dramatically.  That's what he just
     said.
          Now, we learned that Mr. Brown smoked
     about a pack a day for as long as anybody knew
     him, from the 1950s to the 1990s.  But now we
     also know that as he did that, the tar -- the
     nicotine level in particular in cigarettes was
     going down.  Such that by the time he reached
     the 1990s, it was one quarter of what it was in
     the 1940s.
          So if it's true, if you buy the claim
     plaintiffs are making, that Mr. Brown was
     smoking for the nicotine, if you buy what
     Mr. Gerson said earlier about Dr. Benowitz
     saying a person gets to a certain level of
     nicotine and that's what their requirement is,
     then Mr. Brown should have been smoking a whole
     lot more cigarettes to get that nicotine in the
     1990s than he was in the 1940s.  Because as his
     cigarette consumption was steady, the nicotine
     level was dropping.  And if he's smoking for
     the nicotine, wouldn't it make sense that as
BROWN VOL12
1250 the nicotine level in each cigarette he smoked
     went down, that the number of cigarettes he
     would smoke would go up?  Just common sense.
     If he is smoking for the nicotine, he is going
     to have to smoke more cigarettes to get that
     same nicotine.  But guess what, he didn't.  He
     didn't.  He smoked a pack of cigarettes a day
     as long as people knew him.
          What does this tell you?  It tells you he
     smoked not for the nicotine but because he
     enjoyed it.  He smoked not out of addiction,
     but out of choice.  Nicotine did not have ahold
     of his brain and dictate his actions.  His life
     wasn't driven by it.  If it was, if it was, he
     would have smoked more and more as the nicotine
     in each cigarette became less and less.  But
     that didn't happen.  Another piece of evidence
     that Mr. Brown smoked, not because he had to,
     but because he wanted to.
          And finally before I turn the floor over
     to Mr. Upshaw, I'm going to make up a test.
     And it's really the test I think we all should
     employ.  It's the common sense test.  And the
     common sense test goes like this.  Take a look
     at all the facts in the case.  And it says, if
BROWN VOL12
1251 someone says they never -- never say that they
     want to quit, if someone never really tries to
     quit, and never tells anybody else that they
     want to quit or never tells anybody else that
     they're addicted or hooked, and whose wife, the
     closest person in the world to him, believes
     all her life until this lawsuit that he is
     smoking because he likes it, then doesn't the
     common sense test tell us that we should
     respect the choices that man made in his life?
          You've heard from the testimony of his
     wife and his daughter that Mr. Brown was a
     strong man.  He did what he wanted when he
     wanted.  He was the Lord of his house.  He was
     not a victim in life.  And this lawsuit should
     not make him a victim in death.  He never
     second-guessed his decision to smoke.  He
     decided for whatever reason to smoke, whenever
     he decided, on whatever cigarette he decided
     and he never looked back.
          The common sense test tells us that by
     checking no on the verdict form, you are
     respecting Mr. Brown, you are respecting the
     choices that he made, and you are not making a
     victim of a strong and proud man.
BROWN VOL12

          As I said when I opened, I'll say now as I
     close, this case is about Roger Brown and the
     choices he made.  And with that I'll turn it
     over to my colleague, Mr. Upshaw.  Thank you
     for your attention.


1253        CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. UPSHAW:  Let me set up this other
     easel real quickly.
          Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
     Thank you for your wrapped attention all day
     today.  I'm going to try to make it as brief as
     possible so we can move forward in this
     process.
          But what I'm going to talk to you about is
     really part two of the two-part question.  And
     the only reason you get to part two of a
     two-part question is that if you find Roger
     Brown was addicted to cigarettes.
          Now, Mr. Kaczynski just talked about that.
     And I in fact agree with everything that he
     just said.  But you know, I would be remiss if
     I didn't go ahead and tell you what our
     position is with regard to part two of that
     question.
          So let me discuss why we believe the
     plaintiff has failed to prove the second fact
     issue, and that is:  Were Roger Brown's
     injuries caused by his addiction to smoke?
          There is one key that you want to remember
     throughout when we talk about the testimony.
BROWN VOL12
1254 Can you all see that?  Burden of proof.  You
     heard it.  You heard it during voir dire.  I
     talked about it.  You heard it during opening
     statements.  And you're going to hear it again
     during the judge's instructions.
          This is the second question.  Were Roger
     Brown's injuries caused by his addiction to
     smoking, or in other words, very simply, did
     Mr. Brown's smoking cause his esophageal cancer
     or the cancer that was found in his lungs?
          Well, what was the evidence?  Fairly
     short.  You had -- this is the sixth day we've
     been in trial.  And this was the evidence.  You
     saw medical records.  You heard from
     Dr. Bertino.  Remember the medical records
     we've talked about over and over again?  You've
     seen them in detail.  Mr. Gerson's reviewed
     them.  I've reviewed them.  I'm not going to
     discuss each and every record with you again at
     length.  Thankfully.  We don't have to go back
     through the trial all over again.  And you will
     have those records with you when you
     deliberate.  So if you want to review them,
     please do so.
          You heard from Dr. Bertino, the
BROWN VOL12
1255 otolaryngologist, head and neck surgeon.
     Treats 20 esophageal cancers a year.  This was
     his area of the body.  This is where he
     practices.
          Remember he drew the graph.  And we are
     going to get back to that graph.  I think that
     graph may even be here.
          He drew this graph.  Remember how he told
     you how esophageal cancer is going up, but that
     the incidence of smoking has been going down.
     Okay.  He is the one that came in and told you
     that.  He is the one that came in and taught
     you the anatomy.  You remember this
     illustration.
          Dr. Bertino talked to you about this,
     showed you where the esophagus was.  Where the
     lungs are located.  Pointed out to you that
     Mr. Brown's cancer was located right here in
     the midsection of the esophagus.
          And you've heard other testimony, I'm not
     going to pull those records up again, how that
     cancer was along the midsection and it was
     ulcerated.  I mean it was pretty bad stuff.
     And how it was adjacent to the cancer that was
     found in the right lower lobe, right there.
BROWN VOL12
1256 Remember how he said this space in there
     there's a common wall; how the cancer in the
     esophagus was adjacent to where they found the
     cancer in the lung.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Nichols.  Who was
     Dr. Nichols?  Board certified forensic
     pathologist.  The guy who does this type of
     thing as his profession.  And you heard
     Mr. Kaczynski talk about him.  I'm not going to
     belabor the point.  But he was a medical
     examiner for 20 years.  It was his job to come
     into court and tell folks why people passed
     away.  What the cause of their particular
     demise was.
          And then lastly, you heard from Dr. Patel.
     Now, unfortunately Dr. Patel was asked to do
     quite a bit in this trial.  You all know that
     he was the only medical doctor that had
     anything to say about the treatment of
     Mr. Brown.  He only saw Mr. Brown twice.  Once
     when he decided to do the bronchoscopy, and
     then the next day when he actually did the
     diagnostic test.
          You recall he never diagnosed Mr. Brown
     with cancer back in 1993.  He didn't even know
BROWN VOL12
1257 that Mr. Brown had esophageal cancer until
     March of 2009.
          But he did his best, folks.  He did his
     best to testify for all of the doctors who were
     involved.  And we are going to talk about that
     a little bit.  But he did his best to stand in
     the place of every single doctor that saw Roger
     Brown during his hospital stay.  And in fact,
     even tried to stand in the place of Dr. Bass
     and talk about the death certificate as well.
          And that's it.  That is the sum and
     substance total of testimony and evidence you
     have about whether or not Mr. Brown's
     esophageal cancer or the cancer in his lung was
     caused by smoking.
          Now, remember this.  We, Reynolds, the
     defense, does not have a burden of proof.  The
     plaintiff has the burden of proof.  And because
     they have the burden of proof, that's why they
     got to go first.  That's why they got to put
     their evidence on first.  And that's in fact
     why they got to close first and then come back
     and talk to you again.
          They have this very heavy burden.  It
     doesn't say the assumption of proof, the burden
BROWN VOL12
1258 of proof in this case.
          Now, he didn't bring you Dr. Bass.  Okay.
     They have the burden of proof.  He was the
     treating physician.  He was the guy who saw
     Mr. Brown more than anyone before he died.
          He didn't bring you Dr. Alvarez.  Who is
     he?  He is the pathologist.  Put the pathology
     report's up there but you didn't hear from
     Dr. Alvarez.  Were we supposed to bring
     Dr. Alvarez?  No.  Reynolds did not have the
     burden of proof in this case.
          Dr. Singh.  Dr. Patel had to interpret
     what Dr. Singh meant.  And this is what I think
     his words mean -- and this is how I would read
     them -- as a pulmonologist.  But remember
     Dr. Patel is a pulmonologist but not a
     gastroenterologist.  Not his area of expertise.
     Didn't bring Dr. Singh in for you.  Didn't
     bring in the oncologist.  Okay.  They had no
     x-rays.  No CT scans.  No pathology.  And as
     Mr. Gerson agreed, there was no autopsy in this
     case.
          The only evidence presented to you is that
     the cause of Mr. Brown's cancer was Dr. Patel.
     And what did Dr. Patel say?  The best that
BROWN VOL12
1259 Dr. Patel could do when he sat at that witness
     stand, he says it's highly probable.  Highly
     probable.
          Folks, when you came upstairs on this
     floor after lunch, you used that bank of
     elevators, four elevators, right, and when you
     go home tonight, it's highly probable that
     you're going to use one of those elevators.
     But right now, none of you can say with
     certainty which elevator you're going to use.
          When we get the risk factors you will see
     that it was a number of risk factors for
     esophageal cancer but there was not enough
     evidence to say which of those risk factors
     could potentially be the cause.
          I'm giving you a little teaser where we're
     going.
          Now, how highly probable is the best that
     Dr. Patel could do.  And in fact, Mr. Gerson
     said that in his opening.  Dr. Patel cannot say
     it was 100 percent but he says it's probable.
     In fact he repeated here in his closing
     statement to you.  And I agree.
          I agree with something else that
     Mr. Gerson said in his opening.  He said,
BROWN VOL12
1260 there's a lot of information that we don't have
     about this case.  That's the truest fact of all
     the facts you heard.  There is a lot of
     information that we don't have.  But we're
     sitting here in a courtroom and you are going
     to be tasked as the triers of fact, the judges
     of fact.
          As Mr. Kaczynski said when he started, we
     stand up for you because you're the judges of
     fact.  We stand up for Judge Streitfeld because
     he is the judge of the law.
          And because of that, you don't have enough
     information in this case.
          Now, let's look at briefly why we contend
     that there's not enough information, simply not
     enough proof that -- to say that Mr. Brown's
     injuries, his cancer was caused by smoking.
          Let's look at the medical records really
     quick.  There is -- was not one medical record,
     not one, which said that either Mr. Brown's
     esophageal cancer or that the cancer that was
     found in his lung was caused by smoking.
          Now, in 1993 they were not trying to
     determine the cause of Mr. Brown's cancer.  He
     was in the emergency room.  They were trying to
BROWN VOL12
1261 treat him.  They were trying to provide him
     with some treatment for what they found was
     ailing him.
          And so cause was not the issue.  So what
     does that mean?  That means certain tests
     weren't run, other things were not done, and in
     fact, certain specimens weren't kept.
          Now, on this point Mr. Gerson agrees.  He
     wishes that stuff was here because that would
     be evidence.  But unfortunately, it's not.  And
     because it's not, we contend you can't find
     that Mr. Brown's cancer was caused by smoking.
          All right.  I got to do it.  I got to go
     through a few of the records.  You know I
     couldn't not go through the records, because I
     want to show you briefly in 1993 that there was
     in fact some confusion.  And the confusion was:
     What was the real cause?
          Well, he was admitted on January 23rd,
     1993.  There were four issues that were brought
     up by his admitting physician.  I'm not going
     to belabor these.  Four issues, one of them,
     the lung lesion to rule out cancer.  No. 3 was
     the enlarged liver and the prostrate and the
     abdominal pain.
BROWN VOL12
1262 The next day they did a study, right.  And
     they found out the left adrenal gland
     suspicious for metastatic spread of disease.
     Someone's questioning that there's a spread of
     this disease.
          This consult from 1/24/93, this is
     actually the consult that Dr. Bass gave to
     Dr. Patel.  And it asked him to check out
     whether or not -- check the lung mass and
     adrenal mets.  Adrenal metastasis.  We don't
     know where it's going; they don't know.
     Please, somebody check it out.
          Okay.  So Dr. Patel brought in as the
     pulmonologist, the lung specialist, and that's
     it.  Remember I asked him, what was your job?
     His job was to determine what it was.  They saw
     a mass on an x-ray and his job was to find out
     what it was.  So, he noted it was an enlarged
     left adrenal grand, possibly malignancy,
     possibly cancer, possible metastatic disease.
          I'm not showing you these because they
     knew whether it was metastatic from the lung to
     the esophagus or the esophagus to the lung or
     the esophagus to the adrenal gland.  In 1993
     the question was, this guy has some cancer
BROWN VOL12
1263 going on, and we need to figure out where it is
     and where it's spreading to.
          Liver's enlarged.  There has been
     discussion about why his liver has been
     enlarged.  Why it's not.  We'll get to that.
     The liver plays one role in this case.  One
     role.  And that's when we start talking about
     whether or not Mr. Brown drank enough alcohol
     to make a difference as a risk factor for his
     esophageal cancer, we don't have to look any
     further than right there.  Because there wasn't
     a doctor you heard from that didn't say, the
     main cause for an enlarged liver is alcohol
     use, excessive alcohol use.  We'll get back to
     that.
          1/27, I know Mr. Gerson said we are going
     to select records, but I'm following right in
     line here, folks.  We don't have to go over
     every particular record.  But what I'm pointing
     out to you is, 1, probable metastasis.  Don't
     know whether the primary is gastrointestinal,
     okay, or bronchiogenic.  That's right.  To the
     lungs.  Okay.
          What does this note say?  You've seen this
     note I think four times now.  Need oncology
BROWN VOL12
1264 evaluation and full metastatic workup.  This
     note's saying we need to find out where the
     cancer is spreading and where it came from.
          Again, 1/28, need full staging.  We need
     this.
          1/29, possible metastasis to lung and
     adrenal gland.  Okay.  Possible metastasis to
     lung, we don't know; adrenal gland, we don't
     know.  We need to find out.  That's what they
     are saying in '93.
          1/27, Dr. Singh.  We don't have to have
     this interpreted.  It's typed up.  Mild
     esophageal ulcerative mass.  Rule out
     esophageal primary, rule out lung carcinoma
     primary to the esophagus.  Does Dr. Singh know
     where this is starting and where it's going?
     He is saying let's rule it out.
          And then finally, Dr. Bass making the
     determination on the official record, the death
     certificate, that it was the esophageal cancer
     which caused Mr. Brown's demise.
          The one thing that we can be sure of is
     that there was not a doctor who saw Mr. Brown
     in 1993 who could tell whether or not the
     esophageal cancer spread to the lungs.  There
BROWN VOL12
1265 was not one doctor in 1993 who could say that
     the lung cancer spread to the esophagus.  There
     is not one doctor in 1993 who said, I'm sure
     that there were two primaries.  Not one.
     Because that wasn't what they were trying to do
     back then.  They were really trying to find out
     where the cancer's gone and how do we treat it.
          Now, Mr. Brown after getting all the
     information determined that he didn't want
     treatment.  And that's fine, and extremely
     understandable that he and his family would
     make that decision.  But when we go to look
     back, which is what we are doing today, 16
     years later, we don't have the information to
     make that decision today.
          Well, the metastasis question is a big
     question in this case.  Okay.  And what did the
     people you heard from have to say about
     metastasis?
          Dr. Patel -- fortunately, Dr. Patel gave
     no opinion.  Dr. Patel never said, I think in
     my opinion that it was metastasis from one part
     to the other part.  He did a lot.  He read and
     interpreted every single record that Mr. Gerson
     put in front of him.  He did his best to stand
BROWN VOL12
1266 in the shoes of each and every one of those
     treating physicians and he pointed out the
     opinions of Dr. Singh.  But Dr. Singh wasn't
     here to give you those opinions.  Those were
     Dr. Patel's interpretations.
          But most importantly, with regard to
     metastasis, this is what Dr. Patel said.
     Mr. Gerson's question was:
          "Question:  In your experience, does large
     cell lung cancer become esophageal cancer or
     become squamous cell cancer or does squamous
     cell cancer become large cell cancer?"
          And he had to admit:
          "Answer:  At times, it does."
          You recall this testimony.  Dr. Bertino
     was grilled, grilled on how can you say that if
     there's squamous cell in the esophagus that
     there could be large cell in the lung and that
     it transferred, that it was a metastasis from
     squamous cell to large cell?  And Dr. Bertino
     explained that to you.  He explained how that
     common wall, one was infiltrating, and that
     when they metastasize, when the cancer
     metastasizes, it becomes, I think his word was,
     "wild".  Right?
BROWN VOL12
1267 Dr. Patel had to agree.
          Dr. Bertino.  He said that esophageal
     primary -- the esophageal cancer was primary
     with a spread to the lung.  And how did he come
     to that conclusion?
          This is a man who this is his practice
     area, right, 35, 36 years, this is his practice
     area.  1 percent.  1 percent chance that there
     are two primaries at the same time.  I think
     the words come up a couple of times
     "synchronous."  99 percent chance that it's a
     spread.
          And what else did he say?  He said when he
     does an endoscopic study, when someone comes in
     with esophageal cancer in his office, he checks
     everything else in the area of the digestive
     tract because he knows where there's one, there
     most likely is a spread somewhere else.  And
     where did he say that spread most commonly
     happens?  It happens to the right lower lobe of
     the lung.
          The last thing he talked about was that
     there was a small sample size.  Remember we
     talked about how much sample you get from the
     esophagus biopsy versus the size of the sample
BROWN VOL12
1268 from the lung biopsy.  It makes sense.  I'm
     sure Dr. Patel took the amount that he needed
     to make a diagnosis of cancer.  Remember,
     Dr. Patel was not doing a biopsy at that point
     in 1993 to determine whether or not the cause
     of the cancer was smoking.  The biopsy he took
     was the biopsy he needed at the time.  What was
     Dr. Patel trying to find out?  Was this cancer
     or was it not?  And so that's what the
     pathologist gave him.  And he told him what
     that sample said.  Dr. Patel was not trying to
     find out the cause of the cancer.
          And lastly on this issue, Dr. Nichols.
     Dr. Nichols also said that in his opinion and
     in his review of the records the esophageal
     cancer was primary with spread to the lung.
     Again, rare to have two primaries.  Now, this
     is from two different fields, right, because
     Dr. Nichols is the pathologist, the guy who
     reads the slides, and Dr. Bertino is the
     otolaryngologist, head and neck surgeon.
          The presentation of the esophageal tumor.
     It was major to him that it was ulcerated.  I
     guess that means something to him.  But when he
     saw that, he said, well, that's a classic
BROWN VOL12
1269 presentation of primary esophageal cancer.
          Lung to esophagus, very rare.  Different
     cell types.  Does not mean they are different.
     And he also pointed out the small size of the
     sample.
          Now, there's one thing that Mr. Gerson
     brought up.  Do you have the Surgeon General
     one here?
          MR. GERSON:  Yes.
          MR. UPSHAW:  Mr. Brown was diagnosed in
     January of 1993.  He passed away in August of
     1993, eight months.  Remember there was
     testimony about what did that mean.
          Dr. Bertino talked to you that an
     esophageal cancer it grows a little slower,
     right, than a lung cancer.
          Well, look what also was mentioned.
     Patients live five years after diagnosis and
     most die within six months if smoking is
     involved.  If the cause is smoking.  That's
     exactly what they are talking about.
          Now, if the cause was something else, does
     that mean you're going to live a little longer?
     Yes.  That's what that means.
          So looking at the greater weight of the
BROWN VOL12
1270 evidence, you're going to hear that term.  It's
     going to be in the instructions, the greater
     weight of the evidence, the greater weight of
     the evidence here leads us to the conclusion
     that, one, the esophageal cancer was primary
     and that the lung cancer or the cancer found in
     the lung, said most appropriately the cancer
     found in the lung, was spread or metastasized
     from the esophageal cancer.
          Now, if we establish that the primary
     cancer was the esophageal cancer, now we have
     to look at what was the cause of the esophageal
     cancer.  And as we discussed, the medical
     records really don't help us in that sense.  So
     what happened?
          What happened in this trial is there were
     three doctors who now had to take a look back.
     Dr. Patel was asked to do so in March 2009.
     Dr. Nichols did so and Dr. Bertino did so.
     They all had to look back.
          Now, Dr. Bertino used his expertise in
     head and neck surgery to take his look back.
     And his conclusion, after looking at all of the
     medical records, from his point of view as a
     head and neck surgeon was very clear.  There
BROWN VOL12
1271 was not enough evidence to conclude that
     Mr. Brown's esophageal cancer was caused or was
     substantially contributed to by his smoking.
          Now, how did he come to that conclusion?
     He said there was not enough evidence.  Why?
     Because you have to take into account all the
     risk factors.  Right.  Let me show you that.
          This was the chart Dr. Bertino showed you.
     It was shown to Dr. Patel as well.  These four
     are the major risk factors.
          Now, I know that plaintiffs' counsel tried
     to discount all of these.  And in fact, there
     are many here at the end that don't apply to
     Mr. Brown.  But those are the 25 risk factors
     that must be taken into account.  Must be taken
     into account when you're trying to determine
     what the cause of a single person's esophageal
     cancer was.
          All right.  Alcohol use.  We know the one
     key piece of evidence was in the medical
     record.  Doesn't take anybody to testify to it.
     You don't have to believe anything anyone ever
     said from that stand.  The one record that
     makes a difference is the enlarged liver.  The
     enlarged liver.  A sign that every doctor says
BROWN VOL12
1272 is indicative of excessive alcohol use.  But we
     don't have to stop there.  Each of the experts
     were able to look at deposition testimony and
     come to the conclusion after their reading
     deposition testimony from family and friends,
     that there was excessive alcohol use.
          Burden of proof.  We don't have the burden
     of proof here.  We don't have to bring those
     family and friends, people in.  Remember when
     they were asked they had a rebuttal case, and
     they wanted to refute anything that Dr. Bertino
     said or Dr. Nichols said or Dr. Tucker said,
     the burden of proof is theirs.  You did not see
     one of those family members come in after those
     doctors stood up and said --
          MR. GERSON:  Your Honor, I object to --
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. UPSHAW:  So alcohol use is a valid
     risk factor.
          Dr. Bertino talked about reflux.  He told
     you about the Zantac.  He referred to that
     record that said no reflux disease found.  Told
     you that wasn't indicative of reflux, that you
     didn't have to find it on a particular test,
     that there were better tests.  I asked
BROWN VOL12
1273 Dr. Patel, are there better tests?  There's
     another test that they could use.  He had also
     been taking that Zantac for what, three days
     between the time that was done.  I don't know
     how Zantac works, but I can't assume that he
     didn't have reflux or that it wasn't a viable
     risk factor for esophageal cancer.
          Yes.  Tobacco use.  He smoked for 40
     years.  Yes.
          Dr. Bertino said it's one of the risk
     factors.
          And HPV.  You're right.  First thing I
     thought was there's nothing in the medical
     records that says HPV.  But why can we not
     discount it?  Because back in 1993 this was
     not, one, something they would have looked for,
     and two, it's the only -- only risk factor that
     we know that there is a DNA marker for.  So if
     we had the stuff that Mr. Gerson wishes we had,
     and that we wish we had, we could test for it.
     But today in this court we cannot discount HPV.
          Okay.  We can't discount poor oral
     hygiene.  You can't discount that he was
     African-American.  You can't discount that he
     was male.  You can't discount occupational
BROWN VOL12
1274 exposure.
          Dr. Bertino couldn't discount chemical
     exposure either because he didn't know how --
     where Miss Brown worked or what she did at the
     dry cleaner.  But she told us she did pressing
     work.  Okay.  That may or may not have been any
     chemical exposure, but we know that there was
     some occupational exposure, potential
     occupational exposure, so we can't discount
     that.
          Where does all of this go?  It all goes to
     the simple fact that there's not enough
     evidence.  There's not enough evidence to show
     that smoking was a cause or a substantial
     contributing factor to Mr. Brown's esophageal
     cancer.
          Now, Dr. Patel, again, carrying a lot of
     weight, okay, he only had the hospital records
     to come to his conclusion.  And he didn't have
     the opportunity to even look at the radiology,
     which he would have, of the lungs, so he could
     make some other determination, or the pathology
     to send to some pathologist at his hospital.
     He didn't have that.
          Who was the best person, the best person
BROWN VOL12
1275 to take a look back out of the three doctors?
     Well, there was one guy who was called that
     that was his job for 20 years for the state of
     Kentucky, Dr. Nichols.  It was his job to
     always take a look back and determine why
     someone passed from life to death.  He did it
     for airplane crashes, he did it for bus
     accidents, and he did it right here in this
     case.  He took the same evidence, the same
     materials he takes in any criminal case he used
     to do as a medical examiner, in any criminal or
     civil case that he does now as a private
     citizen, and he took that and he gave us his
     opinion.  And his opinion was that, I don't
     have enough evidence.  I don't have enough
     evidence to give you an opinion why Mr. Brown
     passed from life to death.  Why esophageal
     cancer caused his demise.
          That's a tough position for a medical
     examiner to say, "I don't know."  Because
     that's basically what he had to say, is "I
     don't know."
          So what are you left to work with?  What
     do you have?  Well, you have the evidence, you
     are going to have the medical records, you are
BROWN VOL12
1276 going to have the testimony that you heard from
     the stand and from the screen, and you're going
     to have the judge's instructions.
          And I want to walk through just two of the
     instructions that you're going to get, and
     discuss how we believe those instructions apply
     to the evidence in your deliberations.
          Let me move first to instruction No. 2 and
     I'm going to put it on the Elmo here.
          Okay.  This is instruction No. 2, and this
     is going to be believability of any witness.
          And you won't have to read it later.  You
     don't have to read it now.  The judge is going
     to read it to you.  But I want to point out a
     few things for you.  One of the things on the
     believability of any witness and the weight
     given to that testimony is the intelligence of
     the witness, what the witness may have in the
     outcome of the case, and the ability of the
     witness to remember matters, and the
     reasonableness of the testimony of the witness.
          From our experts what's most important is
     there are some separate things that you want to
     take into account on opinion testimony on
     certain technical subjects.  That's Dr. Tucker,
BROWN VOL12
1277 Dr. Nichols, Dr. Bertino and Dr. Patel.
          You can reject it.  Or you can give it the
     weight you think it deserves considering these
     factors:  Knowledge, skill, experience,
     training or education.  Okay.
          When you look at what the greater weight
     of the evidence was in this case, and you apply
     the believability of the witness, and you
     understand that two very well-known, very
     schooled, very educated doctors had to come in
     and tell you they can't give you an opinion as
     to the cause, that goes a long way to the
     frankness and believability of those particular
     witnesses.
          Let me also show you one other
     instruction.  I'll put that one up here.  There
     you go.  I got it.  Okay.
          This is prejudice and sympathy.  And this
     is the area that I want to concentrate on.
          Not to be swayed from the performance of
     your duty by presence, sympathy or any
     sentiment for or against any party.  And most
     importantly, your verdict must be based on the
     evidence that has been received and the law on
     which I have instructed you.  The evidence that
BROWN VOL12
1278 has been received.
          It's our contention that on the evidence
     that you have received, there is insufficient
     proof.  And that shows up on how you answer
     this last question, which is right here.  The
     verdict form which you haven't seen yet.
          All right.  That's the question.  That's
     the piece of paper you're going to have with
     you when you walk back into the jury room.  Was
     Roger Brown addicted to Reynolds cigarettes
     containing nicotine?  That's the first part.
     Mr. Kaczynski talked about that.  And if so,
     was such an addiction a legal cause of
     Mr. Brown's death.  From all you've heard, from
     all we've talked about, from all we've
     summarized, the answer to that particular
     question, we believe, is no.
          Now, this is the last opportunity that
     Mr. Kaczynski and I get to speak to you before
     you deliberate.  Mr. Gerson, as I said, gets
     another opportunity to talk to you because he
     has the burden of proof.  The plaintiffs have
     the burden of proof.  And he'll stand up and
     talk to you a little bit more.
          What I would like you to do and what I ask
BROWN VOL12
1279 you to do is that when Mr. Gerson is talking, I
     want you to think to yourselves, because we
     don't get a chance to do it, we don't get a
     chance to respond to what he says, what would
     Kaczynski and Upshaw have to say.  For
     everything he says, think what would we have to
     say to that.  What would Reynolds have to say
     to that?  Challenge his responses and ask him
     the question, where is the evidence?  Not what
     am I supposed to leap to?  Not I should make
     this assumption.  Where is the evidence?  When
     you do that you're going to find that the
     answer to that question is no.
          I also want to thank you for your time.
     Thank you for your focus.  Thank you for your
     attention.  Realize this has been a long day.
     It's almost over.  And again, on behalf of
     Reynolds and on behalf of Ms. Brown, we
     appreciate your time.  Without you our justice
     system would not work.  Thank you.
