         MR. SHIELDS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good morning, ladies, and gentleman.
         Rayfield Brown was just in his mid teens when
    he started to smoke, buying four cigarettes for a
    nickel at the corner store.  Almost all smokers,
    then and now, start to smoke as teenagers and
    probably for the same reasons, be cool, peer
    pressure, to be like an adult, maybe even more than
    that.
         It was a different time and a different culture
    in America in the 1950s.  Smoking was everywhere.
    Almost all men smoked.  More and more women were
    starting to smoke.  As Kaiser Thomas told you, all
    the men around him smoked.  And advertising for
    cigarettes was everywhere.  It was like wallpaper.
    Kaiser told you, we were bombarded by it.  Often the
    advertising was sponsored on the only three networks
    throughout prime time with the principal characters like Lucille Ball on I Love Lucy, her loving
    cigarettes.  That culture of smoking remained for
    decades following the 1950s.
         Rayfield Brown, by the time he graduated from
    high school and went into the armed services, was a
    regular daily smoker.  He, like the soldiers at the
    time, in fact, was given cigarettes by the service.
         When he returned home to Jacksonville and
    ultimately started to work at the U.S. post office,
    he continued to smoke for decades.  He was addicted
    and although he tried to quit, he struggled with it.
         I want to thank you for your attention, for
    being on this jury.  You've heard a lot of evidence.
    It's been a long trial.  It's been a complicated
    issue.  Obviously we couldn't do this without you.
    And so as a beginning point, let me emphasize again
    how much we thank you for being on this jury.
         Now, John, Michael, Leslie, Rayfield and I are
    proud to represent Mary Brown in this action against
    Philip Morris for the wrongful death of Rayfield
    Brown.
         This part of the case, as the judge told you,
    is called the "closing argument" or "closing
    statement."  It is our opportunity to tell you what
    the evidence is, what we think it is, what we think it means and how it all fits together.
         But you're the ones who determine the facts,
    not the lawyers.  You collectively have to determine
    what you think the evidence means and how it fits
    together.  But let's begin our discussion with what
    the evidence is by talking about how we got here.
         This case arose out of a class action, as
    Judge Jay told you, called the "Engle class action"
    that was filed in 1994 on behalf of Florida smokers
    against the tobacco companies.  It was tried for
    over a year in 1999 and ultimately worked its way to
    the Florida Supreme Court in 2006, when the Florida
    Supreme Court held certain of the findings from that
    trial, but said that the individual damage claims of
    the class members should be proceeded and tried
    separately in individual claims like this.
         Mary Brown, following that decision, then filed
    her individual damage claim for the death of
    Rayfield Brown as a member of that Engle class.
         The Court also instructed you, this case has
    already been tried to a jury and that there were
    certain findings made in that prior jury trial,
    findings that you are bound by, and consequently you
    don't need to decide what has previously been
    decided by the jury. The prior trial determined liability and class
    membership and made the following findings.
         First, the prior trial, the jury determined
    that Rayfield Brown was addicted to smoking
    cigarettes containing nicotine and that his
    addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer.
    That determined he was a member of the Engle class
    and determined certain elements on the cause issue.
    You are bound by that.  You haven't heard all of the
    evidence that that prior jury determined, and you
    oath -- and you would be violating your oath if you
    did not apply that prior finding to this
    compensatory damage claim.
         Secondly, that jury determined that Philip
    Morris's agreement to conceal or omit a material
    fact regarding the health effects of cigarette
    smoking or the addictive nature of smoking
    cigarettes was a legal cause of Rayfield Brown's
    death.  That's the conspiracy finding.  You are also
    bound by it.
         As a result of the findings, it has already
    been determined Philip Morris is liable, is
    responsible to Mary Brown for the wrongful death of
    her husband on the conspiracy count.  You're not
    asked to redetermine that.  All you're asked to determine is the amount of damages.
         As a result of that prior trial, there are two
    remaining issues for your consideration.
         First is the amount of compensatory damages to
    be awarded Mary Brown, the estate, and her daughter,
    Jennifer, for the death of Rayfield Brown.
         Second is whether punitive damages are
    warranted against Philip Morris to punish them and
    to deter others.
         Now, I thought about the best way to talk about
    those two issues and talk about the evidence of
    those two issues.  And it occurred to me that it
    would be most helpful to you if we looked at the
    verdict form which Judge Jay just told you about and
    look at the specific questions you'll be asked and
    talk about the evidence that supports you filling in
    the blanks on that question.  That make sense to
    everybody?  Let's start then with the verdict form.
         Here's a copy of the verdict form.  There are
    two questions on the verdict form, as you can see.
         The first question is the compensatory damage
    question, that is, the amount of damages that you
    will award for compensatory damages.
         The second question, on the second page,
    Question 2, is the punitive damages question, that is, whether punitive damages should be awarded
    against Philip Morris.
         The first question has blanks for you to fill
    out for Mary Brown, a blank to fill in the amount to
    be awarded for her pain and suffering and loss of
    companionship and protection from the death of her
    husband.  There's also a blank to be filled out for
    Jennifer Brown on her pain and suffering and the
    loss of her instruction, guidance and companionship
    from the loss of her father.
         Now, there are other items on compensatory
    damages that are already filled out.  Those are
    called the economic component of the claim.  Damages
    fall in two general categories, as you heard in
    opening statements.  The economics, that is, the
    lost money, and the noneconomics, pain, suffering,
    loss of companionship, protection and guidance.
         Economic amounts were stipulated to, agreed to
    by the parties, as a result of which the Court has
    directed you that you have to include the amounts on
    this verdict form, and they are on the verdict form
    so that you have the amounts for Mary Brown, the
    value of loss of services for the estate, the value
    of medical, funeral expenses and the value of lost
    wages and earnings.  Those amounts are already on the verdict form.  They total around $375,000.
         Now, in addition to those amounts, you will be
    required to award the additional sums for the other
    categories that are left blank, and that's what I
    want to talk to you more about.  That is, what is
    the evidence that supports your determination of the
    amount to be awarded?  The Court has instructed you
    that you should determine and write on the verdict
    form the total amount of damages which the greater
    weight of the evidence shows Mary Brown and Jennifer
    Brown suffered.  It tells you that there is no exact
    standard for fixing that amount other than it should
    be fair and just in light of all the circumstances.
    And you, as jurors, in your mind and conscience,
    will determine what is a fair and just amount for
    these categories under all of the circumstances.
         In determining that amount, you may consider
    the joint life expectancy.  Now, why is that?
    Because obviously Rayfield Brown would have died at
    some point in time, had he not died prematurely from
    lung cancer, and so you would not be awarding
    damages for a period of time longer than he would
    have otherwise lived.  That's why you were given the
    figure of his life expectancy of over 22 years at
    the time of his death.  You were also given the life expectancy of Mary Brown and Jennifer to show that
    it would overlap that 22-year period.
         Now, you have a similar instruction in regard
    to that to Jennifer and awarding damages to Jennifer
    Brown for her pain and suffering and for her loss of
    companionship, instruction and guidance.
         This part of the case is -- the burden of proof
    is the greater weight of the evidence.  That simply
    means if you're balancing, it slightly tilts more to
    one side than the other.  So in evaluating and
    determining the amount of the compensatory damages,
    you are -- you will do that based upon the greater
    weight of the evidence.
         So the fact is, ladies and gentlemen, the only
    evidence in this case, not just the greater weight,
    but the only evidence in this case supports awarding
    substantial compensatory damages on that first
    question.
         I thought maybe the way to talk more about what
    figure should be awarded for compensatory damages,
    we should look back at Rayfield Brown's life and the
    relevant events in terms of it.  And so we have the
    time line that we talked about from the beginning of
    the case with the relevant events from Rayfield
    Brown's life on the top and what was occurring regarding the tobacco industry and Philip Morris on
    the bottom.  I'm just going to be talking about the
    top line.
         Rayfield Brown, once he had returned to
    Jacksonville from the service, was introduced to
    Mary Brown in 1958 by their close friend, Kaiser
    Thomas, and they were married two years later in
    1960, had their first son, Michael, in 1961, and in
    1972, their daughter, Jennifer.
         Rayfield, when he returned to Jacksonville, had
    various jobs, but ultimately got his job at the post
    office in 1967, where he remained for the balance of
    his career.  And you have heard a description of his
    success at the post office.  He was a station
    manager at various stations, and he was the head of
    the organization of management professionals for the
    post office and how he was, in effect, the station
    manager that they called upon to go into a station
    that had particular problems and be a troubleshooter
    and try and solve the problem.  And that's what he
    was doing -- he did.
         Kaiser Thomas and Mary both described his
    success in his career.  Mary went further and
    described him as a husband.  He was a loving,
    caring, compassionate husband.  She told you that he was her friend, her confidant, her go-to person.
         And when she was giving that testimony, it
    reminded me, when I was in high school and working
    on the play Our Town -- you may, if you remember
    that play, it was made into a movie as well -- but
    there was a scene in that play in which a young man
    is talking with his grandfather about what he should
    look for in a wife, and his grandfather's advice to
    him is look for a friend, look for someone you can
    talk to, look for someone who is your go-to person
    because you're going to spend a lifetime together,
    and those are the most important considerations of
    the nature of your relationship.
         They clearly were important considerations for
    Mary, cut short by Rayfield Brown's untimely death.
         You have seen Mary's pictures of him, starting
    with a wedding picture, pictures of them at social
    events, pictures of them on vacation, pictures of
    them with Jennifer and pictures of them on a cruise.
    All of those pictures tell a story.  You see a
    happy, loving family.
         And both Mary, Michael and Jennifer told you
    about Rayfield Brown's involvement with his
    children, teaching them to play basketball and other
    sports, going to all of their activities, becoming involved with them in Jack and Jill and being the
    kind of parent that we all seek to have.
         And you heard about Rayfield's little girl and
    how much Jennifer meant to him.  And because of the
    age disparity -- I'm not saying that Michael didn't
    mean a lot to him as well, but because Michael was
    older at the time, he was more a friend, whereas
    Jennifer was his little girl to the death.
         His loss was devastating to Jennifer.  You saw
    that on the stand.  Here we are almost 20 years
    later and it's still devastating to her.  She
    described her relationship and what she described
    most importantly was what a loss she had.  Recall
    the testimony.  She's had so many successes at a
    very young age.  And, in fact, being like her mother
    in reaching the very top pinnacle of the management
    at the Duval County School Board at a very young
    age.  And she regretted so much that her father
    hasn't been there to participate in her success, to
    talk to her about her success, to congratulate her
    and to be proud of her for her success.
         She also talked about how devastating it was
    for her not to have him walk her down the aisle upon
    marriage, not to be there to talk to when she had
    problems and issues she wanted to discuss. So those are the kinds of things that you need
    to think about and evaluate when you determine pain
    and suffering and importantly, loss of
    companionship, guidance and instruction.
         And when you think about pain and suffering,
    also think about the suffering that occurred from
    watching Rayfield Brown suffer himself.  You have,
    on the screen, the medical time line, and it walks
    you through the chronology of his diagnosis,
    treatment and suffering, starting with his diagnosis
    in July of 1993 with lung cancer, a lung cancer that
    was too big to just go in and remove surgically
    without first trying to reduce it by doing beam
    radiation.  And so the next event was to go through
    those beam radiation treatments to reduce the tumor
    enough that you could cut it out.  They did.
         And so for the next year, there was a follow-up
    and hope that it has been cured.  And the hope was
    dashed in September of 1994 when the tumor recurred
    and started treatment again.  And with that
    recurrence came pain, severe pain, pain so severe at
    some points in time he could not sleep in a bed.  He
    had to sleep sitting up.  Pain so severe that it
    required additional surgery.  And so they started
    chemotherapy to deal with the pain, for what is called "palliative care."  That doesn't mean
    anything more than, we're not trying to cure you;
    we're trying to control the growth of this tumor
    enough to try and reduce your pain or keep the pain
    from getting worse.
         But it got worse and continued to grow until he
    reached that incident described by Michael and
    Jennifer, where he's at home with a bowl of ice
    cream, and he can't feel it because he's paralyzed.
    And taken off to deal with the paralysis, he's
    paralyzed because the tumor was impinging upon his
    spinal cord.  They do the spinal decompression to
    try and deal with the problem, but he remains
    paralyzed and goes through the last stages of his
    life in hospitals and hospice and ultimately died.
    And Michael describes the last day.  Mary described
    it.  Jennifer described it.
         When you think about Mary's pain and suffering,
    think about her going through this and think about
    the fact that, as Michael said, she hardly ever left
    his side, and she saw how much pain he was in.  And
    Jennifer saw it and felt how much pain he was in.
    That's a major component of pain and suffering.
         But pain and suffering didn't just end when he
    died.  Pain and suffering continues after his death. And Mary described that.  She described her
    loneliness, eating breakfast, being alone most of
    her time.  And Jennifer described it and how
    difficult it was for her mother over all the years.
         But loneliness and being alone are not
    necessarily the same thing.  And so Mary ultimately
    decided she didn't want to be alone any longer, and
    she remarried in October of 19- -- of 2014.  But it
    didn't work out.  '13.  It didn't work out.  She
    ultimately was divorced.  The simple fact was that
    she wasn't ready.
         The judge has instructed you that that
    information about a remarriage was admissible to
    show the whole truth, but you should not reduce any
    award based upon that.  It's not relevant to that.
    It would be improper for you to reduce the award
    because she was grieving for a year.  You can
    consider the fact that her loneliness may have been
    a little less during that time period in evaluating
    what amount to award.
         Ultimately you need to determine what is a fair
    and just amount to award for pain and suffering, for
    her loss of companionship and protection of Rayfield
    Brown, and you need to determine with Jennifer what
    is a fair amount to award based upon her pain and suffering and her loss of her father's
    companionship, guidance and instruction.
         Now, that's your decision.  Let me suggest to
    you what I think would be a reasonable figure for
    you to think about.  But it's your decision.  I
    suggest to you that a reasonable amount to award for
    Mary's pain and suffering, loss of companionship and
    protection would be $7.5 million under all the
    circumstances of this case.  I suggest to you that a
    reasonable amount to award for Jennifer's loss of
    her companionship, instruction and guidance and her
    pain and suffering would be $5 million.
         Now, that's my suggestion.  You can determine
    the amount.  You can determine a greater amount.
    You can determine a lesser amount.  That's what the
    jury system is all about, that you collectively come
    together and in your enlightened conscience,
    determine what will be a fair and just amount under
    all of the circumstances.
         That's the first issue in the case.  Let's next
    talk about the second issue in the case, whether
    punitive damages are warranted to punish Philip
    Morris and the tobacco industry.
         Now, I want to start by talking, in regard to
    that second issue, about this conspiracy.  The second issue is based on the fact that Philip Morris
    and the tobacco industry engaged in a decades-long
    conspiracy to conceal and omit the material
    information about the health effects of smoking and
    the addictive nature of smoking.
         That conspiracy is described in general in the
    latest Surgeon General's Report.  You've heard us
    talk a lot about the Surgeon General's Report, and I
    just remind you about what this is.  The Surgeon
    General's Report, by federal law, is required to
    gather all of the available evidence using the
    experts around the country that know about the
    issues and go through this very rigorous, detailed
    procedure to make sure that it sets out the
    consensus of scientific opinion.
         And you'll have this document as an exhibit.  I
    should warn you, it's not going to look like this.
    And if you try and find it, say, I remember that
    brown document, several inches thick, you'll have a
    copy of it, a photocopy, as opposed to the original.
    So look for Plaintiff's Exhibit 799.  If you want to
    find the most recent Surgeon General's Report, it's
    Plaintiff's Exhibit 799.
         And you will see when you look at that report
    that it has pages and pages in it of the expert witnesses who helped write it and who reviewed it,
    including Dr. David Burns, who testified here, and
    Dr. Robert Proctor, who testified here.
         The first section of this report, the first
    chapter, talks about what it was that the industry
    did over the years.  And what you'll see is this
    summary.  "For decades, the industry followed
    strategies set out in the early 1950s, denying the
    harms of its products, discrediting scientific
    evidence that showed those harms, funding research
    that was intended to divert attention from
    cigarettes and marketing new products with the
    implied" -- "that implied lower risk than existing
    products," the very things that we put in evidence
    in this case to show you the basis for awarding
    punitive damages.
         And the major conclusion reached by the Surgeon
    General's Report was that the tobacco company -- the
    tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been
    sustained by the aggressive strategies of the
    tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the
    public on the risks of smoking.
         Now, during that 50-year time period from the
    first Surgeon General's Report that's referenced in
    this report, over 20 million Americans have died from smoking-related disease.  And the major
    conclusion of this report, if you look in that first
    chapter, is that many of those deaths could have
    been avoided, but for this massive, extensive
    conspiracy to conceal and omit material information
    about smoking.
         So let's go back to the beginning of the
    conspiracy and talk about how it came about -- about
    and what occurred.
         First, the time period of the conspiracy is
    1953 through at least the year 2000.  Second, there
    were a number of conspirators.  Philip Morris was
    one of them.  The other major U.S. tobacco companies
    were others.  And you may recall that Dr. Proctor
    drew a diagram of all of the components of the
    conspiracy because over the years, it wasn't just
    the tobacco companies.  They created groups like the
    Tobacco Industry Research Council.  They created
    groups such as The Tobacco Institute, the Council
    of -- Committee of Counsel, various groups that he
    described in detail as part of the arms of this
    massive conspiracy that they engaged in over the
    years.
         He also described for you the acts that they
    did in furtherance of the conspiracy.  And they can be organized and categorized as follows.
         First, the principal focus was the denial that
    cigarettes were harmful and to conceal the
    information they really knew about cigarettes,
    conceal the fact that they already knew that
    cigarettes caused cancer when they first got
    together and over the years, all of the additional
    information that they concealed.
         Secondly, one of the acts done was what we call
    "doubt," creating a controversy.  It was decided in
    the earliest meetings that they could best deal with
    the issue by acting like there was a controversy,
    and they spent vast sums of money to convince the
    American public that there still was a continuing
    controversy about whether smoking caused cancer when
    there wasn't.
         Third, and probably most important for
    this case, was the campaign of reassurance.  The
    campaign of reassurance boils down to one simple
    fact.  If we're going to sell cigarettes, we have
    got to keep people smoking.  And how do you keep
    them smoking?  You reassure them that if there's
    anything harmful in cigarettes, you will take it
    out; you will solve the problem; they might as well
    continue smoking in the interim.  That reassurance theme was repeated for decades, and you've seen lots
    of examples of it.
         But most importantly, all of these things are
    particularly reprehensible because their massive,
    pervasive, misleading advertising was geared to
    focus on teens as the most likely source of
    replacement smokers.  Now, you've got to have
    replacement smokers if you're going to stay in
    business because smokers are dying from cancer and
    other diseases and smokers are quitting smoking.
    You've heard from the beginning of this case about
    the number of smokers that quit in various decades.
    Who's going to replace them?
         The only likely source were teenagers.  And so
    the entire marketing was focused on getting kids to
    start smoking, knowing that when they start smoking,
    they will quickly become addicted, and you may have
    a customer for decades, knowing, as part of their
    addiction, continue to smoke, or they struggle with
    trying to quit smoking.
         So that's the overview of the conspiracy.
         Now, the Court has instructed you that in
    evaluating -- evaluating the total misconduct in
    this conspiracy, you should keep in mind that Philip
    Morris is liable not just for what it did, but for what all of the other co-conspirators did in
    furtherance of the conspiracy.  That's what
    conspiracy law is all about.  You enter into
    conspiracy; you're liable for what all the
    conspirators do.
         It's not like when you say, I didn't
    specifically authorize that.  No, if you entered
    into a conspiracy to rob a bank, people go into the
    bank and somebody pulls a gun and shoots someone, it
    isn't a defense to say, I didn't agree to shoot
    someone.
         MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  The objection, Mr. Reilly?
         MR. REILLY:  Plaintiff's reference to a bank
    robbery.
         THE COURT:  As an example?  Sustained.
         Please proceed, Mr. Shields.
         MR. SHIELDS:  So the Court has instructed you
    that Philip Morris is liable for the acts done by
    its co-conspirators in furtherance of the
    conspiracy.
         All right.  How does the conspiracy start?  It
    started by the developing scientific evidence
    showing that there was an epidemic of lung cancer.
    And we started by having Dr. Burns show you this chart.  It is a chart that indicated that as
    cigarette smoking started to rise -- because back
    before 1900, there was very little cigarette
    smoking.  But as cigarette smoking started to rise
    through World War I and even World War II, there was
    about a 20-year lag, and then lung cancer started to
    rise in a line that's almost parallel to the
    increased use of cigarettes.
         That parallel led to investigators to be
    concerned that cigarettes and smoking was causing
    that dramatic increase of lung cancer, a disease
    that was almost unheard of before the massive sale
    of cigarettes.  And so they started doing a series
    of studies to determine whether smoking was, in
    fact, a cause or the cause of this lung cancer
    epidemic.
         And Dr. Burns told you that the breakthrough
    year was 1950.  Four major studies came out in four
    major medical journals, saying that smoking was
    linked with lung cancer and that it appeared to be
    that smoking caused lung cancer.
         And a couple years later, in 1953, there was an
    additional piece of important evidence, the mouse
    skin study, in which tar from cigarettes was painted
    on the skin of mice, and lo and behold, they developed tumors that were very much like lung
    cancer tumors.  That evidence created a panic among
    the cigarette companies because of the publicity of
    it, and it got a lot of publicity.  You saw the
    magazine article.  It got a lot of publicity at the
    time.  And because of that publicity, stock prices
    of cigarettes started to drop.  The companies had a
    serious problem.
         And so they got together by meeting at the
    Plaza Hotel in New York City in December of 1953 for
    what became the start of the conspiracy.  And at
    that meeting, they agreed that they would promote --
    effectively deal with the problem by engaging public
    relations counsel.
         Now, think about that for a moment.  The
    evidence is coming in that your product is killing
    people, causing lung cancer.  You get together and
    you don't decide what we're going to do to solve
    that problem.  You don't decide we're concerned
    about our customers and what we're doing to them.
    You don't discuss whether we even ought to be
    selling this product under these circumstances.  You
    discuss hiring a major public relations company to
    run a campaign for you, denying that cigarettes were
    a cause of lung cancer. And the documents that you'll see from that
    initial meeting pretty much confirm they already
    knew it caused lung cancer.  They talked about
    producing a cigarette that didn't cause lung cancer.
    They talked about people not being able to quit.
    That deals with addiction.  Interviews done by
    Hill & Knowlton and set out in these memorandums
    make it clear what they really knew at the time and
    instead of dealing with that, what they were going
    to do about it.
         One of the things they were going to do about
    it dealt with advertising.  Up to that point in
    time, it had not been unusual for the cigarette
    companies to make express claims about the health
    benefits of smoking.  Here's an example, Philip
    Morris, which claims that a group -- a report of
    findings of doctors support smoke in cigarettes as
    causing less irritation.  Similar claims were made
    by other tobacco companies during the time.
         And Hill & Knowlton suggested that they quit
    making claims of health benefits, but instead switch
    to what is called image advertising.  That's what we
    all see, that the tobacco companies were the ones
    that invented it back in 1953, for the 40 years
    following it.  Imaging advertising doesn't make an explicit finding in writing.  It uses pictures.  It
    uses images that suggest to you safety, health
    vigor, physical activities.  And so suddenly, the
    ads change from these kind of ads to ads with
    attractive, healthy, vigorous people, doing outdoor
    things, using colors that suggested purity, putting
    filters on the cigarettes that suggested filter
    purity.
         All of that was part of creating an image.
    That's what image advertising was and that's what
    the conspiracy did.  Now, did they compete in their
    advertising?  Of course, they did.  They had
    products.  That misses the point.  As Dr. Robert
    Proctor told you, the point was that over their
    advertising was this umbrella from the conspiracy,
    and that is you use image advertising.  You do not
    tell people what we already know, that smoking
    causes cancer.  You conceal the real health hazard.
    You conceal the addictive nature.  And for decades,
    all their competitive advertising actually complied
    with that very express, explicit conspiracy decided
    in December of 1953.
         The first thing they did in support of this
    public relations campaign was issue the Frank
    Statement in which they denied that cigarette smoking caused disease, while claiming they were
    interested in people's health as a basic
    responsibility paramount to every other
    consideration of the business.
         They also formed a couple of initial
    organizations that were part of the arms of the
    conspiracy.  Early on, the principal organization
    they used was TIRC, Tobacco Industry Research
    Committee, created in 1954.  Most of the early
    activities were done by it.  Later it became --
    called CTR.  They also created The Tobacco Institute
    in 1958 that continued to carry out their activities
    and to be a lobbying arm in Washington, D.C.
         Now, CTR, the Tobacco Industry Research
    Committee, as we know from their internal documents,
    was nothing but a front, a shield for their campaign
    to conceal and deny.  The documents indicate that.
    All of the evidence supports that as well.  It was a
    front because it really wasn't interested in finding
    out the truth.  It was interested in trying to find
    any evidence they could that denied the allegation
    that cigarette smoking caused disease.
         And recall Dr. Proctor described this as
    distraction science; that is, you spent hundreds of
    millions of dollars conducting studies by well-known scientists.  Some of them got Nobel prizes.  But the
    studies didn't look at the fundamental issue of
    whether cigarette smoking caused cancer.  Instead,
    they looked at all these other issues other than the
    real one.  And what this enabled them to do was to
    say, look, we spent $300 million, and we find no
    evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
    It distracted from the issue.  It enabled them to
    make claims that there was a continuing controversy,
    when there was no controversy at all.  And the
    documents confirmed that's what TIRC was all about.
         Now, if there was any doubt about whether they
    really knew that cigarettes really caused lung
    cancer, it is resolved by the memorandum of the
    visit by the BAT scientists to the tobacco companies
    of the United States in April of 1958.  This is one
    of the most important documents you'll have.  This
    document, Plaintiff's Exhibit 216, is a document in
    which they record that Philip Morris and all of the
    other tobacco company scientists that they met with,
    other than Greene at Yale, thought that cigarette
    smoking caused lung cancer.  The top scientist at
    Philip Morris knew that cigarette smoking caused
    lung cancer during the entire time period they were
    denying it in their campaign of denial and conspiracy.
         But you have an addition to that document in
    which they made the admission to the other
    companies, their own internal documents.  Here's one
    from 1958.  Dr. Robert DuPuis.  He was the head of
    their research department, one of the top executives
    at Philip Morris, in which he sets out their
    knowledge that every cigarette smoked contributes to
    lung cancer, either alone or in association with
    other physical agents.
         It's further confirmed in a 1961 report by
    Dr. Wakeham.  You saw Dr. Wakeham.  He was shown in
    some of the interviews.  We've seen lots of
    documents from him.  He was a top executive, very
    top of management of Philip Morris.  In this early
    report that he did, he reported that their research
    showed that he found cancer-causing substances in
    every class of compounds of smoke.  Think about
    that.  This is at the time that they are publicly
    declaring over and over again, there's nothing
    harmful in cigarettes, and if we ever find anything
    harmful in cigarettes, we'll take it out.
         The other thing that was found in this 1961
    memo was that they couldn't take it out.  Selective
    removal of the carcinogens simply did not work. They did not have the technology to do it.
         Ultimately, all of this led to the report of
    the Surgeon General, the first report of the Surgeon
    General, in 1964.  It's actually an advisory
    committee of experts to the Surgeon General, in
    which they conclude what the evidence had
    overwhelming established by that point in time, that
    cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, and then it
    suggested that it caused other diseases, including
    lung cancer being one.
         Now, from the Plaza meeting forward, not just
    through the Surgeon General's Report, but in the
    decades following, the conspiracy had three themes.
    We've already mentioned them.
         First was denying that there was any harm from
    cigarettes and concealing what they really knew.
    The conspiracy is about concealing and omitting
    information.  And what they concealed, they
    concealed that they knew cigarettes caused cancer.
    They concealed that they knew cigarettes were
    addictive.  They concealed that they designed
    cigarettes to create and sustain addiction.  They
    concealed that their filter cigarettes were no safer
    than regular cigarettes while implying that they
    were.  They concealed that low-tar cigarettes, while advertising that they were safer, were no more safe
    than under -- unfiltered cigarettes for the simple
    reason that the way people smoke cigarettes, they
    got the same amount of tar.  So they were not
    low-tar at all.  All of those were the things that
    were concealed in the decades following the Plaza
    meeting.
         They repeatedly told us that if there was
    anything harmful in cigarettes, they would take it
    out.  And we showed you a bunch of documents to show
    that.  I'm not going to go through all of them, but
    let me just run through some of them.
         First, we look at this speech from the
    president of Philip Morris in which he asserted that
    there was not one shred of conclusive evidence to
    support the link between cigarette smoking and lung
    cancer, at basically the same time frame that his
    scientists are talking to BAT scientists, that, yes,
    smoking causes lung cancer.
         He went so far as to go beyond that in another
    speech and said, if I thought that there was any
    harmful effect of cigarette smoking, we would stop
    the business tomorrow.
         And recall, Dr. Proctor told you they repeated
    that statement time and time again.  They would go out of business.  Why do you tell the public you'll
    go out of business if there's anything harmful?
    It's a way of saying, we are credible, believe us.
    There really isn't anything harmful.  If there was,
    we wouldn't be in the business.
         And they did that at the same time that the
    internal documents showed that they knew that
    cigarette smoking was harmful.
         And then you saw one of their representatives
    come on the CBS evening news following the issuance
    of the first Surgeon General's Report and repeat the
    mantra that there's nothing harmful in cigarettes,
    and if and when we ever find anything harmful, we'll
    take it out, their reassurance campaign to keep
    people smoking.
         And later, you saw the president, named Howard
    Cullman, entitled Philip Morris go on Face the
    Nation and repeat it again.  There's nothing harmful
    in cigarettes, and if we ever find anything harmful,
    we will remove it, so you might as well continue
    smoking.
         The New England Journal of Medicine summarized
    what they did in the 1960 editorial, in which it
    says no responsible person could still deny that
    cigarettes cause lung cancer and that the conduct of the tobacco industry has been deplorable.  Because
    of their denials, they're adding filters, suggesting
    that they were taking out anything harmful at the
    very time they claimed they were not -- there was
    nothing harmful.
         That's the denial and concealment portion of
    it.
         But in addition, one major element of
    conspiracy was creating doubt by claiming there was
    a controversy when there was no controversy.  That's
    what TIRC and its distraction science was all about,
    getting evidence out there from other scientists on
    unrelated subjects so as to suggest there was still
    a controversy when there was no longer a
    controversy.
         They also put out all of these white papers,
    sent them to doctors and medical schools and opinion
    makers and newspapers and politicians, in which they
    claimed that there was a scientific dispute.  Here
    are a couple of examples of it.  And this kind of
    attempt to create the impression, totally incorrect,
    that there was a continuing controversy went on for
    years.  Into the '80s, they claimed that there was
    still a scientific controversy when any controversy
    had long since resolved.  There had been a scientific consensus by at least the early mid
    1950s.
         The audience, as we showed you, for all of
    these documents were opinion makers, doctors,
    politicians, newspapers, people that might influence
    the rest of us by their views.
         They also put out phony medical journals.
    Here's an example, tobacco and health research, in
    which they're claiming that lung specialists
    causes -- it says there are 28 reasons for doubt in
    the chart.  Why is it set in this format?  To make
    it look like it's a medical journal when it's not a
    medical journal and then send it out to doctors who,
    like lots of throw aways, put them in their office
    for the patients pick up and take a look at it.
    And, thus, they could influence with the
    now product.
         Another example was the claim that lung cancer
    was somehow related to baldness, totally frivolous
    assertion, but part of their campaign of creating a
    controversy.
         And they recognized that they also had to
    discredit the public health for it.  So they started
    attacking the Surgeon General and the Surgeon
    General's reports and attacking their person.  You saw that television interview of the representative
    from the tobacco company industry, his deep voice,
    talking very authoritatively about Joe Califano.
    What was the point of that?  The whole point was to
    ridicule the Surgeon General, the public health
    community in hopes that people would not listen to
    what they had to say.
         But perhaps the most reprehensible thing was to
    plant totally bogus articles in the major magazines.
    The best example is True.  Back at the time, this
    was a major magazine, and they planted an article in
    it that claimed that cigarette smoking does not
    cause cancer.  The author of that was Hill &
    Knowlton, public relations firm, but they used the
    name of a sports writer who was connected with
    Hill & Knowlton and put his name on it so that it
    appeared to be written by someone other than someone
    related to tobacco.
         They took the same article and then planted it
    in the National Enquirer with the bold headline,
    "Cigarette Cancer Linked to Spine."  Only this time,
    they changed the name again and used another name,
    but one who was not even a real person, a totally
    made up person.
         Now, these aren't just isolated examples. Dr. Goldberg told you about Hill & Knowlton and
    their campaign of going out and talking to Time and
    Newsweek and The New Yorker and meeting with the
    editors, convincing them to add information to
    stories, to publish favorable stories, to kill
    stories that were adversely in this group.
         Now, you have seen -- and you'll see in the
    evidence that you take out -- a lot of documents
    from newspapers, magazines and so forth, some put in
    by both sides.  Take a look at those.  In almost
    every one of those, you will see a statement that
    some scientists say it causes cancer, and then
    you'll have a statement from the tobacco people
    saying it does not.
         Hill & Knowlton played on the propensity of the
    press to think that there were two sides to every
    story and continued to get newspapers, magazines to
    write as if there was still controversy long after
    it wasn't a controversy by putting both sides in.
    That was part of their campaign as well.
         All of this was summarized in a 1979 Surgeon
    General's Report that talked about the claims of the
    tobacco companies being empty back at the time of
    the original report in 1964 and utterly vacuous by
    1979.  15 years of additional research overwhelmingly showed that cigarette smoking caused
    cancer, but they continued to deny it until 2000.
    They continued to conceal what they really knew
    until 2000.
         The third thing was the reassurance thing, the
    whole point of which is to keep smokers smoking.
    That theme started very early when Dr. DuPuis
    appeared on See It Now.  We played that for you.
    And what he said, after talking about how they were
    looking at the components of smoke, and they used
    this scope to try and find them, what he concluded
    by saying was there's nothing harmful in cigarettes,
    and if we ever find it, we'll take it out.  That was
    a very carefully thought-out theme that was used for
    decades.  It was specifically used to keep addictive
    smokers smoking.
         Okay.  You saw from the Cullman video in 1964
    that he repeated it on network television in regard
    to the Surgeon General's Report.  You saw that the
    reason for that in this memorandum between two top
    executives at Philip Morris was to provide a
    psychological crutch for smokers to continue
    smoking.
         Remember, Dr. Burns was asked a question, why
    did they continue these denials and concealments long after it was overwhelming in the consensus of
    the scientific community, long after public service
    announcements, long after all of this publicity?
    And he said, well, you know, they weren't aiming all
    of this at the general public.  They knew it
    wouldn't sell with the general public.  They were
    aiming it at addicted smokers as a way of keeping
    addicted smokers smoking.  And they did that despite
    the fact that their own internal documents showed
    that the present technology did not enable them to
    remove the harmful components of cigarettes.
         Here's the fundamental problem.  When they try
    and take out the carcinogens in cigarettes primarily
    found in tar, it also takes out the nicotine.  And
    so to the extent you're selectively reducing them,
    you're also removing the nicotine.  You reach a
    point where if you take out any more nicotine,
    people won't smoke because people smoke for
    nicotine.  There's a threshold level you've got to
    have to keep people smoking.
         So the choice is we'll take out more and more
    of the carcinogens and reduce the nicotine so that
    people aren't addicted, or we leave it in in order
    to make sure that there's enough nicotine to keep
    people addicted.  And, of course, they chose to never go below that threshold and to leave it in so
    that people remained addicted.
         You've seen the research that they did over the
    years about why people smoke.  They knew and
    understood, going back to the '50s, that people
    smoked for nicotine, that people smoked because they
    became addicted to the nicotine.  And you'll have
    those documents now to see as you deliberate.
         One of the most important documents you'll have
    is Monograph 13.  It is a publication that Dr. Burns
    told you about in which the National Cancer
    Institute evaluated whether these attempts to reduce
    tar actually did any good, whether filters did any
    good, whether the design changes that they made in
    the '50s did any good.
         And Dr. Burns was candid with you and said, you
    know, back in 1981, I was part of the public health
    committee, Public Health Service, recommending that
    smokers should switch to low-tar cigarettes as a way
    of reducing their risks.  But we didn't know what
    the tobacco company knew, what they already
    understood from their internal research and that
    simply was this fact.
         A low-tar cigarette does not mean the smoker
    gets low tar.  Because the smoker has to have a given level of nicotine to stay addicted, and in
    order to get that level of nicotine, they'll smoke
    more cigarettes.  They'll cover the holes, which
    dilute the smoke, so that more of the smoke comes
    in, and because of this phenomenon called
    "compensation," they're not getting low tar at all.
    And as a result, years later when they look at all
    of the scientific evidence and evaluate it, there
    was no reduction in risk.  There was no benefit
    whatsoever from filtered cigarettes or low-tar
    cigarettes.  They simply did not work.
         And one of the conclusions of that report is
    that simple fact, that because of compensation that
    these low-yield cigarettes did not reduce the risk
    whatsoever.
         Now, a major part of their campaign included
    the use of image advertising to develop these themes
    of denial and concealment, a controversy of
    reassurance.  Dr. Goldberg told you that between
    1954 and 1995, they spent $150 billion, in 2006
    dollars, on their massive advertising approach, $4
    billion a year, $10 million a day.  They spent more
    on the massive advertising in one day than the
    public health community had to spend on public
    health announcements in an entire year. Now, this just isn't Dr. Goldberg telling you
    that.  Take a look at the various consensus reports
    we've put in evidence, starting with the 1967 report
    from the Federal Trade Commission, which is required
    to report to Congress and concluded that cigarette
    advertising continues to be pervasive in the
    American society, although at that point in time, in
    1981, it had already been prohibited from the
    broadcast media.
         There is a report from the Surgeon General that
    you will have in evidence as well, called
    "Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young People," 1994
    Surgeon General's Report.  And it analyzes the
    pervasive nature of cigarette advertising and the
    amount of money they spent.  There's a table in
    there.  You can look at that table, and it shows you
    how much money was spent.
         And then there is the National Cancer
    Institute's Monograph 19, "The Role of the Media in
    Promoting and Reducing Tobacco Use."  In that
    report, you will see that in 2005, the U.S. Tobacco
    industry spent $13.5 billion on tobacco advertising
    and promotion.  And you'll have charts that are
    included in Monograph 19, 4.7 and 4.8.  Those charts
    show you how much money they spent and how much they spent on particular brands like Marlboros.
         There's just no doubt that tobacco advertising
    dominated our culture throughout this entire time
    period because it was so massive, so pervasive.
    Back in the '50s, you couldn't turn on the
    television without seeing a tobacco ad.  It just
    totally dominated open television.  And the
    characters smoked in the programs.
         The Monograph 19 reports that tobacco
    advertising has been dominated by the three themes,
    the satisfaction theme, assuaging anxieties about
    the dangers of smoking, allaying the health concern,
    trying to convince people that there really wasn't a
    concern, what we called the campaign of scientific
    controversy and the campaign of reassurance and a
    third theme of associating cigarette smoking with
    desirable outcomes:  Independence, attractiveness,
    social success, sexual attraction, thinness.  Those
    image themes worked in given people, kids primarily,
    to start smoking and keep addicted adult smokers
    smoking.
         Now, here's an example of their attempts to
    assuage anxieties about the health of cigarettes,
    and it's a particularly important example because
    this is a cigarette brand manufactured by Philip Morris that Rayfield Brown smoked, the Multifilter,
    in which there's a suggestion that there's a
    reduction in tar and consequently it must be better
    for you.  And the theme not only included that 95
    percent theme, but also used outdoor image
    advertising of healthy, attractive people to suggest
    that cigarette smoking was okay.
         Now, Philip Morris will say, well, everybody
    does that.  Look at Budweiser commercials or look at
    the commercial for this.  Well, aside from the fact
    that those other constant things don't kill almost
    500,000 Americans every year, the point is, yes,
    that's what everybody uses because it works.  And
    because they were using themes that worked that
    every other advertising used as well, it normalizes
    smoking.  It makes it appear that it's acceptable,
    that it's part of the culture.
         So certainly these are common themes, and
    that's the whole point of what is wrong with doing
    it in the first place.
         Here's some other examples of using image
    advertise to allay the health theme.  They also
    directed their advertising ad kicks, and we know
    that because their internal documents show first
    that they understood that most smokers start out as teenagers, whether -- you've heard it said.  Almost
    90 percent of new smokers are kids.  They knew that.
    And because they knew it, they went out and surveyed
    and interviewed high school kids to try and figure
    out what they could do in their way of advertising
    to get them to smoke.
         And then there's this incredible document that
    you'll see, smoking patterns of teenagers and its
    importance to Philip Morris.  And what this document
    says -- and we'll look at it -- is that the success
    of Philip Morris is the result of selling Marlboros
    to teenagers.  It went from the seventh largest
    company ultimately to the largest cigarette company
    in the world on the strength of the Marlboro brand.
    You saw that documentary we showed you where they
    talk about how successful their ads were and how it
    caused their sales to go up.
         But what they didn't tell you and what this
    document will show you is that almost 70 percent of
    15-year-olds at the time smoked Marlboros.
    Marlboro's brand success was based on 15-year-olds.
    The company's success was based on selling to
    15-year-olds.  And what this document talks about is
    the demographics were changing.  The number of young
    people who are smoking is less because of the changes in the daily consumption.  And when the
    young people are fewer, it's going to adversely
    affect Philip Morris the most, because that's who we
    sell our cigarettes to.  And this whole memorandum
    is about the economic impact on them from the change
    in the demographics and the fact that they would be
    selling fewer cigarettes to kids.
         The campaign also included denying that
    cigarettes were addictive.  And you saw that leading
    up to the most blatant example, going to Congress,
    raising your right hand, swearing to tell the truth,
    the whole truth and nothing but the truth and then
    claiming under oath that cigarettes were not
    addictive when, in fact, your own files were full of
    your scientists telling you they were addictive, and
    you designed your cigarettes to create and sustain
    addiction.  And we showed you some of those
    documents.
         But let me digress a moment.  This is an
    important point.  There's a question here that's
    been raised about whether all this advertising is
    effective in causing people to smoke.  And -- and
    you're likely to hear Philip Morris say, how many of
    them start to engage maybe after it starts?
    Finally, everybody's believed that advertising is effective.  That really misses the point.  The point
    in regard to conspiracy is that this advertising
    concealed what they knew and omitted all of the
    underlying health effects that were the basis of
    conspiracy.
         But does it work?  Now there's massive
    scientific evidence that shows that their
    advertising program caused kids to start smoking,
    and it resulted in increased smoking, that is,
    people continuing smoking.  This is the major
    conclusion of the 2007 report from the National
    Cancer Institute, as you folks have see in the
    evidence.
         It's repeated as well in a report of the
    Surgeon General.  The evidence is sufficient to
    conclude there's a causal relationship between
    advertising and promotional efforts of the tobacco
    companies and the initiation of people starting
    smoking, and the progression of tobacco use among
    young people.
         The evidence is overwhelming.  Dr. Goldberg
    told you about 4,000 cites in the most recent report
    that supported that statement.
         Part of their advertising also was placing
    cigarettes in movies.  They did it by providing free product.  They did it in a variety of ways.  And the
    report of the National Cancer Institute notes that
    between 1978 and 1980, they placed cigarette smoking
    in 191 movies -- that's Philip Morris alone -- many
    of which were rated PG, some of which, like The
    Muppet Movie, was G.  And we saw an example of that,
    Grease, and a movie that I think teenage girls for
    the last three decades have been provided and
    watched over and over and a play about it.
         What this really shows is what starting
    smoking's all about.  The first time somebody picks
    up a cigarette, it's nauseous and you cough and it's
    not a very nice thing.  And as Philip Morris
    recognized, a 16-year-old, 15-year-old picks up that
    cigarette for psychosocial reasons, peer pressure,
    to be cool, be an adult, be a little rebellious, but
    they quickly become addicted.
         And the second big scene that we saw really
    shows a point, how the movie depicted a change in
    the lead character Sandy, Olivia Newton John, to
    this vamp, seductress, to what any 16-year-old girl
    would love to be.
         You think that had an impact on other
    16-year-old girls that went out and started smoking?
    Of course, they did.  That's why they were placed in the movies in the first place, including in
    Superman.  You saw the Marlboro truck in Superman.
         Let's turn next to the question of addiction.
    There is no question that smoking is addictive.
    What that means is how incredibly hard it is to quit
    smoking.  Dr. Burns showed you this information on
    quitting.  Almost 80 percent of smokers went on to
    quit.  Almost 7 percent try to quit each year -- I'm
    sorry -- 50 percent.  Only 6 percent are successful
    six months later, and only 3 percent are successful
    long-term.  Now, that doesn't mean that after years
    of trying, someone's not going to be successful.
    But that's the whole point.  For almost everyone,
    for 97 percent of smokers, it takes multiple
    attempts, years to try and quit smoking.  That's how
    powerful nicotine is in addicting people.
         No one has ever become a cigarette smoker by
    smoking cigarettes without nicotine because nicotine
    is what addicts smokers, and nicotine is what they
    made sure stayed in a cigarette.  Their own internal
    documents showed they understood that nicotine was
    addictive and was the principal means by which they
    were able to sell cigarettes.
         And they designed their cigarettes to be
    addictive.  Dr. Proctor told you there are three ways they did that.
         One is you don't become addicted at the levels
    you see unless you inhale cigarettes.  You inhale
    cigarettes into your lung.  Nicotine hits your brain
    in about 10 or 20 seconds.  If you don't inhale, it
    takes much, much longer, and you're much less likely
    to become addicted.  So how do you make them inhale?
    You add all these flavors to reduce the harshness.
    You flue cure it.  You select a tobacco that people
    can inhale because you need smokers to inhale to
    make sure they're addicted.  That's what the huge
    increase of consumption of cigarettes was all about.
    The industry was able to make them inhalable and
    thus more addictive.
         In order to make sure that there is sufficient
    nicotine to be addictive, they also have to control
    the nicotine level because tobacco out in the field
    doesn't have a uniform level of nicotine.  One might
    have one level; another one might have another
    level.  So they have to bring them together to make
    sure they get the right amount.  They add
    reconstituted tobacco, in which they create a paper
    slurry and chop it up to look like tobacco and
    spread nicotine back on it to make sure that they
    have more formal levels, and they design their cigarettes to have a specific level.
         This is a really crucial document.  This
    document is the Multifilter design, the cigarette
    that Rayfield changed to, in which they had a
    specific specification as to how much nicotine it
    should contain.  The amount that Dr. Proctor told
    you was the sweet spot in which you could make sure
    that people were addicted.
         Nicotine can also be controlled in a variety of
    other ways.  In fact, it shows the sort of thing
    they did to control it.  One of the things was the
    use of ammonia, acetaldehyde to try and control pH.
    Dr. Proctor explained that to you.  The pH of the
    smoke will determine how much of it's absorbed in
    the lungs and how quickly it gets to the brain.  If
    you add ammonia, you will change the pH so that the
    nicotine gets to the brain faster, in hopes that
    it's more likely to be addictive.  Philip Morris
    added ammonia to its products.
         This is the conclusion of the 2010 Surgeon
    General's Report, that cigarettes have been
    researched, designed and manufactured to increase
    the likelihood that initiation will lead to
    dependence and difficulty achieving cessation due to
    the contents of the emissions in addition to nicotine and it references ammonia compound.  And
    these design features increase freebase nicotine,
    produce larger puffs, make it more likely that there
    is nicotine there.
         That's what Marlboro was all about.  It was so
    popular because of its nicotine kept, from adding
    ammonia and then the amount of nicotine to it.
         So at the time that they were designing their
    cigarettes to make sure that they were addictive,
    that they were adding ammonia, that they were doing
    all these things to make sure that they were
    inhalable, that they were controlling the levels of
    nicotine they needed for addiction, they were
    present before Congress, and denying, as all the
    other tobacco companies did as part of the
    conspiracy, that nicotine is addictive.
         In fact, nicotine is the fundamental reason
    that individuals continued to smoke, as the 2010
    Surgeon General's Report suggests.  And it is the
    reason that people end up getting cancer because of
    the nicotine in smoke.
         Now, let's go from talking about those events.
    And you're going to hear, I think, from Philip
    Morris that we have to prove our case by clear and
    convincing evidence.  It is absolutely clear and convincing that they engaged in conspiracy.  There's
    no evidence to the contrary.  It is clear and
    convincing as to what they did in terms of denial,
    concealment, creating a doubt in the controversy,
    reassuring the smoker.  There's no evidence to the
    contrary.  It couldn't be any clearer.  It couldn't
    be any more convincing.
         What they want to talk about is whether or not,
    in fact, it had an impact on Rayfield Brown.  And so
    let's turn to that issue.  What in their conspiracy
    is a substantial cause of Rayfield Brown continuing
    to smoke and as a result of this, did he get lung
    cancer?
         Now, they introduced all kinds of evidence
    trying to blame Mr. Brown.  You saw that from them
    in the case, his mind told him, his conscience told
    him that he knew.  He went to the pool hall.  Why is
    all of that of interest?  Is to blame Mr. Brown.
         Now, let me be clear, they have a right to
    defend themselves, and I'm not criticizing them for
    their defending.  But I have a right to tell you
    that their defense is not true, that it is
    irrelevant, that it is nothing more than a
    distraction from the real issues in the case, just
    like distraction science by TIRC. MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  May we
    approach?  I need to make a motion.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Ladies and gentlemen,
    while we're at sidebar, you can stand.  Please do
    not talk.
         (A sidebar conference was held outside the
hearing of the jury as follows:)
         MR. REILLY:  Judge, counsel has just equated
    the defense in this case to -- to the fraudulent
    concealment to the conspiracy that's been part of
    the causes of action in this case.  It's highly
    improper and I move for a mistrial based on it.
         It is -- it has been the subject of
    countless -- realized by Courts in tobacco liti- --
    in Engle litigation that it is totally impermissible
    and that counsel just did it right now in front of
    this jury.  So I move for a mistrial.
         MR. SHIELDS:  I specifically said I wasn't
    criticizing what they were doing and I'm not.  But
    you have to have a right to say that what they say
    isn't true.  They have --
         MR. REILLY:  I have a problem -- I have a
    problem with this jury -- Mr. Shields saying our
    defense was inaccurate or our defense was off target
    or something like that.  What he said was -- and you can pull it up on your screen.  What he said was
    that our defense in this case was nothing more than
    or the same as this distraction campaign to defraud.
    That's just what he said.  I can't -- I can't
    restate it.  You can see it in the transcript.  And
    it was well beyond simply saying that, you know, our
    defense is inaccurate and not supported by the
    evidence and things of that nature.  So I move for a
    mistrial.
         THE COURT:  All right.  The Court will take it
    under advisement.
         I'll going to -- how much longer do you think,
    Mr. Shields?
         MR. SHIELDS:  I want to say something.  I'm
    going to try to wrap it up in 15 minutes so that I
    have a half hour left.
         MR. REILLY:  I think Your Honor already
    indicated that rebuttal was 10, 15 minutes long, so.
         MR. SHIELDS:  Well, I don't intend to use it, I
    just -- depends on what you have to say, if you
    raise some issues that I have to --
         THE COURT:  All right.  Thank you.
         (The sidebar conference was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court, in the
presence of the jury:) THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, we're going
    to take a short break, and we're going to take a
    longer break in between the closing statements.
         This break also is to assist our court
    reporter, who has been typing diligently all
    morning.  So this will just be a short break to
    allow you to go back to the jury room, use the
    restroom, probably about five minutes.
         Mr. Shields tells me he's got about 15 or 20
    more minutes.  We'll then take our mid-morning break
    at that point in time.
         Please do not talk about the case in any
    regard.
         So we'll just take a short break now for about
    five minutes.
         (Recess taken.)
         [#DELETED MOTION FOR MISTRIAL#]
                  MR. SHIELDS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         One matter I wanted to tell you about.  I told
    you about the importance of that document in which
    they talked about the impact of teenagers on Philip
    Morris.  Let me -- you may not have been able to see
    the document itself.  It's P366, if you want to take
    a look at it during your deliberations.  We were
    just starting to talk about the defenses, and as I
    was saying to you, I'm not here to criticize or say
    they don't have the right to defend this case, and
    I'm certainly not equating anything they're doing defending this case as to anything that's happened
    before.
         I do want to talk specifically about their
    defense as you have seen and how they really don't
    address the issues here at all.  Sort of categorize
    them into a few categories.
         The first category I would call their use of
    documents to suggest that some people knew smoking
    was harmful prior to the time of this conspiracy.
    And you recall you saw an 1845 letter from President
    Adams, and for the life of me I still don't
    understand what the point of that is.  You saw a
    Sears catalog from the turn of the century
    advertising something to help you quit.  It's
    difficult for me to understand what that has to do
    with the issues in the case.  And you saw a Reader's
    Digest and so forth.
         I take it the whole point of that is to say Mr.
    Brown has some responsibility for continuing to
    smoke because there was information out there at
    some point in the past that smoking might be
    harmful.  But this case is not about whether Mr.
    Brown was responsible or was a cause of his own
    death.  The issue for you to determine is whether
    their conspiracy was a substantial cause of the death.
         Now, there can be more than one cause.  Two
    events can come together and be a cause, and both
    can be equally responsible.  Let me give you an
    example.  I'm certainly not suggesting this is an
    example of what we have here, but it demonstrates
    the point.
         Think about an automobile accident.  One driver
    runs a red light and goes into the intersection.
    Another driver coming from the other way is speeding
    20 miles above the speed limit and crashes into the
    car that ran the red light.  They both violated the
    law.  Take away either that they did and you
    wouldn't have a collision.  They are both
    substantial causes of that automobile accident.
    There can be more than one cause.
         Well, the question here is not whether Mr.
    Brown was a cause.  The question here is whether
    they, that is Philip Morris and the conspirators,
    were a substantial cause of his continuing smoking.
         Now, I will tell you quite candidly, I don't
    dispute that Mr. Brown could have tried earlier to
    quit smoking, that we could criticize him for not
    doing more to quit smoking, that he may have some
    responsibility for not quitting smoking.  That doesn't have anything to do with the issue.  The
    question is whether they also are a substantial
    cause.  So you will have to evaluate whether the
    conspiracy is a substantial reason that he continued
    to smoke.
         The second thing they talk about is the defense
    you've heard before, no secret.  Was this document
    secret?  You've heard it repeated time and time
    again.  I call it the no-secret defense.  Totally
    misses the point.
         The secret is not that people were saying that
    smoking causes lung cancer.  You wouldn't have had a
    conspiracy if nobody was saying it.  You wouldn't
    have had a conspiracy unless it was public
    information, unless, as Dr. Proctor said, it was big
    news.  That's not the secret.
         To ask people, was it a secret somebody was
    saying it, was it a secret it was difficult to quit,
    totally misses the point.  The secret is what they
    internally knew and believed, what they internally
    did and concealed from the public and never
    disclosed it.
         Now, you also heard this phrase waiting to
    hear.  I call it the waiting-to-hear defense.  Was
    Mr. Brown waiting to hear something?  For the life of me I don't understand what that means at all.
         If something is being concealed from you, what
    are you waiting to hear?  You don't even know what's
    being concealed from you, how could you be waiting
    to hear?
         Does that suggest that somehow they're not
    responsible?  Think of another analogy.  Once again,
    not saying this is the equivalent of them.  Think of
    this analogy.
         A realtor and an owner conspire to sell a house
    and not reveal that it's got a major leak in the
    roof.  They paint over the stain --
         MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Hold on one minute, Mr. Shields.
         Mr. Reilly.
         MR. REILLY:  Improper analogies for our
    litigation.
         THE COURT:  Meaning different facts from this
    case?
         MR. REILLY:  Sure.
         THE COURT:  That objection is sustained.
         MR. SHIELDS:  Your Honor, may I be heard on
    that?
         THE COURT:  You may.
         Ladies and gentlemen, you're welcome to stand.      (Sidebar bar conference outside the hearing of
    the jury.)
         THE COURT:  Go ahead, Mr. Shields.
         MR. SHIELDS:  The whole point of an analogy is
    to illustrate a point.  I'm not saying it's
    factually identical at all, but to say here is
    something to help you understand.
         I've never had anyone say I can't in closing
    argument do an analogy that's more common to the
    people than the facts you have here.
         THE COURT:  Well, you never until today, Mr.
    Shields.  I think the problem -- I understand, in
    situations you have different types of purported
    breaches, and I understand those types of analogies.
    I think the difficulty is when you're dealing with
    intentional behavior analogizing to other facts you
    run the risk of getting into situations that are
    potentially problematic.
         My next concern is the analogy -- the other
    things, the out of town, and those types of things I
    understand for all those same reasons.  I think -- I
    think you're going to talk about an intentional
    tort, lying related to a house, and that just -- it
    just concerns me because I think that's a higher
    level analogy.      But, you know, perhaps everyone else does it.
    I've been accused of that before by Mr. Reilly with
    regard to this partial verdict, but that's my
    concern with that analogy.
         Mr. Reilly, certainly I'll hear from you.
         MR. REILLY:  You made my argument for me, Your
    Honor.  This is -- there is no way that people can
    start talking about other wrongful acts, intentional
    wrongful acts, and then say this is an analogous
    situation or a situation in which you are going to
    learn this lesson, or you experienced this lesson.
    Just completely inappropriate.
         THE COURT:  That's my ruling.  Thank you.
         (Following sidebar.)
         MR. SHIELDS:  Certainly Mr. Brown wasn't
    waiting to hear information that he knew nothing
    about.  You can't wait to hear something you don't
    know.  That's the whole point of conspiracy, that
    you conceal material information.
         They also have a defense in which they talk
    about what his mother told him, what his coaches
    told him.  Once again, another attempt to blame Mr.
    Brown.  That's not the issue.  The issue is whether
    the conspiracy was a substantial cause as well.
         You recall Kaiser Thomas specifically said his mother's concern was he wasn't old enough.  When he
    later was older he smoked around her.  Her concern
    wasn't that it caused cancer.  The coach's concern
    was whether it impacted your stamina, not whether it
    caused cancer.  Those are wholly unrelated issues to
    what we're talking about.
         You may also hear that there is no evidence
    that Rayfield heard their statements.  It would be
    impossible not to hear.  As the witnesses described
    to you, they were pervasive.  You couldn't grow up
    in America in the 1950's and 60's and 70's and not
    see their advertising.  You couldn't grow up in
    America in that time and not understand from their
    massive pervasive public relations campaign that
    they claimed there was nothing harmful in
    cigarettes, that they asserted there was a
    continuing controversy when there wasn't, that they
    said they would be taking out anything that was
    harmful when they knew they couldn't take it out.
         You from your common sense can understand and
    know given the extent of the conspiracy that he had
    to hear, he had to know like all the rest of us.
         Let's then turn to the specific evidence here
    of substantial cause.  The first evidence is what in
    fact happened?  Dr. Burns took these diagrams to show you the impact of the disclosure of information
    on consumption, the drop, and then the impact of the
    conspiracy and how it went back up.  And then only
    started dropping again as the evidence became more
    and more overwhelming and there was more and more
    information available.
         The point is that lung cancer rates directly
    follow those consumption lines, and had that
    information back at this end then moved 20 years out
    to when the conspiracy started in the first place
    what would have happened?  Millions of lives that
    would have been saved included the high likelihood
    of Rayfield Brown.  That is a compelling piece of
    evidence.
         Secondly, you heard about labeling, and the
    point is that study after study has shown that
    cigarette labeling was totally ineffective in
    advising people of the real risk of smoking, and
    that addicted smokers just didn't accept it, and the
    surveys, the polling information confirms that
    information, starting with the 1967 Federal Trade
    Commission report, the 1981 Federal Trade Commission
    report, and more recently Surgeon General reports.
    And the reason for that is addiction.
         Dr. Burns described for you the effect of addiction on information and whether you accept
    information.  And what he told you, you have these
    competing considerations, but what addiction does is
    it makes an addicted smoker particularly susceptible
    to denial, makes them particularly susceptible to
    the assertion that there is a controversy, that
    there is doubt.  It makes to them particularly
    susceptible to reassurance.  So the very things this
    conspiracy was doing was designed to play into an
    addicted smoker's desire to continue smoking.  That
    psychological crutch that the president of Philip
    Morris recognized back in 1964, because there is
    this addiction cycle, and you can interrupt the
    addiction cycle in an attempt of a smoker to quit by
    such things as filters, claims of low tar, and the
    very things that were done as part of this
    conspiracy.  Dr. Burns explained to you the impact
    on the addicted smoker's ability to quit, the fact
    that they engaged in this campaign claiming
    effectiveness of filters and low tar cigarettes.
         The industry itself has long admitted privately
    that they couldn't defend their argument of free
    choice if addiction were known.  And that's the
    reason that up to 1995 in congress -- '94 in
    congress they denied addiction and did not admit it until 2000.
         Finally, and perhaps the most important piece
    of information, relates to the multi-filter.  Mary
    described for you meeting a Philip Morris
    representative at an event who had a table of
    literature and was handing out free samples of
    multi-filter, with the advertisement of a 95 percent
    reduction in tar from other cigarettes, and the
    clear implication that it was safer and less risky.
    That's what she took from it.  She believes that's
    what Rayfield took from it, whether he said that
    outright or not.
         But his conduct speaks volumes.  He had been
    smoking Philip Morris cigarettes for years.  He now
    switches to the multi-filter.  How do we know that?
    Because Mary bought his cigarettes every Friday at
    the Publix store, a carton.  He was smoking about a
    pack and-a-half a day, and she continued to buy
    those multi-filter cigarettes every week, week in
    and week out, a carton at a time at her favorite
    grocery store.
         Now, it's true Kaiser Thomas may have brought
    some Benson & Hedges down when he came down every
    few months, but he wasn't there week in and week out
    buying the cigarettes.  He wasn't there like Mary was week in and week out knowing what her husband
    smoked.
         All of those brands, the Philip Morris brand he
    started with, the switch to the multi-filter brand,
    Benson & Hedges, were manufactured by Philip Morris
    USA.  They're responsible for those brands.
         And what the switch to the low tar shows you is
    that he is relying, believing that this is a safer
    alternative, and switching to it in effect trying to
    reduce any risk.
         That is what causation is.  Had they told him
    the truth that they knew cigarettes caused cancer,
    that they knew they were addicting, that they knew
    this low tar multi-filter cigarette was no lower in
    tar, was no safer, that filters were no safer, then
    chances that he would have quit smoking much earlier
    would have been dramatically higher.
         That's what substantial cause is.  But for this
    conspiracy, this conspiracy to keep addicted smokers
    smoking, there is a high likelihood by clear and
    convincing evidence that he would have quit smoking
    earlier, he wouldn't have died before he was just
    59, that he would have had a more expected life
    expectancy for another 22 years, and we wouldn't be
    here.      In evaluating their reprehensibility for that
    conduct you're entitled to consider the fact that it
    wasn't just Rayfield Brown, that during that entire
    time period 20 million Americans died prematurely
    from smoking cigarettes.
         Thank you.


         MR. SHIELDS:  Ladies and Gentlemen, I'm not
    going to take much more of your time.  I've talked
    with you too much already.  And I don't want to go
    through every point point by point.  I don't think
    that's necessary at this point.
         But I do have some preliminary observations
    that I think are applicable to what you heard.
         Let's start with the fact that almost nothing
    that you heard from Mr. Reilly has anything to do with the issues in this case.  He simply didn't
    discuss what you're supposed to be deciding.
         And by that I mean the issue in this case that
    the Court was instructing you -- and here's a copy
    of the Court's instruction -- on the punitive damage
    claim.  It's whether conduct in furtherance of a
    conspiracy between Philip Morris-USA and the other
    tobacco companies to conceal material information
    regarding health effects or addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes was a substantial cause of
    Rayfield Brown's death, and that such conduct
    warrants punitive damages under the standards set
    forth.
         Now, Mr. Reilly puts this up and says, This is
    all about Mr. Brown.
         No.  It's all about the conduct of Philip
    Morris and whether the conduct of Philip Morris was
    a substantial cause.
         The issue is not, as you would think from what
    you heard from Mr. Reilly, whether Mr. Brown was a
    contributing cause; the issue is whether their
    conduct in the conspiracy was also a cause, a
    substantial cause.
         I told you when we first talked about this
    that, first, there can be more than one cause of an event.  Two things can come together.
         And we're not here to tell you that Mr. Brown
    didn't contribute.  We're not here to tell you that
    he didn't have any responsibility.  We're not here
    to talk about what role his conduct played.  That's
    already been decided.
         This case -- this phase of the case is about
    their conduct.  It's about whether to award punitive
    damages based on their conduct.
         Mr. Reilly wouldn't talk about that.  Not one
    word in that entire closing argument about their
    conduct.  He simply misstates what the issue is for
    you to decide.
         He also misstates the claims.  He asserts, for
    example, that we failed to prove to you that he
    started to smoke because of the conspiracy.  Well,
    nobody contended that he started to smoke because of
    the conspiracy.  He started to smoke before there
    ever was a conspiracy.  We never even suggested that
    as a possibility.
         What we told you was we had a culture of
    smoking created by their massive advertising.  He
    started to smoke like other kids of his generations
    when everybody around him smoked.  As Kaiser said,
    every male they knew smoked. And they smoked everywhere.  They smoked in
    courtrooms and on buses in restaurants in bars,
    every place you could go, people smoked.  It was a
    culture of smoking.
         And he, like other kids of that generation and
    since, decided to try and experiment with smoking,
    became addicted, and became a regular smoker for
    most of his life.
         All of that is true.  The conspiracy deals with
    why things didn't change when it became clear that
    smoking caused lung cancer.
         Why the culture didn't change.  Why what
    happened in the last decade didn't happen in the
    1950s.
         Think about that.  Think about how different it
    would have been in 1954 if the industry would have
    told the truth and said, We've got a problem.
    People shouldn't be smoking.  It's going to be
    killing people.  What can we do about solving that
    problem?
         And if instead of entering into a decades'-long
    conspiracy to deny that there were hazards of
    smoking, to claim that they would take out any
    harmful elements and to try and keep smokers smoking
    by reassuring them, think how different the world would have been.
         The nonsmoking climate we have today could well
    have been the culture of the mid-'50s instead of
    continuing the culture of smoking throughout the
    '50s and throughout the '60s and throughout the '70s
    and into the '80s and even into the '90s.  It would
    have been a totally different culture that we would
    have had.
         And what would have been the impact, not just
    on Rayfield Brown, but on all of those other smokers
    who died prematurely?
         The third observation:  That is that they
    offered absolutely not one shred of evidence to
    refute the claims of their misconduct.
         They nibbled around the edges with their
    cross-examination of witnesses, and they attacked
    Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns about how much they had
    been paid.  But never even attempted to refute what
    they had to say because they can't.
         Forget whether Dr. Burns is paid some
    substantial amount of money for testifying over the
    last 30 years or how much Dr. Proctor has been paid,
    other than the fact that a major part of that is
    because they constantly take their depositions.
    What did Dr. Burns tell you?  150 times he's been deposed?  Driving up the expense, driving up the
    amount that he's been paid, so that they can then
    talk about how much he's been paid in court.
         If you really want to know the unvarnished
    truth, look at the 2014 Surgeon General's Report.
    It provides a summary, Exhibit 799, of the
    conspiracy in the first chapter.
         Everything that Dr. Burns told you, everything
    that Dr. Proctor told you, everything that
    Dr. Goldberg told you is in the 2014 Surgeon
    General's Report.  The consensus of scientific
    opinion based upon peer review from dozens of
    experts, not just Dr. Burns, Dr. Proctor, and
    Dr. Goldberg.
         And where was any witness from Philip Morris to
    deny that was true?  They didn't call one.  No
    evidence whatsoever to refute.
         Fourth and final, as an observation:  You're
    shown board after board of testimony, primarily
    dealing with things that are not an issue in this
    case, that don't address the real issue in the case,
    but it's all cherry-picked.  It's pulled out of
    context to imply something other than what the
    witness really said.
         You know, think about the example of Dr. Burns being asked about the 95 percent quote.  You heard
    Mr. Reilly say 95 percent of smokers knew it.
    Dr. Burns said so.
         When he asked Dr. Burns about that, Dr. Burns
    said, Let me tell you the context of it.  He
    wouldn't let him tell him.  Dr. Burns said that over
    and over again.  He wouldn't ask him.  He wouldn't
    let him tell him.
         Finally, Dr. Burns said, Look, it was
    hyperbole.  I was trying to say that another
    pamphlet wasn't the issue; that we had to figure out
    a better way of convincing addicted smokers to quit
    smoking.
         But that context just all gets washed away when
    you cherry-pick a little quote out of something.
         You know as another example, Mr. Reilly says,
    where is the evidence that he ever tried to quit?
         Really?  Jennifer testified they talked about
    quitting in 1983, and as far as she knew, he did
    quit.  She never saw him smoke after that.
         Kaiser Thomas said, We tried to quit several
    times before 1986, and then in 1986 we made a pact
    to quit.  Kaiser Thomas thought he had quit.
         Mary talked about him not smoking in the house
    and saying he had quit, but she could smell it on his breathe.
         So what conclusion do you draw from all of
    that?  He, like most smokers, had a difficult time
    quitting.  No doubt quit, relapsed, quit, relapsed.
    That's what happens.
         Dr. Burns told you, You take all those people
    that want to start smoking -- that want to quit
    smoking and try to quit, make a sincere, honest
    attempt to quit, six months later only 6 percent are
    still able to quit.  A year later, only 3 percent
    are able to quit.  That's a difficult, difficult
    process taken many times.
         Why?  Because of addiction.  Addiction is the
    fundamental issue that underlies all of this.  And
    although addiction is not an issue in this case --
    it's already been decided by the prior jury and
    you're bound by that and Mr. Reilly told you they
    weren't going to contest it -- throughout all of
    this recitation of the testimony, he just ignores
    that Mr. Brown was addicted, that a prior jury has
    found he was addicted, and the impact of addiction.
         Their own documents talk about how addiction
    means you can't claim free choice.
         Dr. Burns told you addiction meant that they
    were receptive to this denials campaign, to this conspiracy to withhold what they really knew and
    concealed.
         And Ladies and Gentlemen, contrary to what you
    were told by Mr. Reilly, the contention is not that
    he didn't know that people were saying that
    cigarettes cause cancer.  The contention is not that
    he didn't know it was difficult to quit.
         The point, contrary to what he would claim, is
    that they concealed not only what they knew and
    believed, but they concealed that they, in fact,
    made cigarettes addictive, they designed them to get
    kids to smoke, that they focused their advertising
    on getting the kids to smoke and become addicted,
    that they knew that the low tar in filter cigarettes
    which they impliedly claimed would be safer, weren't
    a bit safer because of the way people smoked.
         Those are the claims.  That's what was
    concealed, not whether or not someone was saying
    that smoking was harmful.
         Of course he knew people were saying smoking
    was harmful, otherwise there would have never been
    any need for a conspiracy in the first place.
         Of course the news was there, otherwise their
    stock prices wouldn't have dropped and they wouldn't
    have gotten in a panic and gone to the Plaza Hotel and tried figure out a public relations campaign to
    keep selling cigarettes for the next 60 years and
    watching 20 million people die as a result of it.
         Now, let's turn from that to talking about
    compensatory damages.
         It is correct, as Mr. Reilly said, that no
    amount of money can pay for the loss of a husband
    and father.  But the law provides that money is how
    you compensate someone for a wrongful death.  You as
    jurors have taken an oath to comply with the law,
    the Court has given you an instruction as to what
    you are to do, and that is awarding punitive
    damages.
         Now, Mr. Reilly told you about we all die.
         MR. REILLY:  I'm sorry.  I object.  You did not
    instruct them that they are to award punitive
    damages.
         THE COURT:  I think you misspoke.
         MR. SHIELDS:  I'm sorry.  I misspoke.
    Compensatory damages.
         Thank you, Mr. Reilly.
         The Court instructed you on awarding
    compensatory damages and the amount.  Mr. Reilly
    didn't dispute the fact that because of the prior
    determinations you are to award compensatory damages, not only for the 375,000 but the additional
    amount.
         And he suggested that the amounts that we have
    referenced were too high in comparative to the
    average annual salary.
         Ladies and Gentlemen, are we really here to say
    that someone's life is measured by a man's salary?
    That the loss of a husband and a father is based
    upon what the average annual salary is?  I hardly
    think so.
         Lost wages have already been determined and are
    part of the verdict form that you have.  What you're
    here to determine is, based upon the amount upon for
    the loss, the quality of the loss, the degree and
    the effect, what money would appropriately
    compensate Mary for not only her pain and suffering
    but separately for her loss of companionship and
    protection from her husband for 22 years of his life
    that she lost.  And for Jennifer, not just the pain
    and suffering of his loss at the time and in the
    years since, but the loss of his parental guidance,
    instruction, and companionship for the last 24 --
    what will be 22 years.  And you are to determine
    what is a fair and just figure.
         Mr. Reilly suggests a million dollars for Mary Brown, 500,000 for Jennifer.  I suggest to you that
    fair and just compensation for a loss of that
    magnitude over that period of time is worth far more
    than the minimal amount that Mr. Reilly suggested.
         I gave you my suggestion.  Ultimately it's your
    decision as to what is fair and just considering the
    totality of the circumstances, including the length
    of time of the loss.  So you fill out the form
    dealing with the amount of compensatory damages.
         It was interesting Mr. Reilly talked about was
    there any reason in connection with punitive damages
    to believe that Mr. Brown did not hear and did not
    know about cigarettes causing cancer.  But
    apparently he doesn't use that same reasoning when
    it comes to talking about their conspiracy.
         You were told by the expert witnesses that this
    conspiracy was so massive -- and you saw the amount
    spent on advertising, for example, and you saw the
    extensive public relations campaign and the constant
    activities of the tobacco industry to pursue this
    denials campaign.  Is there any reason to believe
    that he did not see that avalanche of information?
         Dr. Goldberg told you in terms of an avalanche
    of information that the information from them just
    drowned out anything from the public health community.  And you saw a Surgeon General's report
    specifically quoting the amount of money they spent
    in comparison to how little money could be spent on
    public service.  One day's advertising equalled the
    entire budget for any public service announcement.
         They show you, for example, a public service
    announcement with Mr. Talman on it, and act like
    surely he saw this.
         Well, recall the testimony.  Those public
    service announcements only ran for a brief period of
    time, under what was called the Fairness Doctrine,
    in which for every ad -- three or four ads, there
    had to be a public service announcement.
         Well, that was the last thing the tobacco
    industry wanted, public service announcements on
    television.  And so as testified to by Dr. Proctor,
    they agreed to remove ads from television in order
    to get the public service announcements off
    television.  And, yet, they come into court and say,
    Surely he saw these public service announcements.
         He also talked about the posters on the post
    office vehicles.  That's another interesting thing
    to bring up, as if surely Mr. Brown saw them and
    that somehow deals with their conspiracy.
         One of the documents you will have -- P-738. P-738 deals with those posters from the post office.
    And like other aspects of the conspiracy, you've
    just been told a little bit of the story.
         Yes, there was a proposal to put those posters
    on postal trucks.  And then the tobacco industry
    went after the U.S. Postal Service to prevent it
    from happening.  And they got their supporters in
    Congress to bring up the matter and conduct an
    investigation, and they hauled the head of the post
    office before Congress and succeeded in getting the
    posters taken off of the postal trucks.  That's
    P-738.
         Mr. Reilly talks about the Reasoner example.
    Played it again to you.  But he left out the most
    important part.  The part where Harry Reasoner talks
    about what cigarettes mean to people and how people
    will respond to whether they should be quit.
         Let's play the real clip, not just the little
    part that Mr. Reilly showed you.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         "Smoking has meant a great deal to a great many
    people.  An old smoker never forgets how he started,
    and through the lifetimes of a lot of us, cigarettes
    have been an intimate and reassuring companion.
         The familiar slogans, the familiar packages, have been a part of our lives.
         It's like being told that an old friend has all
    along been betraying you.  In a case like that, you
    give the old friend every possible chance before you
    finally decide to believe what you have been told,
    and maybe even then you give him a chance to reform.
         In this kind of a country, it comes down to you
    whether you like it or not.  No one is going to
    forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear
    that no one is going to tell him it's good for him,
    either.  The decision is his.  The decision and the
    health that may depend on it.
         This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night."
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. SHIELDS:  And there is no doubt that
    cigarettes were an old friend to millions and
    millions of smokers.
         And there is no doubt that the massive
    reassurance campaign of the tobacco industry kept
    those smokers smoking by telling them over and over
    again:  There's nothing harmful in cigarettes.  If
    there is, we will find it and we'll take it out, so
    you might as well continue smoking.
         They did that because that message worked with
    addicted smokers like Rayfield Brown. They did that knowing that cancer-causing
    substances were in every class of compounds in
    smoke, and that there was no possible way to take it
    out, as they were suggesting over and over again.
         The issue is what their conduct did.  The issue
    is not whether Mr. Brown heard that cigarettes cause
    cancer.  The issue is not even whether Mr. Brown
    also bears some responsibility.  He does.
         The question you have to answer is whether this
    massive conspiracy, whether their conduct to support
    that massive conspiracy that ranged from 1954 up to
    at least 2000, also was a contributing factor, a
    substantial factor in causing Mr. Brown's death.
         And I submit to you under the evidence that you
    have seen in this case, had they acted differently
    from the very beginning, the world would have
    changed rapidly and people like Mr. Brown would have
    quit long before they did, and millions of lives
    would have been saved.
         Thank you for your attention.  We appreciate
    it.  We look forward to your verdict.
