          MR. SHIELDS:  Can you still see the screen with
    this here?
          Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
          THE JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. SHIELDS:  This case is about addiction.  And
    as Dr. David Burns told you, as our first witness, and
    as the 2010 report of the Surgeon General confirms,
    nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason smokers
    continue to smoke.  And continuing to smoke is what

    causes lung cancer and other diseases.
          Rayfield Brown was just in his mid teens when he
    first started to smoke, buying four cigarettes for a
    nickel at the corner store.  Almost all smokers, then
    and now, start as teenagers and probably for the same
    reasons -- peer pressure, rebellion, wanting to be an
    adult, wanting to be cool.
          It was a different time and a different culture in
    America in the 1950s.  Smoking was everywhere.  Most men
    smoked.  More and more women smoked.  Advertising for
    cigarettes was like wallpaper, with celebrities,
    athletes and even doctors promoting smoking.  Virtually
    all of prime-time television on the three networks was
    sponsored by the tobacco companies, sometimes with the
    shows themselves promoting smoking.
          By the time Rayfield graduated from high school
    and joined the Army with Kaiser Thomas on the buddy
    plan, he was a regular, daily smoker.  He continued to
    smoke in the Army and he was given free cigarettes.  And
    after he got out, he pursued his career at the United
    States Post Office.  He was addicted.
          He started trying to quit sometime in the early to
    mid '80s and struggled for ten years to stay quit.
    Evidence is that he quit and relapsed, may have quit and
    relapsed on several occasions, but he could not stop 3497
    smoking, even after he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
          He was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1993,
    underwent surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and died of
    complications from lung cancer just before his 59th
    birthday in 1995, leaving Mary Brown, as his widow, and
    two surviving children.
          John and I are proud to represent Mary Brown in
    this case.  It's been a long trial and it's been a lot
    of evidence that you've heard.  We want to thank you for
    your service, thank you for your attention, thank you
    for sitting for a day or so in some pretty hard chairs
    to listen to all the evidence that's been coming in.  We
    know it's been difficult.
          But this closing argument is our last opportunity
    to explain to you what the evidence is, how we think it
    fits together and how it proves our case.
          Now, this case is to be decided only on the
    evidence.  You heard that from the beginning of this
    case, from the Court and from the parties.  And I
    emphasize that, particularly now since you heard
    evidence from the last witness that, frankly, ladies and
    gentlemen, was flat-out contrary to almost all the
    evidence in the case.
          This case is not to be decided based on the
    assertions of counsel or even an expert witness that is

    not supported by the testimony and documents and other
    evidence that you heard.
          Now, this case, as the Court has told you, arose
    out of the Engle class action.  The Engle class action
    was a suit on behalf of all Florida smokers against the
    tobacco companies that went to trial in 1999 and
    resulted in findings by the jury in that trial that the
    Engle defendants, including Philip Morris, one, had
    engaged in a civil conspiracy to fraudulently conceal
    information; two, had fraudulently concealed material
    information; three, had sold products that were
    defective and unreasonably dangerous; and four, that
    they were negligent.
          Now, those findings made in the class action are
    binding on all members of the class.  And in subsequent
    damage trials, such as this one, for members of the
    class, they are binding on the jurors that hear those
    cases, such as you.
          So the first issue you're going to have to decide
    in this case is whether Rayfield Brown was a member of
    the Engle class, and we're going to talk a lot about
    that this morning.
          There are four remaining issues, as I told you.
          The first is this class membership issue, and the
    class membership, which we'll talk about in more detail,
8 3499
3501 comes down to was Rayfield Brown addicted to cigarettes
    and because of that addiction, continued to smoke so
    that addiction is the legal cause of his death and
    injury?  If Mr. Brown was a member of the Engle class,
    you are bound by all those Engle findings.
          The second issue you're going to have to decide is
    specific causation, which basically is an issue of
    whether Philip Morris's misconduct was the legal cause
    of Mr. Brown's death.
          Now, as the Court just instructed you, if you find
    that Mr. Brown was a member of the legal -- of the Engle
    class, then you, in effect, have already decided
    causation -- specific causation in connection with the
    negligence and product defect claim.
          For the other two claims, the concealment and the
    civil conspiracy claim, there's an additional element of
    reliance, which we're going to talk about a good bit
    more later.
          But one important point of deciding that issue is
    that there need not be only one of those, and that goes
    to our third issue of comparative fault.  Under Florida
    law, fault is not necessarily an all-or-nothing
    proposition and related only to one party.  It is
    possible for a jury, such as you, to say both
    parties were at fault.  And that is what Philip Morris

    has contended in this action, that Mr. Brown was at
    fault.
          And so one of the issues you're going to have to
    decide is whether you think he was at fault, and if you
    decide that he was, then you're going to have to
    allocate a percentage of responsibility between Philip
    Morris and Mr. Brown.  That's the comparative fault
    issue.
          The fourth and final issue is the issue of
    damages.  And the Court instructed you about damages a
    moment ago.  Damages includes compensatory damages --
    and the Court just gave you the instruction about what
    compensatory damages there were -- and punitive damages.
    In this phase of the case, the question on punitive
    damages is whether Mary Brown is entitled to recover for
    punitive damages.
          So those are the four issues.  And it occurred to
    me that what made sense in terms of talking to you this
    morning was to organize my thoughts and comments around
    those four issues because those four issues pretty much
    track the verdict form you're going to have.  You'll be
    sent out with a verdict form.  It's going to have a
    series of questions on it, and those questions follow
    those specific four issues.  And so let's talk about the
    verdict form.  Let's talk about those four issues and what the evidence was on those four issues.
          Let's start with class membership.  Now, the issue
    on class membership is whether Rayfield Brown was
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and as a
    result of that addiction, he continued to smoke so that
    it would be considered a legal cause of his death.
          There is compelling evidence that Rayfield Brown
    was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.  The
    issue on addiction, ladies and gentlemen, is not whether
    he was still addicted in 1992 or '93 or even 1987.
    That's a red herring.  That's an attempt to get you to
    look at the wrong time period.  The relevant time period
    is whether he was addicted during those times of his
    life in which it would have made a difference if he had
    quit smoking.
          You recall Dr. Burns, beginning of this case, told
    you that had Mr. Brown quit smoking by 1983, he more
    likely than not would not have suffered from lung
    cancer.  So the relevant time period for whether he was
    addicted or not is before 1983.
          Now, Dr. Burns also told you another -- a number
    of other things about addiction.  He told you, first of
    all, that addiction is a disease.  It is a brain
    disease.  And that was agreed to by the two addiction
    experts, specifically to this case, that's also

    testified.
          Addiction is the result of nicotine in cigarettes
    and thus cigarettes are addictive.  Nicotine is a drug.
    It is a drug that acts like other drugs in hijacking the
    brain and addicting the person as a result of that.
    Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason, as we go
    forward, as the Surgeon General's reports indicates,
    that people continue to smoke cigarettes and continue to
    engage in the conduct that would result in injury and
    death.
          Dr. Burns also told you that that -- it was
    extremely difficult to quit smoking as a result of
    nicotine addiction.  And you may recall the figure he
    used to explain that to you.
          Figure 17, will you bring that up?
          Dr. Burns told that you the current data is that
    about a little less than 80 percent of all smokers
    indicate that they would -- are daily smokers.  Almost
    70 percent of those smokers indicate that they would
    like to quit smoking in any given year, that 52 percent
    actually try to quit smoking in any given year.  But
    only 6 percent are successful six months later; that is,
    most relapse and go back to smoking.  And only 3 percent
    are successful a year or more.  Because it takes many
    attempts and many years for people often to succeed in
9 3503
    quitting smoking.
          He told you, for example, that the figures here
    are current figures, but if you went back to the '80s,
    the time period we're talking about, then at that time
    period, only about 30 to 33 percent of smokers tried to
    quit smoking in a year.  But their success rates
    remained that low.  Less than 3 percent succeeded in a
    year.
          As a result of the relapse, the fact that it takes
    many times to try to quit smoking, Dr. Burns told you
    that there is this addiction cycle that inhibits the
    ability of a smoker to actually quit.  He also told you
    that 80 to 90 percent of all daily smokers were addicted
    to nicotine.
          Now, you heard from Dr. Rosman that he thought the
    figure was lower today.  It may well be lower today.
    But all of the publications and all of the data from
    back in the '70s and '80s, when it was important to this
    case, show that 80 to 90 percent of all daily smokers
    were addicted.  And you'll see that figure in the
    Surgeon General's Report, 2010 -- it'll be one of the
    pieces of evidence that you have -- the consensus
    document of the experts that looked at all the data.
          Finally, what Dr. Burns told you was it's easy to
    determine whether someone is addicted.  It's really

    pretty much common sense.  If they want to quit, try to
    quit, find it difficult to remain and relapse and make
    many attempts and continue to relapse, they are
    addicted.
          A clinician who sees patients doesn't have any
    difficulty in diagnosing someone who's addicted.  And
    all of that's confirmed by the Surgeon General's
    Reports.
          And let me -- let me make a comment about the
    Surgeon General's reports.  The Surgeon General's
    reports, by federal law, are required to be the
    consensus of current scientific opinion.  And there is
    this elaborate process that they go through to make sure
    that they are the consensus of scientific opinion by
    having numerous authors, reviewers, editors.  It is sent
    to all the federal agencies that are relevant to review
    the material.  It's a process that takes months to years
    to get these documents published so that what comes out
    is what is universally believed by the experts in the
    field.
          And I want to say that to you because when we talk
    about Dr. Rosman, his views are totally contrary to
    everything written in the Surgeon General's Report, are
    totally contrary to accepted medical science on
    addiction. 3505
          Now, next, Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor both told you
    that cigarettes, in fact, were designed for addiction
    and designed to keep people smoking.
          Finally, Dr. Frazier confirmed all of these
    fundamental truths about addiction and told you that in
    her clinical judgment, Rayfield Brown was addicted.  And
    that's based on his smoking history.  So let's talk a
    little bit about his smoking history.
          Now, going back to early 1950s, the precise time,
    we're not sure if it's 1949, 1950, 1951, but it's
    sometime, according to Kaiser, when they were 13 to 15
    years of age.  They first started experimenting by
    smoking like all the other kids did and buying these
    four cigarettes for a nickel at the corner store.  They
    continued to smoke, adding to what they were doing and
    buying them by the pack by the time they were upper
    classmen in high school, despite the fact that Rayfield
    Brown was the star basketball player on the city
    championship team.
          And so by the time they were graduated from high
    school, as Kaiser told you, they were carrying a pack in
    their pocket.  They were smoking a pack maybe every two
    or three days.  They had become regular daily smokers.
    And when they went in the Army under the buddy plan,
    they continued to smoke.  And like all soldiers, they

    got free cigarettes from the Army as part of their
    rations and reduced-price cigarettes in addition to
    that.
          They came out of the Army and Rayfield came back
    to Jacksonville, ultimately got a job at the post office
    and continued to smoke.  He married Mary in 1960.  She
    told you about how he smoked when she first met him and
    how he continued to smoke and the amount he continued to
    smoke throughout the time that they were married.
          Michael, his son, also described how extensively
    he smoked, that he smoked literally everywhere and all
    of the time.
          The only thing that's slightly different than that
    is Jennifer's testimony.  We'll talk about that in a
    moment.  Keep in mind, Jennifer was 10 or 11 at the time
    period she was talking about.
          And you have to look at all the evidence together
    and ask yourself, what does the totality the evidence
    showed about smoking history?
          Now, according to both Kaiser and Mary, following
    an incident with his throat in '86 or perhaps '87, he
    decided to quit and made a pact with Kaiser to quit, and
    all the evidence indicates that at least for some period
    of time he quit.
          But then there's also extensive evidence that he
10 3507
    relapsed.  He relapsed because there's evidence from Sam
    Jones that from the time he saw him in 1988 through
    1994, when they got together at work, they would go out
    on the dock and smoke.  When they went out together,
    they smoked.  When they went to meetings and
    conventions, they smoked.  When they played golf, they
    smoked.  So you have extensive evidence that he relapsed
    from his attempts to quit.
          And as Mary and Michael both told you, they
    suspected that.  They suspected that because they could
    smell the smoke on him when he came home from work.  And
    Michael actually saw his cigarettes in the console of
    his car after that period of time.
          Dr. Frazier took all of this information to
    diagnose based upon her clinical judgment.  And she told
    you that basically what she did to do her diagnosis was
    use the Surgeon General's Report, both the 2010 and the
    1988 Surgeon General's Report.  And she told you the
    four features of addiction under those reports were
    repeated and compulsive use, impaired control over use,
    a high motivation to seek the drug and the judgment of
    greater value of other reinforcements, as well as the
    physical dependence shown by withdrawal and tolerance.
    And she walked you through those and said that she
    thought all of those were met.

          She also went through the DSM, which is another
    way of reviewing it and said even under the DSM
    criteria, she clearly thought, in her clinical judgment,
    that he was addicted.
          Now, contrast that with Dr. Rosman, the only
    witness that Philip Morris brought forward to testify.
    Dr. Rosman, I suggest to you, is not qualified.  He may
    be an addiction specialist, but what he deals with, two
    days a week, would be methamphetamines, cocaine, hard
    drug addiction.  He admitted that he hardly ever saw
    anyone for nicotine addiction.
          Now, granted, of course, that most of those
    people that he saw may also be smokers and he told them
    to quit, but he didn't treat them for nicotine
    addiction.
          Dr. Rosman has not published anything.  He's not
    taught on nicotine addiction.  Unlike Dr. Burns, unlike
    Dr. Frazier, he is simply not qualified in addiction
    medicine dealing with nicotine addiction.
          And that was evident from the position he took,
    which is totally at odds with everything that's set out
    in the Surgeon General's Reports and other relevant
    literature.  He uses the term "recreational smoker" to
    describe people in every one of these suits, whether
    they smoked two and a half packs a day for 40 years or 3509
    four and a half packs a day for 40 years and whether
    they smoked everywhere.  To him, the quote, just
    recreation smokers.
          Now, maybe you use the term "recreational" when
    you're dealing with hard drugs and you say, this person
    that's doing cocaine occasionally is a recreational
    user.  No one uses the term "recreational" in dealing
    with nicotine addiction.  Take this document in
    evidence.  See if you find, in the entire document, the
    term "recreational smoker" even used one time.
          Look at the 1988 report on nicotine addiction.
    See if that term is contained anywhere in there.  I
    suggest to you that there is no one, other than
    Dr. Rosman, who would suggest that anyone was a
    recreational smoker with that sort of smoking history.
          Now, also recall how he misstated the facts in
    order to reach his conclusion.  You recall his
    demonstrative, Mr. Brown's smoking before 1983, and I
    walked him through what the actual testimony was and how
    it differed from his demonstrative.  So let's do that
    again and look at the specific testimony that was made
    and not how Dr. Rosman misrepresented it.
          First, let's talk about Mary.  Mary testified that
    Rayfield would carry two packs all the time in order to
    make sure he didn't run out.  And you saw the

    photograph.  You'll have that photograph in evidence,
    where a pack in each pocket.  She said he'd sometimes
    roll them up in his shirt sleeves so he had two packs.
          You don't carry around two packs of cigarettes
    unless you're so concerned that you're going to run out
    and that you're going to smoke more than you intended
    that you want to avoid that.  That's the hallmark of
    addiction.  Wasn't on Dr. Rosman's chart at all.  That's
    the exact testimony of Mary.
          Mary also testified, contrary to the impression
    that Dr. Rosman tried to give you, that after the church
    service, he smoked, that he sang in the choir and the
    other people who were smokers in the choir would smoke
    as soon as the service was over.
          So to say to you, oh, he didn't smoke in church is
    a little misleading.  It's distorting what the real
    evidence is.  Of course, nobody smokes in church.  Have
    you seen the smokers in church get up ten minutes and
    then go outside, even when they're addicted?  Of course
    not.  Anybody, even an addicted smoker, can make it
    through a church service and smoke immediately after
    they get out.  And that's exactly what Rayfield Brown
    did.
          Mary also testified that he smoked in the '60s,
    the '70s, the '80s, that entire time, whenever he was
11 3511
    driving.  And that's the exact testimony shown on the
    screen during the '60s.  The next screen deals with that
    exact testimony in the '70s.  The next screen deals with
    that exact testimony during the '80s.
          So he smoked all the time, driving, when they went
    to the New York, when they went to Pennsylvania, when
    they went to Palm Beach.  He smoked constantly in the
    car.  And that was confirmed by Michael's testimony as
    well.
          Mary also testified that he had ashtrays
    throughout the house.  He had ashtrays in the bathroom,
    in the bedroom, in the den, in the kitchen, on the
    porch, everywhere, because he smoked throughout the
    house, contrary to Dr. Rosman's assertion that he
    controlled his smoking to certain places around the
    house.  That simply was not the testimony.
          Mary also testified that he smoked in family
    outings, that he smoked in restaurants, that he
    literally smoked everywhere.  And all of that was
    confirmed by Michael's testimony as well.
          Dr. Rosman, having told you that he controlled all
    of his smoking before 1983, then said, well, let's look
    at '83 to 1987, and you recall the demonstrative that he
    used for that time period.  This demonstrative is solely
    based on one ambiguous statement from Jennifer Brown.

    They build their whole case on one ambiguous statement
    by someone who was 11 years old in 1983.  And they
    ignore what she otherwise said.
          What she otherwise said -- and let's make it clear
    so that it's not being distorted.  What Jennifer
    actually testified to, when asked whether there was a
    time when she believed her father stopped smoking, was,
    quote, somewhere around my middle school, what would be
    sixth, seventh, eighth grade, I just remember that I
    didn't see cigarettes or didn't smell them like I would
    smell them all the time before then.
          That's the real testimony back in 1983.  Think
    about that.  If you start school when you're six years
    old, like we all do, in the sixth grade, we're going to
    be 12 years of age.  She was born in 1972.  That makes
    it 1984 at the earliest.  But she would never have
    through -- she said sixth, seventh or eighth.  If it was
    the eighth grade, she would, at that point in time, have
    been 14 years of age and it would have been 1986.
          And, of course, you've got to reconcile the
    testimony, see how it all fits together.  1986 fits with
    all the other testimony.  Remember Kaiser Brown -- or
    Kaiser Thomas?  He said, I'm sure it was October 10th,
    1986, when we made this pact because it was the day
    after my wedding.  A really good reason to be able to 3513
    remember that precise date.  Mary thought it was 1987.
    Whether it's '86 or '87, reconcile the testimony to see
    how it fits together, and it is totally contrary to what
    Dr. Rosman wanted you to believe.
          Now, Dr. Frazier walked you through the DSM, just
    like Dr. Rosman did.  And I'm not going to go through
    all of that in detail, but seems it me that there are a
    couple things that are unequivocal, even among both of
    those witnesses, that resulted in the conclusion that he
    was addicted to cigarettes.
          First, both of them agree that he had tolerance
    because the DSM, that Diagnostic and Statistical Manual,
    says tolerance can consist of being able to smoke 20 or
    more cigarettes a day, when if that's what you started
    to smoke with when you originally started, you would
    have been very ill.  You have become tolerant to that
    greater amount over a period of time.  That's what it
    says and clearly that's applicable and that's why both
    of them agree tolerance was met.
          Now, in addition, one of the other criteria was
    persistent desire to quit and unsuccessful attempts.
    You clearly have that here.  He expressed the desire to
    quit to Jennifer.  He expressed the desire to quit to
    Mary.  He expressed the desire to quit to Kaiser after
    the throat incident, and they entered into a pact to

    quit.  And we know it was unsuccessful.  We know it was
    unsuccessful because he smoked the entire time they
    drove back from California in 1988.  He smoked whenever
    he was with Mr. Jones.  He smoked when he was at the
    office, according to other employees as well.
          The only interesting thing here is we -- we -- it
    just defies logic.  Philip Morris will say he was just
    an occasional smoker.  And they base that on the fact
    that a witness says that he smoked every time they were
    together.  Why would you conclude just the reverse?  If
    you were smoking every time you were together, why
    wouldn't you conclude you're smoking even when you're
    not -- when you're not together?  Instead of, oh, the
    only time he smoked was when I saw him, when that
    witness sees him all of those times, over and over, for
    all that time period.  Their entire defense is built on
    distortion of what the evidence is in this case.
          So that second one is met.  You only needed three
    to be exempt.  And third one was -- and perhaps the most
    important -- that he continued to smoke after he had
    adverse consequences.
          Now, whether or not the throat incident was caused
    by his smoking, the doctor told him to quit, that he
    better quit, suggesting that could be an adverse
    consequence.  Continued to smoke.  He relapsed.  And
12 3515
3517 clearly there were adverse consequences when he's
    diagnosed with lung cancer and he continued to smoke
    after he's diagnosed.  That criteria is met.
          That gives you the three under DSM, so that -- it
    is clear that he meets the requirements.
          You know, Dr. Rosman also said that he looked at
    the records, and he smoked only about a pack a day.  I
    want you to take a look at the medical records, in
    particular, the last medical record, even if you --
          This is in 1995.  It is a questionnaire that he
    had to fill out prior to getting medical treatment.  And
    in that questionnaire, there's a specific question about
    smoking and how much.  And the first question is:  Do
    you smoke?  And the answer is yes.  And the second
    question is the amount and it's two packs a day.
          Now, that is consistent with the testimony that
    you heard from Mary Brown and from the children.  Mary
    said, I, all those years, went out on Friday and bought
    a carton of cigarettes.  If that's all he smoked, a
    carton a week, that's a pack and a half a day.
          But there was also testimony that in addition to
    her buying throughout the week, Kaiser Thomas brought
    him down cartons of Benson & Hedges when he came down.
          And there was also testimony from Michael and
    Jennifer that they would go out to the store and he

    would buy cigarettes.
          So it's entirely consistent that his smoking
    history is more like a pack and a half to two packs a
    day instead of what Dr. Rosman told you.
          Now, Philip Morris bases its entire argument on
    whether he was addicted on this concept of, quote,
    control.  And you -- you may recall that Dr. Frazier
    addressed that issue, what is really meant by control.
    And what she told you was that they were totally
    misusing the term, that control as used in addiction
    medicine meant highly controlled, compulsive use.  That
    is, you continue to use the drug, despite the fact that
    you'd like to quit and expressed the desire to quit.
    And, secondly, impaired control, meaning that you use it
    despite the adverse consequences and that you find it
    extremely difficult to quit.  That is supported by the
    Surgeon General's Report.
          First, if we look at the criteria set out in the
    Surgeon General's Reports for the definition of nicotine
    addiction -- and you'll have that, Chapter 4 of this
    document -- read that chapter or at least the first few
    pages of it because you'll see that it supports
    everything we're saying.
          The primary criteria are highly controlled or
    compulsive use.  And then there's an additional use of the term called "impaired control," which is defined by
    the Surgeon General's Report.  Impaired control means
    repeated, unsuccessful attempts to stop use -- that's
    exactly what you have here -- or continued use despite
    the known harmful consequences.  That's exactly what you
    have here, particularly in the latter period of time
    after he was diagnosed with lung cancer, quite earlier
    as well.
          Control does not mean, I don't smoke in church.
    Control does not mean, I'm not so rude that I go into
    somebody's house and smoke when they don't want me to.
    Control does not mean that if my wife says, you know, my
    asthma is such that I wish you wouldn't smoke in the
    bedroom that you no longer smoke in the bedroom.  That's
    not what control means at all.  And their entire case is
    built around misstating what it means.
          It comes down to this, ladies and gentlemen:  Do
    you think that Rayfield Brown smoked for 40 years, up to
    two packs a day, quitting and then going back, quitting
    and then going back, quitting and then going back, even
    after he was diagnosed with lung cancer, but he did it
    just because he was a casual recreational smoker?  That
    makes no sense whatsoever.  You don't abandon your
    common sense when you become a juror.  And common sense
    clearly says, if anybody was addicted, Rayfield Brown

    was addicted.
          Now, the second requirement for class membership
    is that that addiction be the cause of lung cancer.
    Well, of course, smoking is the cause of lung cancer,
    but addiction can be the cause of his lung cancer if he
    continued to smoke because of his addiction.  Doesn't
    have to be the only reason he continued to smoke, but if
    he continued to smoke because of his addiction, then
    that's what constitutes legal cause, and that element
    clearly is met as well.
          Dr. Burns explained to you how difficult it is to
    quit by using a chart on the addiction cycle, which
    clearly applies to Rayfield.  It is the addicted smoker
    gets caught in the cycle of wanting to quit, trying to
    quit, relapsing, trying again, relapsing.  That's why 90
    percent plus of all people who quit smoking relapse on
    multiple occasions, and it takes them years to be able
    to quit.
          Now, you've heard 50 to 60 million people have
    quit.  Oh, sure.  Over the last 50 or 60 years, that's
    true because even if you take those 3 percent figures
    and go through the years and years and years, it will
    add up to those figures.
          But the important point, as Dr. Burns told you, is
    despite all of our efforts, despite all those public
13 3519
    service announcements, despite the current atmosphere in
    which it's restricted everywhere where you can smoke,
    fully half of all smokers are still smoking.  That's how
    addictive this product is.
          All right.  Assuming you find, as we think the
    evidence compels you to find, that he was a member of
    the class, then the Engle findings apply.  Because it's
    as if he was a member of the plaintiffs in that original
    trial.  And so those findings that smoking causes lung
    cancer, that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, that
    they placed the market -- on the market products that
    were defective and unreasonably dangerous, that they
    concealed and omitted material information, the fraud by
    concealment count, that they engaged in a civil
    conspiracy by entering into this agreement with the
    other defendant --
          And go to the next slide.
          -- and that they were negligent, all those
    findings will apply.
          All right.  Let's go then from class membership to
    the second issue.  And on class membership, your -- your
    verdict form -- as to the first question.  Your -- your
    verdict form will have Question Number 1:  Was he a
    member of the Engle class?  Now, if you answered yes,
    then Mary Brown can recover some amount.  We'll deal

    with that issue.  If you answer no, the case is over.
    Mary Brown cannot recover if you say he was not a member
    of the Engle class.  So answer that first question yes.
    You move on to the other questions.
          All right.  The second issue is specific
    causation.  Now, there is no dispute here that smoking
    was the cause of death.  There is no dispute that if you
    find that he was a member of the Engle class, causation
    for the negligence count and product liability count has
    already been established.
          And if you look at the verdict form, there isn't
    even a question about causation for the negligence and
    product liability counts because class membership means
    causation has been proven for those two counts.  It
    applies only to the other two counts for civil
    conspiracy and fraud by concealment, and that's what
    impact did their misconduct have?  That's the issue
    you're going to have to decide.
          To decide that issue, you're going to have to
    review what their misconduct was.  And we've offered an
    extensive amount of evidence on it, in addition to the
    legal findings.  And what we told you and what the
    evidence shows is that their -- their misconduct -- and
    ultimately there are three areas.
          First, they targeted kids, knowing that their only 3521
    source of replacement smokers for those who were dying
    and quitting were teenagers, and so they specifically
    over the decades have targeted kids as their customers.
          Secondly, they designed their cigarettes to create
    and sustain addiction because if they're not addicted,
    people won't continue to smoke them and they could no
    longer sell them.  So the way to keep people smoking was
    to design them, to make them addictive, to make them
    sustain the addiction.
          And, third, from 1954 forward, they entered into a
    conspiracy with the other tobacco companies to deny and
    conceal the real hazards of cigarettes, and the purpose
    of doing that was to keep smokers smoking.
          Now, we've offered an extensive amount of
    evidence.  They've offered nothing to refute it.  Didn't
    bring a witness.  The only Philip Morris person you
    heard from is because I went up and took the deposition
    of that representative so I could show you what they
    said because they didn't call him.  And they didn't call
    any witness other than Dr. Rosman to refute any of the
    information Dr. Burns gave you, that Dr. Proctor gave
    you, that Dr. Goldberg gave.  There's simply no evidence
    to contradict the extensive evidence we had of their
    misconduct.
          All right.  Let's walk through.  Targeting kids.

    Now, we talked about the culture of smoking in the
    1950s.  Everybody smoked.  They smoked everywhere.  Do
    you think that happened just by chance?  No.  It's the
    result of the massive expenditures they made and the
    fact that their advertising and promotions were designed
    to target kids and get kids to smoke.
          And the evidence of that --
          If you'll bring up the next one.
          -- was provided by Dr. Goldberg.  And what he told
    you is that the documents show they knew smokers start
    as teenagers.  Literally 90 percent of smokers start as
    teenagers.  And the internal documents that we showed
    you established that.
          Secondly, they studied teenage smoking to try and
    figure out how they could get teenagers to smoke.  I'm
    going to show you a document about that in a minute.
          And, third, they used advertising that they knew
    would appeal to the teenage smoker and wanted to get
    them to smoke, advertising that emphasized rebellion,
    being like an adult, being cool, all of the things that
    a 15-year-old will find persuasive in deciding to buy a
    product.
          And so let's look first at the major consensus
    reports that deal with this issue.  You'll have all of
    that evidence.  Every one of them reached the same
14 3523
3525 conclusion.
          You start with the Federal Trade Commission report
    in 1967 and that's Exhibit 269.  It noted that
    cigarettes reached virtually all Americans but in
    particular, that the themes of cigarette advertising
    were directed to teenagers and that they targeted
    teenagers.
          The Federal Trade Commission came back in 1981
    with another report, which you will have in evidence,
    and that report also indicated that they targeted
    teenagers with their extensive advertising and that they
    continued to have pervasive advertising.
          And then in 1994, the Surgeon General did a
    massive report on teenage smoking and concluded in that
    report that teenagers were targeted and that that
    advertising caused teenagers to start smoking and
    continue smoking.
          And then there was a National Cancer Institute
    monograph in 2007 -- Dr. Goldberg was one of the authors
    of it -- that set out the details of their concentrated
    advertising and targeting kids as the principal source
    of their ability to get new customers.
          And it's also pulled together by an important
    document from the National Academy of Science, Institute
    of Medicine.  Dr. Goldberg told you about that document

    as well.  We read from it.
          Bring it up.
          This is a report from the Institute of Medicine of
    the National Academy of Science that deals with tobacco
    advertising and promotion.  Importantly, it says:
    "During the past 15 years, the tobacco industry has
    nearly quadrupled its marketing expenditures at a time
    when tobacco consumers has been declining.  Each year,
    each day, approximately 3500 people quit smoking, and an
    additional 1200 tobacco smokers die from a
    smoking-related disease.
          So if the industry is going to maintain its
    business, it has to get 5,000 new smokers a day, just to
    keep up with those that are dying from cigarettes and
    those that are quitting.  Its only source are kids
    because nobody starts smoking after about 21.  They
    start smoking when they're teenagers.  Brand loyalty's
    about 90 percent.
          If you can get a 15-year-old smoking your brand,
    he's likely to remain a customer for years, typically
    because of the addiction.  They are the only known
    replacement that will allow the industry to replace all
    those dead smokers and those that have quit and allow it
    to continue to sell cigarettes and make the outrageous
    smoking ad.  Now, the 2012 Surgeon General's Report also
    addresses they're targeting kids, and that will be in
    evidence as well.  Take a look at what it says about how
    quickly kids become addicted to cigarettes.  They're
    much more susceptible to addiction themselves.  They
    more rapidly become addicted, and they're more likely,
    as a result, to remain addicted.
          Now, in addition to targeting kids, they design
    their cigarettes to make them addicted.  Now, cigarettes
    aren't just tobacco rolled in paper.  They are
    elaborately designed and engineered products.  They are
    designed and engineered to make sure that smokers become
    addicted and thus continue to smoke because of their
    addiction.
          Now, one of the documents I showed you -- and I
    cross examined Dr. Lipowicz about this -- was from the
    Centers For Disease Control, regarding what -- the 2010
    Surgeon General's Report.  And Centers For Disease
    Control out of Atlanta, one of the premier agencies in
    the federal medical establishment, wrote:  "Nicotine is
    powerful and addictive.  Cigarettes are designed for
    addiction, that the cigarette makers had long known that
    nicotine addiction helped sell their products, and today
    they deliver more nicotine and quicker than ever before.
    They are more addictive today because of the continuing

    attempts to design and for addiction, to create it and
    sustain it."
          Now, combine that with the fact that they're
    targeting our teenagers, that they're targeting
    15-year-olds, and then they're designing their
    cigarettes to make sure that those 15-year-olds become
    addicted and stay addicted to their product so that for
    decades and decades, they can sell them.  And almost
    half of them who have become and remain daily smokers
    will die from smoking-related diseases.
          Now, there's no evidence to the contrary presented
    by Philip Morris.  And there's no evidence because they
    can't deny it.  Their internal documents show it.  I'll
    show you one internal document.  There are lot of them.
    But one of the internal documents we showed you was from
    Dr. Wakeham, who you remember, we also had a videotape
    of him.  Dr. Wakeham was their head scientist at this
    point in time.  And he did his analysis, which he
    presented to the Philip Morris board of directors.  And
    in that, he indicated that the 16- to 20-year-old, which
    is where all of these smokers come from, begin smoking
    for psychosocial motivation, that peer pressure to be
    cool, to be adult, to be rebellious.
          You know, as Kaiser Thomas said, Humphrey Bogart
    smoked constantly in every movie we saw.  We all wanted
15 3527
    to be Humphrey Bogart.  That was the cool image that
    would get kids to smoke.  And we showed you the
    documents of how Philip Morris placed its product in the
    movies to make sure that those celebrities in movies
    were smoking.
          Now, but this document goes on to say that's not
    why 16- to 20-year-olds continue smoking.  It's not a
    very pleasant experience when you first start.  They
    continue to smoke because they rapidly become addicted,
    and that's the explanation for continuing smoking.  And
    because of that, they have designed their cigarettes to
    be addictive, and they've designed them in three ways.
          One, by making them inhalable.  Tobacco rolled in
    cigarette paper is not inhalable any more -- for most
    people, any more than a cigar is.  If you don't inhale
    it, your chances of getting addicted are much, much
    less.  It has to be inhalable to get all of these people
    to be addicted and to remain addicted.  And how do you
    make it inhalable?
          One, you flue-cure the tobacco so that the pH is
    lower, it's less harsh and you can take it into your
    lungs.  You select tobaccos that will more likely be
    inhalable and use it in the filter.  You use flavorings
    and anesthetic agents so that the harshness isn't felt
    in your lungs and you can inhale.  You know, it's not

    just menthol cigarettes that have menthol in them.
    Every cigarette has menthol in it.  Menthol cigarettes
    have a lot more, but every cigarette has menthol in it
    because that is an anesthetic, which allows you to
    inhale the drug when you would otherwise not be able
    to.  And so they are designed and engineered to be
    inhalable.
          Secondly, they have to have a threshold level of
    nicotine to be addictive, but tobacco doesn't have a
    uniform level of nicotine.  You go out in the field, and
    one plant will have one level; another plant will have
    another level.  And it may not be the amount necessary
    to create and sustain addiction so they have to blend
    the tobacco to make sure that the nicotine in it is at
    the level necessary to get people to smoke and become
    addicted.
          And an example we have of that was from the very
    document -- the very cigarette that Rayfield Brown
    smoked in 19- -- the Multifilter, and we'll look at that
    in a moment.
          Well, let's go ahead and bring it up now, if we
    can.
          In 1965, this is a document dealing with the
    creation of the Multifilter cigarette, which Rayfield
    smoked.  Mary Brown told you about that being passed out 3529
    by a Philip Morris representative at a social gathering
    they went to, along with ads about how it was 95 percent
    lower in tar and the implication it was safer and
    healthier and so forth.  They designed that cigarette to
    have a specific level of nicotine.
          All cigarettes have that.  If you look at every
    brand, every brand of cigarette has design
    specifications.  And among the design specifications is
    a precise amount of nicotine necessary to create and
    sustain addiction.
          Now, how do you get that precise amount of
    nicotine?  You blend.  You also take stems and leaves
    and chop them up and create a slurry and make a little
    paper out of them.  And then you spray on the level of
    nicotine that you want on that paper and chop it up to
    make it look like tobacco and fill part of the cigarette
    with it as well so that the nicotine level has the
    threshold necessary to create and sustain addiction.
          And finally, they also create and sustain
    addiction by adding ammonia.  Now, ammonia doesn't
    increase the level of nicotine.  Ammonia changes its
    permeability in the lungs so that it gets to the brain
    faster so that by adding ammonia, they could give more
    of a nicotine kick, to make it more addictive while they
    attempted to lower the tars in the cigarette itself.

          Now, so they made them inhalable, they have
    manipulated the nicotine level, they've added chemicals
    to give them more kick, all of that to create and
    sustain addiction.
          And the third thing they had done was entered into
    and engaged in a decades-long conspiracy to conceal the
    real hazards of smoking.  And that's what I want to talk
    to you next about, but this might be a perfect time for
    a break.
          THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Shields.
          Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to take a short
    break during Mr. Shields' closing argument, probably
    about five minutes, so I would ask that you stay in the
    jury room.  We'll start back in a little bit.
          (Jury present.)
          (Recess taken.)
          THE COURT:  Are we ready to start back,
    Mr. Reilly, Mr. Shields?
          MR. SHIELDS:  (Nods head.)
          THE COURT:  Mr. Smoot, you can bring the jurors
    back in.
          THE BAILIFF:  Jurors are now entering the
    courtroom.
          (Jury present.)
          (The following proceedings were held in open court
16 3531
in the presence of the jury:)
          THE COURT:  Please be seated.
          Thank you, Mr. Smoot.
          Mr. Shields, you may proceed.
          MR. SHIELDS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          I've told you that there were three bases for
    liability:  One, that they targeted kids; two, that the
    design of the cigarettes to create and sustain addiction
    and, three, that they entered into a civil conspiracy to
    conceal the real hazards of cigarettes.
          That -- of course, that third item, was an Engle
    finding, that they entered into an agreement or civil
    conspiracy to conceal material information about the
    real hazards of cigarettes.  And we offered a great deal
    of evidence on that, and I'm going to walk you through
    that.
          But as a beginning point, there is no evidence to
    contradict all of what we provided you.  They didn't
    offer anybody to dispute it.  Mr. Reilly, in fact, in
    opening statement, virtually conceded that they couldn't
    defend their conduct over the years.  Although when I
    took Dr. Lipowicz's deposition, he still would not agree
    that what they had done was wrong.  He still would not
    agree that they engaged in a conspiracy, that they were
    negligent, that their products were defective, that they

    fraudulently concealed information.  So let's look at
    the evidence.
          First, a civil conspiracy starts as a result of
    the growing evidence in the early 1950s that cigarettes
    caused lung cancer.  Dr. Burns showed you a chart that
    indicated that there was a relationship between the
    amount of smoking and about a 20-year lapse, lung
    cancer.  Lung cancer at one time was a very rare
    disease, unheard of.  But with the mass production and
    mass sale of cigarettes, it then became the leading
    cause of death in this country.  And that's what
    Dr. Burns told you.
          As a result of that relationship, there were
    studies that were commenced to see if cigarettes caused
    lung cancer, and there were four major studies published
    in 1950 that he told you about.  We're not going through
    those in any detail.  It's undisputed that that's what
    those four studies said.
          They were followed in 1953 by the mouse painting
    skin studies.  And Dr. Burns explained to you, the
    significance of that is that the skin of the mouse, the
    cells, are similar to the lining of our lung so that if
    you could produce tumors by putting tar on the mouse
    skin, it provided evidence that that might be the reason
    for that relationship between smoking and lung cancer. 3533
          And when that came out, it was a major story.  The
    stock price for all cigarette companies bottomed and
    they panicked.  And you saw the telegram from the
    president of the American Tobacco Company, Paul Hahn, to
    all the presidents of the other tobacco companies,
    including the president of Philip Morris, saying, we've
    got to get together and figure out what we're going to
    do about this.
          And they got together at the Plaza Hotel in
    December of 1953, the presidents of the company, later
    the research directors of the company.  And the
    documents show what they decided to do.
          What they decided to do was hire public relations
    counsel.  They didn't think of it in terms of this is a
    problem for smoke -- for our clients that are dying from
    our product.  They thought of it in terms of how can we
    counter the adverse publicity of this so that it doesn't
    affect the sales of our product?
          And so they hired the biggest public relations
    firm in the country, Hill & Knowlton in New York.  And
    Hill & Knowlton then met with them.  And we have the
    memorandum of the meeting and what they suggested to do.
    And that memorandum talks about their interviews with
    the research directors of the companies, in which they
    acknowledge in those interviews the addictive nature of

    cigarettes, and they virtually acknowledge that they
    cause cancer.  And that's important because we see
    what they publicly said instead of what they privately
    said.
          And Hill & Knowlton then put together a program
    for them of what they would do, including killing
    stories about the tobacco problem, including meeting
    with the editors and trying to influence them so that
    they wouldn't write things that were adverse to the
    industry, including sending out information to make sure
    that the industry viewpoint got as much or more play
    than any adverse stories.  And you'll have those
    documents, in which Hill & Knowlton recounts all of its
    activities, who it contacted, with what success, what
    stories it killed, how it impacted everything in
    concealing the real nature of the problem.
          And the evidence will also show you that the first
    thing that they wanted to do following their meeting was
    to have this nationwide newspaper full-page article
    denying that cigarettes cause lung cancer.  That's
    called the Frank Statement.  And it's Exhibit 175.
    You'll have it with you.
          Dr. Proctor walked you through it and told you how
    it was misleading and fraudulent.  It was published in
    every newspaper in the country of a city with more than
17 3535
    50,000 people.  It was reprinted and handed out by the
    industry, reprinted and put in tobacco stores.
          And that document is important, not because we
    think that Rayfield Brown, who was a high school student
    at the time, necessarily saw it and looked at it and
    thought about it, but because it's the evidence of the
    beginning of the civil conspiracy that continued for
    decades after that, creating a culture in which the
    American people did not understand, did not appreciate,
    did not believe the real hazards of cigarettes, as a
    result of the massive advertising expenditure and
    campaign done by the tobacco industry.  And so that
    campaign consisted of three elements.
          First, for decades, they denied that cigarettes
    were harmful at all.
          Second, they pursued what was called the "campaign
    of doubt," in which they said, oh, there's a scientific
    controversy here that needs to be resolved.  And the
    purpose of creating doubt, as Hill & Knowlton wrote in
    that first memoranda, was to keep smokers smoking, by
    saying, you know, this is controversial; this really
    hasn't been resolved.
          And in connection with it, the third element of
    reassurance, which was to say to them, if there is
    anything harmful in cigarettes, we'll find it.  We'll

    take it out before you're ever injured, so you might as
    well go on smoking.
          And look at the Hill & Knowlton document.  That's
    exactly what it says and that is exactly what they did
    over the decades.
          They created, as part of that campaign, two front
    organizations to pursue this campaign of denial, doubt
    and reassurance.
          The first of it, it was called the Tobacco
    Industry Research Counsel, TIRC, later changed its name
    to CTR.  Its purpose was to appear to be a scientific
    research organization, when, in fact, it never really
    researched that their cigarettes caused cancer.  It
    researched everything else so that it could say to the
    American public, we spent $100 million, and we couldn't
    find that cigarettes caused lung cancer.  Because they
    never looked.  They researched viruses.  They researched
    genetics.  They researched everything other than whether
    cigarettes cause lung cancer.
          The evidence that cigarettes cause lung cancer are
    these studies of populations groups that show the
    relationship and that there's no other explanation.  And
    the entire history of the tobacco industry from 1954
    forward, neither Philip Morris or anyone else has ever
    tried to do one of those studies.  Why not?  Because it 3537
    would have confirmed years and decades ago what the
    scientific consensus was, that cigarette smoking caused
    lung cancer.  Instead, they dumped hundreds of millions
    of dollars into what Dr. Proctor called "distraction
    science."
          The fact that this group was nothing more than a
    public relations front instead of a real research
    organization was acknowledged by their internal
    documents themselves.  And here's -- here's an example,
    in which they admitted that it was set up as an industry
    shield in 1954 as a front organization and was not
    really the research organization they claimed.
          The second organization it set up was called The
    Tobacco Institute.  It was its lobbying part.  It had
    offices down the street from the White House.  And we'll
    see lots of documents of what The Tobacco Industry --
    Institute did over the years in successfully pursuing
    its campaign to keep people smoking by denying the harm,
    creating doubt and by reassuring smokers, if anything
    was harmful, we'll take it out, so you might as well
    continue smoking.
          Now, while there may have been some lingering
    doubt in the '50s, despite what Dr. Burns and
    Dr. Proctor said, it was a consensus of the scientific
    community by the mid to late '50s, there could be no

    doubt by 1964.  In 1964, the Surgeon General of the
    United States had an advisory committee composed of
    people that they could veto, that look at everything for
    two years and issued this landmark report that said,
    cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in men and other
    diseases as well.
          Now, that should have been the end of it.  At that
    point in time, Philip Morris had a choice.  It could
    have done what was right, acknowledged the scientific
    consensus, worked with the public health community to
    try and get people to quit smoking.  And think about how
    the world would have been different, how our country
    would have been different if they would have done that
    in 1964 instead of, for the next 35, 40 years, denying
    everything and opposing all efforts to deal with the
    problem.
          The culture we have today, where you don't smoke
    in buildings and restaurants, you don't smoke in almost
    anywhere, could have been the culture of the '60s had
    they not decided on which path they were going to take.
    The path they chose was to continue their campaign of
    denial, doubt and reassurance.  And you will see from
    documents that deal specifically with that.  The most
    important, I think, is Exhibit 252.
          It's referenced on our time line as the
18 3539
3541 psychological crutch line there.  And what it is is a
    memo from a high executive of the Philip Morris company
    to the highest executive of the Philip Morris company,
    Joseph Cullman, saying "We must, in the near future,
    provide some answers which will give smokers a
    psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue
    smoking."  That was their reaction to the Surgeon
    General's Report.
          And so what they did for the next 35, 40 years was
    issue press releases denying that cigarettes were
    harmful, gave statements and made speeches, engaged in
    extensive publicity and used TIRC/CTR and The Tobacco
    Institute to continue the campaign of denial.
          And among the things they did, they issued these
    white papers -- and we've given you some examples of
    them -- that misrepresented what the evidence was about
    cigarette smoking.  And we -- we've given you an example
    of things from each decade, but there were lots more of
    them.
          And what these were -- were were documents that
    they sent out to every doctor and to newspapers and
    editors and medical schools, in which they said there's
    no evidence that cigarettes are harmful and that they
    cause lung cancer, in hopes that those doctors would
    provide that information to the patients.

          And as Dr. Proctor told you, it worked.  You know,
    after the Surgeon General's Report, fully half of all
    doctors were still smoking.  Even a decade later, a
    third of all doctors were still smoking.
          The American Medical Association refused to issue
    a statement that cigarettes were harmful because they
    had the representative from the American Medical
    Association committee that dealt with it.  And you saw
    the document where he bragged about how he kept the
    committee from adopting a resolution that was adverse to
    the tobacco companies' position.
          Think about what difference it would have made if
    in the early '60s they would have told the truth, not
    tried to persuade doctors, in fact, taken a position of
    trying to work with doctors to deal with the significant
    public health problem, how different our world would
    have been.
          Now, in addition to issuing these white papers,
    they would go on television and deny that cigarettes
    were harmful, and we're going to show you an example of
    that in a moment.  But they also denied that cigarettes
    were addicting, despite the fact that they could turn on
    the news that they were addictive and, in fact, designed
    them to create and sustained addiction.
          One of the documents you'll have is Exhibit 258, an internal document from The Tobacco Institute
    executive, in which the executive admits that cigarettes
    are addictive.
          If we could bring that up.
          Here's the report, labeled "Strictly private and
    confidential."  "Moreover, nicotine is addictive.  We
    are then in the business of selling nicotine, an
    addictive drug effective in the release of stress
    mechanisms."  And it says "with certain undesirable side
    effects, one of which is it causes cancer."
          Now, keep in mind, when this internal document is
    written, they are publicly everywhere saying, there's no
    evidence it causes lung cancer.  It's -- there's doubt.
    There's a scientific controversy.  There's nothing
    harmful in cigarettes.  If there's anything ever
    harmful, we'll take it out.
          And, secondly, they're denying that it's
    addictive.  They work to keep the first Surgeon
    General's Report in 1964 from saying it's addictive by
    convincing him that he should just call it a "habit"
    instead of an "addiction."
          The campaign is summed up by another internal
    document, a memoranda, Exhibit 305 --
          Let's bring that up.
          -- from executives of The Tobacco Institute that

    acknowledges that they've been pursuing a campaign of
    creating doubt about the health charges for the last 20
    years, and that is exactly what the evidence showed.
          Now, let me also give you an example of their
    campaign of denial by showing you a clip from Face the
    Nation, in which the president of Philip Morris went on
    national television and denied that cigarettes were
    harmful.  It pulls it all together.  It's Exhibit 247.
    You saw it.  Let's look at it again.
          (Video clip was played as follows:)
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  This is a CBS news extra
    on smoking and health, the finding of the Surgeon
    General committee.  In our studios" --
          (Video clip was stopped.)
          MR. SHIELDS:  We're looking for Face the Nation,
    Exhibit 247.
          While she's looking for that, I'll move on.  We'll
    come back to that in a moment.
          The 1988 Surgeon General's Report finally said
    publicly what the drug community had known for years,
    what the internal tobacco documents showed they had
    known for years, and that was that cigarettes were
    addictive.  And the tobacco industry, The Tobacco
    Institute immediately ridiculed the conclusion.  They
    referenced it as scare tactics.  And they had a press
19 3543
    conference, in which they labeled it as "scare tactics"
    and denied it.
          And as late as 1994, the president of
    Philip Morris went before Congress, the congressional
    committee on whether cigarettes were addictive, held up
    his hand, swore under oath to tell the truth, the whole
    truth and nothing but the truth and swore under oath
    that cigarettes were not addictive, despite all the
    internal documents of Philip Morris that said they were,
    despite the fact those internal documents, which you'll
    all have in front of you, show that they designed their
    cigarettes to create and sustain addiction.
          Now, a major part of the campaign of denial also
    dealt with filters and menthol cigarettes.  Starting in
    the 1950s, they started putting filters to imply to
    people that cigarettes would be safer.  And they engaged
    in what later became the tar derby, in which they
    claimed that they had reduced the tar levels by great
    percentages in order to claim that those brands were
    safe.
          That is important here because Rayfield Brown
    ended up smoking one of those brands, in which they
    claim that they greatly reduced the tar, the
    Multifilter.  The Multifilter claimed to have reduced
    the tar by 95 percent.  A clear implication of that

    claim is that its safer; it's less hazardous; it won't
    cause the diseases you've been hearing about, while
    never admitting that it did in the first place.
          And as Dr. Burns told you, we now know that all of
    that was simply untrue, that reducing the tar levels had
    no impact.  And a major scientific report came out
    called Monograph 13, from the National Cancer Institute.
    You'll have it in evidence.  Look at paragraph -- or at
    Chapter 1.  It's the summary chapter written by
    Dr. Burns and which goes through the evidence that there
    is no implication that low-tar filtered cigarettes,
    low-nicotine cigarettes reduced the risk of lung cancer
    at all.
          To the contrary, what happened with these
    machine-measured levels of lower tar is that people,
    because they were addicted and needed a level of
    nicotine, would smoke more to get the nicotine, would
    take deeper puffs and inhale deeper to get the nicotine,
    would cover the ventilation holes, which is the primary
    way in which they got the lower tar levels, so that it
    didn't reduce the tar in them.
          Philip Morris knew that.  We showed you the
    internal documents in which they recognized that's what
    was really happening back in the '60s.  But they
    continued to advertise low-tar filtered cigarettes and 3545
    give the impression that they were safer.
          Now, Philip Morris wants you to think that all of
    these documents and all of this evidence about their
    conduct is ancient history, that it was decades ago.
    But the reality is that the denials continue today.
          You saw the deposition of Dr. Lipowicz, in which
    he said he stood by all of the statements that they had
    made during that time period, and he was evasive and
    wouldn't answer the questions and was all over the
    board in trying to justify it.  But that was in 2011.
    They still stood by the things they had said over the
    years.
          And so let's -- let's see the things they stand --
    stood by over the years because I showed those through
    Dr. Lipowicz when I asked him those questions.  Let's
    start with the video of Dr. Wakeham.
          And remember that Dr. Wakeham was the head
    scientist at Philip Morris for a great deal of a period
    of time.  And we showed you this video of an interview
    with him.
          (Video clip was played as follows:)
          "DR. WAKEHAM:  None of the things which have been
    found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can
    be considered harmful.
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  "But the components

    themselves can be considered harmful, can they not?
          "DR. WAKEHAM:  Anything can be considered harmful.
    Applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it.
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  I don't think many people
    have died from applesauce.
          "DR. WAKEHAM:  They're not eating that much.
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  People are smoking their
    own cigarettes.
          "DR. WAKEHAM:  Well, let me say it this way:  The
    people who eat applesauce die.  The people who eat sugar
    die.  The people who smoke cigarettes die.  Does the
    fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die
    demonstrate that smoking is the cause?"
          (Video clip was stopped.)
          MR. SHIELDS:  That's the interview from the mid
    '70s.  That's what they were publicly saying and
    engaging in a campaign to convince the American public.
    Now, yes, it's true everybody dies.
          But you have the chart, in evidence, to retaliate
    that.  Rayfield Brown died 22 years before his life
    expectancy.  Average smoker dies 14 years before their
    life expectancy.
          Now, let's look at the next one, Mr. Bowling,
    executive vice president of Philip Morris at the time.
          (Video clip was played as follows:)
20 3547
          "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  As a manufacturer of the
    world's biggest selling cigarette, are you concerned
    that the World Health Organization say that cigarettes
    are the cause of a worldwide epidemic of a disease at
    the present, killed hundreds of thousands of smokers
    every year?
          "MR. BOWLING:  Am I concerned?  I'm concerned but
    possibly in a different way than you might think.  I'm
    concerned that people make claims, including those
    against our products, without adequate knowledge.  There
    has not been the sort of research needed for everyone to
    say that."
          (Video clip was stopped.)
          MR. SHIELDS:  And then finally, do we have the
    Face the Nation clip that we can play?
          And this is the president of Philip Morris.
          (Video clip was played as follows:)
          "MR. CULLMAN:  We are also very concerned about
    the charges leveled against our product.  And we're very
    anxious to do whatever we can to clear the air in this
    matter.  We happen to be optimistic about the future,
    and we happen to feel that this is a great industry
    and that this industry can face the future with
    confidence because when, as and if any ingredient in
    cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to

    human health, we are confident that we can eliminate
    that ingredient."
          (Video clip was stopped.)
          MR. SHIELDS:  20 years before then, one of the
    internal documents shows that they internally knew,
    understood and agreed that cigarettes cause lung cancer.
    And he goes on national television and says, there's
    nothing harmful, and if, when we discover anything
    harmful, we will remove it.
          Why did he say that?  To keep smokers smoking.
    You say that to a smoker to say, there's no reason for
    you to quit because if we ever find anything in here,
    it'll be taken out before you're injured.  It was
    designed to sell cigarettes.
          And so the question is what were they conceding?
    Mr. Reilly will say, none of this was a secret.  The
    health community was saying this.  Mr. Brown must have
    known that.  The point is not that these charges weren't
    being made; it's that Philip Morris denied them and
    never revealed the truth.
          What they concealed was what they really knew and
    believed.  What they concealed included that they knew
    cigarettes caused disease and were addictive, that they
    knew that filters did not reduce the risk, that they
    knew that low-tar and light cigarettes did not reduce 3549
    the risk, that they knew that there was no legitimate
    scientific controversy, while saying to the contrary,
    that they knew what was harmful in cigarettes.
          You'll have a document from 1961, in which they
    identify the cancer-causing agents in cigarettes.  They
    knew what was harmful.  And they concealed that they
    knew they couldn't take it out at the time period they
    were saying, if we ever find anything harmful, we'll
    remove it, so there's no reason for you to quit smoking.
    That's what was fraudulent concealment.
          Now, none of this is disputed.  They offered no
    evidence to dispute any of this.
          So then let's turn to the final piece of evidence
    that needs to be addressed regarding their campaign.
    And that is what evidence is there of reliance?  The
    judge instructed you there must be evidence of reliance.
    All right.
          Ladies and gentlemen, reliance can be inferred
    from all of the evidence.  Mr. Brown isn't here to
    testify.  Mr. Brown died in 1995.  He can't come here
    and say, I relied on this; I relied on that; this is why
    I continue to smoke.
          So you're going to have to use your common sense
    to infer from all the evidence whether there's reliance.
    And the Court will instruct you that you can make that

    inference from -- from the evidence.  You don't have to
    have a specific statement from Mr. Brown.
          And what evidence is there to make the inference?
    It's this extensive campaign that Dr. Proctor told you
    about.  It's the fact that we know what smokers believed
    because the Federal Trade Commission did surveys.  The
    Roper organization, for Philip Morris, did surveys
    during the time period to show what people believed.
          And what they showed -- information showed you was
    that there was very little understanding of what
    cigarettes really did.  And you have one document in
    which the Federal Trade Commission pointed out -- says
    "The warning statement on packages has proved to be
    ineffective, mainly because few people pay attention to
    it."
          There is a later survey from 1981, which is right
    in the important time period we're talking about, in
    which the Federal Trade Commission pulled together 14
    surveys of smokers from around the country, including
    the surveys done for Philip Morris from the Roper
    organization.  And what it concluded was:  "A large
    number of consumers do not know what diseases are
    related to smoking.  A substantial number seriously
    misunderstand and underestimate the extent of the
    increased risk.  That many seriously underestimate or
21 3551
    are unaware of the severity of health consequences.  And
    a significant number of consumers incorrectly do not
    believe the consequences are relevant to them."
          And think about this:  Dr. Burns told you that
    slightly less than half of all smokers will have died
    from a smoking-related disease, some 440,000 Americans a
    year.
          Now, if Philip Morris had ever said to its
    customers, your chances of dying from buying our product
    are about 50 percent, what impact would that have had on
    whether people continued to smoke?  What impact --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. SHIELDS:  -- would that have had on --
          THE COURT:  Hold on, Mr. Shields.
          MR. REILLY:  Impact on people other than
    Mr. Brown.
          THE COURT:  The objection's sustained for the
    reasons I stated.
          MR. SHIELDS:  What impact would that have had on
    Mr. Brown?  You can look at that survey information and
    infer from that that Mr. Brown would have relied on this
    campaign.
          And there's more evidence than that.  There is
    direct evidence of reliance from his switching to the
    Multifilter cigarette.  Mary told you about this meeting

    in which a representative of the Philip Morris company
    gave out packages of the Multifilter.  There were ads
    there about the reduction in tar and the whole context
    of it is here is a safer, less hazardous cigarette that
    you can smoke.  And Mary told you that Rayfield started
    smoking the Multifilter in the belief that it was safer
    and less hazardous for him.  That's direct evidence of
    his reliance on their fraudulent concealment.  So you're
    going to need to determine that issue.
          The third major issue that you're going to need to
    determine is comparative fault.
          Now, comparative fault is simply a question for
    you of whether you think that Rayfield Brown was also at
    fault in not quitting smoking earlier.  And I'm going to
    be candid with you.  You certainly can reach that
    conclusion on this evidence.  That's your decision to
    decide whether he also was at fault.
          But that's not the end of it.  If you decide that
    he had some fault, that he should have quit earlier,
    that he shouldn't have continued to smoke, you can still
    find Philip Morris liable for their misconduct and
    allocate the responsibility between the two.  That's
    what comparative fault is.  You compare the fault of
    both.
          And so what you compare is Rayfield Brown starting 3553
    as a 13- or 14-year-old at a time when there was massive
    advertising, targeting kids, to get them to smoke, in
    which the culture of smoking is that everyone was -- was
    smoking, that he rapidly became addicted, that he
    remained addicted for decades thereafter, that he
    struggled to quit and simply was unable to totally quit.
    And compare that with their purposeful misconduct.  Who
    controlled their actions?
          Philip Morris controlled its assertions that
    there's nothing harmful in cigarettes, when they knew to
    the contrary.  Philip Morris controlled its claim that
    if we ever find anything harmful in cigarettes, we'll
    take it out, so you might as well keep smoking, when
    they knew to the contrary exactly what carcinogens were
    in cigarettes.
          Philip Morris controlled its representations and
    implied representations that cigarettes with lower tar
    and filters were more safe, when they knew internally to
    the contrary.  Philip Morris controlled that they
    designed their cigarettes to create and sustain
    addiction.  They controlled that they targeted kids with
    their massive advertising over the years.
          Compare all of that misconduct with Rayfield
    Brown.  And I suggest to you, even if you find that
    Rayfield Brown had some responsibility for not quitting

    sooner, it is minor in comparison to the massive
    misconduct of Philip Morris.  That's what you have to do
    when you have comparative fault.
          Finally, you have to deal with damages.  Now,
    damages have two components.  You will have a verdict
    form that has you set out components of the damages.
          One are called compensatory damages.  And that
    includes the lost income, the value of services, medical
    expenses and those have been agreed to.  You have your
    instructions, which sets out those exact amounts so that
    it's merely a matter of taking those instructions and
    putting on the form $137,750 for loss of income,
    $123,240 for loss of services, $114,287.41 for medical
    expenses.  Those are easy.
          But above and beyond that, as the Court instructed
    you, you must determine the value of the loss of
    companionship and affection, the pain and suffering from
    losing her husband, the loss of parental guidance that
    Jennifer suffered from.
          In order to do that, you're going to have to
    consider their lives together, and we offered you
    extensive evidence on that.  Mary, Michael, Jennifer
    testified about what they did, how they lived, how Mary
    and Rayfield weren't just husband and wife, they were
    best friends, the kinds of things they did together and
22 3555
    the kinds of things they planned to do together.  You
    are going to have to work your way through that and
    assign a monetary value to those losses.
          Now, there's no magic formula.  I wish there were.
    I wish I could come up here and say, here's what you do
    to determine that figure.  That's a figure you're going
    to have to determine.  All I can do is say to you, as we
    have said from the beginning, I believe the evidence in
    this case justifies an award of substantial damages for
    those categories.
          And by "substantial damages," I suggest to you
    that an award of $10 million for Mary Brown's losses, in
    addition to these specific losses, is reasonable and
    appropriate.  And I suggest to you that a figure of $3.5
    million for Jennifer's losses is reasonable and
    appropriate.
          Now, why Jennifer?  Because under the law,
    Jennifer is a survivor victim recovering for wrongful
    death because of her age and dependency at the time of
    his death.
          So we have two claims to consider; Mary's claim,
    Jennifer's claim.  When you go through the evidence,
    search your consciousness.  See if you can reach an
    agreement among yourselves as to the value of that.  And
    as we suggest, it needs to be a substantial amount.

          You also need to consider punitive damages.
    one of the questions on this form is specifically
    whether there's entitlement to punitive damages.  The
    Court instructed you.  You will have the written
    instruction about the standard from which you can award
    punitive damages.  What does it take to award punitive
    damages?
          And I suggest to you, if you look at that standard
    and you look at the evidence of their intentional
    misconduct in targeting kids, in designing cigarettes to
    create and sustain addiction, in engaging in a civil
    conspiracy for decades to keep smokers smoking, that if
    any case ever justified the award of punitive damages,
    it's this one.  If any case justifies you answering that
    question of entitlement, it is this one.  The evidence
    is overwhelming.
          And there is no evidence to the contrary.  They
    didn't put on a single witness to address their
    misconduct or to try and justify or to say that it
    didn't justify the award of punitive damages here.  They
    didn't offer anything to contradict what Dr. Burns told
    you, what Dr. Proctor told you, what Dr. Goldberg told
    you.  The undisputed evidence supports it.  You should
    answer that question for entitlement yes, and then we'll
    deal with the other issue. 3557
          And let me say this as a final point about
    punitive damages:  If you answer that question yes, then
    we go into a second phase -- it'll be relatively
    short -- that deals with the amount of punitive damages
    and there may be additional evidence on that.
          We've spent close to three weeks here.  You should
    decide that issue based on the evidence, the instruction
    of law, without any consideration of, gee, I'm going to
    have to put in another half a day of time.
          We didn't all spend all this time to then decide
    it because we didn't want to put in a little more time.
    And so we're getting close to the end of the week.
    Maybe we have to go into next week.  I hope not.  But
    the decision has to be made on the evidence.  It has to
    be made on the instruction from the Court.
          So let me just conclude my opening portion by
    saying that you have four issues to deal with.
    the evidence is unequivocal, it supports us in
    connection with all four.  He clearly was a member of
    the class.  He's entitled to the benefit of the Engle
    findings.
          Clearly there's specific causation from a
    relationship between their misconduct and a result in
    death.
          In terms of comparative fault, it's up to you to

    make that decision and determine how you want to
    allocate it.
          And, fourth and finally, there's abundant
    evidence from which you can award the substantial
    damages that you think are appropriate here and that you
    can decide that this case justifies the award of
    punitive damages.
          I thank you again for your time and attention.  I
    know I've talked a long time.  A lot of evidence that
    needed to be discussed with you, and I'll be happy to
    talk to you again.


         MR. SHIELDS:  Good afternoon.
         THE JURY:  Afternoon.
         MR. SHIELDS:  I spent a lot of time talking to
    you.  I'll take a little more of your time.  Bear
    with me.  There are some things I think I need to
    respond to and some testimony I want to show you.
         Let me begin by making two preliminary
    observations.  First is that Mr. Reilly virtually
    ignores 90 percent of the testimony that you heard
    in this case.  Just ignores all the evidence about
    the misconduct.  All the extensive evidence we put
    on that they targeted kids because they knew that

    was their only source of replacement smokers for
    those that were dying and quitting.  Not one word
    from them.
         We showed you the internal documents that they
    targeted kids.  We showed you the reports of the
    Surgeon General that said that targeting worked.
    That it created demand.  That the multiple studies
    from around the world from multiple disciplines show
    that the cigarette advertising caused kids to start
    smoking.
         And you'll have that report with you.  It's in
    the Surgeon General's report.  It's in the National
    Cancer Institute's Monograph 19 report.  Even the
    2012 Surgeon General's Report says that.  Just
    ignored by Philip Morris.
         Secondly, we offered all of this evidence about
    how they designed their cigarettes to create
    addiction in the first place on kids and to sustain
    it on smokers.  You saw the report from the Surgeon
    General that said just that in 2010.  That said the
    cigarettes today are more addictive than ever
    because of how they designed them.
         And what is Mr. Reilly's response?  Well,
    cigarettes have nicotine in them.  People want
    nicotine. 3638
         Well, that's the whole point.  There has to be
    a certain level of nicotine to get people addicted
    and to keep them addicted so that they continue
    smoking.  And they elaborately design and engineer
    their products to make sure they meet that threshold
    level so that the 15-year-old that picks up the
    cigarette becomes addicted and thus will be a
    customer for decades to come.  So that the addicted
    smoker finds it extremely difficult to quit and
    continues to smoke because of the nicotine is
    sufficient and is at a level for that to happen.
         That's what the Surgeon General's report says.
    That's what the National Cancer Institute's report
    says.
         No response whatsoever from Philip Morris other
    than of course nicotine is in tobacco.  But it's not
    the level necessary to sustain addiction unless you
    design it and keep it that way.  It's not at the
    level to get kids addicted and keep them addicted
    unless you design it that way, unless you create
    your paper tobacco and spray nicotine on it and chop
    it up and put it in cigarettes, put it in the
    filters of the cigarettes, and all of the things
    that Dr. Proctor --
         THE COURT:  Mr. Shields.

         Mr. Reilly -- yes, sir, Mr. Reilly?
         MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.  It's in
    violation of the Engle findings.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  You may proceed.
         MR. SHIELDS:  All of the things that
    Dr. Proctor told you that they did to create and
    sustain addiction.
         And finally there was a massive amount of
    evidence about the civil conspiracy they started in
    1954 and ran right through 2000 and through the last
    decade.  All of the things that they did as part of
    that conspiracy.
         You saw videotapes of it.  You've seen
    documents.  There's a massive amount of evidence
    that's going to be sent out with you showing that
    civil conspiracy.
         Not one word from Mr. Reilly in connection with
    that cigarette conspiracy.  Not one.
         Now, the second observation I would make is
    that when he does talk about things, he cherry picks
    the testimony, just like his only witness Dr. Rosman
    did, to create a story that is contrary to almost
    all the evidence in the case.
         Your obligation as jurors is to look at all the
    evidence and reconcile the evidence and not cherry
10 3640
    pick a piece here to try and construct the story
    that's not consistent with all of the testimony.
         Now, let's talk about that because that seems
    to me that's the beginning point.
         The best example of cherry picking is that CBS
    News report they showed you.  And he got cut off
    during the trial because he cut out, right at the
    middle of it, the sense of the whole thing that
    changed the whole context of the statement.  The
    statement implies one thing until you see what he
    cut out.  Of course by closing argument he had
    acknowledged he cut it out.  Let's show that again
    to show what the statement really showed and what he
    took out of it.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         There is no question but that smoking appeals
    to a great many people.  An old smoker never forgets
    how he started.  And through the lifetimes of a lot
    of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and
    reassuring companion.  The familiar slogans, the
    familiar packages have been a part of our lives.
         It's like being told that an old friend has all
    along been betraying you.  In a case like that, you
    give the old friend every possible chance before you
    finally decide to believe what you've been told, and

    maybe even then you give him a chance to reform.
         In this kind of a country it comes down to you
    whether you like it or not.  No one is going to
    forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear
    that no one is going to tell him it's good for him,
    either.  The decision is his; the decision and the
    health that may depend upon it.
         This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. SHIELDS:  That has a totally different
    meaning than when you see the first of it instead of
    just the last of it.  By only showing the last of
    it, you cherry pick to give a different impression.
    That's what he did through closing arguments.  Let's
    look at the specific examples.
         First of all, class membership.  The issue for
    you to decide is whether Mr. Brown was addicted to
    smoking and because of that addiction he continued
    to smoke so that it was a legal cause of his death.
         Now, what were you told in closing?  You were
    told that Dr. Burns said that every 30 minutes an
    addicted smoker had to have a new cigarette.
         Really?  Was that what Dr. Burns said?  If that
    were true, that would mean no addicted smoker could
    ever go to sleep at night.  They would have to be 3642
    getting up every hour and smoking a couple of
    cigarettes.
         It would mean that workers today couldn't work
    because they would have to be having a couple of
    cigarettes every hour, and cigarette smoking is no
    longer allowed.
         It would mean most of our daily activities
    couldn't be done by addicted smokers.
         What it would mean is that virtually no one is
    addicted.  Of course that's not true, and that's not
    what Dr. Burns said.  Dr. Burns went on to say --
         We can bring up that testimony.
         When you get up in the morning, the first thing
    you need to do when you get out of bed is dose
    yourself because all night you haven't had any
    nicotine.
         Not that you had to have it every 30 minutes
    like Mr. Rosman said.
         That happens day after day, and that's the
    reason why exposure to those cancer-causing
    substances is nearly continuous.
         Now, what was Mary Brown's testimony?  She
    testified, and I showed you the testimony during the
    first part of my argument, that he got up every
    morning, and the first thing he did was smoke a

    cigarette on the way to the bathroom.
         That's exactly what Dr. Burns was talking
    about.  It is absurd to suggest that, unless you
    have a cigarette every 30 minutes, you are not
    addicted because, under that criteria, no one would
    be addicted.
         It's absurd to suggest, you know, if you quit
    smoking and therefore aren't having a cigarette
    every 30 minutes, that means you weren't addicted to
    begin with.  That's contrary to all of the testimony
    in the case.
         He told you that the smoking that was done was
    only on weekends after 1986 and said that the only
    evidence of -- that he continued to smoke was from
    Sam Jones.  Really?
         MR. REILLY:  I object, Your Honor.  I didn't
    say that.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  But it's proper
    argument.
         You may proceed, Mr. Shields.
         MR. SHIELDS:  Really?  Mary testified that she
    smelled smoke on him when he came home from work.
    His son, Michael, testified that he saw cigarettes
    in the car.  Neither one of them believed that he
    had succeeded in quitting smoking.
11 3644
3646 And look at the medical records.  We showed you
    the medical record from shortly before his death
    where he indicates that he was smoking two packs a
    day.
         So there is abundant evidence that he continued
    to smoke.  Not just on weekends, as Mr. Reilly
    wanted to suggest, but he smoked throughout that
    time period.  Attempted to quit, relapsed, and went
    back to smoking.
         Sam Jones described, for example, them going
    out on route inspections and being together for a
    week at a time in which they would constantly be
    smoking.
         So it's a total misrepresentation of the
    evidence to suggest that it was only on weekends.
         Just as it's a total misrepresentation of the
    evidence to suggest that he totally quit smoking
    around Jennifer starting in 1983.
         Let's put back up on the board what Jennifer
    actually said when asked the question:  When was it
    that you thought he quit smoking?
         And she said:  Somewhere around my middle
    school, what would be sixth, seventh, eighth grade.
         All of the quotes that Mr. Reilly gave you, the
    1983 figure came from the question, not from the

    answer.  Her answer was sixth, seventh, or eighth
    grade.  In sixth grade, it's 1984; in seventh grade,
    it's 1985; and eighth grade it's 1986.  That's the
    range that she was talking about.
         If it was 1983 she would have still been in
    elementary school, and she never said that.
         You're going to have to decide how reliable are
    recollections 30 years later and look at the
    totality of the evidence.
         And in looking at the totality of the evidence,
    you need to look at the specific testimony of Mary.
    What Mary testified to --
         If you could bring up the next one.
         "Can you tell us whether or not you have a
    clear memory of Rayfield smoking in your home in
    1983?
         "Yes.
         "Was he smoking?
         "Yes:
         "And was Jennifer living in the home in 1983
    with you and Rayfield?
         "Yes, she was.
         "And in 1984 was Rayfield smoking around the
    home?"
         "And in 1985 was Rayfield smoking around the home."
         Now is it conceivable that he's smoking around
    the home; he's smoking everywhere, as Michael
    described; that he's got ashtrays everywhere that
    he's smoking -- other than starting in 1985 in the
    bedroom -- that he's not smoking around Jennifer?
         Well, look at the next testimony about
    Mrs. Brown when she's specifically asked about
    smoking around Jennifer.
         And let's look at 29.
         "Can you tell us whether or not you have a
    clear memory of Rayfield smoking at some of
    Jennifer's activities that you and Rayfield attended
    in 1983, '84, '85, '86?"
         The answer was yes.
         According to Mr. Reilly, he never smoked at any
    of those activities.
         Let's take another look at what she said.
         This is 28.
         "And in 1985, when he was at home, would he get
    up in the mornings and have a cigarette?
         "Yes, he would.
         "And in 1986 when he was home, would he get up
    and have a cigarette?
         "Yes, he would.

         "Let's talk about the evening hours.  When he'd
    come home from work during the week while Jennifer
    was there in 1983, would he come home in the evening
    during the week and have a cigarette:
         "Yes, he would."
         See.  You've got to put the totality of the
    evidence.  Mary's testimony, Michael's testimony,
    and Kaiser Thomas's testimony.
         Kaiser talked about coming down and staying
    with them and living at their house when he came
    down.  Was there one word from Kaiser Thomas about
    him not smoking around Jennifer or not smoking
    anywhere in the house or only smoking on weekends?
    He said he continued to smoke up until 1986.
         He also described quit attempts; another
    example of cherry picking.  Mr. Reilly said he never
    attempted to quit until 1986.  Never expressed a
    desire to quit until 1986.
         Kaiser Thomas specifically said:  We made
    several attempts to quit before 1986 and, in fact,
    before 1984.
         He gave a specific example of where they had
    quit, where Rayfield had quit, gone on a fishing
    trip, got in a confrontation or an argument with a
    labor worker, and because of that stress, went back
12 3648
3650 to smoking.
         Just ignored by Mr. Reilly.  Simply cherry
    picked the testimony.  He wanted to build a scenario
    other than what the total evidence shows.
         And he says what all this shows is that
    Mr. Brown had total control over his smoking.
         Now, the point is that he continued to smoke
    because he was addicted.  The question of control is
    not whether he can keep from smoking in church; it
    is not whether he can keep from smoking part of the
    time at work.  The question of control is whether
    you continue to smoke after you've indicated you
    want to quit and tried to quit, relapsed, and been
    unable to do so.
         And there's just massive evidence of that in
    this case.
         Now let's talk about legal cause.
         You heard Mr. Reilly say that legal cause meant
    that he smoked against his will.  Look at these
    charges from the Court.  There's not one word in
    there about it being against his will.  That's not
    what addiction is, and there's no testimony to
    support that assertion.
         Instead, Mr. Reilly tries to create an argument
    as opposed to dealing with what the issue is.

         The question of legal cause is twofold:  One,
    did he smoke in part because he was addicted?  And
    there's abundant evidence that he did.
         It doesn't mean that he was a hopeless addict
    that was unable to not quit, because he did try to
    quit and he did succeed for some time.  It doesn't
    mean that he couldn't try to taper down.  It means
    that he smoked because he was addicted.  And that's
    what the evidence is.
         The second thing legal cause means is it
    doesn't have to be the only cause.  If you'll take a
    look at the legal cause instruction in the first
    part of Section 10, it specifically says:  In order
    to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction
    to Philip Morris's cigarettes need not be the only
    cause.  Addiction to Philip Morris's cigarettes may
    be a legal cause of injury and death even though it
    operates in combination with the act of another or
    some other cause.
         Now, what does that mean?  This is crucial.
    What it means is simply this:  If you think that
    part of the reasons he continued to smoke was
    because he wanted to, that it wasn't solely because
    he was addicted, that's not the end of it.
         If addiction was one of the reasons he continued to smoke, that's all that's necessary.
         The question of how you compare those is a
    different issue.  It's the comparative fault issue.
    But on the question of whether he's a class member
    and whether addiction is a legal cause, it just has
    to be a reason why he continued to smoke.  And in
    that regard, I'm going to remind you of a couple
    things.
         One is that the consensus of the scientific
    community is that nicotine addiction is the
    fundamental reason people continue to smoke.  And
    you'll see that in all those documents.
         Secondly, Dr. Frazier's testimony was that, in
    her opinion, he continued to smoke because of his
    addiction.  That's all you need to find to find
    class membership, that it was a reason that he
    continued to smoke because there's no question here
    that smoking was the cause of his death and injury.
         So once you've determined class membership,
    then you have resolved the issue of causation for
    the negligence and product defect claim.  There's
    still an issue of reliance, but that issue arises
    only for the civil conspiracy and the fraudulent
    concealment counts.
         So let's talk about reliance.  The Court will

    instruct you and the Court has instructed that you
    can decide these issues based upon inferences from
    the evidence in total.
         MR. REILLY:  Object, Your Honor.  That's not in
    your instructions.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. SHIELDS:  The Court has instructed you that
    you may use reason and common sense to reach
    conclusions.  You may draw reasonable inferences
    from the evidence.  There need not be direct
    evidence of every point.  You can take the evidence
    in its totality and use your reason and common sense
    to draw inferences that would be drawn by others in
    reaching those conclusions.
         And what inferences could we draw?  Well, first
    of all, we know from the survey information at the
    time that, as of 1970, two-thirds of smokers had
    little or no idea of what injuries might occur.  We
    know that, a decade later, from the Federal Trade
    Commission Report in 14 surveys, including those
    done by the Roper Organization for Philip Morris of
    smokers, that there was very little understanding of
    the severity of smoking, of the likelihood that a
    person would suffer any degree of injury that could
    occur.  Look at those surveys.  Read that 1981
13 3652
    Federal Trade Commission Report.
         Mr. Reilly says, oh, that was written by
    lawyers.  Of course it's written by lawyers.  That's
    what the Federal Trade Commission staff is.
         But what it is doing is reporting on what the
    surveys show.  And the document -- it's
    100-something pages long -- has charts showing the
    surveys and the responses.
         Look at those charts and look at the responses.
    As Dr. Goldberg pointed out, fully two-thirds of the
    respondents ranked cigarette smoking as not very
    hazardous and on the order of slipping in the
    bathtub.  So there was very little understanding.
         You can take that general evidence and use your
    common sense to draw some reasonable inferences
    about reliance.
         But secondly, Ladies and Gentlemen, contrary to
    what Mr. Reilly told you, the charge does not say
    that he had to rely on a specific statement by
    Philip Morris.  Instead, this whole concept is not
    about a specific misrepresentation; it's about what
    they failed to say.  It's about the concealment or
    omission of material information.
         And if you'll look at page 15 of your
    instructions, you will see that the instruction

    deals with concealment or omission of material
    information -- not as Mr. Reilly told you, reliance
    on a specific statement being made by them.
         What was concealed.  What was omitted.
         I gave you that list of information that was
    concealed and omitted last time, just to give you
    some examples.  They concealed that, in fact, they
    knew that cigarettes caused cancer.  They concealed
    the fact that they knew that low-tar cigarettes,
    like the Multifilter, were not safer as they
    suggested.  They concealed the fact that they were
    designing their cigarettes to create and sustain
    addiction; they said exactly to the contrary.  They
    concealed the fact that they spent billions of
    dollars on advertising designed to target children,
    to get them to start smoking in the first place.
         Those are just some of the things they
    concealed.  And I suggest to you, given the facts of
    this case, you can infer from what was concealed,
    you can infer from a 40-year period of time in which
    they denied the hazards, they created a controversy
    of doubt, and they reassured smokers that they
    should continue smoking because of everything -- if
    anything was ever found wrong in cigarettes they
    would take it out, all the while concealing what 3654
    they really knew and what they really believed, that
    constitutes adequate reliance.
         Now, Mr. Reilly also said there was no evidence
    that any of these ads ever really had any impact.
    Really?  You remember that Marlboro videotape
    documentary we saw?  That documentary was created by
    Philip Morris.  In that documentary they bragged
    about how their advertising made Marlboro go to be
    the number 1 brand in the world and took them from
    being a relatively obscure cigarette company to, at
    that time, the second largest in the world and now
    the largest in the world.
         They -- that -- that went on for 10,
    15 minutes, with quotes from the president of the
    company and the CEO, and data showing how their
    sales went up with their advertising.  The whole
    theme of all of that documentary was:  Look what our
    advertising did for us.  It made us what we are
    today.
         Their reports.  You'll have it in evidence.
    Their annual reports that they send to stockholders
    brag about how they create demand for their product
    through their advertising.
         Where is that demand coming from?
    15-years-olds.  Because those are the new smokers

    that the new demand is being created.  None of that
    denied by any evidence.  And there's abundant
    evidence to that effect.
         And Mr. Reilly says:  Oh, but there was all of
    this evidence out there that cigarettes might be
    harmful.  It was, quote, no secret.
         The secret, Ladies and Gentlemen, was not that
    people claimed it, because obviously you didn't have
    to engage in a 40- or 50-year conspiracy if there
    were no claims being made.  The secret was that they
    knew it was true and they were concealing the real
    information about it.  That they were targeting
    kids, and that they were designing the cigarettes to
    keep people addicted.  That's what the secret was.
    That's what was being concealed, and that's what
    Mr. Reilly refused to address.
         He mentioned the "See It Now" program but he
    didn't show it.  I think he didn't show it because
    if he had we would have shown you again what else
    was in that program.
         MR. REILLY:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Mr. Shields.
         Mr. Reilly?
         MR. REILLY:  Objection; mischaracterization.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
14 3656
         You may proceed, Mr. Shields.
         MR. SHIELDS:  You remember when we showed you
    the "See It Now" program?  Their head scientist,
    Dupr, was interviewed at length, and he was
    interviewed in the Philip Morris laboratory where
    they were making cigarettes.  And what he said at
    the end of it was what they repeated for the next
    40 years:  There is nothing harmful in cigarettes
    and we're doing all this research to find out if
    there is.  And if we ever find there's anything
    harmful in it, we'll take it out.  The implication
    being so you might as well continue smoking.
         When that program was on the air, they already
    had isolated what cancer-causing agents were in the
    cigarettes.  When that program was on the air, they
    already internally were acknowledging that
    cigarettes caused cancer and obviously were harmful.
         Let me just conclude by saying Mr. Reilly
    started his presentation by saying this is about
    control and responsibility.
         Ask yourself this in terms of control.
         There are two stories here:  There's the
    Rayfield Brown story and there's the story about
    Philip Morris's activity.
         That second story they refused to discuss.

         What we know about the Rayfield Brown story is
    he started smoking as a kid; that Kaiser Thomas said
    one of the reasons was advertising -- whether Kaiser
    said that or not, all the scientific evidence is
    that the culture of smoking at the time was the
    result of their massive advertising; that he quickly
    became addicted because the adolescent mind quickly
    becomes addicted; that later he switched to the
    Multifilter in the face of advertising that it was a
    95 percent reduction in tar, and the implication
    being that it was healthier and safer; that he tried
    to quit, succeeded for some period of time,
    relapsed; and the evidence is that he tried on
    multiple occasions thereafter and never succeeded in
    fully quitting, which is consistent with the
    statistical data about how difficult it is to quit:
    Less than 3 percent try and succeed.  It takes
    multiple years and multiple attempts for most people
    to succeed in quitting.
         That's what control he had.
         Now compare that to them.  What control did
    Philip Morris have?  Who controlled their decisions
    to target 15-year-olds?  Who controlled their
    decision to design their cigarettes to create a
    sustained addiction?  Who controlled their agreement 3658
    to enter into a conspiracy with the other tobacco
    industry, and for 45 years, to deny that cigarettes
    were harmful; to assert that there was a scientific
    controversy; to claim that if anything was harmful
    in cigarettes they would take it out?  Who has the
    responsibility for them?
         To use Mr. Reilly's terminology, when the CEO
    of Philip Morris, Mr. Cullman, got up in the morning
    and looked in the mirror, who made the decision that
    we're going to continue to lie to the American
    public?  When Mr. Cullman went on "Face the Nation"
    and said there's nothing harmful in cigarettes and
    if we ever find anything we'll take it out, when he
    looked in the mirror the next morning, whose
    decision was it that he was going to lie on
    nationwide television?
         When the president and CEO of Philip Morris
    went before Congress and raised his right hand and
    said I swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and
    nothing but the truth, and swore that cigarettes
    were not addictive when he knew that all of the
    scientists said they were and that they went through
    these elaborate lengths to design cigarettes that
    create and sustain addiction, whose decision was it?
    When he looked in the mirror that morning and went

    before Congress, whose decision was it to lie under
    oath in the Congress of the United States?
         Yes, it is about control and responsibility.
    It's their responsibility.  And if you think
    Rayfield Brown has some responsibility, you deal
    with that in comparative fault.
         I think when you put all of the evidence
    together, consider the massive amount of evidence,
    you will conclude that Rayfield was a member of the
    Engle class, the specific causation has been proven,
    and in terms of comparative fault, any fault he had
    is minor in comparison to their misconduct, and that
    the damages that we're asking for are appropriate
    and reasonable under the facts and circumstances of
    this case.
         And we look forward to getting your verdict and
    I thank you so much again for your time and
    attention.
         And I want to end by also thanking Regan and
    Leslie and John and all of the people of our team
    that have worked to put together the evidence for
    you to help you decide this case.
         Thank you very much.
