         MR. REILLY:  Thank you.

         I thought it was going to be good afternoon,
    but it's still morning, so good morning.
         JURORS:  Good morning.
         MR. REILLY:  You know, I want to start my
    closing argument the same way I started my opening
    statement, and that is by thanking you guys for your
    service as jurors.  We've taken you from your homes,
    your jobs, your lives for three weeks now.  And
    we've asked you to do the service that is so
    important to our civil justice system; right?  And
    that is to take the evidence that's occurred here in
    this courtroom and couple that with the law that
    Judge Jay has just read to you, and then take the
    verdict form that he's going to give you now, after
    I stop talking to you and Mr. Shields has another
    opportunity to talk to you again, and then take it
    and answer the questions as only you guys
    unanimously see fit and resolve this civil dispute;
    right?
         And -- so what we hope, to make the system work
    really well, is that the jurors will pay close
    attention to what goes on in the courtroom, and you
    guys have done a wonderful job about that.  There's
    no question about it.  So on behalf of Hassia,
    myself, Philip Morris, thank you very much.
2 3566
         All right.  Now, in the beginning of my opening
    statement, I said -- and don't be afraid of all
    those boards.  Yes, we'll go through them all, but
    it won't be that bad.  I said that I was confident,
    when I put these boards up -- these are permanent,
    you know?  They're solid.  And I said that I was
    confident that the evidence was going to be just
    exactly what I was showing you on my boards.  And I
    said, I'm going to be using those same boards when I
    appear before you in my closing argument, and
    clearly I am.  Clearly I am.
         Because it did.  It turned out to be,
    especially in connection with the story of Mr. Brown
    and Mr. Brown's life and Mr. Brown's smoking
    history.
         And so, once again, I am going to be using many
    of the same boards.  And I'm supplementing those
    with additional boards that point out other things
    that occurred in this courtroom that I think are
    really important for you guys to be refreshed about;
    okay?
         And so when I started, I put this board up.
    This was my first board.  And I said, What is this
    case about?  What is all the evidence in this case
    going to be about?  What are the issues in this case

    about?  I said it's about two words:  Control and
    responsibility.
         Who was in control of Mr. Brown's lifestyle
    choices, especially his decisions to begin smoking,
    continue smoking, and decide whether he wanted to
    quit smoking or not; right?
         And how many days and hours of testimony have
    we had in this courtroom about that very subject?
    That is what this case has been about.
         This case is not a class action.  It's not
    about the American public.  Mr. Shields said, You
    can infer things, about things that happened --
    This case is about one smoker and one smoker only,
    isn't it, and that's Mr. Brown; the decisions that
    Mr. Brown made, and who was in control of
    Mr. Brown's decisions.
         Then I said responsibility.  The question will
    be, Who, if anybody, other than Mr. Brown, was
    responsible for the decisions that he made about how
    he lived his life, how he dealt with his own body;
    right?  And that's what this case has been about.
         There's been an effort here to -- Mr. Shields
    said in his closing argument that you may well find
    that Mr. Brown was responsible for his -- his
    decisions.  Well, how could it be otherwise; right? 3568
    But there is an effort here to make Philip Morris
    also responsible for the decisions that Mr. Brown
    made; right?
         So I put this board up second.  And I said,
    Watch for evidence -- I suggested this to you.  You
    guys -- you're the judges in this case of the facts
    of the case.  And so I said -- I suggested to you,
    Watch in this case to see who was in control of
    Mr. Brown's decisions to begin and continue smoking.
         I suggested to you, Look at who controlled
    when, where, and how much he smoked.  Wow, did you
    have some interesting -- and we'll go over it --
    some interesting evidence about the degree to which
    Mr. Brown controlled where, when, and how much he
    smoked.
         Did he ever lose control, or did he continue to
    demonstrate his ability to control how much, where
    and when, and around who, in front of whom, he
    smoked throughout his life?  And especially -- I
    mean, we really got -- we really got exquisite,
    exquisite evidence about that from Jennifer Brown,
    from Mrs. Brown.  Now, I realize there's been --
    well, I'll talk about it more in a minute.  I'll
    talk about it more in a minute.
         And, finally, did anything that Philip Morris

    said or failed to say have a substantial impact on
    Mr. Brown's smoking?  Mr. Shields just said, you can
    infer, you can infer that it did.  Why did he use
    the word "infer"?  Because there is no evidence.  If
    he had evidence, he wouldn't have said, You can
    infer it.  He would have said, Here's the evidence.
    But instead he said, You can infer it.
         But I suggested that you look for evidence in
    this case.
         I also said these words are not going to appear
    in your instructions.  They're not going to appear
    in the verdict form.  And they don't.
         And we now have the verdict form with the
    specific questions that you're being asked to
    answer.
         So let's just look at the verdict form.
         I think I'll put this one up over here, because
    we'll leave this up.
         Is that level?  Pretty level?  Level enough.
    All right.
         The first question you're going to be asked to
    answer is, "Was Rayfield Brown addicted to smoking
    cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was his
    addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?  Yes or
    no?"
3 3570
3572 Now, that's really two questions, isn't it?
    You can put a period right here.  There's a comma,
    but you can put a period right there.
         And the first question is, "Was Rayfield Brown
    addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine?"
         Now, you've heard a lot of evidence in this
    case addressing that very subject.  There were three
    folks -- three experts who came here and talked to
    you about how physicians determined whether someone
    is addicted to nicotine -- cigarettes containing
    nicotine or not.
         Now, Judge Jay is not going to give you an
    instruction -- you heard the instructions.  He read
    them to you today.  But there is no instruction that
    says how you're to determine whether someone is or
    isn't addicted.
         These experts have been brought to suggest to
    you how they would go about doing it, but it's up to
    you guys to decide how you determine whether someone
    is or isn't addicted.  And then it's up to you guys
    to look at how Mr. Brown smoked and decide for
    yourselves whether he was addicted or not.  But
    let's look at what the experts said.
         Now, Mr. Shields mentioned Dr. Burns during his
    closing argument.  And, yes, Dr. Burns said he

    didn't have much trouble figuring out who is an
    addicted smoker.
         This is what he described an addicted smoker to
    be.  He was talking about addicted smokers.  He
    says, Then when you stop, when you stop smoking,
    take your last puff, in about 40 minutes the
    nicotine levels have fallen down to half and they
    continue to go down.  Now, those receptors in your
    brain don't have any nicotine in them and now you
    start to feel bad; you don't feel right; you have
    difficulty concentrating; you feel irritable; you
    don't feel normal without the nicotine surrounding
    those receptors in your brain.  So now in order to
    feel normal, you've got to have another cigarette.
    So every 30, 40 minutes, as your level starts to
    fall, you re-dose yourself, you get that level back
    up, so that you feel normal.
         So there you go.  Dr. Burns -- an addicted
    smoker is somebody who's got to have a cigarette
    every 30, 40 minutes.
         You know -- you know what?  You don't leave
    your common sense at that door.  You live lives.
    You don't leave your common sense at that door.
         People -- there are people who have to have a
    cigarette every 30, 40 minutes. Let me point this out.  This is the trial
    transcript.  What the court reporter is doing right
    now is taking down every word I say to you.  And
    this gets typed up into a booklet.  Every page has
    25 lines to it?
         THE COURT REPORTER:  (Nods head.)
         MR. REILLY:  And every page, of course, is
    numbered.  So we know exactly this was on Page
    1,002, Lines 3 through 14, that he said that.  Right
    out of the transcript.  No question about it.  No
    debate.
         So for Dr. Burns, that's what an addicted
    smoker looks like.
         Well, who do we have that addressed how
    Mr. Brown looked?  Well, we have his family; right?
         Here is what Michael Brown said about his dad.
         My partner Hassia was asking him these
    questions.
         Said:  "In fact your father wasn't the kind of
    person that had to have a cigarette; isn't that
    true?"
         Michael Brown said, "You're right.  You're
    right."
         "And your father, he wasn't an 'I've got to
    have a cigarette right now' type of person; right?"

         "You're right."
         Trial transcript right there, page and line.
    "You're right."
         Dr. Burns, again -- Mr. Reilly -- oh, I found
    this so fascinating.  You heard Mr. Shields stand
    right here, right about here, and tell you --
    criticized Dr. Rosman for having used the term
    "recreational smoker."  You just heard it an hour
    ago.  I think the right word is lambasted.  Although
    people don't use that word anymore.
         But this is a question that Mr. Shields asked
    Dr. Burns.  This is his words.
         He said, "Are there any significant number of
    recreational smokers who are not addicted but just
    smoke socially?"
         That's Mr. Shields talking to his expert
    Dr. Burns.  So why in the world is he so critical of
    Dr. Rosman for using the term "recreational smoker"?
         And did Dr. Burns have any trouble answering
    the question?  Did he say, "Oh, my gosh.  I've never
    heard of recreational smoker.  I don't know what --
    what are you talking about?"  Heck, no.
         What did Dr. Burns say?  He said, "Recreational
    smokers that are not addicted just smoke socially?"
    Sure.  Yes, there are.  There's about a little more
4 3574
3576 than 20 percent of that population.  That's the
    smokers of this world, 20 percent.  But there are
    individuals who either have never been daily
    smokers, that is, who have a cigarette when they're
    with a friend who is a smoker, but they don't smoke
    in between those times, or they're individuals who
    are trying to taper down.  Taper down.  Isn't that
    what Mr. Brown did, taper down in 1983, in 1987,
    when he stopped smoking in front of his daughter in
    1983; when he stopped smoking in front of his wife,
    son, except for two days in 1988, his best friend,
    Kaiser Thomas?
         But we have more from Dr. Burns.
         We know -- we know from the testimony of -- of
    Jennifer Brown what happened in 1983.  And I'm going
    to talk about that testimony here in just a minute.
    Mr. Shields just described it as ambiguous, didn't
    he?  He used that word "ambiguous" and "vague."  And
    he put up one little quote.  I'll show you that same
    quote.  But I'll show you so much more, so much
    more.
         Here was Dr. Burns again.  Here he's describing
    what an addicted smoker can't do.  And you ask
    yourselves, isn't that exactly what Mr. Brown did
    do?

         "We don't see a population of individuals who
    are addicted and smoke regularly 20 or more
    cigarettes a day and clearly were addicted who are
    then able to stop for a period of time and go back
    to only smoking on weekends with their friends."
         Mr. Brown, Sam Jones.  Isn't that exactly what
    Mr. Brown did?
         He never smokes around his wife.  He never
    smokes around his best friend.  He never smokes
    around his daughter, his son.
         At work -- the only evidence in this case about
    him smoking at work is Susan Phillips who said, "I
    saw him smoke once a month."  And she worked
    shoulder to shoulder with him in the same post
    office.
         Just like an alcoholic, can't go back to
    drinking socially.  Can't go have one drink.  Can't
    go drink socially with your friends.  Non-addicted
    people can do what Mr. Brown did.
         Here's their Dr. Frazier, same subject, same
    situation.
         "Addicted smokers can't do that, can they?
    They can't go from being a regular, daily smoker, an
    addicted regular, daily smoker down to being a
    casual smoker, can they?" "That's correct."
         But that's exactly what Mr. Brown did.  That's
    exactly what Mr. Brown did.
         There's the trial transcript.  That's their
    expert.
         Mr. Shields said, Oh, well -- but you should --
    there's no evidence of it, but you should assume or
    surmise that Mr. Brown continued to smoke lots of
    other times.  But nobody came here and said that.
    There is no evidence of that.
         And who has the burden of proof in this case?
    Mr. Shields, Mr. Kalil.
         When they don't have evidence, they say you
    should infer it.  That's the same as you should make
    it up because we don't have it.
         Here's Dr. Rosman:  "Our folks who were at one
    point in time regular, daily smokers but who have
    become -- have been able to become occasional
    smokers smoking with friends, smokes mainly on the
    weekends or playing golf or going to lunch, after
    lunch, things like that, but who at the rest of the
    time don't smoke, are those folks considered to be
    addicted or not?"
         "Not addicted."
         All three of these experts say the same thing,

    if you can do that, you're not addicted.  And that
    is exactly the evidence in this case.  Exactly.
         Is there any evidence in this case of Mr. Brown
    smoking other than with Sam Jones, except once a
    month, in the post office after 1987?
         And Dr. Burns just told you -- they all told
    you, You can't go from being an addicted smoker to
    an occasional smoker.  Can't happen.  You'll be like
    an alcoholic.  You'll be right back to where you
    were.
         Now, Dr. Rosman said, Look, before 1983 we have
    to look at sort of those instances in which
    Mr. Brown is demonstrating whether he can or he
    can't control his smoking.
         Now, Mr. Brown until -- well, expressed no
    interest.  I asked Mrs. Brown this.  Mr. Brown
    expressed absolutely no interest in quitting
    smoking, made no effort to quit smoking, straight on
    through until she said that she never saw him smoke
    again in 1987.
         So Dr. Rosman said, Look, there are signs that
    I look for to see whether or not you appear to be
    addicted or not.  Now, they're not -- they're not
    the whole story.  They're just examples of things
    that you would look for.
5 3578
         You saw Dr. Burns, every 30, 40 minutes.  There
    are smokers who can't sit in church for an hour or
    two through a church service.  They got to get up,
    they got to go outside, they got to smoke a
    cigarette.  Because every 30, 40 minutes addicted
    smokers got to go.
         So he did look to see whether or not Mr. Brown
    left church to go smoke.  He did look to see whether
    or not Mr. Brown would not go to a nonsmoker's house
    because he couldn't smoke.  He would look to see
    whether or not Mr. Brown didn't ride in cars with
    nonsmokers or would ignore their wishes and smoke
    anyway.
         He did look to see whether or not -- there are
    some smokers who can't stay in bed through the
    night.  They got to get up, smoke a cigarette;
    right?  And so they do.  So you look for it.
         These are just signs.  Never smoked --
    chain-smokers, you know, people that light one off
    of another.  You're looking to see whether somebody
    looks like they're an addicted smoker.
         But now -- and Mr. Shields -- let me put some
    of these down.
         Mr. Shields has demonstrated just exactly how
    important what happened in 1983 is.

         He's basically made this a pivot of this case,
    so important that he's had to say that Jennifer's
    testimony, Jennifer Brown's testimony was vague and
    ambiguous.  Don't trust her memory because she was
    only 11.  Don't believe her.  Don't believe Jennifer
    Brown because she was only 11.  She doesn't know
    what she's saying, and she was vague and ambiguous
    when she said it; right?  You heard all that.
         Will that be on the screen?
         VIDEO TECHNICIAN:  Yes.
         MR. REILLY:  I'm just going to walk you through
    Jennifer Brown's testimony.  It was so far from
    being vague and ambiguous that it's -- frankly, it's
    amazing to describe it that way, really.
         Here's part of it.  I thought it was important
    to have it.  But after I heard this part of the
    closing argument, I decided to get a whole bunch
    more of it.  Because there's pages of it.
         "Your testimony is, aside from the elementary
    school years when your father was smoking, as of
    1983 you never again saw your father smoke a
    cigarette; correct?"
         "I don't ever recall seeing him smoke after
    that," period.
         Is that vague?  Is that ambiguous?  Did she 3580
    say, "I'm not sure.  I'm hesitant.  I don't know"?
         Here's some more.
         Page and line.
         "Okay.  And the time frame that it seems to you
    he had stopped smoking, that was about when you were
    in the sixth grade; right?"
         "Yes."
         "Okay.  And you were in the sixth grade in
    about 1983; right?"
         "That would be correct."
         Vague?  Ambiguous?
         Now, because I didn't know that that was going
    to be such a strong position in this case, the rest
    of this is going to come up on your screens.  And
    I'm going to have to read it that way.
         Here's some more.
         "And at some point when you told your father,
    'You shouldn't smoke,' he, in fact, agreed with you
    and said he was going to stop; right?"
         "He didn't say he was going to stop."
         No, Mr. Brown didn't say he was going to stop.
         "It appeared that he did."
         Next page.
         "So around the time that you had the
    conversation, you're telling him to stop, he didn't

    say to you that he was actually going to stop at
    that time?"
         "He didn't say, 'I've quit.'  I just didn't
    smell the cigarettes anymore.  I just remember it,
    having a conversation several times with him.  And
    one day I just -- I didn't smell it anymore.  I
    didn't smell it at some point, which was after my
    elementary days going into my middle-school days."
         Next page.
         "And the time frame that it seems to you he had
    stopped smoking, that was about when you were in the
    sixth grade?  You were in the sixth grade; right?"
         "Yes."
         "You were in the sixth grade in about 1983;
    right?"
         "That would be correct."
         Next page.
         "So it wasn't present in your senses anymore
    after that point?"
         "Uh-huh."
         "So you weren't smelling it in the car
    anymore?"
         "No."
         "You weren't smelling it in areas of your house
    anymore; right?"
6 3582
         "No."
         "You weren't smelling it on his clothes?"
         "No."
         "His clothes would be in the laundry.  You
    weren't smelling it on his clothes in the laundry;
    correct?"
         "Correct."
         "Now, after that 1983 period where it seemed
    that he had stopped, you saw your father almost
    every day while you were in school before you went
    off to college; right?"
         "Yes.  Yes."
         "And you saw him after school hours; right?"
         "Yes."
         "You saw him on the weekends?"
         "I did."
         "And during those times he was still picking
    you up from activities sometimes in school; right?"
         "Yes, that's correct."
         "And so all the times you were seeing him
    before you go off to college, you were still not
    seeing him smoke; right?"
         Is this ambiguous?  Is this vague?  Did
    Jennifer Brown seem uncertain about her
    recollections?  And is she 11 years old?  1983,

    1984, 1985, 1986.  She doesn't stay 11 years old.
    Sadly, none of us can do that; right?
         "I don't recall seeing him smoking."
         Is that about it?  No, there's more.
         "And you saw your father faithfully in the
    evenings; right?"
         "Yes."
         "Okay.  Wasn't smoking then?"
         "Wasn't smoking then."
         "Also after that time period, you didn't see
    any cigarettes laying around the house; right?"
         "No, I didn't."
         My goodness.  There's more.
         "You didn't see ashtrays around the house
    anymore; right?"
         "Did not.  Not being used by my father."
         "Okay.  When he stopped smoking, Ms. Brown,
    there was no change in his personality; isn't that
    true?"
         "He was always the same person, in my opinion,
    yes."
         That's enough.  Thank you very much.
         This is that list.  These are lots of moments
    when from 1983 to 1987 Ms. Jennifer Brown would have
    been with her dad and he wouldn't have been smoking. 3584
    What kind of control does that show you he has?
         Is that why Mr. Shields shied away from it,
    said it was vague and ambiguous and don't rely on
    it?  Of course.  Because that's control, ladies and
    gentlemen.  That's enormous control.  And this is
    the very time frame -- Mr. Shields said that his
    expert Dr. Burns says, If he stops smoking now, he
    won't get his lung cancer.
         All right.  Has -- has -- has Mr. Brown
    demonstrated his ability to control his smoking?  He
    didn't want to quit.  He didn't say he wanted to
    quit.  He didn't tell his daughter, "I'm going to
    quit."  He did exactly what he wanted to do.
         But, my goodness.  Why in the world would you
    just put up that one little quote and say, "That's
    it, vague, ambiguous"?  Why would you do that?
         I think you have to be candid, tell the whole
    story.  And that's the whole story.
         Now, you know what happens in 1987?  Is it '86?
    Is it '87?  Is it '86?  Is it '87?  Don't know.
    Does it really matter?  Probably not.  What we do
    know is that from that moment forward Mr. Brown has
    the ability to control where, when he smokes to an
    incredible degree.  He goes for days without
    smoking; days, maybe weeks.

         Go on vacation, no smoking.  Mrs. Brown said
    they drove out to California.  You know, that's days
    on the road; right?  I haven't driven to California,
    but it's got to be three days.  I guess if you go
    break-neck all day, 12 hours a day maybe you can
    make it in two.  No smoking.
         Cruises.  They took two cruises.  Days, no
    smoking.  No smoking.
         Did he continue to smoke with Mr. -- with --
    with --
         MS. DIOLOMBI:  Sam Jones.
         MR. REILLY:  Sam Jones.  Sorry.  Don't ever get
    to be my age.  Or, yes, please, all get to be my
    age.
         Did he continue to smoke with Sam Jones?  Sure.
    Sure.  How much?  I don't know.
         Did he smoke with Mr. Jones in 1994?  I don't
    know about that one.  Why?  Because, if you
    remember -- when Hassia Diolombi was cross-examining
    him, she said:  "Mr. Jones, you didn't even know
    that Mr. Brown had lung cancer, been diagnosed with
    lung cancer, had surgery, radiation?  You didn't
    even know that, did you?"
         He said, "No, I didn't."
         Mr. Brown was out for -- you have the medical
7 3586
    records.  Mr. Brown's out for months.  He's getting
    radiation therapy.  He has lung surgery.  So I don't
    know.  You guys -- you guys are the judges of
    credibility.  That's part of your job.  You choose
    who you believe and who you don't.
         Now, turns out Mr. Shields cross-examined --
    oh, now, before I leave this, these are just an
    example of the times that Mr. Brown demonstrated the
    enormous control he had over his smoking after '86
    or '87; right?  You don't have to quit to
    demonstrate your control, do you?  Of course not.
         Bless you.
         You guys can probably think of many more
    instances where a father around his daughter, or a
    husband and a father around their children and wife
    would have demonstrated that they weren't smoking.
         Now, yesterday Dr. Rosman was here, and he was
    cross-examined vigorously by Mr. Shields on his use
    of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual.  Remember
    that?  And he was critical of him.  He says, You
    can't use it.  It's not supposed to be done in a
    forensic setting.  This is a forensic setting.
         And then it turned out that both Dr. Rosman and
    his expert Dr. Frazier both used it.
         Now, why did -- why did Mr. Shields attack

    using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual by
    Dr. Rosman when his own expert had used it?  Why did
    that happen in this courtroom?
         Well, it happened because Dr. Rosman's analysis
    was so much more on point than Dr. Frazier's.  There
    they are.  They both used the DSM in making -- this
    is the -- this is the slide they put up with
    Dr. Frazier.  Look at the title.  "DSM Substance
    Dependence Criteria Applied to Rayfield Brown."  Why
    in the world would you criticize Dr. Rosman for
    using it when this is a slide that you put up with
    your own expert?  Why would you do that?  Isn't that
    a puzzle?  But that's what happened in this
    courtroom.
         This is the slide or the board that I used with
    Dr. Rosman, and he walked you through this.  And he
    gave you item by item whether or not he thought --
    based on the smoking history of Mr. Brown -- why
    Mr. Brown didn't meet the criteria for being an
    addicted smoker.
         Did Mr. -- he said, "Tolerance."  Dr. Rosman
    said, "You know what?  He went from being a
    half-a-pack to a-pack-a-day smoker or three or four
    cigarettes a day to a half a pack a day.  Anyway,
    early on he did increase.  So he said, "I'll give 3588
    him tolerance."
         It's interesting because at the end of his
    smoking career, the last dozen years -- if you go
    from 1983 to 1995, that's 12 years of smoking at a
    reduced rate; right?  So tolerance is going in the
    other direction; right?  But he still said, "Fine.
    Do it."
         Withdrawal.  Here were the withdrawal symptoms
    under the DSM.  Depression.  Nobody said he was
    depressed.  Insomnia.  Inability to sleep?  No.
    Irritability, frustration, anger, none.  Anxiety --
         Oh, irritability.  There was only one piece of
    testimony about irritability and that was the post
    office.  Sammie Jones said that -- Sam Jones said
    that one time Mr. Brown got angry at a postal worker
    because a postal worker screwed up.  And Dr. --
    Dr. Rosman said, That is not irritability.
         Anxiety.  Mrs. Brown said, well, she thought he
    was anxious because he ate candy, but she learned
    that eating candy isn't anxiety.  You saw it in the
    Diagnostic and Statistical Manual that eating sweets
    was not anxiety.
         And you learned from both Dr. Rosman and
    Dr. Frazier that the reason why some people, when
    they don't smoke anymore, they do this (indicating),

    is because -- it's not because they're missing
    nicotine; it's just because they have a habit of
    having to put something in their mouths and so they
    do that.
         Difficulty concentrating; there was no evidence
    of that.  Restlessness; no evidence of that.  Nobody
    measured his heart rate.  Increased appetite or
    weight gain.  It was suggested that because he ate
    so much candy he might have gained a little weight.
    That's it.
         Oops.  Let me go back to the rest of these,
    because this is where it gets really interesting.
         The substance was taken in larger amounts over
    a longer period of time than intended.  Was there
    any evidence that Mr. Brown smoked longer than he
    really wanted to?
         The evidence in this case is that Mr. Brown
    really enjoyed smoking.
         Mrs. Brown said he enjoyed inhaling.  He
    found -- he told her he found smoking relaxing.  He
    liked to smoke in social -- in social situations.
    That was Jennifer Brown -- and others observed he
    enjoyed smoking.  Kaiser Thomas said it.  Barbara
    Brooks said, "He loved his cigarettes."
         (Board fell off easel.)
8 3590
3592 MR. REILLY:  Yikes.
         Was there a persistent desire or unsuccessful
    efforts to cut down or control substance use?
    Didn't Mr. Brown demonstrate exactly the opposite?
    He had absolutely the ability and successfully cut
    down and cut back.
         Cut down when he no longer smoked in front of
    his daughter.  Cut down when he no longer smoked in
    front of his wife, daughter, son, best friend.
         Great deal of time is spent on activities
    necessary to obtain the substance, use the
    substance, or recover from its effect.  That was
    described as being -- in smoking lingo, that was
    chain-smoker.  Nobody ever said he was a
    chain-smoker.
         Important social, occupational, or recreational
    activities are given up or reduced because of
    substance use.  Exactly the opposite for Mr. Brown.
         Whenever -- I mean, for goodness sakes, if you
    can avoid smoking around your family for years --
    how many years?  From '87 to '90- -- what is that?
    If it's -- it's either seven or eight years,
    starting in '86 or '7, and if you go back to '83,
    it's a dozen years.
         Now, the substance use is -- continues despite

    knowledge of having a persistent or recurring
    physical or psychological problem that is likely to
    have been caused or exacerbated by the substance.
         Now, Mr. Shields, in his closing argument,
    talked about that event in either 1986 or 1987 where
    he went to the hospital.  But it -- and it was just
    the vaguest suggestion that that might have been
    smoking related, but in this courtroom everybody
    said that was not smoking related, period, end of
    story.  Not smoking related.  He had some sort of
    throat problem.  He had trouble breathing.
         So what is the only time that he had a
    smoking-related physical problem?  Was his lung
    cancer; right?
         And the only person who said he smoked after
    that was Sam Jones in 1994.  He said, "We went and
    played golf and smoked some cigarettes."
         Now, you have to decide for yourself whether
    Mr. Brown actually did that, and then you have to
    decide for yourself whether, even if he did, did it
    make any difference in this situation for him on one
    occasion to go smoke some cigarettes when he's
    playing golf with a guy that he used to smoke with
    and play golf with and that sort of thing?
         In sum total, you got to have three of these to satisfy the criteria.  And even if you said yes to
    that, based on Sam Jones playing golf -- claiming to
    have played golf in 1994, you'd only have two.
         But there's more.
         Why do people smoke if they're not addicted?
    Well, there was total agreement among every expert
    that came here that people smoked, addicted or not,
    because it's pleasurable.  People enjoy smoking.
         This is a board that was used by Dr. Frazier to
    talk about all the things that people enjoy about
    smoking.
         It's pleasurable.  It modulates your mood.
    Makes you relaxed.  It arouses you.  It has the
    ability to both arouse you and make you relaxed.
    Gives you energy.  Makes you relax.
         For some people it enhances their memory and
    their learning, and it reduces anxiety and tension.
         It is pleasurable.  There's no doubt about it.
         Did Mr. Brown ever say he wanted to quit
    smoking?  Certainly not before nobody saw him
    stop -- nobody saw him smoke anymore.
         Did he use any quit aids, gum or the -- of
    course, the patch doesn't come along for a while.
         You were told, Well, he didn't want to use the
    gum because he had dentures.  He never told anybody

    he wanted to use the gum at all.  It didn't even
    come up.
         Did he go to hypnosis?  Did he go see a doctor
    about quitting?  None of that.  There's no evidence
    of any of that.  A smoking-cessation program?  Did
    he ever express interest in doing anything like
    that?  None.
         Was he more anxious when he stopped smoking?
    Here's Kaiser Thomas.
         "And he didn't appear to you to be any more
    anxious, did he, or nervous after he quit smoking?"
         "No."
         "Did he lose any sleep to your knowledge?"
         "Not to my knowledge.  Everything was normal."
         Remember what Dr. Burns said, every 30, 40
    minutes an addicted smoker's got to reload or they
    get irritable, anxious.  That's their expert.  And
    that's the trial transcript.
         How about Michael Brown?
         "But just talking about you, what you observed,
    your father didn't seem irritable when he wasn't
    smoking; right?"
         "Not to me."
         "In fact, he seemed to be the same old person
    to you when he wasn't smoking; right?"
9 3594
3596 "Yes."
         Trial transcript.
         Jennifer Brown.
         "When he stopped smoking, Ms. Brown, there was
    no change in his personality; isn't that true?"
         "He was always the same person in my opinion,
    yes."
         "He was the same person?  He didn't seem more
    anxious to you; right?"
         "No."
         Trial transcript.
         I want to take you to the Elmo.
         Where will the Elmo come up?  Here.  Okay.  Let
    me put this down.
         Mr. Shields showed you a medical record, and he
    said this was filled out by Mr. Brown.  And
    Mr. Brown said that he was a two-pack-a-day smoker,
    that he was still smoking.  That's what he told you.
         What he didn't tell you is that that form was
    filled out within days of Mr. Brown dying; within
    days of Mr. Brown dying.
         You're going to have all the medical records in
    this case, all that we have.  And you're going to
    see, for example, if you care to look at it -- this
    is a document that was created about a month before

    Mr. Brown died.  And it's -- it bears Mr. Brown's
    signature.
         This is a form from the hospital, the same form
    that was filled out on a different day.  Frankly, I
    hope that you compare the signatures.  Because I
    think you'll find that the form Mr. Shields showed
    you has a very different signature from this one.
         What does this one say?
         "Do you smoke?"
         "No."
         "Have you ever smoked?"
         "Yes, half a pack per day."
         Half a pack per day.
         If you take the time to look at the medical
    records, what you're going to find -- and you -- you
    saw Dr. Wells.  Dr. Wells, one of his treating
    doctors, one of those short depositions, video
    depositions, Dr. Wells said he quit seven or eight
    years before Dr. Wells began to treat him.
         The medical records in this case are going to
    indicate that Mr. Brown represented himself to
    have -- having been an ex-smoker by seven or eight
    years, going back to '86 or '87; ex-smoker to all
    the doctors.
         Now, the doctor's report -- I think there might be one record where there's something about smoking.
    But I think you'll -- when you look at the sum total
    of all the records, you're going to see that he
    reported himself to be a nonsmoker; that he had
    smoked.
         Now, how much he'd smoked over the years varies
    from -- from physician to physician.  There isn't
    uniformity on that.
         But he described himself as a nonsmoker.  So
    why did Mr. Shields put up the one document?  Why
    didn't he show you this one?  Why did he show you
    the one document days before -- created days before
    Mr. Brown dies, with a different signature on it?
    Why did he show you that one to try to convince you
    that Mr. Brown was still smoking in 1995?
         This is in the record, ladies and gentlemen.
         Think about this as you're all trying to figure
    out the answer to this question.
         No one said Mr. Brown was a chain-smoker.
         Mr. Brown controlled his smoking whenever he
    wanted to.
         Mr. Brown never smoked around Jennifer Brown
    after 1983.
         Mr. Brown smoked very little after 1987.
         Was a social smoker.

         And all the experts agree that a social smoker
    is not addicted.
         What is the answer to this question, this first
    question?  If your conclusion is that with all of
    this, with all of this -- and I invite you to look
    at all the medical records.  I've shown you
    Ms. Brown's testimony.  Did it seem vague or
    ambiguous to you, or did it seem exactly the
    opposite?  Was there ever a passage in which
    Mrs. Brown -- Ms. -- Ms. Brown said, "I'm not really
    sure about this.  I'm unclear about it.  Don't rely
    on my memory"?  Never.  Never.  But that's how
    important it is in this case.
         So what's the answer to this first question?
    The answer to this first question is "No."  And if
    that's your conclusion, then you put an X right
    there and your work here is done.  That's it.
         After all of that, who has the burden of proof?
    Mr. Kalil, Mr. Shields.  After all of this, is there
    any other answer besides no?
         If you decide that, no -- unanimously all of
    you conclude that the answer should be yes, then you
    have to go to the second half of this question.  "If
    so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung
    cancer?"
10 3600
    Mr. Shields has already told you that his expert
    Dr. Burns said that if Mr. Brown had quit smoking by
    1983 that he wouldn't have gotten his lung cancer
    most probably.  Okay.
         So what is the answer -- even if you get past
    this first question -- what's the answer to the
    second half?  Well, it's "no" too.
         Now, it's possible that somebody could say --
    some of you might say, "Well, I don't think he was
    addicted," and others would maybe say, "I don't
    think it was a legal cause."  It doesn't really
    matter.  If, by answering either one of those
    questions, you-all conclude that the answer is no,
    then you put a "no."  You don't all have to agree on
    which one of these questions you think should be
    answered no.  You just have to all agree that the
    answer here ought to be no, and then the work is
    done.
         All right.  Your Honor, this is a good time to
    take a break.
         THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Reilly.
         Ladies and gentlemen, we'll take a break as we
    did during Mr. Shields' closing arguments.  I had
    told you five minutes.  It ended up being ten, so I
    will make it ten this time.

         So I would ask that you come back in ten
    minutes.  It's -- it's about 12:47 now, so by 12:57.
         We'll see you then.
         (The jury retired to the jury room.)
         (Recess taken.)
         MR. REILLY:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Now I'll say good afternoon.
         All right.  I've already shown you as far as I
    think you're going to go in this case on this
    verdict form, but on the chance that you guys do
    decide that that's not right, that all this evidence
    shows that Mr. Brown was addicted and that his
    addiction was the legal cause of why he developed
    his lung cancer and died, then you would have to go
    on, so I'm just going to go on.
         Here's what you'd have to go to then.  You'd
    have to go to the next two questions.  And they are:
         State whether Philip Morris's concealment or
    omission of material fact about the health effects
    of or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both
    was a legal cause of Rayfield Brown's death.
         And the same thing regarding an agreement to
    conceal, there has to be a legal cause for
2 3608
3610 Mr. Brown's death.
         Now, there, what is the requirement under the
    law of being a legal cause?  Here's the instruction
    on legal cause:  It's called reliance.
         The next issue for your determination is
    whether Philip Morris's concealment or omission of
    material information concerning the health risks or
    addictive nature of cigarettes was a legal cause of
    the death of Mr. Brown.
         The only remaining matter for your
    determination on this issue is whether Rayfield
    Brown -- and this is key -- relied, to his
    detriment, on Philip Morris's concealment or
    omission of material information concerning the
    health effects or addictive nature of cigarette
    smoking.
         They have to show that Mr. Brown actually
    relied -- actually relied on something that Philip
    Morris said about the health risks of smoking.
         And that's when Mr. Shields said you can infer
    it.  You can infer that he relied because he has no
    evidence to show that he did rely.  No evidence.
         What does it mean to be a legal cause?  This is
    a -- this is a little shorthand that will help you
    think about reliance.  In order for Mr. Brown to

    have relied on something from Philip Morris, he has
    to have heard it.  It has to have a direct
    connection with him.  He has to have heard it or
    seen it, and then it has to have a substantial
    impact on him.
         In what way?  It has to have substantially
    impacted whether he began smoking, continued
    smoking, or quit smoking.  And that's the only way
    it can work, right?
         And only then can it be a legal cause.  So
    that's the concept of reliance.
         And it takes real evidence.  It takes real
    evidence.
         And Mr. Shields said you can infer it.  That's
    the same as saying I don't have any for you, real
    evidence.
         How will you know the answer to Mr. Brown,
    whether he relied on something that Philip Morris
    said about the health risks of smoking?  Well,
    you've got to know Mr. Brown's life, right?  And in
    my opening statement I walked you through -- using
    these boards, I walked you through Mr. Brown's
    personal history -- which Mr. Shields did not do
    today -- because when you walk through it, you learn
    very quickly that there was never a moment in his life when Mr. Brown heard or saw anything from
    Mr. -- from Philip Morris that he relied on in any
    way.  In fact, what you learned is that, from the
    very first moments that Mr. Brown was smoking
    cigarettes, he was being told by the people that he
    loved and respected:  Don't smoke.  Smoking is bad
    for you.  Those are cancer sticks.  Those are
    addictive from the very first moments.
         Where did that evidence come from?  It came
    from his best, life-long friend, Kaiser Thomas, on
    those two videotapes.  That's where we got all the
    information about Mr. Brown's early years.
         You remember that you heard through Kaiser
    Thomas that Mr. Brown's mom's name was Queen?  Queen
    Brown?  That he had an aunt.  And together those two
    ladies told Mr. Brown and Kaiser Thomas:  Don't you
    smoke.  Smoking's bad for you.  And they didn't want
    them drinking alcohol either, right?  But he did
    both.
         Mr. Shields told you, and it's true, that
    they're not contending that there was any conspiracy
    of any kind before 1953.  And he's just told you
    that the evidence is that Mr. Brown began smoking in
    1949, '50, '51.
         All you had to do was read Reader's Digest in

    the '30s and the '40s or look in the encyclopedia.
    Remember I cross-examined Dr. Proctor and pulled out
    the World Book Encyclopedia?
         Is this some secret that smoking was bad for
    you?  Is it some secret that people were calling
    smoking an addiction?  Regular people, everyday
    people calling smoking an addiction.  Was Mr. Brown
    waiting to hear from Philip Morris something about
    whether or not smoking was bad for you or that
    smoking was addictive?  Or did he hear anything?
    Did he see anything?  Was there one person that came
    here that said that Mr. Brown actually saw or heard
    something that he relied on from Philip Morris?  One
    person?  Certainly not Mrs. Brown.  Neither of their
    children.
         Kaiser Thomas said:  Sure, we heard the jingle:
    Call for Philip Morris.  Sure, we saw that.  We
    heard the jingle.  And the only person who said the
    jingles make you do anything was Dr. Goldberg.
    Remember he's the guy that said he heard the
    "Where's the Beef?" commercial for Wendy's and it
    made him go and eat a salad?  You remember that guy?
    That's the only guy that came here that even talked
    about jingles.
         Kaiser Thomas.  Did advertising -- did
3 3612
    Mr. Brown ever say that advertising influenced him
    in any way?  I think we just heard it from some
    of -- oh, I'm sorry.  This is -- I got myself ahead
    of myself.
         Here's Kaiser Thomas talking about how they
    have heard when they're young men, just beginning
    smoking, that cigarettes are cancer sticks and
    addicting:
         "I think we just heard it from some of the
    older people around us calling them that, like:
    What are you boys doing with those cancer sticks?
         "And you heard that in high school when you
    were both in high school?
         "I would say I heard this in the old pool rooms
    and the concession stand when someone saw a young
    kid with a cigarette between his fingers."
         And you remember the coaches -- you remember
    the coaches telling him:
         "Did any of those coaches ever tell you that
    cigarettes were addictive?
         "The coaches didn't, but other -- we've heard
    it from other people.
         "When you were kids?
         "Right."
         Cancer sticks and addicting.

         Advertising.
         This all comes from Kaiser Thomas:
         "You testified about advertisements in response
    to Ms. Bryan's questions earlier this morning.
         "In fact, you don't have any idea why Mr. Brown
    smoked his first cigarette, do you?
         "No, I don't.
         "And you can't say that Mr. Brown purchased
    anything because of something he saw in an
    advertisement, including those little four
    cigarettes that you used when you started smoking,
    right?
         "Right."
         Mother is telling him:  Don't smoke.  Kaiser
    Thomas's mother tells them:  Don't smoke.  They
    disobey their mom's, they smoke, and they get
    caught.  They have tobacco in their pockets.  They
    get caught, and their mom's chew them out.  More
    than ten times, Kaiser said.
         The coaches.  They hide their smoking from the
    coaches because they know that if they get caught
    they'll be benched.  I think Kaiser Thomas actually
    said:  The coaches would have broken our necks.
         So there you go.
         Graduates.  Goes in the Army.  You'll have in 3614
    evidence these articles.
         I talked to Dr. Proctor, I said:  In the '50s,
    there was a virtual avalanche of information coming
    out in lay publications -- that's newspapers,
    magazines, radio, television -- about the link
    between smoking and lung cancer, isn't there?
         And he said:  There was a lot.
         Mr. Shields said nobody knew.  Here's there --
    here's Dr. Goldberg, the salad guy.  I asked him:
         "You're asked a direct question -- and we're
    talking about surveys -- and you heard that smoking
    causes lung cancer.
         "Yes."
         And I said:  "There were polls to that effect
    -- I'm sorry -- in the '50s?"
         And responds by saying:  "Yes.
         "I heard that was in the 90 percent range,
    wasn't it?
         "It may well have been, yes."
         That's in the '50s, with the American public
    learning about the advances that are occurring in
    medical science linking smoking with lung cancer.
         TV programs.
         I don't know.  Do we have "See It Now" tuned
    up?

         TV programs.
         Will this be on their monitors?
         A VOICE:  No.
         MR. REILLY:  It will just be on the screen.
         You know, let's not do it because I don't want
    to take that much time.
         But there are TV programs, specials on what's
    going on.  Specials.
         Did Mr. Brown ever say to anybody:  I don't
    know what's going on?  We know that he was
    intelligent.  We know that he was strong-willed.
    You heard that in this room.
         You know that he was an avid reader.  It took a
    little bit to get that out, but you know he was an
    avid reader.  You know he read the paper in the
    morning, and if he didn't have time in the morning
    to read it, he read it in the afternoon when he came
    home from work.
         You know they subscribed to Ebony, Jet,
    Newsweek, Life, Time.  I mean, the list of magazines
    was enormous.
         You know they watched the news in the evening.
    We know that.  No debate about it.
         Kaiser Thomas said when he got in the military,
    they were calling them coffin nails.  Cancer sticks,
4 3616
3618 coffin nails, addicting.
         Mr. Brown never said:  I've heard something
    from the tobacco companies and it's effecting me and
    my decision about smoking.
         Mr. Brown never said:  I'm waiting to hear
    something from the tobacco companies so I can make a
    decision about my smoking.
         Let's go to January 1964, the Surgeon General's
    report.  Mrs. Brown -- 50 years ago -- 49 years ago.
    Remember, this is the Surgeon General's report.
    That's how big that news was.  The news coverage,
    the television coverage, amazing.
         "Did you hear about the 1964 Surgeon General's
    Report?
         "Yes.  It was big news.
         "You saw the TV coverage?
         "Yes.
         "Was your husband watching the news with you at
    that time?
         "I can't remember.  We watched the news
    together, but I can't specifically say at that
    particular time.
         "It would have been the norm for both of you to
    have been watching the news at that time if you were
    together?

         "Yes, uh-huh."
         Here's -- now, is this on -- is this on --
         A VOICE:  It's on the left screen.
         MR. REILLY:  It's on the screen.
         Actually, this is the part of the news coverage
    that was played in this trial.  Mr. Shields started
    to show part of it.  Let's just show it real quick.
    This is CBS special report.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         This is the "CBS News" extra on smoking and
    health.  The findings of the Surgeon General
    committee.
         Almost from the moment the cigarettes were
    being introduced, they were attacked.  But the
    attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated
    in today's report by the Surgeon General's
    committee.  This, in summary, is what the committee
    says.
         Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung
    cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the
    same way.  Cigarette smoking is a significant cause
    of cancer of the larynx and probably the most
    important cause of chronic bronchitis.  Cigarette
    smoking may be related to other lung diseases.  Male
    smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not prove that smoking is the
    cause.
         On the question of filters, the committee says
    there is no evidence that they do any good, but it
    didn't exclude the possibility that an effective
    filter might be developed.
         In short, the committee says if you smoke
    cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying
    early.  The sooner you start, the more you smoke,
    the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
         In this kind of a country, it comes down to
    you, whether you like it or not.  No one is going to
    forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear
    that no one is going to tell him it's good for him
    either.  The decision is his; the decision and the
    health that may depend on it.
         This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. REILLY:  Now, lest I be accused of not
    showing you the whole thing, there is a segment,
    Mr. Shields showed it, where Harry Reasoner says:
    You might give an old friend a second chance,
    et cetera.  You already saw it in this trial.  I
    just don't happen to have it linked up on my
    presentation, but you saw it in this trial.  I don't

    want to pretend that he doesn't say it, but there is
    a Surgeon General's report.
         What I didn't show you, I don't know if we have
    it, but there is the Surgeon General -- this is an
    hour-long presentation, and in this hour-long
    presentation the Surgeon General stands in front of
    a special committee and he announces to the American
    public:  Smoking causes lung cancer.
         Now, did Mr. Brown ever say:  Goodness sakes,
    I'm confused; I don't know; I don't understand?
         No one came here and said that.  No one came
    here and said Mr. Brown didn't know about the health
    risks of smoking at any given moment in time or that
    Philip Morris influenced his decisions about smoking
    at all.
         The only story --
         I'm not there yet.  Put this back up.
         You know that in 1966 caution language went
    on -- a warning went on every pack of cigarettes.
    Public service announcements like the ones we showed
    you -- I'm just going to show you one -- began
    playing.
         Will that be on the monitors or will that
    be . . .
         A VOICE:  On the screen.
5 3620
         MR. REILLY:  Up here again.  I'm sorry.
         This is just one example.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         This is the house we lived in.  That's Billy.
    He's pretty handy to have around.  Steve, home from
    college.  Barbie, looking after her brother, Timmy.
    Debbie, who will soon graduate from high school.
    Susan, our youngest, and my wife, Peggy, who looks
    after all of us.
         And that's me, Bill Talman, with a friend of
    mine you might recognize.
         You know, I didn't really mind losing those
    courtroom battles, but I'm in a battle right now I
    don't want to lose it all, because if I lose it, it
    means losing my wife and those kids you just meant.
         I've got lung cancer.  So take some advice
    about smoking and losing from someone who's been
    doing both for years.  If you don't smoke, don't
    start.  If you do smoke, quit.  Don't be a loser.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. REILLY:  Do me a favor.  Would you play the
    Yul Brynner one, too.
         (A video clip was played as follows:)
         Ladies and Gentlemen, the late Yul Brynner.
         I really wanted to make a commercial when I

    discovered I was that sick and my time was so
    limited.  I wanted to make a commercial that says
    simply now that I'm gone, I tell you:  Don't smoke.
    Whatever you do, just don't smoke.
         If I could take back that smoking, we wouldn't
    be talking about any cancer.  I'm convinced of that.
         (The video clip was ended.)
         MR. REILLY:  These public service announcements
    in the '60s, Bill Talman from the 60s -- are
    powerful.
         I asked Dr. Proctor, his expert:  Powerful?
         He said:  Sure.  Powerful.
         I asked Dr. Goldberg -- remember I asked
    Dr. Goldberg:  Powerful?
         He said:  No.
         I showed him the -- the Yul Brynner one:
    Powerful?
         No.
         This is what he said:  There's soup commercials
    and there's candy commercials and there's tons of
    tobacco commercials, and in there, once in a blue
    moon, you see one of these.  So yes, in court
    they're great; in reality, no.
         How many of those commercials do you need to
    see?  How many times do you need to see it to 3622
    understand that if you're smoking, it comes with a
    possibility of developing lung cancer?  Do you need
    to see it more than once?  Really?  Are you going --
    are you going to not understand it or forget it
    because you saw a soup commercial or a candy
    commercial?  I mean, really.  You don't leave your
    common sense at that door.
         Postal truck.  He works at the post office.
    Postal trucks have this ad on every postal truck:
    100,000 doctors have quit smoking cigarettes.
         This is just one example.  These are just one
    example.  For every three cigarette ads, an ad like
    that, that Bill Talman had, were running.  For every
    three cigarette ads on television.
         Mr. Shields says the cigarette ads were
    blanketing the evening news, right?  For every three
    of those ads, a Bill Talman-type ad runs.  Wow.  How
    many times do you need to see it?
         That's why no one came here and said that
    Mr. Brown didn't understand that what he was doing
    came with a risk of developing of lung cancer, but
    they have to prove reliance.  They have to prove
    reliance.
         1970.  Mrs. Brown begins teaching school on a
    regular basis.

         I asked Mrs. Brown:  In 1970, you were a
    regular teacher?
         That's right.
         Full time.  And as part of the curriculum here
    in Jacksonville in the 1970s, '80s, and '90s there
    were educational materials and lectures for students
    regarding the health risks of smoking and drugs,
    correct?
         Correct.
         1970.
         Dr. Proctor told you that they existed long
    before that, but that's when Mrs. Brown becomes
    involved, because that's when she teaches school
    full time.
         Mr. Shields said that his proof, his proof that
    Mr. Brown relied on something that Philip Morris
    said about the health risks of smoking was the fact
    that he smoked Philip Morris Multifilter cigarettes
    beginning in 1972.
         Well, the facts speak volumes differently.
         At the very moment Mr. Brown smokes Philip
    Morris Multifilter cigarettes, he's still smoking
    his favorite brand, Benson Hedges.  And Kaiser
    Thomas said he continued to smoke Benson & Hedges
    right on through.
6 3624
         And I asked Mrs. Brown:  You actually have no
    idea whether your husband thought it was safer to
    smoke a low-tar, low-nicotine cigarette rather than
    one that was not low tar and not low nicotine, do
    you?
         And her answer was:  I have no idea.
         They have the burden of proof here, Ladies and
    Gentlemen.  This is Mrs. Brown saying:  I have no
    idea.
         But what we do know is that he stops smoking
    Philip Morris Multifilter.  When, exactly?  Nobody
    recalls.  No one came here and said exactly when.
    But by the end of the '70s, he's not smoking Philip
    Morris Multifilter anymore.  What's he smoking?
    Benson & Hedges.  Benson & Hedges, his favorite
    brand.  His favorite brand.
         Michael Brown said:  Sometime in the mid-'70s
    Mr. Brown stopped smoking at the dinner table.
         We've already gone through all the places where
    he didn't smoke.
         In 1970 the warning changes on all the packs.
    Warning now says:  The Surgeon General has
    determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to
    your health.
         You have an instruction that says Philip Morris

    had no obligation to warn anybody.  After that, why
    would you?
         Let's go to the '80s.
         It's in the '80s.  You now know that Jennifer
    Brown begins to talk to her dad about -- she's in
    late grade school, late grade school, and she's
    talking to her dad about cancer from smoking.  She
    said she did that for two or three years, and then
    in 1993 she has the conversation I've just gone in
    great detail about.  I'm not going to do that again.
    I'll spare you that.
         1985 -- oh, 1983.  That's when Mrs. Brown tells
    Kaiser Brown to stop bringing those inexpensive or
    less-expensive cigarettes from up at the military
    base, the PX.
         1985.  The warnings change.  Now they
    explicitly say that smoking causes lung cancer.
         Oh, by the way, let's go back to 1981.
    Mr. Shields talked about how there was an FTC
    report -- remember I asked Dr. Proctor:  Isn't that
    made by lawyers?
         And he laughed and he said:  Yeah, it's made by
    lawyers.
         But who is the guy that came here that
    Mr. Shields brought?  Dr. David Burns, right?  And 3626
    this is what I showed Dr. David Burns.  This is his
    own statement, January 17th, 1981.  This is a quote
    from David Burns.
         And I said:  Dr. Burns, did you say that?
         He said:  Sure I did.
         And he was right.  He wrote -- he said:  It
    isn't that smokers don't know the risks.  In fact,
    95 percent of them are thoroughly aware of the
    health dangers and 90 percent realize that their
    health could be affected.
         According to Dr.  David Burns.  That's 1991.
    Look at those numbers:  95 percent know and 90
    percent believe.
         Ms. Hassia Diolombi talking to Jennifer Brown:
         "And when you would tell your father these
    things, when you would tell him it was bad for him
    and wanted to stop, your father, in fact, understood
    you, right?
         "He heard what I was saying and acknowledged:
    I hear you.  I understand."
         Here's Mrs. Brown's testimony.
         "And one of the reasons why you hadn't talked
    to Mr. Brown about not smoking during that, roughly,
    30-year time frame was because you learned early on
    that people have their own things that they enjoy

    doing or appear to enjoy doing and you don't try to
    talk them out of it, right?
         "That's right.
         "You don't try to change people.
         "No."
         This is a recognition Mr. Brown enjoyed smoking
    and she didn't try to talk him out of it.
         Now, you know that as of the mid-'80s,
    Mrs. Brown says:  I don't want you to smoke in the
    bedroom any more, right?  He enjoyed smoking on the
    floor of the bedroom watching sports.  And she said:
    You know what, I don't like your secondhand smoke,
    and I don't like being exposed to it.  I don't want
    you to do it in here anymore.
         And his answer was what?  His answer was -- I
    think she said he said something like, well, maybe I
    ought to move out or something like that.  I'm sure
    he didn't mean that, but . . .
         He did it.  He stopped smoking in the bedroom,
    right?
         And you know about the rest of this story.
         And remember I asked Mrs. Brown this question:
    In fact, in that time frame if you spoke to your
    husband about his smoking, he had sort of a standard
    response, and it was:  You've got to die of
7 3628
3630 something, right?
         Her answer was:  He made that comment to me.
         Does that indicate that Mr. Brown doesn't know
    what he's doing?  Does that indicate he's waiting to
    hear from Philip Morris or that he is being deceived
    by Philip Morris?  His answer was:  You've got to
    die of something.  And she's not going to try to
    talk him out of it because it's something he enjoys
    doing.
         That's the evidence in this case.  Rather than
    stand up here and say to you, you have to infer that
    he didn't rely, I'm giving you all this hard
    evidence.  I'm not telling you to infer it.  Here's
    the evidence.
         I'll put this up over here.  We've already
    covered everything I want to cover here.
         This is when he begins socializing with Sam
    Jones.  I'm not disputing that he smoked some
    cigarettes with Mr. Jones, but you know the rest of
    the story.
         Here are things Mr. Brown never said to
    anybody.  He never said he'd felt he had been
    deceived about the risks of smoking, that somebody
    else was responsible for his smoking decisions other
    than himself, or that he regretted smoking, or that

    he blamed Philip Morris.  Never said one of those
    things.  Not once.
         That's the evidence in this case.  You don't
    have to infer it.
         All right.  They have to prove reliance.  In
    order to answer these questions yes, you have to
    find that there was not just a little evidence, not
    just a tiny bit of evidence, but evidence that
    outweighs what I just showed you.
         I don't have the burden of proof on this.
    Mr. Shields and Mr. Kalil do.  Hassia and I don't
    have a burden of proof here, but I just brought you
    all this evidence.
         They have the burden of proving that Mr. Brown
    relied on something that Philip Morris said -- not
    the American public, not some segment of the
    American public, but Mr. Brown.
         The answers to these questions are absolutely
    no.  I don't think there can even be a minute of
    debate about it.
         All right.  Mr. Shields said I didn't bring
    anybody to dispute anything that he showed.  Well,
    you know what?  There's no evidence to support this
    claim.  Why would I bring you somebody?  To take up
    more of your time? This story -- this case is about Mr. Brown.
    This case is about the things that Mr. Brown
    experienced; the things that influenced Mr. Brown.
    That's their obligation.  That's their burden.
         All right.  If you've answered question number
    one yes, you do have to come to this question.  If
    you don't answer question number one yes, you don't
    have to come to this question.  But if you do, you
    have to come to this question apportioning
    responsibility between Philip Morris USA and
    Rayfield Brown.
         Every day when people wake up, they look in the
    mirror and they decide how they're going to live
    their lives.  We're issued one body.  Who is
    responsible for the body that we're given except
    ourselves?
         Mr. Shields said Mr. Brown has minor
    responsibility in this case for the decisions he
    made.  On the instructions you're going to see, it
    talks about his actions.  He has minor
    responsibility for his actions.
         When someone looks in the mirror in the morning
    and they decide how they're going to live their
    life, is there really anybody else looking back in
    the mirror?  Really and truly?

         If you smoke cigarettes, if you drink alcohol,
    if you drink caffeine, is there really anybody else
    in the mirror looking back at you?  Really and
    truly?
         I leave this to your sound discretion.  If you
    do think that there's anybody in the mirror other
    than whose body it is, put a percentage down.
         If you've answered question number one yes,
    then you have to go on here and assign dollar
    amounts.  And I'm not even going to talk to you
    about dollar amounts.  You heard Mr. Shields.  You
    heard what he's claiming.  And he wants 10 million
    and $3 and a half million.
         If you get here, you use your common sense and
    your sound judgment -- if you get here.  I don't
    think you get here, but if you get here, use your
    sound judgment and common sense.
         Mr. Brown made his decisions about how he lived
    his life.  I truly don't think you'll get here, but
    if you do, that's -- of course it's your judgment.
    It's not my judgment; it's your judgment.
         Only if you answered -- oops.  I lost it.
         Only if you answered these questions yes, one
    or both, do you answer this question.  And that is:
    Under the circumstances of this case, state whether
8 3632
    by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages
    are warranted against Philip Morris.
         A couple things I have to tell you about this
    one is that the circumstances that are being
    referenced there are whatever it is that impacted
    Mr. Brown.  So you first have to find that something
    impacted Mr. Brown.  You have to find that reliance.
    And whatever it is you think he relied on, that's
    the circumstances that we're talking about.  Because
    you can't -- you've got this instruction from Judge
    Jay, and that is:
         You may not seek to punish Philip Morris for
    any harms suffered by any persons other than
    Mrs. Brown as a result of Mr. Brown's death, and you
    may punish Philip Morris only for those harms
    suffered by plaintiff as a result of Mr. Brown's
    death which were caused by Philip Morris's
    punishable conduct.
         What's their burden of proof on this issue?
    This has got to be done by clear and convincing
    evidence.  An even higher standard than the burden
    they have on the whole rest of the case.
         What's clear and convincing?  Clear and
    convincing evidence differs from the greater weight
    of the evidence in that it is more compelling and

    persuasive.  It's got to be precise, explicit,
    lacking in confusion, and in such weight it produces
    a firm belief or conviction about the matter at
    issue.
         Inference:  Lack of evidence.  That could never
    satisfy precise, explicit, and lacking in confusion
    and such weight that it produces a firm belief or
    conviction about the matter.
         One more thing.
         So what's the answer to this question?  If you
    ever got that far, the answer would be no.
         Mr. Shields said:  Philip Morris engineers its
    cigarettes to create and sustain addiction.
         The truth of the matter is yes, it's the
    nicotine in cigarettes.  Yes, nicotine has been in
    cigarettes.  You go all the way back in time -- this
    is a question I posed to Dr. Proctor -- all the way
    back in time.  Remember, I took Dr. Burns all the
    way back to -- goodness sakes -- the turn of the
    last century, 1890s.  Nicotine has been in tobacco.
    It's grown in tobacco.  It's part of the tobacco.
    It's the natural part.  It's naturally in tobacco.
    The plant makes it.  It's been in every tobacco
    product that's ever been made.
         And I said:  If we go back all the way in time, 3634
    you told this jury yesterday, I think, that there's
    generally about 2 and a half percent of nicotine in
    the tobacco that's in cigarettes.
         And he said:  Right.  By weight.
         And I said:  And this range of 2.5 percent of
    nicotine in the tobacco is really the function of
    the consumers deciding that's what they want to
    consume.
         His answer was:  Well, it's a mixture of that
    and producers trying to produce what they think will
    sell.
         And that's right.  Cigarette manufacturers make
    cigarettes that they think will sell to consumers,
    and consumers decide what they want to consume.  So
    it's no secret that there's nicotine in tobacco.
    There's no secret that it's part of why people enjoy
    smoking and why they smoke.  And there's also no
    secret it is in part why some people become
    addicted.
         It's just like alcohol in beer.  Alcohol in
    wine.  Alcohol in scotch.  It's part of the reason
    why people like to use it.  It's why people can get
    addicted to it.  And it's part of the reason why
    people, when they go buy cigarettes or they go buy
    whatever -- scotch, beer, whatever -- they expect it

    to be in there.  It's part of the product.  It's
    part of why you go to the store and buy it.
         And it's in this range.  It has been ever since
    the beginning of time.
         Mr. Shields said that tobacco put in paper,
    rolled, and burned can't be inhaled.  That's just
    nonsense.  Nobody said this in this courtroom.  You
    can go out and buy roll your own tobacco and buy
    paper and roll it and smoke it right now.  I don't
    know why he said that.  There's no evidence to
    support that.
         All right.  I'm done.  You guys have been
    extremely attentive to my closing argument, and I
    greatly appreciate it.  Greatly appreciate it.
         Hassia and I look forward to receiving your
    verdict.  I'm going to sit down now.
         Now, you know Mr. Shields gets to get back up
    again because Mr. Shields and Mr. Kalil, they have
    the burden of proof in this case, so he gets another
    bite at this apple.  He gets to come back and say
    whatever he wants.  I don't get to come back.
    Hassia doesn't get to get up and start talking to
    you again.
         I would only ask that, as he talks to you in
    his -- I don't know how long he's going to take.  I
9 3636
    don't know if he's going to take ten minutes,
    30 minutes, or another hour.  But I would just ask
    you think about:  What does this have to do with
    Mr. Brown.
         Thank you very much.
         Thank you, Your Honor.
