MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Judge.
Almost 20 years ago to the day, May 8th,
1992, Johnnie Calloway was taken from his house
and brought to the hospital.
This is Johnnie. It's been 20 years that Marvine has waited for this day, for you to make a decision in her case, for you to tell her that Johnnie Calloway belongs to the class.
He's belonged for 20 years now. He's belonged. And yet they say he doesn't.
118.
Johnnie Calloway was brought to the hospital because he was urinating blood so badly and he had so much pain that he couldn't stand it. He was brought to the hospital why? Because of his bladder cancer. Plain and simple.
Now, I told you at the beginning of this case that a lot of these issues, really no-brainers. The issues that you have to decide in this case talk about addiction and talk about disease and whether this man, Johnnie Calloway, whether he smoked enough cigarettes to develop a disease because of his addiction.
That's what this case is about, very simple. And then once you answer "yes," we move on to Phase II. It's really that simple.
Johnnie Calloway smoked these things for 43 years, not because he liked them, not because he enjoyed them, but because he was addicted to the nicotine in them. He was dependent on nicotine in them. He needed the nicotine.
There's been a lot of talk about choice and failures to quit, ability to quit. The bottom line is, the question is, was he addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. That's the question. It doesn't matter about choice, it doesn't matter about his ability to quit, doesn't matter if he did quit; that's all Phase II issues.
Now, those things -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. That's an improper statement.
THE COURT: Thank you. The objection's sustained. Move on, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: Those things may go to the level of addiction, but the bottom line is, was he dependent on nicotine.
As a result of smoking these things for 43 years, he developed heart disease and bladder cancer, and I'm going to talk a lot
about that in the next couple hours. But they know -- they know why smokers smoke these things. There's only one reason.
Some people smoke for enjoyment because they want to smoke with their friends, they look cool; but once they start smoking a lot, once they start smoking two, three, four cigarettes a day, up to five, up to a pack, up to two packs, up to three packs, they're not smoking it anymore to be cool or to hang out with their friends or because they like the taste. They're smoking it for the nicotine.
They know it. That's why they keep it in the cigarette, because you know, we all know -and you heard the testimony -- that if this thing didn't have nicotine, no one would buy them.
And that's what's happened when they tried to make them without nicotine. Nobody bought them.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor. That's outside the record and Phase II.
THE COURT: Thank you. The objection is noted.
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: They put the nicotine in there and keep it in there to keep smokers smoking, to keep them hooked.
Now, the choice of the defendants to market tobacco, which is obviously known to be both addictive and cancer-causing, does raise the question of fault, but that's reserved for Phase II.
The evidence of what the tobacco companies knew about their deadly product, wha they knew about their product, when they knew it, what they told the public -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: The jury is to disregard.
This is Phase I, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: The choice of a teenager like Johnnie Calloway, who started smoking in 1948 when he was 16 years old, that also raises the question of fault, but that's for Phase II.
The question of what he knew, when he knew it, that will be addressed by you at that time.
You can't decide now how much either side is at fault for their choices -- their choice
is to market it; Johnnie's choice is to use it -- until you hear all the evidence. Please keep that in mind.
So, why are we talking about choice when we haven't even reached the fault evidence in the case? Because the tobacco companies, the want to sit here and pretend that Johnnie Calloway was not addicted, never addicted, not even one day of his life. That's nonsense.
But if you won't buy that, then they want a fallback position. And they want to say well, if he was addicted, it was his choice to continue smoking long enough to get sick. Therefore, it was his choice and not his addiction that caused his heart disease and his bladder cancer.
But, you know, not one piece of evidence was presented by either side that Johnnie Calloway's addiction was his choice. Think about that. Nobody chooses addiction. It's often a terrible side effect of the choice to smoke. That's what addiction is.
Just like the addiction some people get from prescription medication, no one chooses that addiction; but, unfortunately, it
frequently happens as an unintended consequence.
Lawful but dangerous drugs, they do have some horrible side effects. One of those is addiction. We know that. That's why ordinary people say -- they say, hey -- about tobacco or pain prescription medication -- they say, be careful, don't get hooked.
But why do we say that? Well, we say that because addiction is like a fish getting hooked. It really is. The fish chooses to strike the bait, gets caught by the hidden hook, the hook starts pulling the fish along, the fish starts fighting the hook and tries to get off.
Fish that were hooked only through the side of the lip, they get lucky and they do get off; they get away. But those that are hooked, hooked deep, they're goners. All fishermen know this. That's why they use hooks. But no fisherman would ever tell you that the fish chose to get hooked. The fish died because he didn't see the hook in the first place.
You know, Johnnie Calloway, when he was 16 years old, he didn't see the hook. He died
in 1992; 1992, 20 years ago. The tobacco companies didn't tell their customers they thought cigarettes were addictive until eight years after Johnnie died, in the year 2000.
Instead, they repeatedly told everybody, they told everybody who could read -- and Johnnie read a lot; we know that he read the newspapers, he read the magazines -- they told everybody, there's a scientific controversy about whether cigarettes are harmful or addictive. There's a controversy about whether or not cigarettes would get you hooked. That's essentially what they were telling the public and telling Johnnie Calloway.
Sure, there was a Surgeon General's report in 1964 that talked about the health consequences and the various reports thereafter; but, by that time, Johnnie was 32 years old. He had been smoking for nearly 20 years. He was addicted to smoking by that time, heavily addicted. He was hooked. He was hooked bad. He tried to get away, but he couldn't. Being hooked eventually killed him.
Now, the tobacco companies want to come in here and say, we had nothing to do with
that; we just put out a product and threw out the bait and he grabbed it. Us, we were just the fishermen. Yeah, they were.
Johnnie chose to smoke at a time when no one knew the real dangers of addiction or disease. He started as a teen -Think about it. The advertising back then. And we saw it and we are going to look at it again. The movies. It was everywhere. Everywhere. Everybody smoked. It was the thing to do. It was popular. If you didn't smoke back then, you were almost the exception to the rule. It was a different time.
Those advertisements, the movies, they didn't talk about addiction and how you get hooked to that cigarette. They never mentioned cancer, any of the dangers associated with smoking. Not back when he started smoking in 1948. Nobody knew about it then.
Twenty years before the Surgeon General's report came out in 1964, almost 20 years -- 18 years, actually -- he was smoking. In that amount of time, that hook gets set deep inside Johnnie. He was hooked.
And that hook dragged him along for
another 20 years, 43 years of smoking. He tried to fight it. We heard about that, and we'll talk about that more. But he didn't get off.
And maybe some of you think he should have tried harder. Maybe that's true. But that is for Phase II, not for this phase.
MR. REID: Objection. Improper statement.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: Right now these defend; want you to believe that Johnnie was never hooked. If you won't believe that, they want you to believe that being hooked didn't contribute to the cause of death in any way.
Common sense tells us that's nonsense.
The reason we all worry about getting hooked is because addiction starts pulling you along and it's hard to get away. If you don't get away in time, you die. And that's what happened to Johnnie Calloway. He didn't get away in time.
And at least one of the important reasons for that -- at least one of the important reasons for that was his addiction to the
nicotine in these cigarettes.
They ought to know. They're the ones that put it in; they're the ones that keep in.
They make cigarettes with the hook built right in. And they know they don't have to; but they know that if they don't, nobody will buy them.
MR. REID: Your Honor, excuse me, objection to the use of this document based on -- as evidence on cause of death.
THE COURT: The objection is noted. It's overruled.
MR. REID: Thank you.
MR. HAMMER: Now, these defendants war you to believe that the hook has no role in pulling smokers towards disease. That's what they want you to believe. That's crazy.
They're the ones that put the nicotine in the cigarettes. And we'll talk a lot about that in a little bit.
They keep the nicotine in cigarettes that keep their customers hooked. That's what they do. That's their business. We've heard all about that. That way, their customers are buying more and more of these things. And that's exactly what Johnnie did. They count on
that. They buy them all the way to the end; and that's exactly what Johnnie did. They know that. That's what they want.
They keep the nicotine in their products to keep people hooked. That's why they do it. People get hooked, and Johnnie did. And he go hooked all the way to the end.
Now, in this case -Slide 2, please.
Why don't you pull a chair up here so it's easier. Thanks.
Now, in order to be considered a member of the Engle class membership -- and remember please keep in mind, this is merely a threshold question -- to determine whether or not Johnnie should be a member of this class, a class of
700,000	other smokers -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. HAMMER: -- who -THE COURT: What's the objection?
MS. GALLAGHER: Outside the record.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. GALLAGHER: And 403.
MR. REID: May we approach on that, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. REID: There is no evidence that
700,000	people died. They tried to get that in; we objected to it. No witness has testified in this trial that 700,000 people died.
So, it's outside the record and, therefore, it's extremely prejudicial. In fact, that number came from an estimate made in one of the -- one of the intermediate appellate decisions of the Engle -- of the first Engle case, and there are numerous other numbers cited in all those opinions, as well.
So, there's no witness who's testified to that in this case, and it is highly prejudicial, and especially in Phase I.
So, we'd move to strike; and may we have an instruction to the jury?
MR. SCHLESINGER: I heard you overrule it, Judge. If you want argument, I'll give you additional argument.
THE COURT: Well, it's not in evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: We presented Your Ho with the case and we presented you with the request for judicial notice.
And what's more -- what's most important is it was stated in opening statement without objection; and then, about an hour later, towards the end of the -- towards the end of the opening, when Steve Hammer repeated it,
Mr. Reid made a speaking objection and said, there is no authority for that, when he knew that the Florida Supreme Court definitively stated that there was at least 700,000 smokers.
The objection was not well taken; it was untimely because it had already been discussed for an hour without an objection. We followed up by giving the Engle opinion to you, and we also gave Your Honor the motion for judicial notice.
The numerical law of the class has been stated by the Florida Supreme Court. There is no prejudice whatsoever. It's merely a reference number to discuss. And Mr. Hammer's prepared to do it, and I think it's -THE COURT: Thank you. Excuse me. It's not in evidence. I'm going to sustain the
objection. I was wrong.
MR. REID: Can you instruct the jury, please?
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
THE COURT: Proceed, sir.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you.
Ready?
The question is: Should Johnnie Calloway be considered equally among all these other Florida smokers that became addicted to their product and got sick and died over the years? Shouldn't he be considered part of that group of people, part of that class? Of course he should.
Now, the Judge has already told you that there are certain things that are already established, and that is that Johnnie Calloway was a resident of the State of Florida by November 21st, 1996, which is one of the requirements to meet the class; that Johnnie Calloway must have been a smoker. Well, most certainly he was. That Johnnie Calloway must have been diagnosed with heart disease or bladder cancer, one of the qualifying diseases;
and obviously we've heard testimony, we've got medical records in evidence that certainly -that certainly support that.
I mean, we heard from his treating physicians, and these are in evidence and you can go through them. But we highlighted -- we took out quite a bit of them and reviewed those records for you so that you'd have a better idea of what's in there; but you're free to go through those records on your own.
But was he diagnosed with heart disease? Of course. The man had a heart attack; he had bypass surgery. Was he diagnosed with bladde cancer? Yeah, he had pathology, where they went in and removed part of his bladder and tested it and tested those tumors, and it tested positive for cancer. So, there's no doubt that he meets that criteria.
The question becomes: Were those diseases substantially caused by smoking cigarettes? Well, we're going to talk about that quite a bit; but, again, it's important not to leave your common sense outside.
A man that smoked for 43 years, that many cigarettes, of course, those diseases were
caused -- in part substantially caused, to some degree -- whatever words you want to use -they were caused as a result of his smoking.
And he smoked because of the nicotine, because of the dependence on his nicotine. That's what I talked about in my opening statement to you. Johnnie Calloway must have been an addicted smoker who smoked as a resull of his addiction. I think we've established that.
Now, the Judge told you -- and this is very important to consider, and you've all got your instruction packet -- but the Judge told you in his instructions that it's your obligation, your duty as jurors, to decide the issues and only the issues, in this phase of the case, and the only issue for you to determine in this phase of the case is whether or not Johnnie is a class member. It's very simple.
Now, we've got verdict forms in this case, and I want to show those to you real
quick.
But, really, the first issue for your determination has to do with the actual part of
the class membership. And that is: Was Mr. Calloway addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his heart disease or his bladder cancer?
Just like what's on the board there, this is a copy of the verdict form that you're going to get. You either answer "yes" or "no" to these questions.
And you've heard a lot of evidence about that, and we're going to talk about that throughout the next couple of hours that I talk to you and the defense talks to you; but those questions are pretty basic.
The question is: Was he addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine? Sure. And was his addiction a legal cause of his heart disease? Yeah, of course.
I mean, that should be a no-brainer. He smoked all those years; he got heart disease. He smoked all those years because of the dependence on nicotine. And it should be an easy question to answer and check that off. Same with bladder cancer. It should be a very simple question for you all to answer.
Now, of course, the tobacco companies, they contest that Johnnie was an addicted smoker. They contest that Johnnie developed his bladder cancer or his heart disease as a result of his addiction. They contest -Can I have the death certificate?
They even contest the fact that he died from his bladder cancer. The death certificate -MR. REID: Your Honor, may we have a standing objection based on our prior discussions pretrial about the death certificate?
THE COURT: Counsel, if there's something in particular that you want to object about, you object to it. The document's in evidence; counsel's commenting right now on what's in evidence.
The objection is noted. It's overruled.
You want an objection, you make it.
MR. REID: It's irrelevant as to cause of death. That's our objection.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: The defense would like you
to think that this document is irrelevant with regard to cause of death. Really? They want you to take this document, which is in evidence, and throw it away. That's what they're asking you to do. Really? You should be offended by that.
This is a document that's filed with the State of Florida, it's never been challenged in 20 years, and they want you to just toss it out as if it means nothing.
You know, there are certain admitted facts in this case.
Slide 4, please.
The cigarettes smoked by Johnnie Calloway -Well, first, he was a citizen; he suffered from the disease; cigarettes cause bladder cancer; the cigarettes cause coronary artery disease; he had cancer; he had heart disease; that they're addictive and dependence producing. Those are admitted. The tobacco companies can't run away from these facts.
Now, what's interesting is you heard their own expert say, well, nicotine can be addictive. He wouldn't come out and say it is.
Can be addictive.
And remember, in his opening, those words just kept flowing out of defense counsel's mouth. It can be addictive. Why won't they just come out and say it? Because that's established. It is addictive. But they hide behind those words.
Now, in this case, you already got the jury instruction that says greater weight of the evidence. And the jury instruction is -we have a slide.
Slide Number 6, please.
And the Judge read this to you already.
The "greater weight of the evidence" means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
Well, what does that mean? Well, remember we talked a lot during voir dire about starting out equal. Well, these are scales.
And in a civil case, we start out equal, just like this (indicating).
Now, this is a civil case. Remember, we talked about criminal cases in jury selection.
In a criminal case, the defendant starts out with the presumption of innocence, and the
state must present evidence beyond and to the exclusion of each and every reasonable doubt and tip the scales all the way. That is in a criminal case.
We're in a civil case right now. We start out even. We start out balanced. And in a civil case, the law says, by the greater weight of the evidence -- we must prove our case by a greater weight of the evidence; tipping the scales. More likely than not. Probably. 51 percent.
Now, in this case, we believe we've presented evidence of addiction, evidence of his cause of death, evidence of his disease, evidence of his heart disease, his bladder cancer, linking it to his smoking cigarettes.
We believe we presented evidence that tips the scales quite a bit.
And, you know, in a case like this, you're the jurors of the facts and we don't know what you want from us to meet your burde because it's your burden; you're the triers of the fact. Whatever you decide the facts are in the case, that's your decision.
So, we presented a lot of evidence. Some
of it may have been repetitive; some of it may have been -- got you there sitting, thinking, why are they doing this whole thing again?
Well, because we're not sure what you're thinking. And, so, we want to make sure we present to you as much evidence as possible to make sure that we've established our burden.
And I apologize to you if we did get repetitive; I apologize to you if it took longer than expected. But we don't know what you all were looking for, and so we wanted to make sure we brought forth the evidence. And think we did that. And once we do that, it's for the defendant then to present evidence to rebut it.
Once we've established the greater weight of the evidence, the greater force and effect of the evidence, more likely than not, once we've established that, it's their job to convince you otherwise.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. That's a misstatement of the -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: The jury is to disregard it.
MR. HAMMER: What evidence was presented in this case? I'm going to go through the evidence, and there was a lot of it; but before I do that, I want to talk to you about addiction as a legal cause. Because that's kind of a strange concept.
You know, generally you get a definition of all sorts of things during the course of the trial, and that's why you got the jury instruction packet; but you're not going to get a definition of "addiction" throughout this case. And that's kind of weird.
But as I told you during jury selection and as I told you during opening, "addiction" is what you deem it to be in this case.
Whatever evidence you think you need to establish addiction, that is addiction.
And if you think that somebody who smokes a pack, two or three cigarettes (sic) a day for 43 years, if you think that, in and of itself, is enough to make a determination as to whether or not somebody is addicted, a heavy smoker like that, that is enough. But we presented to you more than that.
Now, I want to talk to you about this
definition. And what I really want to talk to you about is some words in there.
Slide 8.
It talks about addiction being a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contribute substantially to produce the injury, so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction to the cigarettes containing that nicotine, the injury would not have happened.
So, what is that saying? Well, it's saying that did the addiction -- his continued smoking, his dependence upon the nicotine -did it contribute substantially to producing his injury. That's a question you must answer.
But you're also told, in the next paragraph, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of injury, addiction need not be the only cause. Well, what does that mean? What does that mean, it may not be the only cause?
Addiction may be a legal cause of injury even though it operates in combination with some other cause, if some other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and if the addiction contributes substantially to
producing such injury.
And you're also given an instruction -116 -- on intervening cause, which was read to you, and those are all in the packet that the Judge gave you. And I ask you to please go back there in the jury room and look at those words carefully, because, again, it may be -also be a legal cause of heart disease or bladder cancer even though it operates in combination with some other natural cause -- or some other cause occurring after the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, in combination with.
Slide 9.
"Contributes substantially" means: Did the addiction to nicotine play an important role? That's what we're really asking about.
Did the addiction to nicotine, did his dependence upon nicotine, play an important role? Did it in some way contribute to Johnnie Calloway's heart disease or bladder cancer? O course it did. It contributed to him smoking all those cigarettes over all those years.
"But for the addiction," basically it's asking: If he was not addicted to the
nicotine, would he have smoked one, two, up tc three packs a day -- up to three packs a day of these things if it weren't for the nicotine?
Of course not. Nicotine had something to do with it. Of course it did. That's why they put it in there.
But keep in mind, his addiction need not be the only cause.
Slide 10, please.
The addiction must be a factor. There could have been other factors. His choices to smoke, his choices to continue smoking, his inability to quit, those may have been other factors contributing to him getting the bladder cancer, to him getting the heart disease, but did the addiction operate together with those things? Of course. And that's really what the question is.
But, also, while those things may come into play here, much of that has to do with his conduct -- with his conduct, his ability to do something; his failure to do something, that is conduct -- and to start judging him on conduct is not appropriate in this phase.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. That's
a misstatement.
THE COURT: Proceed, Counsel.
MR. REID: May we approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. REID: Your Honor, his conduct is -Clearly, you've allowed much evidence in about conduct, meaning it's relevant. His conduct in not quitting is evidence that he was -- that he -- that he chose not to quit is evidence that he was not -- it was not addiction as the cause; it was choice.
And you've let all that evidence in; and he just told the jury that conduct is not part of this phase. And I move -- I move to strike that testimony -- that statement.
MR. SCHLESINGER: To the contrary, Yo Honor. If Mr. Reid uses the word "conduct" in his closing, we're going to object because conduct has to do with fault and responsibility. They can use "choice"; they're going to talk about choice. They cannot use conduct. And all -- all Mr. Hammer is trying to do is make sure that the elements of fault
don't spill into Phase I.
They're the ones that asked for this phased trial, Judge; and they want to make this phased trial, Phase I, about Mr. Calloway's fault. So, we're obligated; we must keep those things separate.
And what Mr. Hammer is saying, it isn't part of this, is the correct statement of the law; and the prohibition to the contrary should be of Mr. Reid saying that word at all. Fault, responsibility, conduct, does not have anything to do with Phase I. I think Your Honor has already indicated that.
MR. REID: Your Honor, choice is conduct. His choosing not to -- not to quit, with full knowledge, is conduct. That goes to the issue of addiction in this phase. We have not said fault at all. And he just told the jury conduct is irrelevant.
Mr. Calloway's -- whether he read articles about it, whether he saw ads, how he responded to the ads, whether he knew that smoking was risky or not, all that is conduct, which goes to the question of whether or not he should have quit, whether he was addicted.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, it's closing argument.
The only thing I would add is that Mr. Hammer -- all he said was that you're not supposed to judge his conduct. That's all he said, is judge -- don't judge his conduct.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's a closing argument.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. REID: No, sir.
THE COURT: This is closing argument, so you're going to have a chance to argue about choice. It's not an issue. All right? You're going to do that. Thank you.
(Whereupon, the following proceedings wer had within the hearing of the jury:)
THE COURT: Proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Judge.
Things such as conduct and blame and responsibility have no room in your deliberations in this phase. Please remember that. No room.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. That's different than what we discussed at sidebar.
THE COURT: Proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Judge.
There are things that may have affected Johnnie Calloway's choices to do certain things. But that, again, goes to conduct and should be considered in Phase II.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Counsel, why don't you proceed; but let's talk about Phase I, and what the evidence was, all right?
MR. HAMMER: Why he made decisions shouldn't be considered by you.
MR. REID: Same objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: The objection's noted. It's overruled.
MR. HAMMER: So, if you determine that h« was addicted, if you determine that he was dependent on the nicotine in cigarettes, it doesn't matter if there may have been other reasons why he smoked. It doesn't matter.
If you determine that he was dependent upon the nicotine in cigarettes, it doesn't matter, because that can act in combination with other things. That's what the law says.
And what I want to make sure you keep in
mind -- Slide 11, please -- it talks about addiction is a legal cause. Not the legal cause; a legal cause. It talks about addiction may be a legal cause. It doesn't have to be the only cause; a cause. That's important to keep in mind.
So, perhaps it could have been, when he first started out, looking cool, fitting in, as a reason. Eventually he got hooked. It could have been he liked it, but eventually he got hooked. It could have been he did it to pass time; but eventually he got hooked, and he got hooked to the nicotine and became dependent upon the nicotine.
Slide 12.
I want you to listen very carefully, very carefully, when the defense makes their argument, because he did it in his opening and I guarantee you he's going to do it when he argues to you today. He kept saying "the cause," "the cause," and he'll do it again today, I guarantee. Don't be sucked in by that. The law says "a cause." There's a big difference between those two words. Big difference.
They'll take the word "a," they'll turn it into "the." They'll say his refusal to quit was the cause of his disease, his choice was the cause of his disease. Don't let them do that to you. Don't let them confuse the issue. Because they're good at it. They've been doing that for 50 years.
MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: Number 14, please.
And remember, no consideration of fault should be in this phase of the case. Fault is for Phase II. Fault, responsibility, blame, conduct, those things are for Phase II. Please don't let that enter your deliberations.
Number 15.
In this case, the issue is not whether Johnnie had free choice. The issue is not whether addiction prevented Johnnie from quitting. The issue is not whether Johnnie was unable to control himself. The issue is not whether addiction took over Johnnie Calloway's life completely. Those aren't the issues. The issue is whether addiction was a substantial contributing factor, one among any other cause.
It's very simple.
Now, the tobacco companies, they dispute that Johnnie was addicted to nicotine. They dispute that his addiction to nicotine contributed in some substantial way to the development of his heart disease and bladder cancer. They dispute that heart disease or bladder cancer in any way contributed to his death. And they dispute that Johnnie's bladder cancer was a cause of his death. I mean, despite all the treating doctors, that's what their position is.
I want to talk to you a little bit about the evidence and about addiction, first, because that's really one of the first hurdles you have here to determine class membership: Was Johnnie Calloway addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? Was he dependent upon the nicotine?
Well, did Johnnie Calloway smoke cigarettes, to some degree, as a result of his dependence upon nicotine?
Slide 18, please.
Was his heart disease, in some way, as a result of smoking cigarettes? The real
question is: As a result of smoking cigarettes, did Johnnie get heart disease; did he get bladder cancer? All his treating doctors said so.
Was his heart weakened from that heart attack he had in 1991? Weakened him, couldn' return back to work full time, made him maybe susceptible, nine months down the road, while he was in the hospital, susceptible to infection that led to his death? Sure, of course, it weakened him. He had a weakened heart.
Did the treatment for his bladder cancer and the complications from that treatment, did that in some way contribute to his death? Of course. That's why he was hospitalized, on May 8th, for his bladder cancer.
So, I want to talk about addiction.
Slide 20.
All these people, all these witnesses -family members, Dr. DiFranza, his own treating doctor -- they all said Johnnie Calloway was addicted.
You didn't hear any evidence in this case about addiction; we started putting it on. One
witness after the other was asked their opinions. They all said -- they didn't hesitate; they didn't have to think about it -they all told you, this man was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor, may we approach?
Can you take the slide down, please?
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. REID: Robbie Mitchell is listed on that chart as having testified that Mr. Calloway was addicted. Robbie Mitchell didn't testify in the case. They listed her, but they never called her.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Abramson admitte that Robbie Mitchell said he was addicted, that she -- he read her deposition and he admitted it. It's in evidence.
MR. REID: That would be hearsay.
MR. SCHLESINGER: That's in evidence, am that's argument. Perfectly appropriate argument. It's in evidence.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. REID: No, sir.
MS. GALLAGHER: Your Honor, can I ask that we actually get a copy of the exhibit?
THE COURT: That's what I thought I ordered -- I know it's coming in -- beforehand.
MS. GALLAGHER: Before it's on the board.
MR. REID: They give us -- give it to us after they show the jury.
THE COURT: So, tell Mr. Hammer to rearrange it.
I don't recall that witness testifying.
I'm sustaining the objection. Thank you.
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
MR. HAMMER: The medical records in this case -- Slide Number 22, please -- they showed a history of heavy smoking: Two packs a day for 40 years; one of them said two packs a day for 20 years. They all talked about his smoking.
Is there any doubt this man was a heavy smoker? Of course not.
Slide Number 23, please.
He smoked all the time. His family members described him that way.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor. Can we get these slides before -MR. PEDROSA: Your Honor, may we approa> on this one, please?
THE COURT: No. Get the slides to them before you put it up on the screen. I indicated that twice now.
So, take it down until it's done, and then, you know, you can show it. Thank you.
MR. HAMMER: He smoked all the time. He increased his smoking. He started one cigarette a day, every few days, until he finished the pack. He worked his way up to a pack, then up to two packs, then up to three packs.
His hair smelled from smoke; his clothes smelled from smoke; his car smelled from smoke. He chain-smoked; chain-smoked, lighting one cigarette from another.
The ashtrays were always filled in the house. He smoked first thing in the morning; he smoked last thing at night. He smoked throughout the day. He always had cigarettes on him. And if he didn't, he was running out to the store to go get them.
He bought shirts with pockets to keep his cigarettes in. He smoked last thing before going to bed. He woke up in the middle of the night -- not just on one occasion -- many, many times, Marvine told you. He would wake up in the middle of the night and smoke a cigarette.
He smoked after his heart attack in 1991. Even though the doctors told him not to. Even though Marvine begged him not to.
All of his family members knew he was addicted. No question about it. Dr. DiFranza opined that he was addicted.
Slide Number 24. Don't put it up yet, please. You can leave that one up. No, don't put it up.
MR. REID: No objection to that one.
MR. HAMMER: Dr. DiFranza told us he couldn't get any relief from it; the addiction never sleeps. Even if he was sleeping, the addiction was still wanting nicotine. That's how nicotine dependence works. He told you he's off the top of the scale; I haven't had a patient who is more addicted than Mr. Calloway He was as addicted as you can get.
Throughout this case, you've heard no
dispute about the fact that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, and that smokers can become addicted to it.
It's clear that Johnnie Calloway was, in fact, one of those smokers who became addictei There should be no doubt in your mind at this point that Johnnie was addicted. But we don't have to prove it that -The Judge instructed you -- and the packet's right there -- we have to tip the scales, as I showed you.
It should be obviously -- obvious to you, at this point, obvious that Johnnie Calloway was addicted, was more likely than not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. That's why he smoked all those cigarettes.
Now, there's no question that Johnnie wanted to quit. He tried. He did try. And while quit attempts aren't required, he did express a desire to quit. And quit attempts may serve as evidence of addiction.
Is it required, do you have to quit, to be addicted? Of course not. There are addicts out there -- all sorts of addicts, whether they're alcoholics, drug addicts or addicted
smokers -- who have never tried to quit, but they're certainly addicted. But the fact that Johnnie Calloway tried to quit and couldn't, that is further evidence of his addiction.
And what did he do? You heard from Marvine that after she quit, after Frank quit, he tried to quit one to two times a year after that. Sometimes even more. And he couldn't do it. He would quit for a day or two, then go back.
She told you he used this plastic cigarette; she told you he used this nicotine gum that tasted horrible and he couldn't stand the taste. He told you -She told you -- and you heard from all the witnesses -- he used these stepdown filters; he used Nicoban. He actually went out and bought those products. He made an effort to buy those products.
So, it's not a situation, as the defense would have you believe, that when Marvine said, Johnnie, you got to quit, he just blew her off.
He took steps to try to quit. That shows that he wanted to quit. Did he try hard enough? Maybe not. But that's for your determination
not in this phase.
He switched to filters. When the health effects became known, he switched to filters.
But you know what? He ended up smoking thosi even harder. Remember Marvine describing hov he (indicating) sucked in like he was drinking water?
He switched to the light cigarettes, low tar, low nicotine, and he smoked more of those, but he tried to lessen his intake. It didn't work. He tried. That is evidence of addiction.
Now, Dr. DiFranza told you that Johnnie was incapable of quitting, that he tried all those times, but his addiction was too strong.
But he also told you -- Slide 26, please -that the prescription drugs that are available today, the ones that are available today were not available to Johnnie Calloway back then.
And he told you, you know what? Those might have helped him, because he told you -remember he told you about a patient that he had that was really addicted and then tried all sorts of things? He prescribed her medication and, boom, she was able to quit, after years
and years of trying? It wasn't available to Johnnie, unfortunately. That might have worked, but we don't know, because the addiction took over and killed him.
Johnnie's quit attempts are certainly clear evidence of his motivation to quit and evidence of his addiction, because he wasn't able to break it.
So, the question becomes: Is Johnnie addicted to the nicotine? Is it more likely than not that Johnnie was addicted?
And, remember, we don't have to prove it 100 percent. If we tip these scales, we've established it. And we've certainly tipped these scales by the weight of the evidence that we presented. And the only evidence that you were presented from that side is Dr. Abramson. And I'm going to talk about him in a little bit.
Now, the fact that he smoked, again, one to two to three packs for over 40 years, that -- that's evidence for you to find him addicted. That's sufficient. Because you're not going to get a definition of "addiction."
And, come on, folks, if Johnnie Calloway
wasn't addicted to these things, if he wasn't addicted to these things, then who is? He is the picture of addiction.
So, how do cigarettes -- how do they cause heart disease? Well, the cigarette smoke is filled with toxins, filled with tar. And what happens is the smoker ingests it. That smoke goes into the lungs; it gets filtered out through the vessels in the lungs and goes into the heart, through the bloodstream. And while it's there in the heart, the tars, all that other nasty stuff that's in smoke, builds up.
It builds up.
You heard the doctors describe it. And it blocks the arteries. That's what happens.
We all have heard about that. It doesn't take a genius to figure that out. And that's what happened to Johnnie Calloway from all of his smoking. He developed heart disease. It's really as simple as that.
It created such a blockage he had a heart attack, in September of 1991, and had a bypass five bypass. That's a lot of blockage. It's a lot of damage done to the heart.
And yet their doctor comes in here and
says, no, his heart was fine after that. There was no damage. Well, wasn't there an MI? Myocardial infarction? Doesn't that mean death of the heart muscle?
Well, that's what we used to call it, but everybody uses that term wrong now.
Really? I don't know, it's used all over the place today.
Now, how do cigarettes cause cancer?
Well, we heard about that, too. There are carcinogens in cigarettes.
Slide Number 27, please.
The carcinogens in the smoke, they're inhaled into the lungs -- just like how it goes into the heart, goes in the lungs -- goes through the blood vessels, and the toxins get filtered out; they go into the kidneys. It ends up in the kidneys, the kidneys filter out the toxins, and the toxins are discharged into the bladder. And the bladder is the holding tank for the toxins in your body. And then, when you urinate, you excrete those toxins.
The problem is, between the time that your bladder is full and it's time to urinate, the toxins that are in there with the urine,
they're bathing the walls of the bladder and it starts to affect the cells in the bladder, and it causes tumors; it causes cancer.
And that's exactly what happened to Johnnie. I mean, think about, you know, a steel tank, filled up with corrosive material like acid. It's going to be okay for a while, but eventually the acid is going to start eating the inside of the tank.
Well, that's what happens to somebody's bladder with all these carcinogens sitting there, bathing it. That's what happens. And that's what happened to Johnnie Calloway. It's a very simple concept.
Would Johnnie Calloway have developed heart disease or bladder cancer but for his addiction to cigarettes? Well, really, the question becomes: Would he have smoked tha many cigarettes throughout his lifetime if he were not addicted?
Now, you know, some of the compounds in cigarette smoke -- beta naphthalene, arsenic -those two were actually described during the course of this trial.
Dr. Nieder referenced arsenic as a
cancer-causing agent. Bladder cancer-causing agent. Well, cigarette smoke has arsenic.
And Dr. Soloway told you beta naphthalene, that is the carcinogen known to cause bladder cancer. He told you that.
Now, here we go. That's his trial testimony. Now, we know, in general, that people would not smoke cigarettes like they do if the cigarettes did not contain nicotine.
It's obvious. Without nicotine, nobody bought them. You've heard testimony about that.
Did Johnnie smoke the number of cigarettes that he did throughout his lifetime as a result of his dependence upon that nicotine? Of course.
Number 29, please.
Throughout his lifetime, he was exposed -- calculating one and a half to two packs a day, for 43 years -- now, of course, there's some calculations that he smoked, at the beginning, less than a pack; he got up to a pack. He got up to a pack and a half, two, up to three.
So, we take the median numbers, one and i half packs a day, ten -- almost 11,000
cigarettes a year. Eleven thousand cigarettes a year. Imagine that.
And you take ten puffs a cigarette, on average -- eight to 12 puffs a cigarette, that's what the average is, so let's figure it out at ten -- five -- close to five million doses of nicotine. Five million doses of nicotine.
Imagine if somebody took five million doses of any drug throughout their lifetime, what would you say about that person? They'i addicted.
That's why I talked to you at the beginning about saying it's a no-brainer. You take five million doses of a drug every day of your life, you're addicted to that drug. And that's just figured at one and a half packs a day. At two packs a day, he's at over six million doses of nicotine. That's incredible.
Number 82.
If a person smokes a pack of cigarettes a day for 43 years -- 300,000 cigarettes, just at a pack a day. Two packs a day, 600,000 cigarettes. That's incredible. That's
incredible. That is addiction. That's dependence upon nicotine. Nobody smokes tha many cigarettes if they're not dependent upon nicotine. Come on, use your common sense.
We were told that smokers smoke for nicotine.
Slide Number 30, please.
Dr. DiFranza told you that. Dr. Cummings told you that.
Slide 31, please.
They both told you if there were no nicotine in the cigarettes, people would not smoke them and die.
Well, if that's the case, why haven't you guys taken the nicotine out of them? Why?
They know it. They know that's why smokers smoke. And yet they keep the nicotine in them. You know why? Because when they took it out, nobody bought the cigarettes. You heard that from Dr. Cummings; you heard that from Dr. DiFranza. They know it. They know that's why people smoke.
Continuous exposure to these carcinogens contained in the cigarette exposed his organs -- his heart, his bladder -- to disease.
It's just a natural consequence of exposure to carcinogens.
And there's no evidence whatsoever that Johnnie Calloway faced any other real -- let me say that again -- any other real exposure other than the cigarette smoke.
Now, there was talk about cement and there was talk about his diabetes and we'll talk about that in a little bit, but think about the evidence you heard about the cement and the diabetes, because that's nothing but the defense throwing something out there like a hook and hoping that you'll bite onto it.
Don't do it.
There were no real exposures other than smoking cigarettes. The doctors that treated Johnnie Calloway, they knew that. They knew what his risk was, they knew what his exposure were, they knew what he did for a living back in 1992, when they treated him. They knew about his diabetes.
And what did they all tell you? This man that I was treating, that I saw in the hospital, that I was taking care of, that I talked to, that I spoke to his family members,
this man had bladder cancer caused from smoking. Come on. Cement, diabetes?
And what did we hear about the diabetes? We heard it was borderline diabetes, described in the medical records. Mild case of diabetes. Diet-controlled diabetes. Diabetes that affected no part of his vascular system, none whatsoever. But they claim that's what really caused his heart attack and bladder cancer. Really?
And cement, Dr. Nieder talked about cement. And we'll talk about Dr. Nieder in a little bit. But Dr. Nieder couldn't identify one carcinogen in cement that would be cancer causing, but he just threw it out there. Is that believable? Is that credible?
Slide 44 -- I'm sorry, 34. Excuse me.
Dr. Soloway, a world-renowned urologic oncologist, he came in and testified. He was our expert in this case.
He reviewed the records and he told us, in his opinion, cigarette smoking for many years predating his bladder cancer was the cause of his bladder cancer. He told us that.
He reviewed the records. He had all the same
records that the defense had at their disposal. Slide T97, please.
And he told you also: In your review of the materials, did you identify any actual real risk factor that Mr. Calloway had other than smoking which caused his bladder cancer?
No.
And did any of his treaters ever make note in any of these records that diabetes or concrete exposure caused his heart disease or bladder cancer? Of course not. You know why? Because it didn't. Smoking was the only risk.
And Dr. Nieder told you -- Slide T73, please-- 51 percent of patients with bladder cancer have been smoking cigarettes for years. Well, the 51 percent, that's more than half the folks that have a relationship between cigarette smoking and the development of bladder cancer. That's what he told us.
And he told us that -- Slide 72, please -- that the single greatest risk of bladder cancer is smoking.
And then he even acknowledged, after cross-examination -- Slide 35, please -- that smoking may well have been a contributing causi
of the bladder cancer. And he says: That's correct. That's his own testimony.
The defense expert is basically telling us -- telling you: Well, I guess I got to admit, smoking may well have been a contributing cause of the bladder cancer.
They proved it through their own expert.
Slide T70, please.
And he told us that Johnnie Calloway would not have died on June 17th, 1992, but for the bladder cancer. Their own expert.
This is the man that they hired as their urologic oncologist; the man that deals with bladder cancer. The man has written articles on bladder cancer and the association of bladder cancer and smoking cigarettes. That's what he's focused his research on. That's it.
He's never written about concrete exposure; he's never written about diabetes. He's written articles about what? Smoking and bladder cancer and the relationship. And he says, hey, this man wouldn't have died of bladder cancer on June 17th, 1992, if it wasn't for his cigarettes. Their own witness acknowledges that.
So, was Johnnie Calloway addicted to the nicotine? Was that addiction one of the reasons that he continued to dose himself, day in and day out, for 43 years? Was his dependence upon the nicotine one of the reasons that he did that? Of course it was.
Dr. Cummings, Dr. DiFranza, they both described the addictive process. Dr. DiFranza told you, in his opinion, Johnnie Calloway was addicted.
Now, Dr. Cummings, he never actually met Johnnie Calloway; he was brought in to describe the addictive nature of nicotine and give you an overview before we started presenting the actual witnesses in the case.
And he was also brought in to talk about what was going on out in the world. And we introduced all these documents through him and played some videos and such. That was to kind of set the stage and let you all know what to expect throughout the course of this trial.
Dr. Cummings and Dr. DiFranza, these two guys, world renowned, world respected. They've written hundreds of peer-reviewed articles between the two of them. They've written
chapters for the Surgeon General reports. These things that are in evidence. They've written chapters.
The Surgeon General -- the President of the United States designates a Surgeon General -- asked them to write chapters for these reports.
How many chapters did Dr. Abramson write' How many articles did he write? How many peer-reviewed articles did he write?
(Indicating.)
That's their expert who comes in here and the only one that tells you that Johnnie Calloway was not addicted. Is that credible evidence?
The evidence is that nicotine is a highly addictive drug. It's considered to be as addictive as heroin and cocaine. Dr. DiFranza told you this.
Slide 27, please.
He told you that. And who else told us that? The Surgeon General told us that in 1988.
Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. The pharmacological and
behavioral processes are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. The Surgeon General told us that. Those were his findings back in 1988.
Dr. DiFranza -- Slide 37, please -- he explained to you how the brain changes, and he told you how he did these experiments with the rats, and -MR. REID: Your Honor, may we approach?
THE COURT: Do you have an objection, Counsel?
MR. REID: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. REID: It has to do with the subject we discussed earlier about the instruction; it's now become important.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Yes, sir?
MR. REID: The other afternoon we gave you what we believed to be the final version. They said they wanted to look at it and make suggestions. They never suggested anything more.
Now we didn't get it; and now he's going
into his mice testing, and you needed to -- the instruction called to exclude all the testimony about human testing, and that's the reason.
THE COURT: He didn't mention anything about human testing; he mentioned some mice testing. So, your objection is noted. It's overruled.
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
THE COURT: You may proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Judge.
And he told you that he did these studies with the rats and they confirmed his theory.
He did these experiments where the rats were exposed to the cigarette smoke, the nicotine, and he observed changes in the rats' brains.
That's how scientists do studies. They use animal studies. And he did that and they confirmed his theories. Just like Drs. Graham and Wynder -- remember, Dr. Cummings talked about their studies in 1953, where he painted the backs of mice with tar and nicotine from the cigarettes and they developed tumors? -and that's what established the link between cigarette smoke and cancer. That's what
scientists do, study it on animals.
And he described how his MRI experience on the rats established proof that nicotine changes the brain structurally and functionally. That was his testimony when he was describing his rat studies.
And he told you that the cigarettes caused -- the nicotine in the cigarettes that Johnnie smoked for all these years caused permanent changes in his brain.
T31, please.
Nicotine is why people smoke. That's well established. And we know that the younger people begin to smoke -- and Johnnie was only 16 -- the younger they begin to smoke, the more impact it has on their brain, because the brain is still developing.
Dr. DiFranza explained all that to you.
Dr. Cummings explained it to you. And you know what?
Slide 90, please.
Philip Morris describes it to you in their pamphlet, "Raising kids who don't smoke." And they say: Younger people -- the younger people are when they start smoking, the more
likely they are to become strongly addicted.
Symptoms of nicotine appear in teens within weeks or only days. Their own documents say this. The tobacco companies' own document say this.
And guess what? Footnote Number 6,
Dr. DiFranza. The man that we called to present testimony to you about Johnnie Calloway's addiction, they rely on,
Dr. DiFranza.
What does that tell you about the credibility of Dr. DiFranza? They're quoting him. And yet they come in here and cross-examine him and say, you don't know what you're talking about. Really? Then why do you use his studies? Why do you use his words? Why isn't Dr. Abramson quoted in this study or any of their studies? I'll tell you why.
Because he's not credible.
And it goes on to talk about -- T91, please -- or Slide 91, excuse me -- talking about talking to your kids. Ask about some of the symptoms of nicotine addiction. And they give you a list of the symptoms. And they say:
If your child answers "yes" to any one of
these, he may be addicted.
And yet Johnnie Calloway could have answered "yes" to every single one of those; and they come in here with their expert,
Dr. Abramson, no, he's not addicted.
Come on, folks. Is that credible? Is that believable? Of course not. The evidence presented by Dr. DiFranza and Dr. Cummings \ clear that a 16-year-old brain, it's affected by nicotine differently than an adult. And it affected Johnnie's brain, absolutely, no doubt about it.
The nicotine changes the structure of the brain and the physical makeup of the brain and the brain needs addiction -- I'm sorry, the brain needs nicotine and it will not function the same without the nicotine.
Slide 40, please.
We heard about the addictive process.
Dr. DiFranza described it. That's what happens. They start out smoking. They think, oh, at the beginning it's just a choice, free choice; they start experimenting. But eventually the nicotine starts working on the brain. They know that's how it works. They
rely on that. That's how they make billions of dollars every year. They rely on that.
And they get into an addiction cycle. An addiction cycle with diminished choice, an addiction cycle with relapsing, an addiction cycle of having difficulty quitting. All those things come into play.
And the addiction creates a compulsion to keep smoking, and the continued smoking causes disease. That's what happens and that's what happened to Johnnie Calloway.
You know, even their own expert,
Dr. Abramson -- I got to give him credit -- at T7 -- even Dr. Abramson acknowledged, just because a smoker -- someone can be addicted even though they never try to quit. He acknowledged that a smoker can be addicted even if he never tries to quit.
What does that tell you? Johnnie tried to quit. He wasn't able -- he didn't have the necessary prescription drugs available to him because he was so heavily addicted, but he was addicted. And even though you don't need quit attempts, he tried to quit.
We already saw that slide.
Now, I want to talk to you a little bit about choice, because the defense in this case is choice.
It's clear that smokers do make a choice to smoke that first cigarette and even the third, second, third, fourth. Eventually, though, they do become dependent on the nicotine if they continue to smoke.
Now, some people are successful and they only smoke, maybe, with their girlfriends when they're out having a drink, or they smoke once a week when they're in a social setting and people are smoking, or when they go out to a bar and they decide to have a cigarette; but that's not a regular smoker.
Regular smokers, their brain depends upon the nicotine. It's just how it works. And that's why people wake up -- you know, after sleeping all night, they're deprived, their brain is deprived from the nicotine because they've been sleeping -- they wake up, the first thing they do is have a cigarette in the morning.
That's why Johnnie Calloway at times, many times, woke up in the middle of the night
to replenish his nicotine supply. That is a natural sequence of nicotine dependence. That's why people smoke right before they go t bed, to get that nicotine inside, to store it until -- for that hibernation. It's a nicotine dependence; your brain is craving it.
And Dr. DiFranza explained to you the concept of constrained choice. And he explained to you that -Slide 64, please.
Limited choice, constrained choice, he talked about that to you. Remember his testimony?
I mean, it doesn't eliminate all choice.
It constrains the choice; it has an effect on it. It impairs a person's ability to make that free choice. That's the concept.
And when it comes to young people, the age of initiation of smoking and nicotine addiction refutes the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice.
Slide 101, please.
This was the position of the Surgeon General in the 1989 report; the same report that Dr. DiFranza contributed to.
They said two additional factors make smoking among young people a preeminent pu health concern: The age of initiation, and nicotine addiction.
And what do they say the Surgeon General says? These two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. The Surgeon General's words. Right here in the Surgeon General report. Refutes the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice.
And, again, I want to remind you, you will not hear -- you will not see in that packet of instructions that the Judge gave you -- you will not see the word "choice." You will not see that. You will not see "quit attempts." You will not see "choice" in that packet. The word that you will see is "addiction." Was addiction the legal cause. Because that's the question in the case.
So, the defense has said repeatedly throughout this case, and they will during -and they will during their closing -- that Johnnie had a choice, he wasn't addicted, it was his choice. You'll hear that word, that term, time and time again in their closing, I
guarantee.
Well, even their own brochure that the tobacco companies put out -- Slide 92 -- says: Talk about why you started smoking. Don't be afraid to admit that you might have made a different choice had you understood now -- I'm sorry -- had you understood then what you know now. Their own document says that. Think about that. Don't be afraid to admit that you might have made a different choice had you understood then what you do now. Think about that.
Think about the choices Johnnie would have made had he known then what we all know now. Would his choice have been affected? Of course. Just like they say in their brochure.
And yet they come in here and argue choice whe their own documents refute it. Why can't they admit it?
We know that Johnnie would have made different choices. The man loved life. You heard from his family, he loved life. He had a lot to live for.
He would have made different choices if he knew that he was going to get addicted like
he did, if he knew that he was going to get heart disease and bladder cancer and die at age 59. Fifty-nine.
You think he wanted to leave this world at age 59? Do you think that was his choice?
Of course not.
Why can't they admit that? He would have made different choices. Why can't they admit that? I'll tell you why. Because they don't admit anything. They haven't admitted he was addicted in this case; they won't admit he had bladder cancer or heart disease, caused from all those cigarettes; they won't even admit that this man died from bladder cancer, even though it's written on the death certificate.
And even though all those doctors -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I'm sorry, I didn't hear you.
MR. REID: The death certificate is evidence of the cause of death. Same objection we made -THE COURT: The objection is noted. It's overruled.
MR. HAMMER: Even though all his doctors said this man died from bladder cancer caused
by his smoking, they won't admit a thing.
They create confusion. They've created confusion in this courtroom by virtue of their expert witnesses, and they created a confusion back in 1953, when the studies started coming out linking cancer to nicotine, with their meeting at the Plaza Hotel. We all saw that.
Dr. Cummings talked about that.
Slide 79.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
May we approach on this?
Take the slide down, please. Can we take the slide down, please?
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. REID: The objection is that at the bottom there's some -I have no objection to showing the hotel, but there's something about locking arms and not telling the truth or something to that effect. That's an improper statement to make on a slide.
THE COURT: I haven't seen this slide.
Can I see it?
MR. GDANSKI: Sure, I'll grab it.
MR. REID: I have another one that I'd like to bring up that they are going to use in a few minutes. We can do it now, also, while we're here.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: And I have an objection, Your Honor. It went to what was -the issue that we had in opening. Mr. Hammer'; using the term "they." Liggett was not involved.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He's going to clarify that.
MR. REID: It's Slide 79, for the record, that we're objecting to.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Anything else?
MR. GDANSKI: It's argument that's supported by the evidence.
THE COURT: Is there anything else?
MR. REID: No, sir.
THE COURT: All right. The objection's noted. It's overruled.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Your Honor, I just want to make sure they're going to clarify with regard to Liggett.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He will.
MR. REID: Slide 49 has one, two, three, four -- five that go to manufacture. They're all Phase II: Company conduct, controlling the price of cigarettes. That's not relevant to this case. Controlling how they're manufactured, how much they contained, how addictive, that's nicotine manipulation, that's manufacturing.
And, finally, we object to -- to the first, second, six, seventh and eighth bullet on the Slide Number 49.
MR. GDANSKI: Those are all supported by the evidence. Dr. Cummings' testimony touched on every one of those issues.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. REID: No, sir.
THE COURT: Thank you. Your objection's overruled.
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
MR. HAMMER: They met at the Plaza Hotel all the heads of the tobacco companies, except for Liggett; they didn't join in 1953. They joined a few years later. They weren't part of
this. But they joined a few years later.
And what happened was they get togethei at the Plaza Hotel -- because that's when the studies are coming out linking smoking and cancer -- and they say, wow, for the first time in history, our sales are going down. We've got to do something.
And they did something that was just unbelievable in an industry like this where they're all competitors. They get together, they hire a public relations firm called Hill & Knowlton -- you heard this whole story from Dr. Cummings -- and they create this Frank Statement.
Slide 119.
A Frank Statement to Smokers. On January 4th, 1954, a full-page ad runs in 448 papers, and it disputes that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. And they say -Next slide, please.
THE TECHNICIAN: It's up.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you.
And they say we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our
business.
And they tell the world, they tell all of these American citizens, throughout the newspapers, we don't believe our products hurt anybody. Don't listen to the science, because we're going to hire our own scientists and start studying ourselves and we will come up with the real answers. Don't believe what all the scientists are telling you; we are going to look into it ourselves.
And you know what? In 1953, it was a different world. People trusted companies.
And the smokers, they trusted the tobacco companies when they told them, don't worry about it, we're going to do our own research.
And what happens in 1955, after they formed the TIRC, the Tobacco Industry Researc Committee, which was what was on the bottom there, 1953? Then they form, in 1958, the Tobacco Institute and the Council for Tobacco Research, the CTR. You'll hear a lot about that, and you'll see a lot of documents.
But in 1955, Dr. DuPuis -- Slide 32 -- of the TIRC -Can you play it?
This is what he tells everybody.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: I am Dr. Robert N. DuPuis, chairman of the Industry Technical Group of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee.
Our primary objective is to analyze all of the components of smoke. So far we've found none that give us any cause for concern. If we do find any that we consider harmful -- and so far we have not -- we'll remove these from smoke.
MR. HAMMER: Really? So, he goes on this news show in 1955, in the heat of all this scientific research that's out there and says, folks, don't worry about it, we care about our customers; and if we find anything bad, we'll remove it. Don't worry about it; trust us.
Because we're good. We look out for your health.
Really? And they continue those same lies to the American public and to Johnnie Calloway -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: -- right through his death in 1992, and then for another seven years after, because it's not until 2000 that they admit that smoking causes cancer or that it's addictive. That's incredible.
2000 is when they finally come out and admit it. You think they did that voluntarily?
Of course not. It's because of lawsuits like this that they did those things.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: The jury is to disregard the last comments of counsel.
MR. HAMMER: They talked about, in their opening statement, about control. But who has -- who really has control? It's pretty clear the tobacco companies have control.
Slide 49, please.
They control how the cigarette is manufactured, they control price, they control the marketing and advertising, they control how much nicotine goes into their product. They control the nicotine to keep their smokers
addicted.
And how do we know that? Clip 02, please. Dr. Cummings told us that. Here's his testimony.
(Thereupon, an excerpt of the videotaped deposition of Dr. Cummings was played as follows:)
Q. In your opinion, Dr. Cummings, is there anything about the way cigarettes are engineered tf affects whether a person -- or affects a person's ability to quit or stop smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. What is it about the way cigarettes are engineered, Doctor?
A. They're engineered to deliver nicotine to the smoker at levels that help induce and maintain a person's dependence on nicotine. So, speed up delivery to the brain, delivered in sufficient dose, delivering the dose in a way that is acceptable to the consumer.
Q. Has the tobacco industry always admitted that -- what you believe, that cigarettes are addictive?
A. No.
MR. HAMMER: And you know what? They pu
things in the cigarettes like ammonia to increase the conversion of nicotine. To cause like a -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor. THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: The Surgeon General report, which is in evidence, supports that. So, in 1964, that first Surgeon General report comes out, and it publishes again -Remember President Kennedy designated the Surgeon General to look into smoking and health because he was concerned about the health of the nation? '64 Surgeon General report comes out; and the next day, Howard Cullman, TI, tobacco industry chairman, appears on a show to talk about the Surgeon General's report.
Please.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: This is a CBS News Extra on Smoking and Health, the findings of the Surgeon General's committee.
In our studio this afternoon, following the Surgeon General's news conference, CBS Nev
Correspondent Richard C. Hottelet put some questions to one of the leading spokesmen for the jury, Howard Cullman, president of the Tobacco Merchants Association and a long-time director of the Philip Morris company.
Mr. Cullman, prominent in the New York theater and civic affairs, is a third-generation member of a tobacco family.
VOICE: I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon Generals, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed. But at this point, we do not know.
MR. HAMMER: That's what they say in 1964. So, they said it in 1955; they say it again in 1964. And guess what? In 1972 -1971, excuse me, when they can no longer advertise on TV, there was a ban. Guess what happens? Another Cullman goes on TV and says what? Chairman of the TI, the Tobacco Institute.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's
ability as follows:)
VOICE: Because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
MR. HAMMER: Eliminate. That's what they're telling the smokers. They're giving an addicted smoker, a dependent smoker, a psychological crutch to keep on smoking.
That's the goal. That's why they're doing it.
And in 1972, they did it again in the Wall Street Journal.
Slide 105.
If our product is harmful, we'll stop making it.
Really? Have they done that? Well, it's certainly harmful; we know that. Have they done that? Have they lived up to their promise, the promise they made back in 1954 in the Frank Statement?
What they've told the American public, what they told Johnnie Calloway all those years, have they lived up to that promise?
That we'll take out the bad stuff, we'll stop
making it? That was in 1972. 1972. Twenty years before Johnnie Calloway died.
Listen, addicted smokers, don't worry about it; you have nothing to fear from our product. If we find anything bad, we'll stop making our product, because we care. We're a corporation, we're a company, that cares about your health.
That's what they're telling their smokers. That's what they're telling their customers. You shouldn't be -- you shouldn't stand for that.
Why would they say these things? Because they knew people listened. They knew their smokers needed to hear that so they would keep on smoking. And guess what? It worked.
You know, they've also got their expert witnesses that they presented with regard to their addiction case, with regard to their medical case.
What did we learn from their experts? We learned from Dr. Abramson -- Slide T4 -- that they meet with their experts with a script, with the -- with the questions they're going to ask and the answers they want their witnesses
to give.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. That's not what the document says.
THE COURT: Thank you. This is argument, Counsel. Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: Well, we looked at a script with the lawyers, their anticipated questions and the answers that they anticipated you would give. I don't know; looks to me like that's what it says. But I guess, you know, words -you know, you could play with words any way yo want. And that's what they've been doing for 50 years.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: What else did they tell you? Dr. MacIntyre -- Slide T111 -- he met with them and they go over the questions and he would give them an answer like A, B or C, and he would say: Well, which one sounds better? Which one do you want me to give?
Really?
Is that how an expert should come in and testify? Tell me what you want me to say and I'll say it. Just pull my string. That's what
they bring to you?
And guess what, folks? If they did that, if they did that with Abramson, if they did that with MacIntyre, you can sure bet they did it with the other two experts.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. GALLAGHER: Move to strike.
THE COURT: The jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. HAMMER: And you watched each of th get up here with their notebooks, with their script, and follow it along.
And the doctors that were up there, they basically knew the questions that were going to be asked and they knew the answers and they answered -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: What's the objection, Counsel?
MS. GALLAGHER: It's outside the record.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MS. GALLAGHER: Argumentative.
THE COURT: Overruled. This is argument. Thank you.
MR. HAMMER: And they sat up here in the witness stand and they answered their questions directly, no hesitation.
And what happened when we got to ask questions and we went off script? What happened? You saw what happened. They gave these explanations: Well, that's not really what happened; and what do you mean by that term; and I don't really understand your question.
How evasive is that?
And the Judge is going to tell you -it's in your packet -- opinion testimony from people referred to as experts, you may accept such opinion testimony, reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves considering the knowledge, the skill, the experience, the training, the education of the witness, the reasons given by the witness of the opinion.
Well, guess what, folks? You have the power to accept a witness' testimony, or you can take their testimony and say, you know what? I don't buy it; it just doesn't make sense. I don't like the way you answered the questions, I don't like the way you were
evasive, I don't like the way you hemmed and hawed, I don't like the way you responded, I don't like the fact that you answer questions by way of a script that they tell you how to answer. I don't like the fact that they tell you A, B or C, pick the best one. You can throw their testimony away. That's the power you have.
Now, I want to go through real quick about their experts. I mean, they talk about Dr. Philips, the cardiologist; Dr. Nieder, the urologic oncologist. They make reference to this diabetes, and they make reference to this concrete, without any evidence supporting it whatsoever. No evidence whatsoever.
They say, well, he had a family history. Well, guess what, folks? He had no family history of bladder cancer. No, none, no family history of bladder cancer.
And this man had mild, borderline diabetes; and they want to come in and try to convince you and say diabetes is what causec this man's heart disease and bladder cancer? Come on. You know better than that.
They want to come in here and say that
concrete exposure caused his bladder cancer? Don't accept that. It's just not credible.
They want to come in here and challenge the doctors that treated him, every day that he was in the hospital, and say that they were wrong.
They want to come in here and challenge the doctor that filled out this death certificate, the man that met with Mr. Calloway at the hospital, the last man to see him alive, the man that touched him, that felt him, who said there was no evidence of C. diff, nothing.
I examined him; nothing to support that finding. This man died from bladder cancer. That's why I wrote it.
And you know what, folks? He told you:
I had all the medical records at my disposal. Unlike the defense experts, he knew what was going on with this man. He knew why this man was in the hospital. He knew why this man died. He died from bladder cancer, complications of his bladder cancer.
He was given chemotherapy. And everybody has the -- has the knowledge that chemotherapy it's a poison, it's a toxin, it's used to fight
the cancer. And it's crippling.
And the doctors told you, the seven- to ten-day period is the most important because that's when you're most susceptible to disease.
And what happened to Johnnie? He got infection. You're most susceptible to the infection in that seven-day period, and he got an infection and he died.
He died from his bladder cancer. He died because his heart was weakened from his heart attack before. He died because bladder cancer killed him, resulted in his death.
The chemotherapy weakened him, his heart couldn't take it, and he went into septic shock. That's what happened to this man. It was a horrible death, but that's what happened.
And you know what? When -- they sat around -- Slide 62 -- at Johnnie's funeral -you know the family members, somebody asked a family reunion -- somebody asked, you know, what happened to Johnnie, why did he die at 59 years old? That's awful young.
You know what they all said? Well, my dad, my uncle, my husband, he smoked all his life; he was addicted, couldn't kick that
nicotine demon. And he got a heart attack from smoking. He got bladder cancer from smoking. And that's what killed him.
It's common sense. The verdict form, folks, when you take it back there -- based on the evidence we presented, have we presented to you evidence sufficient enough to tip the scales by a greater weight of the evidence, more likely than not?
Was Johnnie Calloway addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his heart disease? Of course. It's common sense. You should check off "yes."
Next question: Was he addicted to cigarettes; and, if so, was it a legal cause of his bladder cancer? Come on, of course. You should check off "yes."
And then when you do that, go on to the next page, and there's a question about the cause of death. And did heart disease contribute to his cause of death? Was his heart weakened because of that heart attack he sustained in September of 1991, just eight months before he was hospitalized for his
bladder cancer? Of course it did.
He had a weakened heart, couldn't stand the infection that ravaged his body as a result of the chemotherapy. Of course it contributed in some way. So, you should check off "yes."
And did he die from bladder cancer? That should be a no-brainer. His death certificate says it, all the doctors say it, his family knew it, we all know it. This man died from bladder cancer, and he died because of all those cigarettes. Check off "yes" and let's go on to Phase II. You know -THE COURT: You have ten minutes, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: I'm going to get to address you again. Keep in mind what I said; keep in mind the fact that this question is a threshold question: Was Johnnie a class member? Of course he was. Don't let them exclude him. That wouldn't be fair, that wouldn't be justice, that wouldn't be right. And that's all Marvine has been looking for, for 20 years, now. This is her day in court. Put Johnnie where he, unfortunately, belongs: In the class.
Thank you.



MR. SCHLESINGER: Thank you, Judge.
Hi, folks. I haven't sot to talk to you
this whole time, and I'm just busting to do it.
So the hour is late. The defense lawyers hate rebuttal because they don't get to talk back again, and they always say the plaintiff's lawyer is going to start hollering and waving his arms around. The plaintiff’s lawyers think sometimes rebuttal is good, because we get last licks. And everybody likes that; one last shot. But sometimes, after five, six hours of it, you guys are like, Enough already.
So here is what I figure: I haven't gotten to talk to you this whole time. I'm at the sidebar, I'm jumping around like a Mexican jumping bean over there. Give me 30, 45 minutes, and I won't bother you again.
Can we do that?
All right. First thing, one of the instructions that His Honor is going to read you says: If you find that cigarettes were a legal cause of Mr. Calloway's heart disease and/or bladder cancer, then defendants are also responsible for any injury or his death caused by medical care or treatment reasonably obtained by Mr. Calloway.
So, the issue with regard to the
treatment of C. diff -- and Dr. Hernandez, who was a treating physician, testified to you that he had pus in his urine, 3 plus plus plus pus.
And that's a urinary tract infection by any measure, a clinical urinary tract infection.
Antibiotics sterilize the urine, and you won't see it on a culture, any more than, as Dr. Soloway said, you won't see an infection in a blocked ureter when the man's entire bladder is so corroded that it's blocked his ureter and no urine has come down from one kidney. So that's why you'll get sterilized urine from the other side, the other kidney, where the urine is flowing.
But the fact of the matter is, if you think anything having to do with the medical care is what caused or contributed to cause this man's death by the treatment and complications of bladder cancer, then legally they are responsible for giving him the bladder cancer from the years and years of smoking.
And there is no other cause of this gentleman's bladder cancer besides smoking. No matter how you want to cut it, no matter how
you want to spin it Dr Nieder -- and I want
to talk to you about credibility. I don't want to talk to you about disregarding the treating physicians.
Every treating physician came into this courtroom and testified to you with specificity about the man's illness was caused by smoking. These were treating doctors, like eyewitnesses on a street corner who see an accident and report to the police officer who had the red light.
Don't discount the significance of the treating physicians, because the believability of witness instruction talks about credibility.
Who is more credible; the men and women in our community who seek to help a man find out what's wrong with him when he takes a one-two punch from cigarette smoking after a lifetime of it?
He gets hit in the chest with a massive heart attack. He's filleted open and bypassed because he smoked millions of hits of nicotine to his brain and the poison and toxic substances that go with it. The man takes a major hit. He's got scars in his heart.
Myocardial infarction means death of heart
muscle. You can't spin it some other way.
The man comes in and takes that kind of hit. He's in the hospital for 35 days. This is one of the most substantial things that ever happened to this man medically in his life.
And the physicians that treat him are credible. They have no bias, they charge no money.
What did Hernandez say? He charged $250 for his time to meet with the lawyers before his deposition. Dr. Lipton didn't talk about charging any money for this. Dr. Greenberg didn't talk about charging any money for this. They were just the guys that took care of him.
If they didn't know what they were doing, what business did they have treating him for bladder cancer?
The poor man has a heart attack, major heart attack, takes a huge hit. That scintillation study in the second hospitalization, when he was there for bladder cancer, showed the scarring on the heart.
Dr. Phillips mentioned it.
The man goes in and is in extraordinary flank pain, and he's suffering from some unknown disease process with intermittent
hematuria just six months -- nine months after he's been debilitated to the point where he never goes back to work because of a massive heart attack with open heart surgery. And now he comes in and his -- his bladder is corroded.
His ureter is blocked. He's in excruciating flank pain, and he is he in that hospital for 35 days. 70 days of hospitalization from smoking-related diseases.
The overwhelming cause of heart disease in this country is smoking. 140,000 people a year die from smoking-related heart disease. 450,000 people a year die from smoking-related diseases. Tens of thousands of people die every year from bladder cancer from smoking -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, just rely on your own testimony.
Please, Counsel. Proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Nieder, very interesting talking about the comparison of witnesses and credibility.
I want you to compare treating
physicians. We don't know them. They have no ax to grind. They have no interest in the outcome of the proceedings. Every one of the treating physicians came in and said: I was there at the time when we had complete records, a complete patient, access to the family and the history that we would take from their family. We would talk to the family. We would talk to Johnnie Calloway. We would find out what was going on. And then we tested him, and everything we determined was sufficient to conclude what happened to him.
And Dr. Lipton didn't just treat him at Broward General for his heart attack. He also treated him at Broward General for his bladder cancer. And Dr. Lipton is a Board-certified critical care medicine doctor. Do you know that the board certification in critical care is a subspecialty of the board certification of pulmonary medicine, and a huge part of critical care, taking care of the people in the ICU, is cardiac, cardiology. You are hooked up around the clock, 24/7 to cardiorespiratory monitoring.
And Dr Lipton was there the whole time
And he goes: Yeah, the guy smoked two packs a day for 40 years. He's addicted. That's clear. It's common sense.
His Honor is going to tell you, there is no definition of addiction. There is every bit as much credibility for Marvine and her family members and all the loved ones and Harry Calloway, who also said he was addicted. For you to take into consideration their analysis, their determination, the man they lived with, the father that raised them, that he was dependent on the nicotine in cigarettes. Their opinion is every bit as valuable as any doctor that came in to testify.
And they come in and they say to you:
Dr. DiFranza has an agenda to be against smoking. That's like saying a cop has an agenda against crime. If you come in and say, "I'm against the Boy Scouts," I can understand that problem. But a man like Dr. DiFranza is a hero. He should be credited for seeking to keep kids from getting addicted to nicotine and spending their life suffering the ill effects to the point where they become sick or die.
The same thing with Dr. Cummings. These
fellows are world-renowned. Millions and millions of government dollars and CDC dollars and National Institutes of Health and all of the government agencies that teach the public policy and public health to try to help us, to try to help Americans be healthier are these -are the life's work of these men.
Dr. DiFranza. So, I don't know if it's a "through the looking glass" kind of thing where things are topsy turvy and turned on their head, but these gentlemen are heros, and we're lucky to have them.
This is the Surgeon General's report.
This document is in evidence. Just like the medical records are prospective -- they exist before there's litigation, before there's a lawsuit. Doctors treating a patient who say...
Dr. Greenberg. Was his bladder cancer caused by smoking?
Yes, absolutely.
What did Dr. Greenberg say about the reason the man was having fevers at home?
Tumor sweats. Cytokines. That's a final common pathway of the inflammatory cascade that occurs when someone is having an inflammatory
process. When cancer is eating your body and eroding your bladder and eating into your prostate and eating into your muscles and metastasizing so that you get to the point where you have a fatal case of it.
You know what? At night, in addition to the blood and hematuria, sometimes you're going to have night sweats. And Dr. Greenberg is a cancer doctor.
Dr. McIntyre is not a cancer doctor. He said as much. And Dr. McIntyre said: Bladder cancer doesn't cause night sweats. They were twisting all over that. But the fact of the matter is, it's part of the inflammatory process. That cancer's eating his body. When it eats his body, it erodes and other infections are occurring.
And I want to show you something, because Ms. Gallagher said -- she said there is nothing in the record anywhere that talks about any doctor, the chief of the department of oncology, the man who tries to take care of people with cancer, he doesn't know what he's talking about. He doesn't know about cancer.
Dr. McIntyre, who doesn't even know what
MVAC is -- doesn't even know what it is -- he's going to tell you that the tumors and the effect on the body of cancer eating your body can't make night sweats?
Ms. Gallagher said it's nowhere in the record; it doesn't exist.
Pull up Bates 29, please.
Dr. Weiss, April 15th writes -- this is in the chart, in the evidence. We try to point out to you the key things that we see in the evidence, because that's a massive stack there and sometimes -- I've been a juror. I got picked on a jury. I got to sit back there, so I have had that experience. Sometimes you look at that stuff and it's daunting. Sometimes, depending how you all feel, you got to go back there and you've got to dig into it. Sometimes you don't.
It doesn't have to be complicated.
Ms. Gallagher says it's complicated, because she's got to torture what is on the face of the evidence. If a man dies, and Dr. Ramos comes in here and looks at you in the eye and says:
I know what the man died of. He died of the treatments and the complications of bladder
cancer, he has no ax to grind. He's making no money. He's not a professional expert witness.
Dr. McIntyre admitted to you 40 percent of his professional career is spent in a courtroom. Probably more than half the money he's ever made is made in a courtroom, being an expert.
Lawyers talk to witnesses, yeah, but there's different kinds of talking to witnesses.
Frank Calloway testified on the witness stand. Frank Calloway spoke with what some jurors recognize as the ring of truth. He does not give depositions by the hundreds or the dozens like Dr. Abramson and Dr. Phillips and Dr. McIntyre have done. Dr. McIntyre is making -- he'll admit to half a million dollars that he's earned in his lifetime as an expert witness. That's what he admits to.
It's like the man that admits to drinking a beer when he's pulled over very intoxicated because he has a six pack in his leg. You don't know he's isn't underplaying it. And we'll talk about that.
But the doctors that are the treating
doctors, the believability of witness instruction talks them as regular folks. The paid, hired experts that are given to very narrow opinions is a very different subject.
Let's look at Bates 29. Is it up there?
The patient does suffer from night sweats. This may be secondary to his tumors.
That's Dr. Weiss's note, April 15th,
1992, at the time in the record, no if's, and' or but's about it. Remember Ms. Gallagher said: There's no record of it. There it is.
Remember Ms. Gallagher said those night sweats from two months ago was from the mystery martian virus that he had in his system. It wasn't the fortune of money spent to diagnose to take care of his bladder cancer. It wasn't the tremendous lack of full recovery the man ever made from the huge heart attack he took, the one-two punch he took, and cigarettes were what caused it.
Dr. Nieder -- this is a fellow they came up with a month and a half ago -- made at least $30,000 in the case. What I thought was interesting was, talk about credibility of witnesses and why we talk about money in this
case. Because money is the root of all evil.
And people do things for money, and bias is exemplified by the expenditure and earning of money.
And these men come in here and they want to tell you about the accuracy and the precision with which they are able to testify and parse the record. But all of a sudden, they have amnesia about how much money they're making.
So when we bring it out to you, we just want you to think about it. We want you to think about what can bias a witness. What can influence a witness, what might impair the credibility of a witness.
So when Dr. Phillips admits on direct up to $40,000, and he tried to assign $4,000 of that to us, like we hired him, too. And we had to clarify that. $40,000, on cross we got $50,000.
Why didn't they get that on direct? Why not be precise? You know what people know about? Let me tell you what people know about. They know how much money they earn. People know how much money they earn.
So if the influence of money on the opinion could impair the credibility of the witness in particular, especially hired expert witness for a cigarette manufacturer, you all are entitled to consider that.
So why did Dr. Phillips not tell you the full amount that he earned? Why did Dr. Phillips not tell you that he earned at least $150,000, and perhaps as much as $200,000 doing work for tobacco companies? You all are entitled to consider that, too.
Dr. Nieder, on his direct exam -- these are the questions they asked them. They started with the money. Hey, did you get some money? Yeah, $12,000, $13,000. On cross-examination, $30,000. And we know he's got four other cases, and he said he's been paid about $10,000 on those four other cases.
But, a lot of times the bills are not fully paid.
Now, is that to try to diminish the impact of the money on this jury, and they'll get them paid when the case is over? Anything is possible. But you deserve to know about it, and you deserve to think about the influence
money has on these witnesses' testimony.
Similarly, Dr. Abramson. $13,500 on direct, $45,000 on cross. More than triple the amount of money that he had to admit to when we went into cross. So we know he has multiple other cases, all for the defense, in tobacco.
And then on at least one of them, we proved that he earned $40,000 on that case.
So $40,000 a case on average, and we know he's got multiple cases. He's also into the six figures, which is a multiple of how much money he gets for treating patients on the couch. He gets paid a lot more by the tobacco companies per hour than he earns. He's not replacing his earnings; he's supplementing his earnings.
Same thing with Dr. McIntyre. $12,000 went to $20,000 to $25,000 from direct to cross. That's not a candid, complete recitation of how much money is involved with these witnesses or what the influence of the money might be on them. So that's why we bring it up.
This is the Surgeon General's report.
The real expert witnesses in this case,
besides -- were Dr. Cummings and Dr. DiFranza. Dr. Cummings spoke extensively about the public health controversy supported and engendered for years and years by the tobacco companies.
If -- why didn't they say what they knew and what they admitted? Why did they continue to say there's no proof that cancer is caused by smoking?
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MS. GALLAGHER: Phase II.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In 1994, why did the seven CEOs, two years after this man was dead and buried in the ground, why did the seven CEOs of the major manufacturers -- there's four now, because they all bought each other out -why did the seven CEOs raise their hand and say nicotine is not addictive? The -MR. REID: Objection. That misstates what the evidence was in the videotape.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you're to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Take a second to play the tape. Take one thing from me at face value. I will not intentionally misstate the record or the evidence to you. If your collective memory diverges from what I'm saying, you rely on your collective memory and disregard something I say. Just take from me at face value. I will not intentionally misrepresent the evidence.
MR. PEDROSA: Objection, vouching.
(Video clip played as follows:)
VOICE: I would like you to rise and those who will be testifying as well, with you to rise. Would you raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
VOICES: I do.
VOICE: Please consider yourself to be under oath.
VOICE: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first, and I want to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive.
I heard virtually all of you touch on it.
Just yes or no. Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
VOICE: Mr. Johnston?
VOICE: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no -VOICE: We'll take that as a no. Again, time is short. I believe each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We would like to have this for the record.
VOICE: I do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MR. REID: Your Honor, I'll move to
strike as argument as to R J Reynolds The --
VOICE: -- you said, quote, to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. This is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus, not by some, but by all of the scientific community.
Will you ever be convinced? And what evidence are you waiting for? And let's have the microphone passed over.
VOICE: Yes, I may be convinced. We don't know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. REID: Your Honor, I move to strike counsel's argument with regard to Mr. Johnson and R.J. Reynolds.
MR. GDANSKI: Objection, speaking objection.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Over 90 -- 85 to 90 percent of all long-term smokers are dependent upon nicotine. The nicotine is the drug. The
nicotine is the drug in this.
This here, all of this, these are drugs.
It's the hardest thing in the world to get your mind around because we're so inured to it. We spent our lifetime with these in front of us.
This is RJR, Lorillard, Philip Morris, Liggett.
All this is drugs. This is a daily dose of nicotine.
Now, as Dr. DiFranza told you, because it's so expensive, most people can only afford half a pack a day, but they're still addicted.
They're still dependent upon the nicotine. And as Dr. Cummings said, they control the amount of nicotine with specificity so that it maintains and sustains smoking and -MR. REID: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- the addictive effects of smoking.
MR. REID: This relates to Phase II, your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled. Excuse me.
I overruled the objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Cummings testified to that in this case.
Nicotine addiction is the fundamental
reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. Nicotine is the key chemical compound that causes and sustains the powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products.
The prevalence of individuals diagnosed as nicotine dependent is higher than for any other substance abuse disorder. Heroin gets you higher. That's more intoxicating. Cocaine gets you higher. That's more intoxication. Heroin has more severe withdrawal effects. However, nothing is more addictive than nicotine.
Nicotine is more addictive than heroin and cocaine. And addiction is not withdrawal and addiction is not intoxication. It's the effect of intoxication and the withdrawal that keeps the nicotine dependent sufferer in the slot, in between the increased concentration.
The high, not so high that you can't get through your normal day and do your work, and withdrawal every five or ten minutes, where you start to feel the cravings.
And as Dr. DiFranza said -- and this is super important because many of us have never
smoked. And Starr never smoked, because her dad didn't die in a peaceful way. And at her most vulnerable, because we know from the DSM that Dr. Abramson talked about, 95 percent of all smokers start as teens. If you don't hook them when they're teens, you never hook them.
While it may be a legal product, it isn't legal for teens, and yet 95 percent of the replacement customers come from children.
And -MR. REID: Your Honor, I object. May reproach?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. REID: Your Honor, this clearly violates the in limine ruling about youth marketing. This is -THE COURT: Excuse me. Mr. Schlesinger?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Must be trouble, if I'm here.
THE COURT: No. You're the one doing the talking.
MR. REID: This clearly violates the in limine order on youth marketing. He's talking about generically -- children being addicted
generically.
Not talking about Mr. Calloway. He's talking about generically. It's highly prejudicial. It's a clear violation of the court's in limine ruling on the question of youth marketing, and I move for mistrial.
MR. PEDROSA: He's talking about "replacement smokers," so he's clearly talking about today.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, this has nothing to do with youth marketing, number one. Number two, all the statistics that were talked about by Dr. DiFranza were based on his treatment of youth.
All the Surgeon General's reports addressed youth smoking. All the studies supported youth smoking. And so what Mr. Schlesinger's citing, the -MR. SCHLESINGER: It's in evidence.
THE COURT: Excuse me. I can only hear one at a time.
Yes, Mr. Schlesinger? You're the one talking, sir.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's the pamphlet in evidence, Judge.
THE COURT: Thank you. Let's do this. How much do you have on this?
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm moving right off
it.
THE COURT: You're going so fast. I keep looking at the court reporter and she keeps straining her eyes, so slow down.
MR. SCHLESINGER: All right. Yes, sir.
MR. REID: We move to strike his argument about replacement smokers and about 95 percent of people who are youth who smoke. It's a clear violation of your pretrial ruling, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you. It's coming out things that are right now in evidence. So your objection is noted. It's overruled. There's no manifest necessity for mistrial. It's denied.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: Counsel, you may -MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court, of those smokers who try to quit, less than 5 percent are successful. The nicotine pharmacokinetics associated with cigarette
smoking leads to a high potential for addiction. Withdrawal symptoms impair a nicotine-dependent smoker's ability to remain abstinent from smoking.
Starr never smoked because of what she saw happen to her dad at her most vulnerable point to become a smoker. Teenagers are who become smokers, 15 to 16, but she had to see something extremely violent and not peaceful to see her poor dad collapse on the floor. That was the indelible imprint that overcame any of the other temptations that might have set her down the path.
But you know what? It must have the ring of truth, because Starr must have associated what happened to her dad with smoking.
In other words, she went through a loss with her dad, but if she didn't associate it with and if in the family understanding of things it wasn't associated with smoking, it wouldn't have taught the lesson that it taught to her. That's the ring of truth.
Why didn't Starr smoke? She knew what happened to her dad because of smoking. It's been true to 20 years.
The central element among all forms of drug addiction is that the user's behavior is largely controlled by a psychoactive substance. Some smokers may not believe the tobacco is addicting because of a reluctance to admit that one's behavior is largely controlled by a drug.
I looked at them last night. I stopped at the 7-Eleven. I bought one of every one they had. The man thought I was out of my mind. He goes: What are you going to do with these?
I'm looking at them and go: These are drugs. Even when I say it to you, it's hard for me to believe. I used to think smokers are -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Nobody -MR. REID: Your Honor, may I object, please?
I object to counsel's opinions about what he used to think.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Counsel, this is argument.
Proceed.
MR SCHLESINGER You think of a smoker
as he's weak, he doesn't care about himself, he's not trying hard enough. And it's stinking up the room and I want to get away from it. Now I just feel sorry for him.
MR. REID: Your Honor, I object as to who counsel feels sorry for. That's not relevant to this case.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard. Sympathy is not to be involved in your decision.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Sorry.
Most smokers admit they would like to quit, but have been unable to do so.
Cigarettes are addicting in the same sense as are such drugs as heroin and cocaine. Nicotine is a powerful pharmacological agent that acts in the brain and throughout the body. The physical characteristics of nicotine delivery systems can affect their toxicity and addictiveness.
Cigarette smoking is not a behavior that simply occurs at the will of those who smoke. Cigarette smoking is not a behavior that simply
occurs at the will of those who smoke.
The instruction is going to be a cause.
Was the nicotine in those cigarettes that he smoked all those years a cause, even if it acted in combination with other causes?
It's not either/or. It isn't, I'm addicted to nicotine or I had inadequate willpower. It isn't, I'm addicted to -- I'm dependent on nicotine or I wasn't motivated enough. Or I didn't try hard enough. It's not either/or.
Those things can act in combination and together. There is compelling evidence that nicotine is a drug that can effectively control behavior, including behavior leading to its own ingestion. Let me read that again.
There is compelling evidence that nicotine is a drug that can effectively control behavior, including behavior leading to its own ingestion.
The central and common element among all forms of drug dependence is that a psychoactive drug has come to control behavior to an extent that is considered detrimental to an individual or society. The term "drue dependence" refers
to a situation in which the individual is no longer to an -- entirely free to use or not use the substance.
Increased rates of deposition in the respiratory tract lead to increased rates of nicotine delivery to the brain, which intensify the addictive properties of the drug. The faster the delivery rate of absorption and attainment of high concentrations of nicotine, the greater is the potential for addiction.
The amount and speed of nicotine delivery also plays a critical role in the potential for abuse of tobacco products.
Tobacco products can contain constituents such as ammonia which increase the conversion of nicotine to the non-ionized or free base state. Nothing speeds a hit of nicotine, millions of hits of nicotine, to Johnnie Calloway's brain for a lifetime like the highly engineered cigarette designed to sustain its smokers to be dependent upon that nicotine, hooked to the very end.
Frank Calloway testified: You have been aware of the risks of smoking from that, at least, correct?
ANSWER: And this was one of the answers I thought we got from Frank, and I remembered it and I marked it and I wanted it repeated again to you, because in the crucible of a courtroom, where there's pressure and there's witnesses with various degrees of experience, some folks that do a lot of testifying and some folks that haven't done any testifying. You get a man on the witness stand and you look at him, and you know, note-taking, some of the business about observing the demeanor of a witness sometimes gets lost. And we lawyers watch you guys taking notes like reading the tea leaves. We don't know what that means.
But sometimes you look the guy in the eye, and you see what they're saying and what they're doing. And I was watching Frank. And when they asked him, did you know there was some illness problems from cigarettes? Did you learn about that in the '60s and '70s?
Don't forget, Harry Calloway goes back to 1968, 40 years ago, to talking about his dad.
Could have been. It was confusing.
There was a lot of confusion there because there was one thing being said in one paper,
and then ads were saying something different in other medias. The man -- I thought it had the ring of truth. There was confusion. Yeah, we heard there was illnesses.
But don't let presentism, the idea of what we know today -- everybody knows today cigarettes are bad for you. Everybody knows. It's not a secret anymore.
But up until the year 2000, it was steadfastly denied by the tobacco companies, who said that the American Cancer Society was half-baked, and that the American Lung Association or the Surgeon General was trying to hoodwink the American public. That wasn't true. They were not speaking forthrightly.
They were not telling what they knew to be true.
MR. PEDROSA: Objection.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Jack Abramson.
Jack Abramson comes in here, and I think he is what we would call -MR. PEDROSA: Objection to the slide that's up, Judge.
THE COURT: I'm sorry?
MR. PEDROSA: Objection to the slide that's up, Judge.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Jack Abramson comes up here and he was hired to be an addiction expert, and here is what is interesting. Here is what I want you to think about that's important, a taint, a possible contamination of the independence, the veracity, the believability of Dr. Abramson.
He was strangely approached in the early to mid '90s, 1995 at the latest, by tobacco lawyers who wanted to have some consultation with him. And they started stocking his library and giving him articles and interacting with him. Because, when tobacco approaches a witness in the medical community, they don't know if they're going to be rebuffed. So they have to develop -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. This is counsel's speculation. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Counsel, five minutes?
Objection sustained. Move on.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The evidence shows in 1995, when Jake Abramson was approached in a strange way by the attorneys for tobacco, he was not a specialist in addiction medicine. He did not have a Board certification in addiction medicine. He had not taken that test.
That's the one test -- he took a test, passed the test, and he got a credential in addiction psychiatry. That's it. But that was after he was already being consulted with and paid by tobacco attorneys. That was afterwards.
But sometimes the truth slips out. When Mr. Gdanski was cross-examining Jack Abramson about the meaning of drug dependence under the definition of NIDA, the National Institutes of Drug Addiction, a governmental department of the National Institutes of Health, he walked up to Abramson and gave him the definition. And remember, Dr. Abramson read from it, and he said, My question now to you: Under that definition of the National Institute of Drug Abuse definition, Johnnie Calloway would be addicted. Do we agree on that, right?
ANSWER: There are a variety of issues in
this definition. I believe Mr. Calloway meets some of them. I don't necessarily believe he meets others. His use was chronic. His use did engender harmful consequences.
"Engender" means -- nowadays you just click on a word in your computer and it gives you a dictionary definition -- cause. Cause or give rise to.
So, Dr. Abramson was on here to talk about dependence, but the truth popped out of his mouth accidentally for a second. And, in fact, when asked whether he got an illness caused by smoking, he said: His use was chronic, and it did engender harmful consequences.
So Dr. Abramson gets a yes. Dr. Abramson had no qualifications in addiction and no qualifications in nicotine or drugs like the drug of nicotine or cigarettes at all. Neither did Dr. Phillips, neither did Dr. McIntyre.
And the one doctor they got just the month before the trial started was Dr. Nieder, and he had to be very tight in the lane, because he said 51 percent of bladder cancers are related to smoking 51 percent is more likely than
not. That's probably related to smoking.
And Dr. Nieder also acknowledged that but for his bladder cancer, he would not have died on the date that he died. He acknowledged that.
So that means that bladder cancer contributed and played a role in his death.
But for bladder cancer he would not have died. We are using the words and language Miss Gallagher said was so important to use. But for bladder cancer, the man doesn't die on June 17, 1992.
And what happened on June 15th and June 17th, 1992? He hit the nadir, N-A-D-I-R, the low point. Nadir just means low point.
Doctors use it for the seven to ten days after chemo where we are wiped out. And anybody who's had the misfortune to follow along with a family friend or loved one -MR. REID: Objection -MR. SCHLESINGER: -- and observed the impact -MR. REID: That's the golden rule argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Seven to ten days after a person gets chemo, which this man got on June 8th. He got a heavy four-day dose of MVAC chemo. That MVAC chemo, seven to ten days later, knocked him out, wiped him out, put him back into the hospital at Florida Medical Center, where two days later he was dead.
Because he had reached the nadir. The timing is perfect. It's what makes perfect sense in this case. Now there is -THE COURT: Counsel, you need to wrap it
up.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay. Many individuals who use nicotine take nicotine to relieve or to avoid withdrawal symptoms when they wake up in the morning, or after being in a situation where use is restricted, like being at work or on an airplane.
Just like Frank and others said. As soon as Johnnie got out of church, he lit up.
That's exactly -- that's exactly an example of you are holding back, you are holding back.
The minute you get out, right in front of the church, even though you're not supposed to, you light up aaain.
I want to do one thing with Dr. McIntyre. Here. He testified about a distinctive odor of diarrhea. He started out that testimony by saying how nurses sometimes recognize C. diff in a hospital because the C. diff has a very distinctive odor, and then he testified when asked, Did anybody describe the smell of Mr. Calloway's diarrhea during that time?
Now let's all agree that diarrhea -- and if a man can't control his bowels because he's so sick and he can't make it to the bathroom, diarrhea smells. Let's accept that generally.
But they went on and tried to make a medical diagnosis because of the smell of diarrhea. And they characterize it -- what they said: Did anyone describe the smell of Mr. Calloway's diarrhea during that time?
The answer was -- this is from Dr. MacIntyre. Yes, it is described by one of the witnesses as being a very distinctive odor and very permeating. A very distinctive odor.
Later when, Mr. Johnstone did his cross-examination, he said: I want to see -MR. HAMMER: It's up.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He said: I want to see
if I heard you right. I want to be fair and make sure I heard you right. Did you say or did you try to suggest to this jury that some family member testified as to the smell of the diarrhea being distinctive and therefore must be related to C. difficile?
ANSWER: No, I did not.
You did not do that?
No, I did not.
Yes, he did. Yes, he did.
But just like he denied the day before that he'd read Ramos, the next day he said: I have to correct my answer. I did read Ramos, the man who diagnosed the cause of death, who was there. Which -- we put that up? That is an out-and-out untruth by Dr. MacIntyre. But he's a courtroom expert.
The advertisements. We didn't get to do a lot of them. There are an awful lot of them. Do they provide a health reassurance? You saw some of the ads. They will be in evidence.
This is a drug. That's all it is. And when they say "Alive With Pleasure," it doesn't really -- the fine point to put on it is:
Johnnie Calloway is smoking Newports, "Alive
With Pleasure," and he's dead and buried in the ground now for 20 years from heart disease and bladder cancer.
The family is not asking that you award them any money in this phase of the trial; they're just asking you to recognize his proper place in the class.
If he doesn't belong in the class, if their defense that folks have a choice to quit, then there isn't any person, ever, that could ever belong in the class. That defense, that argument that it's your choice, they didn't talk much about admitting the nicotine dependence. If it's your choice, then there isn't anybody -- none of the so many folks that could ever be in the class. That defense would exclude everybody. And there's an old Chinese proverb: One cat at the hole can hold off 500 mice.
If they can knock those class members out one by one, nobody would ever be in the class.
MR. REID: Your Honor, I object. This is improper argument.
tHe COURT: Thank you. Sustained.
Counsel, you need to wrap it up.
MR. SCHLESINGER: This entire document is in evidence. This is the 2010 Surgeon General.
It's one of the most latest statements of this whole thing. It has all the different measures of nicotine dependence, every one of them that Johnnie Calloway absolutely meets the criteria of, from the Fagerstrom to the Heaviness of Smoking Index. It's right here on page 109.
There is a whole chapter here to page 181 on nicotine dependence. The "Hooked On Nicotine" checklist by Dr. DiFranza is recognized in the Surgeon General as one of the measures of nicotine dependence.
The Cigarette Dependence Scale, the Wisconsin Inventory of Cigarette Dependence, the Nicotine Dependence Scale -- the NDSS -they are all in here. Chock full of the highest doctor in the land's statement to us on behalf of our public health of what we ought to be doing to try to tamp down this epidemic, this scourge of death of folks that died from it.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: That's the golden rule. I
move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard.
Counsel, can I see you sidebar, please?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: Mr. Schlesinger, respectfully, I want you to wrap it up, okay? Because I don't want you going on to new topics.
MR. REID: Excuse me. I need to move for a mistrial. Twice you sustained an objection that he violated the golden rule, the most recent one being the most outrageous, saying that this jury should stamp out smoking or stamp out something. You sustained the objection. The only way I can preserve the error is to move for mistrial. And the two things together warrant a mistrial in this argument.
THE COURT: Thank you. Your objection is noted. I've ruled on it. Regarding the motion for mistrial, it's denied. There's no manifest necessity.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. SCHLESINGER: Also in the Surgeon General smoking appears to have a multiplicative interaction with other major risk factors for coronary heart disease including diabetes mellitus. For instance, if the presence of smoking alone doubles the risk the simultaneous presence of another major risk factor is estimated to quadruple the risk. Two times two.
The presence of two other risk factors with smoking, approximately eight times the risk; two times two times two, of persons with no risk factors. It isn't either/or.
These risk factors can keep on top of each other. If Johnnie's family had a history of heart disease, some of those folks got it from smoking, but some of them got it from -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor, objection.
THE COURT: Counsel.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Excuse me. Counsel, wrap it up. All right? You're over your time limit.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay. The final point. I started talking about not -- no one in this
room is a smoker. We live in the present circumstances, we know a lot about smoking that we didn't know before.
But Dr. DiFranza told us, and this is a very important thing to be thinking about. But if you've never been a smoker, what Dr. DiFranza said was it's extraordinarily hard to understand just how difficult it is to quit if you're a smoker, and just how powerful that nicotine addiction is if you've never experienced it.
And just like Johnnie Calloway's brother Frank, the closest living analog to Johnnie that is alive today, told you that for ten years after he finally put those cigarettes down, he didn't know every single day thereafter for ten years that he wouldn't pick them up again.
So, when Dr. DiFranza, who has dedicated his life to this issue, nicotine dependence, said, if you've never been a smoker, it's super hard to understand how terribly difficult it can be to put those cigarettes down. That's the kind of important expert testimony to consider.
Folks, thanks a lot. I'm really glad I got an opportunity to talk to ya. I'm sorry it's so late in the game. It's over and above, beyond the call of duty to take the time to pay attention. I know you did, and I wish you good luck in coming to a just verdict. Thank you.
