MR. REID: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court. Good afternoon.
The very first thing I want to say to you folks is just to thank you, on behalf of all the parties. You've been diligent. You've been here every day on time. We've made you wait sometimes. We apologize for that, but we've done the best we can. Lawyers typically don't get to be on juries, so I've never been on a jury.
But I'm told by people who are on juries that it's remarkable when you go back into the room; one person will remember a certain thing and another person something else, and by the time all six of you will have remembered everything. That's why the system works.
And that's what -- and we understand it's a real inconvenience for you to come down here and spend all this time to resolve this dispute. That's why I asked you during voir dire if you minded. You said you didn't, and your actions certainly support that.
I want to talk to you today -- I'm going to talk about part of the case, the same as I did in opening, about the addiction questions, and Ms. Gallagher is going to talk to you after that about the medical questions. You'll see how they come together on the verdict form, as you've seen to some extent.
Now there have been a lot of disagreements in this case, you've noticed, between the two sides. But there's one thing that you heard from Mr. Hammer in his opening statement right out of the box when he said that you would hear me use the word "choice" a lot, and he was absolutely right. Choice. Because that's what this case is about.
Now that's not something that I made up for this case. That's not something the tobacco industry made up for this case. That's something that is inherent in the discussion of the use of this product, of this legal product, choice. Now could I see slide number 1, please?
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, we object to this. May we approach?
THE COURT: What is the objection? On
the slide?
MR. GDANSKI: It's not in evidence.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. GDANSKI: The 1982 Surgeon General's report is not in evidence. And I'm no sure this section is either; but to my recollection, the 1982 report is not in evidence.
MR. REID: It's not, but Dr. Cummings talked about all three, testified about these -THE COURT: Objection is noted.
Overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: In 1977, the Surgeon General referred to smoking as a personal choice health behavior. In 1982, in another Surgeon General's report, the Surgeon General referred to it again as a personal choice behavior, such as smoking; and then in 1986, the Surgeon General referred to it as -- by stating that the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
But that's not the only place you've heard it in this case. Can I see slide 2, please? Dr. Cummings agreed that an individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue smoking. He's the one that individually can determine whether they can change that behavior; in other words, choice.
But he's not the only one you heard it from. Can I see the next slide, please?
Dr. DiFranza. Do you agree that it was Mr. Calloway's decision to make up his mind whether or not he wanted to quit?
ANSWER: Yes.
So choice has been involved in this case because it has been involved in the whole subject of smoking and health back to -- the earliest reference was 1977 and beyond.
Now, the Court permitted a great deal of evidence. The Judge decides if evidence is relevant, and the Judge allowed a great deal of evidence about choice, about Mr. Calloway's smoking activity and what choices he made and when he made and choices he didn't make and so forth.
So when counsel says choice only comes up
as fault, that's not the evidence that you've heard. The evidence that you've heard, which was admitted by the Court, was about Mr. Calloway's choices to continue to smoke, and to never decide to quit smoking.
And that's important, because there's a real divide here. The plaintiffs claim that Mr. Calloway's choice were impaired; that nicotine so captured his brain that he was unable to choose to stop. We, on the other hand, say that Mr. Calloway made a choice to continue to smoke. And that's really for you to decide in this case, and I'm going to go through the evidence that you've heard which support the view that Mr. Calloway made that choice.
Now, first I want to talk about the burden of proof, and that's complicated. You saw -- I don't know; three, four, five slides with a lot of pretty dense language. You'll have it back there, you can look at it, but I want to say this: There seems to be an enormous rush by Mr. Hammer to get to Phase II in this case.
He told you this morning that the issues
of addiction and the medical issues were, in his words this morning, "no-brainers." Minor little issues. You just have to stamp the book and move them on like in a line at the airport. But we've had I think 18 days of testimony in this case, we've had 17 or 18 individual witnesses, we have all these documents over here.
And to suggest that Phase I is nothing but a quick decision, a no-brainer, that there's no dispute, frankly does not support what you've actually heard and seen and ultimately will read in this case. It's all in a rush to try to get to Phase II without carefully and deliberately considering the evidence of Phase I. And that evidence, as I see it, by and large, is about Mr. Calloway and his choices regarding smoking.
Now, as you know, the plaintiff gets to go first because the plaintiff has this burden of proof. And I want to say something. They took away their scales, but we start even. But that doesn't mean we start 50/50, because you haven't heard any evidence when the trial starts. We start 0 to 0. And the plaintiff’s
burden is to start building that -- so if I had their scales, their scale would be all the way down on the ground. And their burden is to build it up all the way, until it reaches 51 percent.
It's not this tiny little piece of difference in the evidence, as counsel suggested to you today, when they put that up there and said we just have to tilt it a tiny bit. Well, they have to get it all the way up with evidence. So don't think it's an easy burden. It's 51 percent, and they have to get more likely than not.
Now, the language is the most important.
If I could see slide 5, please. The language is the most important: Produces or contributes substantially to producing the injury. In this case, they are talking about the addiction.
And then it goes on to give you a little bit of extra help: But for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the injury would not have occurred.
Now it will be a dispute. There is a dispute about what was the cause of Mr. Calloway's smoking in this case: Addiction
or choice. And you'll have to decide that.
But the "but for" language is the same as saying "without." In other words, without addiction, would there have been an injury?
And I submit the evidence is overwhelming that even without considering addiction,
Mr. Calloway made a choice and continued to carry out that choice throughout his smoking life. And I'm going to go through a lot of evidence, both Mr. Calloway and his friends and family, that will establish that Mr. Calloway was making an informed choice during his entire smoking -- time that he smoked.
They have to show that the addiction at least "contributes substantially." That means it was substantial, and that's their burden.
That's their burden. If you decide that it was not substantial, that choice is the substantial cause, then your verdict would be for the defendant in this case.
Now, I'm going to use slide 6 next. You saw the verdict form you have to fill out, and we will talk about that in more details. I think you can organize your thoughts or I would like to organize the evidence some today along
these lines.
The first question is whether addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Calloway's choice to smoke. And that's really two different questions. The first is: Was Mr. Calloway addicted? And the second is, if you find that he was addicted, was his addiction a legal cause. Two questions. And the verdict form has, you'll see -- is divided into multiple questions.
The second question: Was bladder cancer or heart disease a legal cause? Ms. Gallagher is going to talk to you about that. So I'm going to talk to you about those first two questions within 1.
So you ask yourself, was Mr. Calloway addicted? But you won't be given a definition, as you heard. So what was the definition you did hear today? And you've heard it over and over throughout this case. Mr. Hammer told you that smoking -- that Mr. Calloway is addicted solely because of how many cigarettes he smoked for how long. And that's the only inquiry.
At one point he said: You don't need anything else, once you're told how many
cigarettes and how long. And if you can think back -- gosh, a month ago now, when we were talking -- we talked about that. I asked you, how many of you believe that's the only thing you would look. At and some of you said that; but you also said you would be interested in hearing the evidence about that. And that's what you now have the benefit of.
Every family member who testified -- and we'll talk about it in more detail -- that long list of people who said Mr. Calloway was addicted, every single one based it on the fact that he smoked a certain number of cigarettes for a certain period of time. And that's all.
The treating doctors, the family members and so forth.
Now, in deciding what does addiction mean, I would submit to you it's not enough just to say: Well, somebody who smokes X cigarettes for X years is addicted. That's not enough. There needs to be some measure of compulsion, there needs to be some lack of control to get to the subject of addiction.
And Dr. Cummings, you've heard already -let's see slide 7. He agrees that you're
really talking about here is your choice has to be constrained in some way. Constrained choice. Not how many did you smoke for how long, but was there something that kept you from quitting. Dr. DiFranza actually agreed.
Let me say this: Dr. Cummings and Dr. DiFranza, you're going to see a couple of slides from them that I'm going to show you as we go through, and we will talk about them in detail. But remember, they are not friends of the tobacco companies. They are not -- they don't go around testifying in favor of tobacco.
In fact, it's the opposite, as we'll talk about.
So when they agree to something, it must be such a definitely established fact that it must be true. And both of them have agreed that you've got to have -- this choice has to be constrained in order to determine what addiction is.
So the real question in this case is did Mr. Calloway smoke because he wanted to smoke, or did he smoke because he had to smoke? Now remember, the definition, addiction, has changed. You heard that testimony way back
from Dr. Cummings.
It used to include intoxication, and it changed and it didn't include it. And if the same person had been examined by a psychiatrist in the early definition and then again in the later, you would have the same behavior.
MR. GDANSKI: Objection. That's not in evidence.
THE COURT: This is argument, Counsel. Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. REID: You would have the same behavior, but one time you would put this label on it and one time you would put that label on it. Now, in that long list that they put up of people, some of the treating doctors who said that.
Remember, every one of the doctors -- in fact, you saw the charts. It would say addicted and say something about so many packs a day for so many years. Every one of the treating -- they didn't give you a definition.
But in their reports and records you'll see, they base it entirely on the amount of time that he smoked.
And none of these doctors who were
treating him had expertise in the area of addiction or psychiatric medicine. And they didn't give you a definition. They were treating Mr. Calloway's medical condition.
They were trying to make him comfortable and do the best they could do in his medical condition. They weren't thinking about his situation concerning his smoking history.
And you also heard some of the family members testify to the same thing. Remember Miss Evelyn Calloway said: Other than the fact that Mr. Calloway smoked, is there anything else that causes you to think that he was addicted to smoking?
And she said no.
And if you recall the video of Mr. Harry Calloway, the son, he said, when asked: Do you believe your father was addicted?
He probably was.
Why do you think he probably was?
He was smoking.
Those are just two examples. Two examples. But if you look at all the witnesses that said that, the treaters and family members did not have the same broad view of the
evidence that you've had. You are the first jury to have ever heard the whole story about Mr. Calloway's smoking and his choices.
The family members, the doctors, some knew this piece, some knew that piece. Some didn't know how many times, if ever, he tried to quit. They didn't know how he described himself, they didn't know how he went about quitting, if he did; they didn't know his ability to control his smoking. You heard bits and pieces from different people. They didn't know how motivated he was.
But you've heard all the evidence now. That's what I'm going to talk through today. And the treaters did not have -- nobody else except you has had the benefit of a psychological evaluation done by a qualified psychiatrist, Dr. Abramson. You now have the benefit of the first psychological -- and everybody agrees nicotine addiction is an issue of psychology, of psychiatry. It's a mental condition. It relates to the brain.
You're the first jury to have heard about an actual -- and you know, they said: Well,
Dr. Abramson couldn't -- Dr. DiFranza said I
couldn't do this because he was not living.
But you heard from Dr. Abramson it happens all the time, when you look at a will and you have to look back and decide if the person was competent to give the will or things such that.
Mr. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. May we approach?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is not argument. There is no evidence that addiction and dependence on nicotine which was admitted by the defendant is psychological. There's been no evidence of that. Dr. Abramson didn't testify to it. That's an unlawful denial of addiction. It is a physiological disorder.
If he wants to talk about the components of choice, that's fine; but he falsely stated what is not in evidence. There is absolutely nothing in evidence, and this goes against their admission to say that nicotine is a psychological or mental. That's just not in evidence. That just turns this whole trial on its head. You can't say that. It's not in
evidence It's a false statement of what
nicotine dependence is, by every testimony of every witness in this case, and by the law of the Engle case.
THE COURT: Wish to be heard?
MR. REID: Yes. Dr. Abramson is a psychiatrist. He talked all about the psychological evaluation they did, based on the records in this case, and he came up with a psychological evaluation and psychiatric evaluation. Dr. DiFranza said I couldn't do it because he wasn't living.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He never said that word. You will never find psychiatric or psychological evaluation in the record anywhere from Dr. Abramson.
THE COURT: Thank you. Your objection is overruled.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: So as I was saying, you have had the benefit of a trained psychiatrist who has looked at all of the facts of this case and has made an evaluation, and you will have to decide if you accept that or not. Remember when we talked about addiction back during voir
dire, we all talked about all the different ways that term is used. Addiction to chocolate, addiction to running, to the Internet.
So just to say, as the plaintiffs are saying in this case, how much did you smoke and let's call it addiction and that's all you need to consider, that's all you need to consider, that's essentially the plaintiffs case on whether or not Mr. Calloway was addicted. But you have the opportunity, and it's your duty to delve more deeply to the facts of this case, because you have heard all the facts and you will be able to make that determination.
Now, even Dr. Cummings agreed that the label is not important. Could I see slide 11, please? It's the behavior.
So that means it's not enough to say he smoked, and a lot, and for a number of years, and let's call it addiction. Dr. Cummings even agrees that it's the behavior. And you only learn about the behavior from all the evidence that you've seen throughout this trial.
And really, that's why I started this case off telling you that this case is about
Mr. Calloway and his choices regarding his smoking. Because we don't dispute that smoking causes cancer and we don't dispute that smoking causes addiction. But if that were at issue in this case, there would be no reason to have you spend three or four or five weeks of your time doing it. That's not in dispute. They spent a lot of time trying to prove that, but it's not in dispute.
The issue is whether this individual, this gentleman himself falls under the category of addiction or falls under the category of choice. Of course, it's the same with the medical.
Now, you were engaged in this debate, you might say, right out of the box in this case.
You heard from two experts. I want to talk about experts for a minute before we get into the details, because we had -- I didn't count -- 7, 8, 9, different experts in different fields that you talked about.
And you've seen what the judge told you; that is, it's your job to evaluate the experts, their bias, their interests, what they've done, their experience and so forth. And if you
remember last week, maybe the week before, there were maybe three medical witnesses. And Mr. Johnstone came in those days to cross-examine them.
And I didn't count the pages or add up the time, but it seemed to me Mr. Johnstone spent a lot of time, a lot of time cross-examining each of those about the fact that they were being paid for their time and work in the case, the fact that they had met with lawyers before they testified, and the time -- and that they had testified in other cases.
Now, maybe we should have asked the other experts more questions like that, but that doesn't go to the issue you have to decide.
Think about this for a minute. Dr. Cummings and Dr. DiFranza have spent their lives, their professional lives going around the country testifying in cases against the tobacco companies.
And let's compare those topics that Mr. Johnstone went into such detail. Are they paid for their work? Paid a lot. You heard Dr. Cummings. I forgot what the number was,
but it was a very large sum. They met with lawyers. In fact, they give seminars to lawyers to teach them how to get big verdicts in lawsuits, Dr. DiFranza and Dr. Cummings. And you can look at the pamphlet from Dr. Cummings, the seminar he taught that in, when you go back into the jury room. It's in evidence.
And they certainly meet with lawyers.
And they testify in many cases against the tobacco companies all over the country. In fact, Dr. Cummings testified that he has so many cases against the tobacco companies that he can't keep them straight. It seems odd that Mr. Johnstone would have spent so much time -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. That's not in evidence.
MR. REID: Yes, it is in evidence. It was the deposition.
THE COURT: Objection sustained. I don't recall it. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence, not mine, not plaintiff's, not defendants'.
You are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. GDANSKI: Move to strike counsel's comment.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. REID: It seemed odd that Mr. Johnstone would spend so much time asking the defense experts about the fact they're paid, they met with lawyers and they testified before, when the two witnesses that I'm talking about now for the plaintiff do the same thing, except more so.
Now, he wasn't here every day and he maybe didn't hear that testimony from Dr. Cummings or Doctor -- but the fact is, you will have to decide, based on what they say.
Now let's talk about Dr. DiFranza, who says he is he addicted, and Dr. Abramson, who said he does not meet the definition, except in the psychiatric community, for dependence or addiction.
Dr. DiFranza has no training as a psychiatrist or psychologist. He has no training or certification in the subject of addiction or addiction medicine. He has no training in the field of pharmacology, which is the effect of drugs on the brain. He has no
experience in treating people who suffer from addiction.
In fact, if you remember, he said:
When -- I see him one time. He is a general practice. He delivers babies and some other things. If I see them one time and realize they have a smoking issue, I send them to a professional for treatment.
Now, they showed you a chart today, or a quote where he said Mr. Calloway is one of the most addictive people of all the patients I have ever had. Well, he didn't -- he doesn't treat patients for addiction. So I'm not sure what he was making reference to. But the fact is, that's his experience. You have to weigh that in determining.
Now, beyond experience, there are tools that people use to study addiction. There's the DSM Doctor -- put together by psychiatrists from all over the country. It's in every psychiatrist's office. It's used to help diagnose conditions such as dependence and addiction to nicotine.
He said he doesn't think it should be used. There's something called the
International Classification of Disease. He doesn't use that. He didn't use something called the Fagerstrom test in this case, but he came up with his own test. It was the HONC, H-O-N-C, and he admitted no addiction group has ever endorsed that.
And that tells you, remember he put the ten questions, asked you these ten questions up on the board. And if you answer any one of the ten questions yes, you're addicted. One of questions is, if a person answers yes to the question "have you ever felt like you really needed a cigarette," that person is addicted.
How can that be? If that's all you know, if a person said yeah, one time in college I felt like I needed a cigarette because I was in exams and I was stressed, whatever. How can that possibly be? But he told you if an answer there is yes, he would come into court and tell you they are addicted.
He told you if you smoked one cigarette a day, addicted. Two cigarettes, one a month or one on weekends only. He talked about this test at length, all ten questions, and yet he didn't even apply it to Mr. Calloway in this
case. So the one test he seems to say he can use, he didn't use. He didn't use.
He also based his opinions on some fairly stark errors in the evidence. First of all, he told you he didn't believe in willpower. Could I see slide 13? He didn't believe in willpower, at least not in regards to smoking. Now, if that's true, that means nobody would ever be able to quit, ever, ever. Doesn't believe in willpower.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object to this slide. Can we approach, please?
THE COURT: What is the objection, Counsel?
MR. GDANSKI: Counsel reading from a deposition. It's not testimony from the witness.
MR. REID: It was read from the witness in trial.
THE COURT: Objection noted. Overruled. Proceed.
MR. REID: And then more importantly, and this goes down to -- one of the things that you've heard a lot about is -- and you heard it this morning, the claim was made, Mr. Hammer
said Mr. Calloway quit, tried to quit many, many times. We'll talk about that in a minute. But Dr. DiFranza just made a mistake.
Could we see slide 14? He never showed -- first of all, he said he believed he was incapable of quitting. That's because he doesn't believe willpower has anything to do with it. Then he goes on to say he never showed that he was capable. He tried 20, 30, 40, up to 60 times to quit, and he was never successful.
There was no evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that Mr. Calloway tried to quit smoking 60 times in his life. In a little bit, I'm going to talk when I get there about the specific times we think he may have tried to quit, and it's not close to 60.
And he also told you that heroin and cocaine were all the same when it comes to the effect on the brain. They are the same in the sense that they both have some effect on the brain; but the effect they have, as you remember from the chart, is substantially different. And we'll talk about that.
So it's fair to say why would a person
who really has no qualifications in the field of addiction, who rejects the accepted methods used in the field by true experts, who sends his patients over to true experts, who doesn't do any methodology, doesn't do anything other than say everybody -- I don't believe in willpower. He tried to quit a lot of times, he must be addicted because I'm sure that at least once in his life he felt like he needed a cigarette.
Well, the answer is clear: He's here because he told you also that his goal. His goal was to eliminate all cigarette smoking. Now, understanding that the Congress of the United States -MR. GDANSKI: Objection. Not in evidence.
THE COURT: Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. REID: It's a legal product. Adults have the choice whether or not to use the product, but Dr. DiFranza says shouldn't have that choice. And he also said, he said this to you from the stand, that litigation is a good way to get after the tobacco companies. That's what he was doing in this case. He was
continuing his litigation.
Now, I would like you to consider a comparison to Dr. Abramson. And by the way, let me just say one other thing. There was talk about how Dr. DiFranza has written some articles accepted by the Surgeon General.
Well, when you get back there and you look at this, and you heard Dr. Cummings describe it somewhat, the Surgeon General is not a report that one human being sat down and wrote one day. It's a collection, it's a collection of articles and papers and studies and research and so forth by people who have an interest in whatever the topic is.
Dr. DiFranza has an interest. We know.
We know what his interest is in smoking and health. But you know, you also heard from Dr. Cummings -- I don't want to get too far ahead of myself, but the Surgeon General has cited over 600 times to research that was sponsored and a grant came from the tobacco industry. Over 600 times. So that's in those books too.
But now going to Dr. Abramson, he's a psychiatrist. He treats people who have these
problems. He's Board-certified in addiction psychiatry, and he had training before he went to medical school on the brain, the effects of the brain on nicotine and other types of substances.
He doesn't just go around and testify in tobacco cases. He told you that was a very small part. He does things like competency reports to determine if somebody who wrote a will was competent. For guardianship, is someone capable of taking on guardianship.
He works and does forensic work in licensing issues, and he's called on by Courts and by the state agencies to evaluate people to determine whether or not they ought to have their license or they ought to have their license revoked or what their state of mind is.
And he has treated thousands of people with nicotine addiction. Now, as he told you, very few people come in to a psychiatrist if their only problem is they want to stop smoking; but he said because of the other areas that he works in, many of his patients have that issue.
So he has -- he said he treated 10 to 15
recently just for nicotine. But he said those people, he works with them on the entire gamut. He does -- that's call "clinical experience," which Dr. DiFranza doesn't have.
He told you about the DSM. He told you how it's used, why it's used. It's not a cookie cutter. They put that quote up there in cross-examination. You don't just make a list and check it off the way they want you to do; say how many cigarettes, how many years, did anybody use the word addiction, yes, then Mr. Calloway was addicted. That's their approach in the case.
So what conclusions did he draw from the evidence? I would like to see slide 15, please. There is a definition he gave you, a definition that is accepted by people in the psychiatric community. DSM only uses "dependence," but both people agree that also means addiction. No clinically significant impairment or distress.
That's the test he applied. And looked at several things. Did it limit his daily life in any way? Did it impair his ability to understand the risks? Think of hard druss, how
those might play out if you looked at these factors. The smoking did not impair his ability to make decisions.
And Dr. Abramson told you -- remember, we put up a chart of every single thing he had read. He said based on that, he could not conclude that Mr. Calloway was dependent, because he wasn't motivated. So I would like to see the slide -- see what number that is -slide 17.
This is a comparison. And this is -these are the type things you can consider, which -- board-certified psychiatrist with a subspecialty in addiction. Research experience in psychopharmacology, experience with various standard tests, uses the DSM, vast clinical experience. Clinical means dealing with people, with patients. Treating addiction issues, including nicotine. Relying on established facts in the case. That's the 60 or so -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. Portions of this slide are not in evidence and inaccurate.
THE COURT: Thank you, Counsel. This is
argument.
Proceed. Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. REID: Which one has a broad forensic experience beyond tobacco? In other words, does something else besides judicial or administrative, outside of tobacco. And the only yes Dr. DiFranza gets is who has an agenda against tobacco through the use of litigation.
So in evaluating these two experts, I would submit that you could consider those items.
But there's more. There's the story of Mr. Calloway. And that's where your judgment will come into play. Now, this morning Mr. Hammer put up -- I think it was a quote from one of the people who testified, and they talked about Mr. Calloway's choice being constrained. Remember it said Dr. Cummings, I think, said and Dr. DiFranza both said it's a constrained choice.
And listening to all that you've heard, they are really saying there's three ways that Mr. Calloway's choice was constrained, meaning he lost control because of this; he had the inability to quit smoking. The first is they say he was constrained from quitting because he
was addicted. And they say addiction is so many cigarettes per year for so many years, and somebody used the word "addiction."
Secondly, they say he was constrained because he relied on advertising and public statements that the companies made. And you heard some of that today. And we'll talk. And thirdly, they said he was constrained from quitting because he wasn't aware of the risks.
He didn't appreciate the risks.
So I would like to talk about each of those and talk about what evidence is there that Mr. Calloway's choice was in any way constrained by any of those three items. Now, they are suggesting that nicotine captured Mr. Calloway's brain and that he just simply didn't have the ability to quit.
But you know, there's -- there aren't many in this case, but there are a few things that nobody really contests. I want to mention three to you right now that go to the question in evaluating whether or not it was addiction or choice.
The first one of these is that everybody agrees that addicted smokers can quit. So just
because you smoke X for X years, and somebody, a lay person or a treating doctor says "addiction," that doesn't mean that you can't quit. That's where choice comes into play.
Secondly, everybody agrees that a lot of people have quit smoking. Could I see the next slide, please, 20? Remember these statistics? 3,000 people -- 60 million people have quit.
mR. GdANSKI: Judge, I object. Portions of this are not in evidence. Can we approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: I have the statistic, 60 million people have quit smoking in this country. A statistic that was used with Dr. Abramson and Dr. Cummings, as I recall, was 59 million, which was true and correct as of the time Johnnie Calloway stopped smoking.
MR. REID: It was 45 then. This was later. I object to counsel standing up and saying -- the thing where you sustained, if you don't remember, I can show it to you. The statement that I made. He ought to just object and come sidebar.
THE COURT: I understand how it is. I don't want them to rely on -- they are to rely on their own recollection.
MR. REID: Sure. That's what you should tell them.
THE COURT: This is your argument. I don't see anything wrong with it. It's argument. I mean, there -- it's their theory of the case.
MR. REID: But you have to come sidebar, instead of saying it's not in the record, because we'd have to take a break and I need to find it, so -THE COURT: Counsel, he can -MR. REID: Shouldn't make speaking objections.
THE COURT: I don't disagree with that.
If you have an objection, just say what your objection is. Outside the scope or -- I'll deal with them. All right?
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: You remember when Dr. Abramson testified, he gave you some similar numbers back in 1992, talking about the time when
Mr. Calloway passed. But these numbers are the numbers that are accepted, and 90 percent of former smokers quit cold turkey. So the second point is, people can't -- and those 60 million people had the same experience, they smoked the same cigarettes, saw the same ads.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object to "other people."
THE COURT: What's the objection, Counsel?
MR. GDANSKI: Referring to "other people."
THE COURT: Objection noted. Overruled. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. Proceed, Counsel.
MR. REID: There are smokers out there that probably -- one of the witnesses said some of them would be addicted. So there's no dispute that people can quit.
You heard some talk this morning about in early times, when everybody smoked -- well, that's true. In earlier times, people did smoke. But since that time, over -- more people have quit than are currently presently
smoking. So it's -- it demonstrates that you can quit. And there's really no dispute about that.
The third point is motivation. And next to "choice," that's probably the most important word that we have to deal with in determining whether somebody is smoking because of an addiction or because of a choice. Dr. Cummings told you -- remember, no friend of tobacco -Dr. Cummings told you that people who are motivated, it's 100 percent.
He tells them that the success rate for quitting among people who really want to quit and stick to it is 100 percent. Anyone can quit, if they make their mind up to do it. I have testified to that. Dr. Cummings.
Dr. DiFranza agrees that motivation is important. It's essential. Motivation is essential.
So it's fair for you to evaluate the evidence in this case and ask yourself this question: Is there evidence, have plaintiffs carried the burden that Mr. Calloway was truly motivated to stop smoking? I'm going to talk to you about four areas of evidence.
First, Mr. Calloway plainly was able to control his smoking in a number of ways throughout his life. Now, I want you to remember something. His daughter testified that he was so addicted that throughout her memory of childhood, he could never go into a store for more than five minutes. Remember, she said it was the five-minute drill. They would go in, because he could only stop smoking for five minutes. That was sworn testimony that you heard.
Let's see the next slide. You heard that his son from his first family said he didn't smoke in the house. His son from his first -and remember, that was 20-some years they were together, that family. Did not smoke while he was working. There is no -- later there is some testimony that he may have smoked during other jobs. But for 20 -- for that first part of his life, from '48 until '71 or '72, when that relationship ended at work with his son, he wasn't smoking.
He didn't smoke at the dinner table, all through dinner. That's more than five minutes. He sat in nonsmoking sections in restaurants.
Again, that's more than five minutes. He did not smoke at the movies. He did not smoke at church. Mr. Harry Calloway said he always went to church every week for the first half.
The testimony later was he would go several times a month. But whether it's every Sunday or several times a month, he didn't smoke -- and he didn't immediately smoke when he got out of church. You heard that from several.
And he was able to control the amount he smoked. If a person is so addicted, they get up to a level of smoking, you would expect they would stay at that level. But we know for the first 23 years, as long as he was married to Ms. Evelyn Calloway, he never got over a pack a day, for 23 years.
Now, it seems it would have been a lot easier to quit if a person is motivated to quit when you're smoking a pack a day than it was later, when you might be smoking three packs a day. Quit attempts would be easier. But there's no evidence ever, during that 23-year period, any attempt to quit smoking.
And then after his heart attack, he quit.
He then immediately cut down to one and a half from three. That's a sign of somebody who is in control. All of these items that I pointed to you a minute ago, plus the fact that this chain -- remember, Mr. Frank Calloway said that Ms. Evelyn Calloway would be the best source of information. Not Mr. Frank Calloway, who was in the Army and traveled around and going all over the world, but Ms. Evelyn Calloway, who was living with him every day for those first years. And he never tried.
So that's the first thing. He also -- he also -- you can also -- is there evidence he could control his smoking? What actions -think about this -- in determining whether somebody is addicted, what actions would you expect them to do? What actions would you look for that would be evidence now, as you evaluate this case?
For instance, let's look at slide 26.
You might throw away your ashtrays or cigarette lighters or cigarettes. And you've heard some testimony from various witnesses. That's one of the things that they recommend for people who really want to quit. You change your
habits, you don't drink the cup of coffee in the morning, if that's what always triggers you to want a cigarette. You drink the coffee later, somewhere else.
You go seek help from medical professionals. You go to a clinic where people are trained to help people stop smoking. You announce to others that I'm going to quit on this day. You announce to others that I have an intention to quit.
And most importantly, you might ask your very close family members that you have observed quitting, mostly cold turkey, how did you do it? Remember, Mr. Calloway saw both of his parents quit smoking; his brother,
Mr. Frank Calloway, that you saw quit smoking.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object to portions of the slide.
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. GDANSKI: Evidence of a witness who did not testify.
THE COURT: Thank you. Your objection is noted. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. This is argument. Proceed, Counsel.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, can we approach?
THE COURT: Yes.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, this slide specifically discusses Robbie Mitchell, who we were not permitted to discuss in our closing because she didn't testify. That objection was sustained at the time. Robbie Mitchell still hasn't testified.
MR. REID: One of the daughters testified that she quit.
MR. GDANSKI: But that was our position that Dr. Abramson had testified that she said he was addicted in her depo.
MR. REID: The daughter knew it firsthand.
THE COURT: Objection noted. It's overruled. Proceed.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: Continuing, you heard testimony that Mr. Frank Calloway, who came to testify, and Ms. Calloway herself, and the sister-in-law -- you heard that from one of the
daughters. One of the challenges for you really is you heard bits and pieces of testimony from a lot of different witnesses.
That's why way back in voir dire I said to you: Are you patient? Because I knew that when something came up with a witness, that later on there was going to be another witness that you were going to hear something else from. And now is the time when you go back into the room that you'll gather all this together and you'll recall which witness said what.
So for example, obviously, neither of his parents testified. But somebody, one of the other family members testified that they both quit smoking. So that's sort of the challenge. But you see, all of these people knew how to quit, and they were with him at various times in his life. Very closely connected.
And the other thing that's interesting is that the suggestion that all these articles and ads that are out in the general public -- in fact, Ms. Calloway told you she looked at a lot of the ads too. Those were all out there for all these family members as well, and yet they
all quit. They all quit. So the suggestion that Mr. Calloway was constrained because of things like that doesn't make sense.
There is substantial evidence that Mr. Calloway never really took actions that would cause someone to conclude that person is really motivated. The next thing -- that's 2.
The control smoking and the actions.
The next is did you try to quit? And Mr. Calloway had virtually no serious quit attempts throughout his life. Can we see slide 28? Beginning in 1948, up through 1976, that's the time he was living with Ms. Evelyn Calloway. There was no evidence of any attempt to quit. And these dates came from Dr. DiFranza and Dr. Abramson both, who reviewed Ms. Calloway's deposition.
Between 1976 and 1980, Mr. Calloway attempted two or three times in some years.
Not every year, but in some years. And then from 1980 to 1990, the testimony was that Mr. Calloway quit one or two -- tried to quit one or two times. And then we know that in 1991, Mr. Calloway quit for somewhere between
three and six months Different people have
different remembrances of that.
But the interesting thing, even Dr. DiFranza agrees the two quits over ten years would tell you that a person is not motivated. And that's the record in this case. That's the evidence in this case. In 1991, the quit -- it was three, four, six months. All of the nicotine and all of the effects were gone from Mr. Calloway's body when he chose to start smoking again.
Remember the testimony that in 48 to 72 hours, the doctors call -- talked about half lives of substances. It's all gone.
Withdrawal symptoms are typically gone within 7 to 14 days. There is a change on the brain.
You increase receptors if you're using nicotine; but in four to six weeks, that's completely reversed. So any brain change that Dr. DiFranza mentioned is gone by that time.
So Mr. Calloway may have remembered that he enjoyed smoking, but to say that it's because of nicotine that that's what drew him back into smoking is not supported by the undisputed scientific evidence that nicotine is a not affecting somebody once you get out to
four to six months from smoking.
You did hear some testimony that there was some withdrawal. You heard from one witness, Ms. Calloway, when she said Mr. Calloway was irritable, you didn't want to be around him. But none of the three daughters ever supported that. They didn't see that.
One said well, he was sick from the heart, but other than that, I don't remember any -- any
physical changes.
And another one said she didn't remember any physical changes. But there's no dispute that people do have mild withdrawal symptoms. Mild withdrawal symptoms. Headaches. You heard the doctors talk about it. Headaches, sometimes insomnia, sometimes you eat a little more, but it goes away after a while.
So that's the third thing you're looking at to see if a person is really motivated. The fourth is the knowledge that surrounded the person. It's reasonable to assume that if Mr. Calloway really wanted to quit, if Mr. Calloway hated the fact that he smoked, that his brain was a captive, you might say, you would have expected some witness somewhere
to say, oh, yeah, he told me about this. He told me about this.
We will look at slide 31. Mr. Calloway never -- this is from all the different witnesses. Mr. Calloway never described himself as addicted. He never called smoking a bad habit. Remember every one of those depositions, we went through all these questions.
He never said he could not quit. He never said he wanted to quit. He never told anybody he was having trouble quitting, and he never told anybody he wished he could quit.
Now, Mr. Frank Calloway, after testifying before came into court, and he thought Mr. Calloway -- he changed his testimony and said Mr. Calloway may have described himself as addicted. But that's the bulk of the testimony in this case. Every single witness that you heard from.
You would expect that if somebody was really addicted, someone really wanted to quit, was motivated, they would have said something like that to somebody in all these years that he smoked. And there is no evidence in this
case to that effect.
You know, counsel put that list of things up, all the ways Mr. Calloway tried to quit.
And I went back and I looked at that.
Actually, I looked at that before he put it up because I had a feeling he might put it up.
And Mr. Calloway smoked for about 15,000 days in his life.
And I counted up the number of times there was any attempt to quit. It's a little hard, because Ms. Calloway, as you heard, said he would quit for a day, two days, I'm not sure. It was kind of -- but I went through and counted it up, sort of taking the best case scenario each time.
Like for instance, the use of the filtered things, the step-down. She said five times. Five or some number. I gave her five days. So I assume that's five quit attempts.
Same thing with the gum. Adding it all up.
Can I see that chart again, the timeline.
Adding up, assuming he quit four times during the whole four years, adding it all up, I came to a total number of days of quit attempts of 32 Out of 15 000 days of smoking
And I was thinking about this. If you had a friend that you went to high school with,
and the day after graduation this person said I'm going to get a job, I'm ready, I'm motivated, and great. And the person -- you separated and you didn't see that person again for 43 years, about 15,000 days later. And you said to the person: Well, did you get a job?
You were going to go right out.
I never got a job.
Did you try?
He was really motivated. I really tried.
How many times did you go out and do something? I went out and did something 32 times. You would walk away from that conversation thinking that person didn't seem motivated to get a job. That's what we have here. 32 days, giving the benefit of the doubt, the greatest number.
And most of those would not be considered legitimate quit attempts, because they didn't last enough days. There's some scientific principles. To count as a legitimate quit, it's got to last more than that.
MR. GDANSKI: Your Honor, I object. Not in evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Overruled. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. Proceed.
MR. REID: If you look at those four things, you reach the conclusion that Mr. Calloway, for whatever reason -- and nobody really knows, because he never talked about this. This case is about the current family, in effect, second-guessing what Mr. Calloway believed when he was alive.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. Phase II. Move to sidebar. I move to strike.
THE COURT: Objection -MR. REID: I'll withdraw it.
MR. GDANSKI: I would ask the Court to strike that comment.
MR. REID: I withdrew it.
THE COURT: It's done, Counsel.
MR. REID: There really aren't any -there really is no evidence when you consider those four: Control, actions, quit attempts, and talking about it to family. There is no evidence to support that Mr. Calloway was motivated. Now, how can somebody say I can't
quit, if that person never really, really tried to quit? How do they know they couldn't quit?
That's really what you have here. You don't have Mr. Calloway saying it, but you have the argument made that he just could not quit. Well, how do you know, if he never tried? And that's the nub of the question.
Now, I want to talk about the second part of the question; that is, if you think Mr. Calloway meets some definition that you developed about addiction, was addiction the cause or was it something else, such as was addiction a legal cause of his smoking? As opposed to something else.
I told you there were three restraints they claim -- constraints. The first one, they say he was constrained, his choice was constrained because he was addicted. The second one is he was constrained because of all these public ads, public statements and as, and you heard a lot of those this morning.
You saw some clips of people on the radio -- I mean on the TV. Almost all of that evidence came from Dr. Cummings during his testimony. The ads were shown in Mr. Frank
Calloway and to Ms. Calloway, but the bulk of these public statements -- and they're claiming in effect that Mr. Calloway wanted to quit and couldn't quit because of something that was out there in public, something that was said by a tobacco company or a press release or something that he saw in an ad.
Well, as I say, this came from Dr. Cummings. And you might ask yourself, why really was Mr. Cummings here -- Dr. Cummings here. He was here in support of his admitted role in what he calls the war against tobacco.
And he told you he had, in effect -- he told you he had written or he has taken the war into the courtroom.
So you didn't know that you were watching a war, but that's what Dr. Cummings thought he was doing. He gives lectures about how to get good verdicts. He advocates greater regulation of tobacco. Now he can have those opinions, and I hope you don't misunderstand. I'm not saying that Dr. Cummings needs to suddenly say I think smoking is the greatest thing in the world and I want to go out and do that.
But I'm saying you get to look at those
kind of things in deciding whether -- in evaluating his testimony. Is this part of a national campaign he has undertaken to try to wipe out smoking, as Dr. DiFranza said that was his goal, to stop smoking, or is it something else?
Now, the first part of Dr. Cummings was he spent a lot of time in that deposition trying to convince you that smoking causes cancer. And he spent a lot of time trying to convince you that smoking is addictive. And you've seen more today. You saw that list of all those -- all those carcinogenic substances.
Well, that's not in dispute in this case.
That has nothing to do with the case that you're going to decide. You're not going to be asked to decide if smoking causes cancer or smoking is addictive. That's conceded for purposes of what you're doing in this case.
And yet he spent all of this time, all this time, 20 years ago they showed you a video of a tobacco executive basically saying we accepted the earlier definition of the Surgeon General, not the later one. What did that have to do with Mister -- what did that have to do
with Mr. Calloway? You can ask yourself that.
Dr. Cummings didn't know anything about Mr. Calloway, and that's what this case is about. It's not about these general topics.
It's what did Mr. Calloway know and see and do? Dr. Cummings didn't know how much he smoked, didn't know whether he was a man or woman, didn't know about his spouse, didn't know why he started smoking, didn't know whether he ever quit.
In fact, Dr. Cummings told you -- you know, there was talk about somebody reading a script. Dr. Cummings told you he does so many cases, he does so many cases and he meets with lawyers and he trains lawyers, he said I do so many cases I can't keep them straight. I can't keep them straight.
So it's not surprising that Dr. Cummings wasn't prepared to talk about Mr. Calloway, the only issue for you to decide in this case.
Now, he showed you a lot of public documents.
I don't want to go through a great deal of those, but I want to give you an example. The Frank Statement, the meeting in the Plaza Hotel. Remember he showed you a picture of the
hotel up in New York City.
Well, what he didn't mention to you today and what Dr. Cummings also told you was that some of the defendants met and formed that, but they invited the justice department to come to the meeting. They invited the assistant Attorney General to come to the meeting. They sent the -MR. GDANSKI: I object, Judge. That's not in evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. Proceed.
MR. REID: They sent the bylaws from -to the Assistant Attorney General Barnes.
That's some way to start a secret conspiracy, isn't it, to invite the federal government to come in and meet you about it.
MR. HAMMER: Can we approach, Judge?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. HAMMER: Judge, defense counsel is talking about things that were never discussed in evidence, but more importantly -- excuse me, Counsel. But more importantly, he just said --
referenced a conspiracy. We haven't been able to talk about the conspiracy.
MR. REID: I'll withdraw that.
MR. HAMMER: Excuse me, Counsel. We haven't been able to talk about the conspiracy. There is a finding, a finding in this case, when we get to Phase II that there is a conspiracy. For counsel to make that statement, it opens the door for me to comment on that. And Judge, it opens the door to -- it should open the door to all the documents to come in.
He said -- he said that's some conspiracy. Well, it was a conspiracy. They were found guilty of conspiracy. And that's a finding that you're going to read to this jury in Phase II.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MR. HAMMER: Totally improper argument.
MR. REID: Every bit of this is in Dr. Cummings' testimony. He was responding -perhaps I shouldn't have used the word "conspiracy." You can correct in front of the jury and tell them to withdraw. But we talked
about all these secret meetings with Hill &
Knowlton, that Mr. Calloway did not know the truth. That these public statements were false and it all revolved around the Frank Statement.
I've got the testimony right here from Dr. Cummings that all that I just said was true.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, I would ask the Court to give a curative instruction right now to say that there is a finding that the tobacco companies did conspire. You would be hearing that in Phase II if we get to that point.
Defense counsel has misled this jury, he's committed a fraud upon the Court, and it's totally improper.
And I'm certainly -- last thing I would do is move for a mistrial, but what he just said is totally inappropriate and is mis-triable grounds, but I'm not moving for mistrial. Because the last thing I want to do is try this case again. The fact of the matter is he's opened the door.
You at the very least, should -- at the very least give a curative instruction and tell this jury that these defendants have been found to have conspired. That is a finding under
Engle, under the law.
MR. REID: I object to that. I have the whole testimony. I have no objection if you want to tell the injury that I should not have used the term "conspiracy." I should have said "meeting," I should have said "private meeting."
THE COURT: Anything else? Your objection is noted. I've already ruled on it.
I ruled on it before. Don't use the word "conspiracy."
MR. REID: Okay. I apologize.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: As I was saying, part of the Frank Statement -- you remember, there was an organization formed to fund research. And Dr. Cummings told you that this organization funded over $150 million, 1,108 scientific studies, all funded by the tobacco companies, 700 scientists.
The board of this group was made up with the former president of the University of Michigan and the former president of what became the American Cancer Society. And
Dr. Cummings admitted in an article he wrote that the funding went to independent scientists who were assured scientific freedom.
But the real problem here is Mr. Calloway didn't know about any of this. This has nothing to do with Mr. Calloway. He didn't make any smoking decisions because the industry decided to fund, and in fact funded substantial -- 600 times cited by the Surgeon General of the United States research.
Now, that's the reason Dr. Cummings came to tell you about something that really has nothing to do with Mr. Calloway. But there were witnesses, there were fact witnesses, and I want to talk to you a little bit about fact witnesses. You know, you'll have to judge the credibility of fact witnesses also.
And in the case, as you've surmised, the witnesses many times have given a deposition. And the deposition was taken under oath and they were sworn to tell the truth. There were reporters, lawyers present, maybe they met before or not, whatever. And then after, the witnesses had the opportunity to read it and to fill out a form and list anything that they
thought was in error.
And then when the case came, when they came into this courtroom, then the question becomes has the witness changed any testimony? And it's an obligation of the lawyers on both sides, if that happens, to point it out. And that's what happened with Mr. Frank Calloway.
Now, I want you to remember, I made this chart over here. I wrote it. There are four more on the back page. Mr. Calloway changed his testimony in virtually every one of those topics, between his deposition and his testimony in the court. Things such -- and important things that Mister -- whether Mr. Calloway relied on ads, whether he smoked low-tar cigarettes because they were safer, and so forth.
He changed it between the time of the deposition, where he signed the document and the time -- and I had to point these out. And Mr. Frank Calloway was a nice gentleman, and I tried to be respectful. I didn't try to make it any harder than it had to be, but I had an obligation to let you know that there had been
a substantia! change
And nothing had really happened between the time he signed his deposition sheet and when he came here to testify, except he had met with the lawyers. That's the only thing that happened between those two. And he substantially changed his testimony.
For instance, he told you that -- about Mr. Calloway smoking low-tar cigarettes, 34.
He testified previously -- this was read to him in the trial -- that they didn't talk about that. In fact, his brother testified that he never talked about advertising, never talked about anything he had heard in a cigarette ad.
He told you here under oath at first on direct exam that's the reason Mr. Calloway made decisions. He told you that previously that his brother never took any action because of an ad. That's completely different from what you heard in this courtroom. And he told you he never talked about why he changed from one to the other.
So we walked into the courtroom with a deposition, expecting that Mr. Frank Calloway would say all of those things. And you were here to see that he changed on almost every
substantial point. The simple fact is,
Mr. Calloway did not smoke because of anything that was said by the companies, because of advertising. He smoked because of price. He smoked -- he picked his brands because of price.
And you remember Ms. Calloway was asked what brands did Mr. Calloway smoke, and she listed about 29 different brands of cigarettes.
She listed them in alphabetical order. And she said these are what he smoked. The plaintiffs have the burden of showing that the choice was constrained in some way by something the company said.
At trial, all these different ways with Dr. Cummings and so forth, the simple fact is, they have not carried that burden.
Mr. Calloway was not constrained. His choice was not constrained because of anything that he read or heard or saw from the company. He exercised full choice, which leads me to the third constraint.
And that constraint relates to his lack of knowledge. The suggestion is that he didn't really appreciate the risks; that there was --
you heard talk today about reading ads that somehow made him think that smoking was healthier or risk-free or safe.
Well, we talked in opening and you've heard evidence throughout and you heard evidence from the witnesses about how do people learn about things? How do you learn that cigarette smoking is risky? Well, one way is you learn it through public means, magazines, newspapers, TV, things such as that.
You heard evidence that nicotine, for instance, has been studied for 100 years.
There is no secret that nicotine is in cigarettes. You heard there is more nicotine in a cigarette -- in the tobacco in a cigarette than there is in nicotine out in the world, out in the field.
Dr. Cummings talked about the mouse skin paintings being broadcast all around the country in all kinds of newspapers and magazines. You heard the Surgeon General's report in all kinds of newspapers and magazines. That's how it's out there.
The next thing is, well, did any of this show up in Mr. Calloway's life. They show you
the Frank Statement and say that was published. But they don't even show you a newspaper where Mr. Calloway lived to try to show it was carried in the Melbourne -- I forgot the name of the Melbourne newspaper, but we know from all the witnesses Mr. Calloway read vociferously, and that he read Time, Life, Readers' Digest, Ebony and Jet. And he read the newspapers from front to back his whole life, both his first family and his second, no matter where they lived.
They showed you -- they introduced into evidence an Ebony Magazine that had some advertisement about smoking in it. Well, when you go back and look at it, what you're going to find in the very same magazine, I think it's on page 30, there's an article described as the ten things people do to harm their health. And there was a whole discussion about smoking.
So in the same magazine that they put into evidence about Mr. Calloway seeing an ad, there is an article in there that talks about the risks of smoking. So that's sort of the broad general knowledge. Then you narrow it down to what did he read?
But Mr. Calloway was surrounded by people in his life who were fully aware, and it's reasonable to assume that some of them at some point would have said, you know, this stuff is really bad for you. So we look at the family members.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. Again, this slide contains people who didn't testify.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Overruled. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. Proceed, Counsel.
MR. REID: Those are the people surrounding. And aside from Ms. Robbie Mitchell, who you didn't hear from her, but you heard Miss Tamara Cartledge talk about her. She's the sister-in-las who is the nurse, who quit smoking.
Starting in 1964, with blowing the smoke into the handkerchief; '66, Miss Calloway said she knew about the risks. The sister from Mississippi in '66, the two daughters. Again, you know, people are nervous when they testify, and sometimes people just -- I understand that. That's another reason that we have the
transcript.
For instance, Ms. Tamara Cartledge told you that in these car trips they would take, only her mother warned her about smoking. She was asked that two or three times. And when I came and asked her she said the same thing. Well, she testified under oath that her mother and father warned her and said it several times.
Now, lawyers do this a lot. But I understand when people come in to testify, it's not -- it's kind of scary and maybe it changed. But the point is, the key is for you to get the facts. It would have been wrong to leave it hanging out there that only Mrs. Calloway smoked -- warned them of that, when the facts are that both parents did.
And Starr Williams, the daughter, Miss Williams is the one who talked about telling her dad, even though he told her it was a light, she told him it was still a cigarette.
So that's another way people get knowledge. When people around them have knowledge, it's reasonable to assume they would have talked about it. And he talked about it.
But the most personal, direct, specific knowledge really came to Mr. Calloway. The question is was his choice constrained because he didn't know smoking was bad? I would like to see 41A, please. And this gives you testimony from all these witnesses who -- this is Mr. Calloway's personal direct warnings.
His -- he told his daughter, his wife -they used the term "nag" after his heart attack. He was warned.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object to this line. May we approach?
THE COURT: Yes. Excuse me. Can all defense counsel approach, please.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. GDANSKI: This slide contains references to warnings and cautionary statements in our packages. Those are not in evidence. They've never been before the jury. Warning labels are not in evidence; never mentioned to the jury. The dates they came on and changed are not in evidence, not put into evidence through any witness. I object to the slide that brings that out.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. GDANSKI: That's it.
THE COURT: Objection is noted. It's overruled. Listen, the reason I asked you to come up is, you're a little over an hour and 15 minutes into your closing. I don't know how it's going to affect everybody else. That's all I'm trying to find out.
MS. GALLAGHER: I'm going to have an hour and 15.
THE COURT: So you're going to wind up? MR. REID: I'm getting close. I would say we can still finish between -THE COURT: I'm not trying to rush you or anything. I'm just trying to let you know that -MS. GALLAGHER: Can we take five minutes between?
THE COURT: Yes, ma'am.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. REID: So these are the direct, personal warnings that Mr. Calloway had. And you've heard evidence about all of these. I would submit to you that the constrained claim
that Mr. Calloway's choices were constrained in any way by a lack of knowledge, the plaintiffs just simply haven't met that burden.
Now I want to sort of think about wrapping up here. As I told you, this case isn't about whether smoking causes disease or whether it's addictive. If it were, we wouldn't need you to be here. That's already been decided and not disputed.
This case is about Mr. Calloway and his choices. And there are really four factors in this case that I really think cannot be disputed. The first one of these is the slide we just left with. Mr. Calloway had direct, personal knowledge; direct, personal knowledge from all these sources about the risks associated with smoking. I will pick it up.
This is in your way.
That's point number 1. Point number 2 is that Mr. Calloway never talked to anybody -there is no evidence that he ever talked to anybody about -- and said the kinds of things people really would say if they really wanted to quit.
And we looked at that before. He didn't
have those conversations. It's reasonable to assume that a person who was really motivated would have had those conversations with anybody.
The third is that he didn't ever take any real actions that people take when they are trying to quit smoking. As I said, he quit, if you give the benefit of every doubt, at most 32 times in 15,000 days.
And finally, Mr. Calloway -- actually,
I'm going to put this down. Mr. Calloway, as you saw before, this lays it out graphically, the quit attempts. This, more than anything else, tells you that Mr. Calloway really just, for whatever reason -- we can't guess what his reason was, but for whatever reason,
Mr. Calloway never tried. And how can you say I can't quit, if you never try?
So I was thinking about these points and I was thinking about the witnesses. And all the different witnesses came and went, and you heard what they said and what they said before. But there was one witness that nobody really attacked with any -- and I don't mean attacked in a bad way.
There is one witness that they never pointed out how he said something different.
He was around Mr. Calloway. He talks about all these kinds of things. And that witness, I want you to hear what he said about Mr. Calloway and his smoking decisions that are consistent with those. So I want to show a clip of Mr. Harry Calloway's deposition.
(Video played as follows:)
Q Do you remember ever seeing your father smoke at the job site?
A Not really. No.
Q Not really. Did you ever see him?
A Well, not -- not on the job site. But you know, when he get ready to get off, he would smoke, you know.
Q Not while he was working?
A Not while he was working.
Q And sometimes you would work pretty long days with your father?
A Yes.
Q So while you were still living with both your mother and your father, your father wasn't smoking in the house?
A Huh-uh, no. Well, if he did, he smoked
in the bathroom, if he did.
Q Did your father smoke while he was sitting in church?
A No.
Q Did he ever leave in the middle of the service to go smoke?
A No.
Q Did your father smoke at the dinner table?
A No.
Q Did your father ever leave the dinner table to go smoke a cigarette?
A Never remember seeing him do that.
Q Did you ever go out to eat at a restaurant with your father?
A Oh, yes.
Q When you were eating at a restaurant with your father, did you sit in the smoking section or the nonsmoking section?
A Nonsmoking.
Q Do you recall your father ever leaving the table to go smoke a cigarette -A No.
Q -- while out at a restaurant?
Did your father ever tell you not to
smoke?
A Yep.
Q And what -- why did he tell you not to smoke?
A I would have no idea. You know, he just told me. And I took it, you know, believing from there. So I never smoked.
Q I believe you mentioned earlier something about a handkerchief?
A Yeah. He blowed the smoke into a handkerchief, showed me the brown on it and said this is what will kill you. What he did it for, I don't know. But he just showed me that.
Q And how old were you when he showed you that?
A About 8.
Q Did he ever tell you that he wanted to quit smoking?
A Nope.
Q Did he ever tell you he was trying to quit smoking?
A No.
Q Did you ever see him doing anything that made you think he was trying to quit smoking?
A No.
Q So you don't recall your father quitting, even for a short amount of time?
A No.
Q Did you ever hear your father refer to smoking as a bad habit?
A No.
Q Did you ever hear your father say that he was addicted to smoking cigarettes?
A No.
Q Did you ever hear him say he couldn't quit smoking?
A No.
Q Would your father always attend on a weekly basis with your family the church services?
A Every week.
Q And you had mentioned that he did not step out during the church service, correct?
A Nope.
Q When the church service was complete, do you know if your father would step out to smoke a cigarette?
A No.
Q Do you know one way or another?
A No.
Q No, he did not?
A No, he did not. Because everybody left church together.
(Video concluded.)
MR. REID: Ladies and gentlemen,
remember, the 8-year-old boy heard that warning and he never smoked. And he was exposed to all the same ads, the same newspapers, he lived in the same house with Mr. Calloway for a number of years. No interest in this lawsuit. He's not a plaintiff. He has no claim to -- he's perhaps the most unbiased witness that you saw in this case.
Now, you saw the verdict form, and can I see the -- I'll just briefly remind you that that first question is the one that deals with addiction. It gives you the two questions:
Was Mr. Calloway addicted to cigarettes? And if so, question number 2, was such addiction a legal cause? So that's why you have to look at both of those things.
Now, this is the last time I get to talk to you. You'll hear from some of the other defendants, and then Mr. Hammer will get to talk. Nothing's worse than telling a lawyer you have to sit down and you can't respond to
anything that's said. I've tried to respond to everything he's said. He may say something new that I didn't think of.
I'll say to you, I hope, as you've been listening to me and you've been thinking did what I say make sense; you know, critically listen to me, I hope you'll do the same thing.
If he brings up something new, maybe you can think what would Ben Reid say if he had the chance to do it again.
And the last thing I want to tell you, suggest to you, this whole system you're working under, you didn't know this, but you have a pact with all these parties. You have an agreement, the juries do. We agree, the parties agree, that when you go into that room to decide this case, your decision will be final. No one will grab you as you come out and say, wait a minute. Did you think about this, should it have been this.
You have the power to do that. That's what we've given to you. You've given the parties something. And that is, you have agreed to only decide this case on the merits, on the facts and evidence that you heard in
this case. Not to decide it because you don't like tobacco or you don't like smoking. Not to decide it because you feel sympathy for someone who suffered obviously a very significant loss in her life.
Not to decide it because smoking can cause cancer or does cause cancer and is addictive, but to decide it on the evidence that you've heard about Mr. Calloway and his choices in life. Not because the parties all had to pay fees to experts to come in to testify and met with them before they testified and that the experts maybe have testified again.
You will decide the case on the merits.
And that's why, as I sit down, I'm completely secure in the fact that the system works, because juries such as you -- and I know you will -- do your duty. Thank you for your time.
THE COURT: Counsel, thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to take a short recess, give counsel a chance to set up for the next argument. So we will be just a short recess. You are not to discuss the case, don't form any opinion about the case, don't allow
anyone to discuss the case in your presence.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Just be about five minutes. Leave your notepads on your chairs. Thank you.



MS. GALLAGHER: Good afternoon. Ladies and gentlemen, as you can tell from the weeks you've been here listening to a number of different doctors testify, there are a lot of complex medical issues in this case. And I'm going to spend the next hour or so talking to you about those complex medical issues, but I'm going to start where Mr. Reid ended, and that is with the verdict form that you will be asked to fill out when coming to your conclusions in this case.
And the verdict form -- Mr. Reid was showing you this. And the verdict form, these are the first questions you'll be asked to decide: Was Mr. Calloway addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his heart disease and bladder cancer?
And as Mr. Reid explained, there's really two questions there: Was Mr. Calloway addicted -- and Mr. Reid talked to you about that, and I'm not going to talk to you about that -- but the second part of it, was addiction a legal cause of the different
diseases the plaintiff is claiming in this case.
And Mr. Reid talked to you about legal cause. Legal cause is a substantial contributing factor. It is a "but for" cause.
"But for" Mr. Calloway's smoking, would he have gotten heart disease or bladder cancer? And I bring this up now because I'm going to talk to you about all the reasons that Mr. Calloway's heart disease and bladder cancer were not caused by his smoking.
But there's a piece here, because even if you believe Mr. Calloway was addicted, and even if you believe the smoking caused his heart disease and bladder cancer, that's not the end of your inquiry. Because you have to find that his addiction was a legal cause of those diseases, "but for." Which brings up what Mr. Reid was talking to you about, quitting.
Could Mr. Calloway have quit years and years ago in time to avoid any smoking-related disease? Could he have quit? And the answer to that you know is yes, because Mr. Calloway did quit. When he was motivated in 1991, after his heart attack, he quit smoking. You know
that from all the things that Mr. Reid told you about.
So in this case, you can believe that Mr. Calloway was addicted, you can believe that smoking led to his heart disease and bladder cancer, but you also have to find that it is the legal cause. Keep that in mind, as you're going through here.
So, let me tell you now about the medical issues in the case, because medical issues in this case dictate "no answers" to both of those questions also. And let's start back where we were several weeks ago. Several weeks ago, I told you there were three questions that you were going to need to answer to decide the medical issues in this case.
And those three questions were: Did smoking cause Mr. Calloway's heart disease? Did smoking cause Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer? And did smoking -- did Mr. Calloway die from his heart disease and bladder cancer? And I told you the answer to each of those questions was no.
The plaintiff has the burden of proof to prove each of those questions to you. The
defendants don't have to prove anything. The defendants don't have to prove how Mr. Calloway died. That is the plaintiff's burden. She bears the burden of proof to bring you credible evidence on all three of those questions.
And not just "maybes," not just "I thinks, maybe, possibilities," not assumptions, but actual evidence that you have heard in this courtroom to support those questions. That is the plaintiff's burden.
And I told you that each of those questions, the answer was no. And I'm going to go through now the evidence that you've heard in this case as to why the answer to each of those questions is no. And let's start with heart disease.
First, what evidence did the plaintiff bring you that Mr. Calloway's heart disease was related to his smoking? Well, it wasn't much.
In fact, it was one doctor. You heard from Dr. Lipton by videotape deposition, and you could have missed it because it was really, really brief. Dr. Lipton was asked: Do you intend to offer any opinions with regard to the cause of his coronary artery disease or MI?
And Dr. Lipton said: I think the smoking was the main cause of the coronary artery disease.
That was it. That is the only testimony the plaintiff has brought to you about smoking and Mr. Calloway's heart disease. And from a pulmonologist.
Now, the Judge read you some instructions, and I'm going to remind you of one, and this is one of the instructions he read you that you can take back. And it says: You have heard opinion testimony from persons referred to as expert witnesses.
You may accept such opinion testimony, reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves, considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training or education of the witness, the reasons given by the witness for the opinion expressed, and all the other evidence in the case.
So let's talk about the knowledge, skill and experience that Dr. Lipton has. Well, the first thing is Dr. Lipton is a pulmonologist.
A pulmonologist treats diseases of the lungs.
Dr. Lipton is not a cardiologist, the person
who treats diseases of the heart.
Now ask yourself why didn't the plaintiffs bring you a cardiologist to talk about cardiac issues? They didn't. They brought you a pulmonologist, a person who had to take the medical boards four times to get certified in his own area, pulmonology.
Dr. Lipton has always worked as a pulmonologist. He now works as an intensivist.
He doesn't treat heart disease now, and he never has. That's not his job. That's not what he does. And, in fact, Dr. Lipton was asked during his testimony: Are you an expert in cardiology?
And his answer was: No.
And that's who the plaintiffs have brought to you to try to prove that Mr. Calloway's heart disease was caused by smoking, someone who is not a cardiologist. Well, who did the defendants bring you?
Defendants brought you Dr. Phillips, a Board-certified cardiologist, someone who has spent his entire career treating people's hearts, diagnosing heart problems, looking at CAT scans, looking at angiograms, looking at
the actual testing that is done to diagnose somebody's heart problem. That is what Dr. Phillips does.
And in fact, people like Dr. Lipton, pulmonologists, refer their patients who have heart disease to cardiologists like Dr. Phillips, because cardiologists like Dr. Phillips specialize in diseases of the heart. So between Dr. Phillips and Dr. Lipton, who is the person who has the experience, training, knowledge, education and skill on cardiac issues? It is clearly Dr. Phillips and not Dr. Lipton.
And which of these two, another thing you are to consider, are the reasons given by the witness for the opinions expressed. Well, which of these two witnesses gave you the reasons for their opinions? Again, it was Dr. Phillips and not Dr. Lipton.
Dr. Lipton offered very little testimony on heart disease. He gave that one sentence, and that's not surprising, because he really has no expertise in heart disease. Although he was in the hospital when Mr. Calloway was being treated for his heart disease, the
cardiologists were treating Mr. Calloway's heart disease, not Dr. Lipton. He was dealing with Mr. Calloway's lung problems.
Now Dr. Phillips came in and told you the reasons why he could give you the opinions he could. And that is because Dr. Phillips sees this all the time. And Dr. Phillips knows the different kinds of coronary artery disease.
That's what he's spent his life doing. And he came in and explained to you that he knew Mr. Calloway had diabetes, based on the medical records that he had reviewed.
And Dr. Phillips knows that diabetes is a risk factor for CAD, coronary artery disease.
Dr. Lipton also told you about Mr. Calloway's -- I mean, Dr. Phillips also told you about Mr. Calloway's extensive family history. Dr. Lipton gave you no basis for his opinion, other than "I think."
Now, Dr. Phillips told you that he knows Mr. Calloway's heart disease was caused by his diabetes, and not by smoking because the way that Mr. Calloway's heart disease looked. And he told you he got this information from the medical records, that Mr. Calloway had severely
diffuse disease.
Remember the difference between diffuse and focal disease? And you can see this in the medical records. You've seen this before.
This is talking about the different arteries that Mr. Calloway had that were diseased that needed to be grafted. And it says becomes a very diseased vessel, the anterior descending, the circumflex is diffusely diseased vessel.
The right coronary is a diffusely diseased vessel. There is diffuse disease throughout this segment.
And why is that important? Because Dr. Phillips explained to you the difference between focal and diffuse disease. You recall I tried to draw a picture of it during opening. Now you have something that you can actually understand. On the left side is the healthy artery. That would be an artery with no disease in it.
In the middle is what you have called typical CAD. Dr. Phillips explained this to you. Plaque builds up on the inside of the artery in one spot of the artery, and that's called focal disease. It's in one local area.
And that is the kind of CAD that you typically see with people who smoke. That is not the type of CAD that Mr. Calloway had.
Mr. Calloway had the CAD in the diagram on the right, and you can see the yellow plaque goes up and down the entire artery. That's the kind of disease, the diffuse disease that you see in people with diabetes.
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object.
THE COURT: Objection is noted. Counsel, we discussed this sidebar. It's overruled.
People, this is a demonstrative aid, this is not in evidence. This is counsel's recollection of the evidence and her argument. Proceed.
MS. GALLAGHER: Dr. Phillips told you that because of the appearance, the diffuse disease that he saw in the medical records.
And he, as a cardiologist, knows what diffuse disease looks like, that he could tell you that Mr. Calloway's coronary artery disease was not caused by smoking; it was caused by diabetes.
Now, plaintiff wanted you to believe that Mr. Calloway had only minor or insignificant diabetes; that it was diet-controlled and
called "borderline". Well, Dr. Phillips told you about that, too, and he said that there were numerous places in the medical records where doctors note that had Mr. Calloway had diabetes.
And these are some pull-outs from some of the various medical records that are in evidence over here that you can pull out and see. But rather than pull up each one, these are some of the different times that Mr. Calloway's doctors noted that he was diabetic.
Now, the plaintiffs also tried to get you to believe that the diabetes without complications that was in the Florida Medical Center billing records, that that somehow meant that Mr. Calloway's diabetes was insignificant.
But you know from looking at the Florida Medical Center billing records -- Dr. MacIntyre went over these -- that what is in a billing code entry, you have to go to the billing code book to see what it includes, because the definitions for billing aren't necessarily the same as the definitions that doctors use.
Remember him talking about that? And he
said that the definition for diabetes without complications just means diabetes. Doesn't tell you how severe it is, doesn't tell you how significant it is.
And all that really doesn't matter, because Dr. Phillips told you that it was the fact that Mr. Calloway had diabetes that was important to him; not whether he had to be on medication for it, not whether he needed insulin, but the fact that he had diabetes.
Because as a cardiologist, he knows that's what leads to diffuse CAD.
Now, Dr. Phillips also considered Mr. Calloway's family history. Remember what Dr. Phillips said about family history: It is probably the greatest single predictor of whether someone will end up with heart disease. It runs in families. He told you that.
And he also told you that he had reviewed all the depositions in the case that had talked about Mr. Calloway's family, who had diabetes and who had heart disease. And he told you that both Mr. Calloway's parents, his mother and father, both of them had diabetes. And his
And of the ten children, Mr. Calloway and his nine brothers and sisters, seven of them had heart disease, and six of them had diabetes. You need to look no further than Mr. Calloway's family to see the relationship between diabetes and heart disease.
Now, the other thing that I was talking to you about right at the beginning was legal cause, this "but for" standard. But for Mr. Calloway's addiction, would he have developed heart disease? And the answer to that is no. Dr. Phillips told you that.
He told you that if Mr. Calloway had never ever picked up a cigarette, he was still going to have this type of coronary artery disease. He was going to have that type of coronary artery disease because he had diabetes and because it ran in his family.
Smoking did not play a substantial contributing factor in Mr. Calloway's heart disease. That's the credible evidence that you have in front of you.
Now, you are also asked a question on the verdict form that you haven't seen, and that is was Mr. Calloway's death caused by heart
disease? And let me say that there is not a single doctor who has testified in this case that Mr. Calloway's heart disease led to his death, contributed to his death, much less was a substantial contributing factor in his death.
You've heard from eight different medical doctors in this case on medical issues. You've heard from psychiatrists on addiction issues. But on medical issues, there were eight different doctors who testified here. And not one of them said that Mr. Calloway's heart problems had anything to do with his death. Not one.
Mr. Hammer got up in closing and told you, well, maybe he was weakened, and maybe that led to susceptibility to an infection.
Well that's maybes upon maybes, not based on any testimony, on any evidence you have heard in this case. This is an assumption, and there is absolutely no evidence to support that.
So the answer to the first question of whether Mr. Calloway's addiction was the legal cause of his heart disease is no. And it did not have any thing to do with his death.
Now, the second question I told you about
relates to bladder cancer. Did Mr. Calloway's smoking cause his bladder cancer? And I want to back up and remind you of something Mr. Reid told you in opening statements several weeks ago and he alluded to it again day. And he said that you would be in a different position than a lot of people who came to testify in this case.
And he was right. You are in a different position because you have all of the facts.
You have all of the pieces of the puzzle when making your determination as to the answers to these questions. Because you're in a different position than the treating doctors that the plaintiffs brought you.
The doctors who actually treated Mr. Calloway didn't have all the pieces of the puzzle. The plaintiff's lawyers had sent them the medical records, but the plaintiff's lawyers never sent those experts the depositions in this case, the fact witnesses.
So those doctors, when they were giving their opinions, didn't have all the pieces of the puzzle that you have today. And it matters, because in reaching an expert opinion,
you need to have all of the facts. And they simply did not.
So let's go through what you heard about bladder cancer and smoking. The first person that the plaintiffs brought you was Dr. Greenberg. Dr. Greenberg, the oncologist. He testified by video deposition.
Now, Dr. Greenberg is a doctor who treats cancer. He's the oncologist. Once you're diagnosed with cancer, you go see the oncologist. Dr. Greenberg doesn't diagnose cancer. By the time people see him, they've been diagnosed and they are coming for treatment.
He doesn't need to know what caused somebody's cancer in order to treat it. He is there to treat it. And Dr. Greenberg doesn't specialize in bladder cancer. In fact, he testified at the time of his deposition last year that he hadn't seen a bladder cancer case in over six years. It's not something he does on a regular basis.
And he told you he's not an expert in urology. Urologists are the doctors who diagnose bladder cancer in people. They are
the ones who make the determination of whether someone has bladder cancer, not an oncologist. And Dr. Greenberg, you can tell he doesn't know a whole lot about bladder cancer, because he was wrong about some of the facts he gave you about bladder cancer.
For example, he told you that the relative risk -- you might remember that term -- the relative risk of getting bladder cancer from smoking was 20. Well, Dr. Nieder, the urologist who actually studies this, who knows what that relative risk is, told you it was 3. Dr. Greenberg was just wrong about that.
Dr. Greenberg was wrong when he told you the percentage of people who get bladder cancer from smoking. He told you it was 90 percent.
Dr. Soloway, the expert urologist the plaintiffs brought you, said no. He has published in literature before that 45 to 50 percent of bladder cancers are caused by smoking, and he got on the stand and said:
That's about the same percentage in the general population.
And Dr. Nieder confirmed that number.
Said it's about half of bladder cancers are associated with smoking. Dr. Greenberg just had those facts wrong. And that's because it's not something Dr. Greenberg does. He just doesn't specialize in that area.
The plaintiffs also brought you Dr. Lipton, the pulmonologist I was just talking about. Dr. Lipton's not an expert in urology, he doesn't diagnose bladder cancer, he doesn't treat bladder cancer. In fact,
Dr. Lipton was asked if he had somebody with bladder cancer, what would he do, and he said: I'd refer them to a urologist because that's what urologists do. That's not what pulmonologists do.
Dr. Lipton couldn't answer the question about Mr. Calloway's prognosis. Dr. Lipton was asked: Well, what would Mr. Calloway's prognosis been if he came in in May of 1991, when he first had blood in his urine, versus May of 1992? Dr. Lipton said, I don't know.
I'm not an expert in that field.
And that's who the plaintiffs want you to rely on, people who are testifying outside of their areas, giving you opinions about things
that they are not experts in. Dr. Lipton also told you what he did to prepare for his testimony on bladder cancer was he got on the Internet -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. This is not in evidence.
MS. GALLAGHER: It was in his testimony, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, again, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed, Counsel.
MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you, Your Honor.
He did some research and he learned for the first time that occupational exposures could be a risk for bladder cancer. But then he couldn't tell you if Mr. Calloway was at risk for any occupation he'd ever had because he told you he couldn't find Mr. Calloway's occupational exposures.
Well, the reason he couldn't find Mr. Calloway's occupational exposures is because that information was in the depositions, the depositions that the plaintiff's attorneys did not send to their own
experts. He couldn't consider something he doesn't know about.
Dr. Lipton also said he couldn't rule out occupational exposures as playing a role in the development of Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer. Drs. Greenberg and Lipton simply do not have the education, experience, training in determining the cause of somebody's bladder cancer. They can't give you a reliable opinion because they don't have that expertise and because they didn't consider all the facts.
Now, the plaintiffs did bring you somebody who does have the credentials, who is an expert in urology, and that was Dr. Soloway. The problem is, Dr. Soloway didn't consider all the pieces of the puzzle.
Unlike Mr. Calloway's treating physicians, the other experts the plaintiffs brought you, the ones who actually treated Mr. Calloway, Dr. Soloway was sent the depositions of the family members. He was sent the depositions of the people who knew Mr. Calloway. The problem is, he just didn't use it. Dr. Soloway either forgot about or ignored a lot of the facts that were in those
depositions.
In fact, one of the things that was interesting about Dr. Soloway was when he was talking about how Mr. Calloway started smoking, and he said: I'm sure he bummed a cigarette from a friend or family and then started smoking on his own later.
Well, you remember the testimony of how Mr. Calloway started smoking with his brother Frank, and they stole the cigarettes from the father, and went out and both of them got sick the first time they started smoking.
Dr. Soloway was just not that familiar with the facts of this case.
And what important pieces of this puzzle did Dr. Soloway not consider? He didn't consider diabetes. Remember he told you that's just not a risk factor for bladder cancer. He told you it's his job to keep up with the literature as to these risk factors that are being discovered with bladder cancer, but he just hasn't done it.
Because Dr. Nieder, when he was cross-examined, told you that there were studies that show that there is an association
between bladder cancer -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object. This is just not in evidence. It's bolstering from stuff that is not in evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Overruled.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the facts. Proceed.
MS. GALLAGHER: Dr. Nieder told you that diabetes is a risk factor for bladder cancer.
That's something Dr. Soloway just didn't consider, because he didn't know about it or didn't take the time to learn about it.
Dr. Soloway also didn't consider occupational exposures. He knew and told you that there were certain occupations that there's a higher risk of getting bladder cancer if you work in them, but he didn't know what all of Mr. Calloway's occupations had been.
He knew that there were some occupations, but he did not know that working with cement, being a cement finisher, was one of the occupations that increases a person's risk of getting bladder cancer. He simply didn't know about that risk factor, either because he
hasn't kept up with the literature or he hasn't looked for it.
Now, in listening to Dr. Soloway, you might have thought -- or actually from Dr. Greenberg and Lipton, you might have thought that smoking was the only cause of bladder cancer, but it's not. Dr. Soloway told you that there are people who have never smoked a cigarette in their life that get bladder cancer.
Dr. Soloway told you that the majority of smokers don't get bladder cancer, and Dr. Soloway told you that there is a percentage of the population that has absolutely zero risk factors known to science at this time, and those people get bladder cancer.
All of the people, the doctors the plaintiffs brought you to talk about Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer and the cause of it, either aren't experts in the field or did not consider all of the evidence. Dr. Nieder did.
Dr. Nieder, the urologist from Colombia University -- the difference between Dr. Nieder and the plaintiff's experts is that the defense
experts had all of the information. The defendant sent all of the depositions, the fact witnesses, the family members, the treating physicians, sent that information to the defendants' experts, so they would have the full picture; so that they would not be constrained by not knowing all the facts in the case before they gave their opinions.
The doctors the plaintiffs brought you, their analysis was simple: Mr. Calloway smoked, Mr. Calloway got bladder cancer. Therefore, Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer was caused by smoking, period. That's the end of the discussion.
The bottom line is they simply did not consider all of the evidence. And that's not considering all of the evidence; that's considering the evidence only that supports your opinion. You, ladies and gentlemen, have all of the evidence. So what risk factors did Mr. Calloway have?
The one before that, Juan. There we go. Bladder cancer and risk factors. Now, you remember these risk factors were talked about
by Dr Soloway and/or Dr Nieder
MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object again to this. Not in evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, the slide is not in evidence.
That's correct. This is a visual aid to assist. This is client's recollection of the testimony. You are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. Proceed,
Counsel.
MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you, Your Honor.
So what risk factors did Mr. Calloway have? He was male. You heard Dr. Soloway say that men get bladder cancer twice as often as women do. His age. Mr. Calloway was in that group of 90 percent of people who get bladder cancer, at age 55 or older.
His diabetes. Now these -- his smoking.
Dr. Nieder and Dr. Soloway both told you that smoking is a risk factor to getting bladder cancer, but that's where Dr. Soloway stopped, because he didn't consider diabetes and he didn't consider occupational exposures. He simply did not consider all of the evidence.
Those are all risk factors that Mr. Calloway had.
And remember when I was talking to you about risk factors in opening, I talked about relative risk. That's how scientists decide what the additional risk is. If somebody engages in certain behaviors, have certain diseases, are born as a male or female, have increased age, those are relative risks.
Remember the example I used; if there's a relative risk that's higher of you getting in a wreck if you're speeding. It doesn't mean you're going to get in a wreck if you speed.
And it doesn't mean if you got in a wreck, it was caused by speeding. It's a risk factor.
And the relative risk for bladder cancer and smoking is about 3. The relative risk for bladder cancer and diabetes is about 2.
And Dr. Nieder told you clinically those are so close, it's just not that big a difference. And in addition to having those two, diabetes and smoking, Mr. Calloway had occupational exposures. You've heard through the fact witnesses in this case that Mr. Calloway worked with cement for decades.
And you heard from his sister and his son Harry that he would come home, he would aet
cement dust on his clothes, he would have cement on his skin, and he actually worked with the cement. You heard his daughters talk about when they were with him, he was acting as a supervisor. When his sons were with him, when he was actually working, he was getting cement on him.
And Dr. Nieder told you about the deposition testimony of Mrs. Calloway, that when they were married, she would wash cement off Mr. Calloway's clothes two to three times a week. That was information that Dr. Nieder had that Dr. Soloway ignored and Mr. Calloway's treating physicians were never provided with. They had incomplete evidence. They had pieces missing from the puzzle.
Now I want to talk to you, because Mr. Hammer, earlier today, put up some testimony from Dr. Nieder, some very confusing questions, double negatives. I'm saying he wasn't going to die likely on June 17, 1992, if he didn't have bladder cancer.
I don't know what that means. But I do know that Dr. Nieder was asked some very direct questions, and he was asked: Doctor, in your
opinion, did Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer play a role in his -- let me start over. I got that all wrong.
Doctor, is it your opinion that Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer did not play a role in his death on June 17th?
And he said: That's correct.
Doctor, what is your opinion as to what role Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer had in causing his death on June 17th?
He answered: Minimal, if any.
And he was asked the real question, the standard that you have to apply, not whether it may be a cause or could be a cause or possibly was a cause: Was it a substantial contributing factor to his death on June 17th?
And Dr. Nieder said: I don't believe so.
As Dr. Nieder told you, with a person who has multiple risk factors, there is no way to tell which, if any, of those risk factors gave somebody bladder cancer or led to somebody getting bladder cancer. You don't know, because there's no test.
You can't look at the tumor, you can't look at where it is, you can't look at how big
it is, you can't do any tests on it. Nothing tells you this is what caused somebody's bladder cancer. And when you've got this many risk factors, there is simply no way to tell which one, if any, caused Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer.
Because remember, 50 percent of the people in Florida -- Dr. Nieder told you this -- have never smoked a cigarette.
Dr. Soloway told you that environmental factors are so ubiquitous, meaning they're everywhere, you can't really define them and you can't -it's hard to stay away from them. There are so many things out there that science just doesn't know about.
50 percent of the people have no known risk factors. There's simply no way to tell, if a person has a risk factor, if that is the cause of their bladder cancer. And if they've got multiple risk factors, there's no way to say which one was a substantial contributing cause to that bladder cancer. So the answer to question number 2 is no.
Now, the last area I want to talk to you about is the question of whether Mr. Calloway's
bladder cancer led to his death. And this is where the medicine gets really complex, because there's a lot going on with Mr. Calloway when he was in the hospital in May and June of 1992.
But looking at all the evidence, the evidence is that Mr. Calloway died from hypovolemic shock -- you can take that down, Juan -- died from hypovolemic shock. And the hypovolemic shock developed as a recurrence of his C. diff. And he got that C. diff from being on antibiotics in the hospital, antibiotics that were used to treat an infection that he walked into Broward with on May 8th of 1992.
As Dr. MacIntyre told you, Mr. Calloway died with bladder cancer, not from bladder cancer. Now, in order to believe the plaintiff's story on Mr. Calloway's dying of septic shock, there are several things you have to believe, and there are several things you have to assume.
And one of those is that Mr. Calloway -I need a bigger marker -- is that Mr. Calloway had septic shock. That's the first thing you have to believe, to believe the chain that the
plaintiffs have put forth. And you have to believe that he died of septic shock and not hypovolemic shock.
Everybody agrees that Mr. Calloway died of shock. But the question was: Was it septic or was it hypovolemic? Now, for septic, it's got to be that Mr. Calloway developed some raging, out-of-control infection that advanced so far that it got septic and sent him into septic shock in a very few days. Hard to do.
But it is very clear that Mr. Calloway could have developed hypovolemic shock from the massive severe diarrhea and vomiting he had for the four days after he got out of Broward.
Now, plaintiff tells you that it's septic shock because that's what is on the death certificate; a death certificate that was completed by Dr. Ramos, who at the time had been practicing medicine in private practice for two years.
There is no evidence -- other evidence to support septic shock as Mr. Calloway's cause of death. What is supported is hypovolemic shock. And I'm going to come back to this record, because this record shows you hypovolemia, and
it shows you shock without trauma. Hypovolemia and shock is hypovolemic shock.
All of the witnesses that the plaintiffs brought you who said yes, Mr. Calloway died of septic shock didn't have the whole piece -- all the puzzle pieces. They accepted what was on the death certificate, but they had a significant limitation. They had no information as to Mr. Calloway's condition, once he was discharged from Broward and until he went into Florida Medical Center.
And they didn't have that information because it was in the depositions, the depositions that the plaintiff's lawyers did not send to them. They knew nothing about his diarrhea, they knew nothing about his vomiting, because they weren't provided that information. And Dr. Soloway, again, he had that information; but apparently he just didn't consider it.
Remember when he was asked by the plaintiff's attorney during this trial: What was Mr. Calloway's condition after he was discharged, before he went to Florida Medical
He said: I'm sure he was weak and didn't feel well. He said nothing about the massive, smelly, worsening diarrhea that Mrs. Calloway described in her deposition and Ms. Williams described in her deposition.
Now, in order to believe that Mr. Calloway died of septic shock, you also have to believe that he had sepsis; because you can't have septic shock without sepsis. But there's no evidence of sepsis. Remember you heard that sepsis has its own symptoms? Fever, shaking, chills, an altered mental status over a period of time. That's what sepsis is.
And there is absolutely no evidence that you have heard that Mr. Calloway had any of those symptoms from the time he was discharged at Broward until the time he went into Florida Medical Center. You also have to believe, for septic shock, that Mr. Calloway had an infection; because you can't get septic without an infection.
What infection did he have? All of the doctors who treated Mr. Calloway, the treating physicians who testified to you told you: I can't tell you what kind of infection he had.
I don't know. Don't know what the underlying infection was that led to sepsis that led to septic shock.
Dr. Soloway told you I'm not sure what he had, but I believe it was related to all the tubes he had in his body when he left Broward. Again, the problem with that is Dr. Soloway simply doesn't know the medical facts. Because the only tube that Mr. Calloway left the hospital with was his nephrostomy tube. The catheter was out, the belly tube was out. He had one tube.
And we know that from the medical records. This is Mr. Calloway's discharge summary from Broward. The patient is being discharged, voiding clear urine. He's urinating himself, and with a left nephrostomy tube in place. Again, Dr. Soloway just didn't have the medical facts right.
Mr. Calloway had no signs of an infection when he left Broward on June 11th. His last white blood cell count had been done two days before, and it was normal. It was 6,500. He had had no fever and had been off broad-spectrum antibiotics for over a week. So
there was no indication that Mr. Calloway had any infection when he left Broward.
Now, the other thing that comes back is this billing record because, as Dr. MacIntyre explained to you, there are ICD codes for infection. There is a code for urinary tract infection, for pneumonia. And none of those are on here. There is no indication of any infection when Mr. Calloway is in Florida Medical Center from June 15th, when he comes in in the emergency room, until he passes away on June 17th.
But what do we know about what happened to Mr. Calloway while he was at Florida Medical Center? Dr. Ramos told you about that.
Dr. Ramos said it's been too long. Nobody would expect somebody to remember a patient they had 20 years ago. But he said he probably saw him for a little more than an hour. No reason he would remember Mr. Calloway.
But what he did tell you is I can tell you what happens in the emergency room. If somebody comes in with symptoms like Mr. Calloway, they're going to get a full workup. We're going to test their blood, their
urine, their sputum, and we're going to send those off to be cultured, just like Dr. MacIntyre was talking about.
That's how you see if someone has an infection. Look for their urine, culture that to see if they have a urinary tract infection.
And what did Dr. Ramos tell you? He told you all those cultures would be back in 24 to 48 to 72 hours. Those tests were sent off on the 15th when he was at the emergency room.
Dr. Ramos signed the death certificate on June 18th.
Mr. Gdanski asked Dr. Ramos when he was on the stand: Before you signed the death certificate, would you have had access to the entire medical chart? Would you have reviewed the entire medical chart?
And Dr. Ramos's answer was yes. He would have had the entire chart before him. And if there was an infection shown by any of the testing the lab had done, it would have been in the chart. It simply is not there.
Now you also have to believe, if you believe septic shock, is that Mr. Calloway had agranulocytosis. Agranulocytosis, which the
plaintiffs want you to believe Mr. Calloway got from his chemotherapy. Agranulocytosis is a dangerously low white blood cell count.
But what do you know about Mr. Calloway's chemotherapy? First you know there were many rounds planned. You saw that in his discharge summary. But at the time he had had one round of chemotherapy, and all of the doctors reported that Mr. Calloway tolerated that chemotherapy well. He had one episode of vomiting at the time they were giving him the chemo, and then he was doing well.
And the vomiting that Mr. Calloway had when he got out of Broward, before he went back into Florida Medical Center, wasn't from the chemo. You know that from Dr. Greenberg and Dr. MacIntyre. Remember they said if you're going to get vomiting from chemo, you get it at the time. You don't get it a week later. So the vomiting he was having then was not related to his chemo.
We know that Mr. Calloway, at least on June 9th, had a normal white blood cell count.
In order for him to get agranulocytosis, his white blood cell count would have had to fall
dramatically in a period of a few days. And we don't even know that Mr. Calloway actually had agranulocytosis, because the only place we got that word is from the billing records.
And again, remember Dr. MacIntyre told you that the word in the billing codes may not be the same as the medical definition. And agranulocytosis includes a number of blood issues, including leukopenia, a low white blood cell count. So all we know from this agranulocytosis is that Mr. Calloway did not have a normal white blood cell count.
We don't know if it was 100, 3,900. All we know is that it was below normal of 4,000. And nothing about that tells you that his white blood cell count got so low as to allow an infection to go raging to get septic, to get septic shock.
These are all links in a chain. You have to believe that Mr. Calloway had an infection. You have to believe that the infection -- that agranulocytosis led to the infection or the infection led to agranulocytosis. These are linked. And you have to believe that the infection in a period of three or four days led
to sepsis, and you have to believe that that sepsis led to septic shock in a matter of three or four days.
And if you don't believe any of those, like you don't believe he had an infection because it's not noted anywhere and Dr. Ramos would have seen it, then this chain is broken. And if that chain is broken, then Mr. Calloway did not die as a result of the chemo he received for his bladder cancer. If any one of those chains is broken, the whole thing falls apart.
So let's talk about what the evidence does support as far as Mr. Calloway's cause of death. What the evidence does support is that Mr. Calloway got hypovolemic shock from hypovolemia that was due to massive diarrhea from a recurrence of C. diff, from antibiotics that were used to treat an infection he walked into Broward with.
Juan, could you put this back?
Ladies and gentlemen, you've seen this timeline before. Let's see if we can do this without knocking over the easels. All right.
So what does this timeline show? It starts
over here in March or April of 1992.
And the reason it starts in March or April of 1992, because as -- here we go, so you can see better. Can everybody see that? It starts in March or April of 1992 because that's when Mr. Calloway tells his doctors he started getting night sweats.
And what's important about the night sweats? Because Dr. MacIntyre told you that fever is one of the things that causes night sweats. And fever is the prime symptom of an infection. So that tells you that Mr. Calloway had signs of an infection back in March and April of 1992, months before he ever went to Broward.
Then he comes into Broward and his chief complaints of sharp pains, nausea, vomiting, blood in the urine, shortness of breath and history of fever. And Dr. MacIntyre told you that is all consistent with an infection. And it's all consistent with what his doctors did.
We know Mr. Calloway's doctors thought he had an infection when he came in on May 8 of 1992. We know that that infection was pneumonia. That's what they put in the
discharge summary. But we know that they thought he had an infection when he walked in because his doctors put him on antibiotics immediately.
He was in the emergency room that morning. That afternoon about 5:00, when he's admitted, his doctors start him on antibiotics.
They thought he had an infection. As Dr. MacIntyre told you, if somebody had the signs and symptoms of an infection, you don't wait to figure out where the infection is.
If you think they've got an infection, they start antibiotics, and that's what his doctors did. And that infection was pneumonia.
As Juan showed you from this discharge summary, there were only two infections Mr. Calloway was noted to have the entire time he was in the hospital. One was pneumonia; one was C. diff.
Now, the plaintiffs evidence in this has been very confusing. On one hand, they want you to believe that Mr. Calloway had pneumonia. They brought evidence, witnesses to tell you that it was pneumonia, except they say it was hospital-acquired. And then they say, no, no, no, wasn't pneumonia. It was actually a
urinary tract infection. That's what Dr. Soloway said.
And then they say no, no, no, it's not pneumonia or urinary tract infection. It's a tumor fever. That's what was causing his fevers. Well, it can't be all three. And let me go through why it is a pneumonia that was community-acquired that Mr. Calloway walked into Broward with.
First of all, for a hospital-acquired pneumonia, every doctor who was asked said if somebody gets a hospital-acquired pneumonia, they note it in the medical records. And nowhere in the entire medical records is it noted that Mr. Calloway's pneumonia was hospital-acquired. All it says is pneumonia.
When his pneumonia appears in the medical records, this is pneumonia; not pneumonia, comma, hospital-acquired. Not hospital-acquired pneumonia. Just pneumonia. You notice even in the FMC records, they actually even have -- it's not on this one.
The FMC records actually have a line on the billing records to indicate if somebody has a hospital-acauired infection.
So at Broward, not a single doctor said it was hospital-acquired. See, remember this record from Florida Medical Center? On the billing records they even indicate if somebody has a hospital-acquired infection. That's how seriously they take it. And it was never noted anywhere in the Broward records that this was a hospital-acquired infection.
Now, we know Mr. Calloway's doctors thought he did, because they started him on antibiotics back here on May 8th of 1992. They put him on a broad-spectrum antibiotic. And what did his doctors say after that?
Dr. Hernandez was asked: What kind of antibiotic did you give Mr. Calloway?
He said, one to treat pneumonia.
It wasn't for a urinary tract infection.
It was an antibiotic specifically for pneumonia. And it was pneumonia, because that's what is on the discharge summary.
That's what Dr. Winkler said in his discharge summary, after caring for Mr. Calloway and looking at the records to complete the discharge summary.
Now, plaintiff also talked about the
chest X-ray. You remember Dr. MacIntyre getting cross-examined about the chest X-ray and how it didn't show pneumonia, when actually it showed the exact opposite. It did show pneumonia.
Dr. MacIntyre told you the pleural effusion, infiltrates, the things that were on that X-ray report are consistent with somebody having pneumonia. And it's the same X-ray report that Mr. Calloway's doctors saw, and they diagnosed him with pneumonia.
Now, plaintiffs second theory was no, it's not a pneumonia. It's a UTI, even though a urinary tract infection is listed nowhere in the discharge summary. You'll have that discharge summary, and you can look at it. Plaintiff wants you to believe that Mr. Calloway had a urinary tract infection that was related to his bladder cancer.
The problem is that Mr. Calloway was tested numerous times for urinary tract infection, and every single one of them came back negative. There are five of them on here. Urine culture from the nephrostomy tube, urine culture, negative. Urine culture from the
nephrostomy tube and bladder are negative.
Mr. Calloway was tested five times to see if he had a urinary tract infection, and every single one of them was negative. And Dr. MacIntyre even explained to you that this urine culture test, the one on the 8th, was done before Mr. Calloway had received any antibiotics.
You can see it in the emergency room where it says urinalysis done in the morning when he's in the emergency room, and he's not given antibiotics until that night. So the first urine culture that was done, there were no antibiotics on board.
If there was an infection, it would have appeared. It would have been discovered. And the records are replete that Mr. Calloway did not have a urinary tract infection.
Juan, will you pull up -- this is from Dr. Winkler. And Juan, would you pull up the date, please? It's at the bottom.
This is two days after Mr. Calloway has been admitted. And what does Dr. Winkler say? See the circle with the negative, with the minus sign? That's negative UTI. He has no --
negative burning with urination. So this is two days later. This is the test from the urinalysis taken in the emergency room, and it shows no urinary tract infection.
There are more. This is one from the nephrostomy tube. Remember how Dr. MacIntyre explained that there was bladder blocked in the nephrostomy tube in the kidney; that's where the cancer was blocking and that's where they had to put the tube in? And remember he told you that urine was trapped there, because it couldn't go anywhere.
So there's nothing circulating in or out.
No antibiotics could get to it and that showed no growth. No growth means no infection.
That's the on the 21st. And here we are,
Dr. Winkler again, the urology consult at the end of May. Again, all cultures, blood and urine, are negative. Mr. Calloway's doctors kept testing for one, and they never found one.
Now, the plaintiff showed one record to Dr. MacIntyre and said: Well, doesn't this show that he had a urinary tract infection?
And it was this record from Dr. Hernandez, where it says UTI check, slash, negative. And
Mr. Johnstone, who was cross-examining Dr. MacIntyre, said doesn't that tell you he had a UTI.
And Dr. MacIntyre said no. What that means is they had checked for a urinary tract infection, and it was negative. Nowhere in the medical records anywhere is there a positive culture or a diagnosis of a urinary tract infection.
Now, Dr. Hernandez, the doctor that the plaintiffs brought you in rebuttal, testified to you that he believed Mr. Calloway had a UTI. This is almost 20 years after he was treated,
Mr. Calloway. And only in this litigation has he testified that Mr. Calloway had a UTI. His records are some of the records that we're looking at, and nowhere in those records, 20 years ago, did Dr. Hernandez ever say Mr. Calloway had a urinary tract infection. Nowhere.
If he really thought 20 years ago that Mr. Calloway had a urinary tract infection, he would have written it down in the records. And if he wrote it down in the records, it would have made it to the discharge summary where
they record these infections. It wasn't there.
It's only after he's been involved in this litigation that he now says Mr. Calloway had a UTI, based on a lab report that he says exists that is nowhere in the medical records.
That's the only doctor who treated Mr. Calloway who says he had a UTI. A doctor who has absolutely no recollection of this patient is basing his testimony on the medical records 20 years later and now says he has a urinary tract infection.
Dr. Soloway actually told you Mr. Calloway never had a pneumonia. Remember? He said just because the doctors wrote it down -- talking about pneumonia -- doesn't mean they're right. Dr. Soloway says Mr. Calloway never had a pneumonia. He had a UTI. You just can't tell, because the antibiotics masked it.
Once you have antibiotics on board, the cultures may not show up.
Well, the problem, again, is Dr. Soloway simply doesn't know all the facts. Because if he had really looked at the facts, he would have known that the very first urine culture was done before Mr. Calloway was eiven anv
antibiotics.
And then finally, the last thing the plaintiffs will tell you or brought evidence on, was that no, it wasn't pneumonia, it wasn't a UTI; it was a bladder tumor fever. Well, the problem with that is that nowhere in the medical records does it say that Mr. Calloway's fever was caused by his bladder tumor.
And as Dr. MacIntyre told you, there are certain cancers that cause people to get fevers, but bladder cancer isn't one of them.
It doesn't cause tumor fever. And to believe that Mr. Calloway had tumor fever, you would have to believe that his doctors just gave him antibiotics for a long period of time to treat an infection he never had.
That's just not credible. Clearly all of Mr. Calloway's doctors thought he had an infection. What they thought he had was a pneumonia, and what they thought he had was a pneumonia that he walked into Broward with.
Now, as Dr. MacIntyre explained to you,
Mr. Calloway was being treated on two different tracks here. There was the track he was on about what infection does he have? How do we
identify that infection and how do we treat it?
The second track that he was on was the bladder cancer track. That track was trying to figure out what was causing blood in his urine. And then once he was diagnosed with bladder cancer, how do we treat that bladder cancer?
Two separate things that he was being treated for during the same hospitalization:
The infection track, identify and treat the infection; and bladder cancer. Figure out what the blood in the urine is from, diagnose and treat that. Remember, he called that concurrent treatment, being treated for more than one thing at the hospital.
So let's go back to the timeline, because Dr. MacIntyre explained all these different antibiotics to you, and he told you which of these antibiotics actually -- what they're for. And he told you -- kind of out of order. You have to go up, down and back up. He told you that Cefotan, Primaxin, Ancef, Cipro were all antibiotics that could cause C. diff.
Then he told you that vancomycin, which Mr. Calloway was on over here at the end of May, and Flagyl, are two antibiotics that
actually kill C. diff. And then that leaves one antibiotic, the Gentamicin, the only antibiotic that Mr. Calloway was on specifically for his bladder cancer.
Remember, that was the antibiotic that he was given prophylactically for the surgery for that one day? That's the only antibiotic related to Mr. Calloway's bladder cancer. And what did Dr. MacIntyre tell you about that antibiotic? It's neutral. It doesn't cause C. diff and it doesn't kill C. diff.
So we know that Mr. Calloway was on antibiotics for a long period of time. Starts over here on the 8th, and he continues on antibiotics all the way through June 2nd and 3rd. And then what happens? On June 2nd,
Mr. Calloway has several episodes of diarrhea. You'll see in the medical records, it's three or four times on June 2nd.
His doctors figure out what he has, C. diff, and they treat it. They take him off Cipro and put him on Flagyl. And we know that Mr. Calloway had C. diff because the lab actually tested for it. They cultured it like these other things.
Okay. Here is a consultation report from June -- Juan, can you blow up that date, please, for me? There we go. June 3rd.
Reason for consultation: The patient has developed diarrhea while on antibiotics. A test for C. difficile has been positive, and I have been called in consultation in reference to treatment.
What does that tell you? His doctors realize he has C. diff, and it developed while he was on antibiotics. That's what everybody in the hospital thought. There was some implication that perhaps Mr. Calloway picked up C. diff while he was in the hospital. Well, that's just speculation, ladies and gentlemen, because all of the medical records point to his antibiotics as the cause of Mr. Calloway's C. diff.
It is a known complication from being on certain of these antibiotics that Mr. Calloway had been on for an extended period of time, and that's what his doctors thought he had. And so what do they do? They take him off these other antibiotics that can cause C. diff, and they put him on Flagyl, which is what you're
supposed to do, because Flagyl kills C. diff.
The problem is, he's only on C. diff -he's only on Flagyl for two or three or four days. And as Dr. MacIntyre explained to you,
C. diff is a bacteria that can form a spore. Remember he said that they have -- they are like in a tornado shelter, and that they throw off these toxins, but that they don't die; they still live in these spores.
Well, Mr. Calloway's doctors give him the Flagyl, and his symptoms go away. His symptoms go away, but the C. diff isn't completely gone.
The C. diff is hunkered down in the tornado shelter, and it quits throwing off the toxins, so that the C. diff test they do on him later doesn't detect toxins.
So his doctors think he's negative. But then Mr. Calloway is discharged. And once he is discharged, you heard Mrs. Calloway say his diarrhea comes back. And you heard Ms. Williams talk about how smelly it was. Remember Dr. MacIntyre saying because of the toxins that this C. diff throws off it's a very smelly diarrhea?
The diarrhea gets worse and worse and
worse each passing day, until Mrs. Calloway is helping Mr. Calloway to the restroom and he passes out. And remember Mrs. Calloway and Ms. Williams both said they thought he had died. Until he gets completely horizontal again and, as Ms. Williams told you, when EMS was rolling him out, he was completely lucid.
Remember what Dr. MacIntyre said? That's completely consistent with hypovolemia and hypovolemic shock, because hypovolemia is not having enough fluids in your body. It lowers the blood volume you have, so there's not enough blood getting to your brain. Once you get horizontal again, you get enough blood to the brain, and the person comes to. Exactly what happened with Mr. Calloway.
Mr. Calloway had persistent worsening diarrhea that led to a decrease in his blood volume, which led to hypovolemia and led to hypovolemic shock, just like you saw on this FMC record. Hypovolemia and shock without trauma.
Shock without trauma would include septic shock and hypovolemic shock. And the thing that supports hypovolemic shock, in addition to
the evidence that you have heard in this case is this, hypovolemia right there.
The doctors the plaintiffs brought you, the treating physicians didn't know about this, because they didn't know about the testimony about the diarrhea. They had no idea of this C. diff. Dr. Ramos said he wouldn't have known of it. He would not have had the Broward records when he was treating Mr. Calloway at Florida Medical Center, and none of those doctors were provided the depositions where that information exists.
So let's talk about the death certificate, because that's what the plaintiffs are relying on.
THE COURT: Excuse me. Could I see counsel sidebar for a second?
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MS. GALLAGHER: Five minutes.
THE COURT: Okay. That's what you need, five minutes? How much time?
MR. PEDROSA: Two minutes max.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Only two.
MS. GALLAGHER: How long have I been now'
THE COURT: About an hour, 18 minutes. I wonder how far -MS. GALLAGHER: I'm on my last page. THE COURT: Starting a new topic. I just want to make sure they have a chance to talk too. Thank you.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: I'm sorry. You may proceed when you're ready.
MS. GALLAGHER: Thank you, Your Honor. All right. So let's look at this death certificate. You have this in evidence. I want to look at some of this death certificate.
Here is where it says septic shock. And on this death certificate are instructions for filling out the death certificate.
And over here it says sequentially list conditions leading to immediate underlying cause, disease, or injuries. Right here.
That's where you're supposed to list something that caused the septic shock, the whole chain. That's what you put right here. What led to the septic shock? And it's blank.
Down here is bladder cancer. If
Dr. Ramos believed that bladder cancer led to the septic shock, then it should be up here on the death certificate and not down here, which says "other significant conditions contributing to death, but not resulting in the cause given in part 1."
This, the leukopenia, the bladder cancer, the dehydration, did not result in septic shock. That's what Dr. Ramos is saying when he fills out this death certificate. The Florida Medical Center records tell you, billing records tell you what actually happened.
The consistent evidence in this case, without having to make assumptions, without having to ignore what's in the records, is that Mr. Calloway walked in to Broward on May 8th and had concurrent tracks of treatment. One involved the bladder cancer and one involved the infection.
And he had an infection, his doctors put him on antibiotics that led to the C. diff.
The C. diff wasn't treated for long enough with Flagyl. That led to the recurrence, to the severe diarrhea he had that depleted the fluids in his body, depleted his volume, led to
hypovolemia and hypovolemic shock.
It was the infection track, not the bladder cancer track, that led to Mr. Calloway's death. Mr. Calloway died with bladder cancer and not from it. Mr. Calloway died with bladder cancer and not from complications of its treatment.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you very much for your service. I know you have all paid very close attention in this case, and we appreciate that. We appreciate your time. Thank you.
THE COURT: Counsel, thank you.
Mr. Pedrosa?
MR. PEDROSA: Ladies and gentlemen, I want to join my colleagues in thanking you. You've been a wonderfully attentive jury. From day one you've been listening to all of the evidence, paying attention, and you've done that today during arguments. And that's important. It's important because you have an important job to do.
Now, as lawyers or job is important too.
Our job is to present the evidence, to make our arguments, but it's also important that we be
respectful of your time and that we give you credit for doing your job and not use up any more of your time that is necessary to present this case.
So as I listened to Mr. Reid and Ms. Gallagher present the issues to you, I took notes, I paid attention. I know that they covered all of the things that I wanted to say, so I'm not going to use any more of your time. Instead what I'll do is just ask you, as Mr. Hammer speaks to you one last time, to keep the issues, the medical issues that Ms. Gallagher addressed in mind.
Keep the issues about addiction, about control, about motivation and choice that Mr. Reid discussed with you in mind, and keep those things in mind as you go back to deliberate. So the only thing, the last thing that I'll tell you is just to say thank you; not just for the time you've spent already, but for the time you have left and for the time you'll spend deciding this case. Thanks.



MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: May it please
the Court.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. As you may recall from openings, my name is Ann St. Peter-Griffith, and I represent Liggett Group. I know you haven't heard that much from me during the course of this trial.
In part it's because you haven't heard that much about my client.
Mr. Reid and Ms. Gallagher have been very thorough of their presentation of the evidence. I'm not going to reiterate what they have to say. I, like Mr. Pedrosa, have listened carefully and they've covered all the topics.
What I would like to stress, as the last person from the defense side who is going to speak with you, is that you have to bear in mind that the plaintiff bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that Mr. Calloway was a class member. And for all the reasons that Ms. Gallagher and Mr. Reid discussed, the plaintiff has not met that burden.
On behalf of myself, my client Liggett, and all the defendants, we thank you for the careful attention we know that you've paid for the evidence presentation thus far and for the
time and commitment that you've put into this case.
And we would request that you enter a verdict in favor of the defendants and answer no to each of the questions on the jury verdict form. Thank you for your time.
