MR. REID: Boy, I didn't know if I would ever get to say this is the last time, but this is the last time. It's been a long time. I'm not going to shout. I'm not going to scream.
I'm going to ask you to remember the evidence.
You've heard some things just now, for instance, you heard about lawsuits, then later you heard the companies were right, because the FDA -- Congress did not remove the Constitution protection of the First Amendment.
They talked about Camel 9. To hear the argument they were making you would have thought that was just advertised, put into -passed out, two times in Oregon, never in an advertisement, never done again. But never in an advertisement.
They talked about Crush. Never an advertisement. They talked about Eclipse, and they told you just a minute ago, twice, that we had the ability to make a safer cigarette, and because people wouldn't buy it we took it off the market.
Remember Eclipse? When they wouldn't bu Premier, we retooled it. We went back to the drawing board, so to speak, and you can buy it today. When counsel told you twice that we should be punished because we refused to sell the product, he's just wrong.
He talked about money that the companies made. Not a bit of evidence was in here, not a bit of evidence in here about company finances or profits. It's not in the case. It wasn't permitted into the case. But you heard it over and over.
Now, obviously I had advocated for a different verdict in Phase I. You all know that. But my job now isn't to question that verdict that you rendered, at all.
Plaintiff talked mostly about the evidence from Phase I and Phase II this afternoon. That's what you heard. You heard a
regurgitation of the same evidence that you've already heard. But you're going to hear from the Judge that whether or not the companies have changed is a legitimate -- or you heard from the Judge already -- is a legitimate consideration in reaching your verdict.
This is a different phase. I could go back and say: Well, you're right.
Mr. Calloway smoked the cigarettes, but remember all the testimony about whether or not he knew it was risky or not; whether he tried to quit or not? But I'm not going to go through all of that today. That was for the earlier phase.
What you have to decide today is if, in 2012, does R.J. Reynolds deserve to be -- need to be punished because they need to be deterred from acting as they did years before.
So I would like to talk about this, because it's not an ordinary thing that people have in their life, to decide about punitive damages. My guess is none of you have ever ha to think about this problem before. So I want to talk a little bit about the concept and how we get there. And the first thing, if I could
see the slide, I really want to talk about these things.
I would like to talk a little bit about the legal requirements, what the Judge is going to tell you you can do or you can't do. What he has told you already.
Secondly, we're going to talk about who is entitled to a punitive award; and then I want to talk about who is punished by a punitive award. And finally, I want to talk about the purpose.
So, as I told you in the opening this morning -- seems like it was days ago, but it was this morning. You will see the Judge has told you -- let's look at slide 2.
The purpose of the punitive award, the legal purpose, is to punish and to deter. And the punishment relates to the deterrence. Because the idea is, if you punish somebody, they won't do it again. So you have to decide, do you need to punish these companies to keep them from doing something again that bothered you in the first phase of the trial or the second phase of the trial.
Now, if we go to the next slide, as I
mentioned to you this morning, the Judge told you, contrary to what you just heard, that you don't have to award. Because you may decide -you may decide that based on the change in conduct of the companies, that there is no need for further deterrence. You made an award already, an award that at a nominal return would produce about a million dollars of income a year -MR. HAMMER: Objection.
MR. REID: -- in perpetuity.
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. HAMMER: That is totally improper argument.
THE COURT: All right. Objection noted.
It's overruled.
MR. REID: In perpetuity, and you would still have this whole $20.5 million available.
So you have to decide if additional funds would be appropriate in this case. Because it may have been -- and I can't know what you were thinking, obviously, none of us do. But you may have decided that, because you made a finding of entitlement to punitive damage and then came out with the $20.5 million result,
that may have been, in part, some punishment.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, that's contrary to the law.
THE COURT: No speaking objections. Just make your objection. No speaking objection, all right? Overruled.
Proceed.
MR. REID: So that's the thinking that the law requires of jurors in this phase, to determine whether or not it's appropriate to award additional damages. And this really leads to the second question. That is, who is entitled to the money, the punitive damage award.
Remember, as I said today, this case is still about Ms. Calloway. It's still about her family, and it's about the folks to whom you've already awarded the $20 million. You have fully compensated them for their loss. So any additional money awarded in punitive would be over and above. It would be a windfall, beyond the actual damages that you found in this case.
And the Judge will instruct you that you may only award damages -- number 5, please -for harm suffered by Mr. Calloway,
Mrs. Calloway and Ms. Williams; not the 400,000 or the million people that he -- all the different numbers he was talking about. This is about the Calloways and their case.
And you may not punish for harm to others. The Judge told you about that this morning.
Number 6.
These are kind of the rules of the road for juries in deciding the question of punitive damages.
And you can only award damages for -- the next slide, please -- for harm that produce harm, acts which produce harm or have an effect in Florida. That's for you to decide.
Mr. Calloway moved around. Much that you heard about happened in other parts of the country.
Some happened in Winston-Salem. Whether there was a harm in Florida or not, you'll have to decide all that. But that's just one of the rules that the Judge has given you today.
Essentially, what these last three or four rules tell you is that any other people who have the same complaint, the same harm, can bring their own lawsuit and recover whatever
they choose to recover.
MR. GDANSKI: Objection. That's not proper.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. REID: Whatever a jury in their case would decide for the same behavior. So it really boils down to how many times must a company be punished for the same behavior? An you have to take that into account.
Now the third thing was, who was punished. And essentially it's the plaintiff's burden to establish that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, in May of 2012 should be punished. Because that's who pays the judgment. That's who pays the judgment.
And you will have to decide if that company should be punished for past acts or has it been punished enough; and if that company needs to be deterred to make sure it acts differently in the future. Or, are there other things in place that will assure that whatever behavior concerned you in the first and second phase can never happen again?
Think about the evidence. Much of it
centered around very old activity.
And I told you at the very beginning two months ago that you were going to see some documents that I can't explain and I'm not even going to try to explain. They are just stupid in some respects. I don't know what would cause people to write things like that. But the question that we talked about before was? Did they have an impact on this particular plaintiff? Did it ever -- and I raised some questions. I suggested to you that it was fair to look at questions like did the company ever adopt a policy in accord with somebody's memo, and things such as that.
I did point out parts of documents that time to time -- that the witness had ignored in direct examination. And I asked you to consider whether these documents had any effect. And I asked you to consider in the early phases whether or not something that was claimed to be concealed was actually known by Mr. Calloway from some other source. And I was trying not to offend you. But, as I told you at the beginning, some of those documents you can't explain. But it was fair to look at
those documents that way, as a juror.
I mean, you may have felt at some point during this trial that you would like to walk up -- go up to Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and go into R.J. Reynolds and find the people who wrote those documents and find out what they were thinking about.
Well, if you went there today, you wouldn't find Dr. Teague or Mr. Horrigan or Dr. Rogers. You would find people like Dr. Borgerding. I have a hard time saying his name. That's who you would find, and you got to see him today and you got to hear him testify. And the Judge told you, you can evaluate his testimony. And you heard the few questions that he was asked. He wasn't asked any questions about his expertise or his specialty or all the work he's been doing for 30 years. He was asked about was there a lawsuit; do you disagree with what's on the website?
Look, there is no question about what the position of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is today. You saw the website. Smoking causes these diseases. Smoking is addictive. You
should rely on the public health officials.
There's no question about that.
To try to ask trick questions of a witness, why didn't they ask Dr. Borgerding questions about his research? Instead of getting up and telling at the end here that Reynolds stopped selling the product because it lost money? But that's the kind of people you would meet at R.J. Reynolds if you went there today.
You know what Reynolds says about the risks associated with smoking. You know what Reynolds is doing to try to make cigarettes safer today, or to at least keep them from being any more dangerous. You heard all of that.
And I think it's fair, in looking at this whole picture, to consider the environment that we're dealing with, a tobacco company who is selling this product.
Now, there's no dispute in this case by anybody, and there wasn't from the very first day, when I told you that we would never contest the two conclusions, that is that smoking causes cancer -- bladder cancer in this
case, and that smoking is addictive. The Judge read those to you, and I told you two months ago.
The fact is, Reynolds sells a dangerous product.
Now a number of their experts -- and you heard it again today. Their answer is simply:
Go out of business. That's what they're saying. You just ought to close up shop.
In fact, counsel said to you a moment ago: The best thing to do would be to go out of business. And several of their experts said: That's my position, and I believe litigation is the way to do it. That's why I'm here testifying in that case.
That was Dr. DiFranza, if you remember him, from way back in the first phase.
But the point is, this case is not about that. But their argument makes it sound like it is. Make the cigarettes so bad that nobody will buy them, and that will force you to go out of business. Have a part of your company that is tasked with the idea of getting rid of smokers and getting out of business. That's what they're really asking you to do here with
these numbers.
But our society has said, through our representatives, that smoking, even thought it's risky, even though it causes disease, even though it's addictive, our representatives on behalf of all of us have said that it's a legal product. And that's why this case isn't about putting somebody out of business.
Now I want you to consider the environment in which Reynolds does business and all these companies do business.
Let's go to Number 8, please.
We sell a dangerous product, no dispute about that. No cigarette is less dangerous or less addictive. You can't remove all the carcinogenic substances from tobacco smoke.
You remember going all the way back to Dr. Proctor when he talked about you get the same materials when you burn broccoli or hamburgers. You can't take them out. Some are some such small, tiny, tiny little quantities that you can't even find them. You can't identify them. Cigarettes can't be made safe. That's the environment that we work in, that my client works in. And yet, understanding all of
that, we've decided as a country that adults should have the ability to smoke.
So really, I think it's fair to -- I may have said this this morning. What does it take to say that a tobacco company who is faced with that is socially responsible or not?
Now if you're in the business of healthcare, it's pretty easy to explain how you're socially responsible. But if you deal -- if you're in a business that has the risks associated, how can we determine whethei or not Reynolds and these other companies are socially responsible?
Well, there are three ways. Three ways.
First -- and you heard this from Dr. Borgerding today -- don't make cigarettes more dangerous. You do whatever you can do to keep them from being more dangerous. Secondly, you try to make them safer, to the extent that's possible. And then thirdly, you try to help people quit smoking if they -- if you can't do the first two.
So you heard today what Reynolds is doing, trying to make cigarettes -- to make sure cigarettes are no more dangerous. You
heard from Dr. Borgerding about product stewardship. They used literature review, chemical, biological and behavioral testing.
They have toxicologists review it, both inside and outside; and they attempt -- anything that would increase the risk, if a substance that is of concern is increased because of a change, it's not done.
And you didn't hear a single piece of evidence -- you didn't even hear any cross-examination of Dr. Borgerding today about that. And you didn't hear a single piece of evidence that R.J. Reynolds today is doing this, and you heard how it goes about.
Every change, every change, even minor changes. If you have a supplier of paper, and you change to another supplier, you have to go through the process. This would include materials, design, blends, ingredients, flavor, so forth.
So that's what Reynolds is doing to make sure that the cigarettes aren't more dangerous.
The second is how will they work to make them safe? And you heard today the "heat not burn."
Now counsel told you that if we could spend a billion dollars trying to make a safer cigarette, we should be able to pay a punitive award. Well, it seems to me the opposite might be true. If we're spending a billion dollars to try to make a safer cigarette, you would think that would be applauded. Instead of applauding it, counsel tells you we should be put out of business. And then he tells you we're not selling it because we're losing money, which just isn't a fact.
You heard Dr. Borgerding. You can buy Eclipse in Florida right now. And you heard from Dr. Borgerding today that they lose money on every single pack. And remember that talk earlier about putting profits ahead? Well, ladies and gentlemen, if you are losing money on every single pack of cigarettes, and you continue to sell it because you think it's a less risky, you think it's a safer or a better product, that sounds to me like you're putting public health ahead of making money. And that's the evidence in this case. It's not screaming about what happened.
The evidence in this case is that
Reynolds loses money, and it's still staying in the game and still selling the product.
And you heard that Premier reduced the carcinogenic substances by up to 90 percent. Eclipse was the next generation product when there were problems with Premier. You heard there were manufacturing problems, some taste problems, and it wasn't successful. So they didn't stop. They kept going, and they kept working on it. And based on the research, they launched Eclipse back in '96.
Still on the market today, in 2012. And the point is, they didn't just hide all this information. You have one example here. You can look at it. They published every bit of research that they had done about this product. They brought in outside scientists to evaluate it. And it's all here.
You can see exactly what they were doing in the research to try to find. To say that Reynolds has no interest in a safer product just isn't borne out by the evidence that you heard in this case, and it's evidence that isn't really disputed, except to say something wrong; that we don't sell it anymore because we
were losing money.
Another example that you heard about today was the TSNA. That was something we discovered. That was a problem with the way the plants were growing. Remember, there was an agronomy group on one of the slides? We discovered this, and we found out, and we reduced this harmful substance -- or the farmers were able to reduce it by changing their process. And we worked with the farmers.
Imagine if Reynolds had kept this to itself and gotten the patent on it and been the only company that had this safety factor. Imagine how that would be.
Well, they didn't do that. They shared it with the world. They shared it with the world. And these companies are competitors, remember. We're all being sued in one case, but we're competitors in the marketplace. And what did they do? They shared that information.
And now, not only are all the Reynolds products using this better tobacco in terms of the level of TSNAs, but the whole industry is using this same tobacco, all because we cared
about it. How can you punish Reynolds for that kind of behavior?
So that's the second.
The third is to try to help smokers stop.
And this suggestion that's been made that we should make less-addictive cigarettes and have a department. Well, we do. We do.
We help them because we have two brands that you heard about, Carlton and Now, .01 milligrams of nicotine. That's 95 percent less than sort of a mid-range product.
You heard that we provide smokeless tobacco and snus. And the idea -- you remember the continuum? The idea that if people want to quit, they are smoking cigarettes, they might move to the "heat not burn," then they might move to smokeless, then they might move to nicotine replacement therapy, which Reynolds also advocates, in order to move them all the way down to the no-risk part.
If all Reynolds cared about was making profit, why would it have programs to cause people to stop using its products? Why would it do that? It wouldn't. It wouldn't.
Now, there are really two major factors
that bear on this question of deterrence and punishment.
The first is the MSA, Master Settlement Agreement. Reynolds entered into a settlement with 46 states and into a separate settlement with four other states. And this was an agreement that limited things such as -- can we have number 14? Advertising, no billboards, no stadiums.
There were more things that Dr. Borgerding talked about today, but this is a summary. No branded merchandise; no concerts; no buses, taxis or other transit.
Under the MSA, the companies are prohibited from making any false or misleading statement about its product.
Statements disagreeing with the public health authorities can never be made again.
As part of this there was a national document depository set up that's accessible with hard copy and with Internet, and you heard about that with Dr. Proctor. We provided the documents that Dr. Proctor then goes through and brings in to testify about in this case.
Those documents came because we set up the
repository so there would be transparency. That's the MSA.
And on top of that MSA, that activity, we have made substantial payments. You heard billions of dollars in payments. And you heard that all the companies are participants in that agreement. And that is punishment. That's punishment. There is no doubt about it.
Counsel talks about needing to punish, to deter. Well, that is money that we're paying that goes to the states to cover medical bills for people who claim to have injuries, who have injuries which are associated with our products.
So when counsel says, Yeah, but that's not Mr. Calloway, well, I don't know whether he used any of that, would have used that or not. But the point is -MR. GDANSKI: Judge, I object.
MR. REID: I'll withdraw.
It's billions of dollars that the companies are paying now and forever. That's punishment. That's deterrence.
The second significant point is the Food and Drug Administration.
Now there was discussion about, well, they're not really enforcing it or we don't -it's too bureaucratic. It's interesting, the arguments made here that the companies should be deterred and regulated and we should have changes. And then the criticism is, well, the federal government doesn't know what they're doing.
They showed that chart with all the little steps trying to make it sound like the Food and Drug Administration is totally frozen, has no ability to regulate. Well, you've heard different. You heard from Dr. Borgerding, and again, no cross-examination about that. He told you we invited the FDA into our plants.
They can drop in on a moment's notice.
Can we see the next slide, please?
Think about the things they can control now: Additives and ingredients. They know everything that's in the tobacco, and they have control over it. And if they don't like what we are doing about it, they can stop us from selling the product.
The list is there. It's also on our website. We gave it to the government back in
the '80s, as you heard. And they have to require -- and they can require testing and they can -- and they have to approve any changes.
What about nicotine? They have complete control of nicotine. The FDA now can tell us exactly how much nicotine should be in cigarettes.
See, the plaintiffs make it sound like this just passed in '09 and none of it has happened yet. Well, a lot of it's happened, and it will continue to happen. The point is, the legislation is in place. Congress, for the first time ever in '09, or before '09, authorized the Food and Drug Administration to regulate tobacco. Before that, it had no ability.
Once it regulated it, now you hear about our cooperation. Now, we have difficulties from time to time with the federal government. We felt that some of their restrictions were violative of some constitutional rights. And when you heard the rest of the story, when I got to ask some more questions, we were right. The courts decided that the FDA had
overstepped.
How can that be possibly -- how can we be criticized because we're in these negotiations? You heard about two lawsuits, and you heard on one of them they said some of this is right and some is wrong. The other one they said we were completely right. We were completely right.
The FDA controls advertising also in addition to the MSA. The FDA controls the smokeless products. Even though they are substantially less risk, they still control it and require advertising (sic).
The FDA can decide that we're not allowed to use filters, but they haven't done that.
They can do that. The FDA decided that -Mr. Jupe was criticized today because they took lights off the cigarettes. Well that's a perfect example. And we were criticized.
Dr. Borgerding was asked, Haven't you been fined? Well, that's an example of how the regulation is working. On the one hand they tell you -- counsel tells you: Well, FDA, they're not really doing anything. They're not really enforcing. But then they point out two or three enforcement things and say it's our
fault; that there have been some enforcement actions.
They are looking at this industry closely. There are 50 state attorneys general that have the ability to bring any actions that decide they need to bring, including about Crush and about 9. And as you heard, none of them have done that.
The FTC asked for some documents and then dropped the whole thing. They have the unlimited access to come in and shut us down, to inspect us without notice. They can seize our product, they can halt sales. They can issue fines or penalties. I would submit to you that there is, going forward, in this country, there are substantial regulatory restrictions about this business.
Now, I can't read minds, and I don't know what any of you or each of you thought about the evidence. But I've considered how the evidence came in and arguments of counsel and so forth. And I would like to just talk about a few things that may have been -- at the basis of your decision that punitive damages would be warranted in this case.
One of those things was advertising. And now you know that since '71, no TV ads; since '72, ads have carried warnings. Reynolds hasn't advertised in magazines since '07. And now you know about the restriction.
There will never be any -- any of the behavior that you found to be offensive or bad, can't happen again about advertising because the new regime. If you were concerned about ingredients -- they talked about ammonia and menthol and things like that -- it can never happen again.
You now know that we've been disclosing them since '86, and you have the whole story about what we will have to do if we ever want to change them. We can't use any additive or any ingredient that the government doesn't allow us to use.
We can't manipulate nicotine or do anything like that, that maybe you heard some words that upset you during the first phase.
It will never happen again.
You heard about our close working relationship, not only with the federal authorities but with the government of Canada
and with a couple of the states. We not only -- this is all voluntarily. We list our additives and ingredients, and we list them by brand. So if you want to know what your particular cigarette -- that the person smoking is, you can find it on our website. And that is completely voluntarily.
If you were upset because plaintiffs argued that we were manipulating nicotine, well, first you heard that Reynolds does not add nicotine. In fact, there's less nicotine in cigarette tobacco than there is in tobacco from the field. And it does not do things to aggravate or to increase the addictive quality.
That testimony again -- they didn't ask him any questions, they didn't bring in any evidence to the contrary. There's not a document that establishes any of that.
But again, even if -- if you felt that that was happening, it can never happen again.
Filters, low tar, if that bothered you, if you felt that -- you remember there was an argument that filters were not good, and you heard some testimony to the contrary. But if that bothered you, the FDA has complete
control. They can say "stop using filters" if they think the filters are problems.
The transparency. If you believe that we were hiding documents, it will never happen again, because not only have we put all of our documents online about this subject, but also you now know the FDA has the ability to come in and look at our documents about our research and about smoking and health.
If you were concerned about CTR and TIRC or statements about -- contrary to the Attorney General -- Surgeon General of the United States, it will never happen again.
On our website now, we now know what the company -- 16A, please.
Well, that's -- all right. That's what is on our website now. And you heard Dr. Borgerding talk about the website.
We're not going to disagree with the Surgeon General ever again.
You also saw that we provide links to those organizations, if you want to get more information.
If you're concerned about youth marketing, the government has control. Now
they suggested to you today that we're marketing to youth because of giving out these gifts. Then you heard the whole story. There was one event at an adult nightclub or adult place. It happened two or three times, and it never happened again. And it was never in any advertisement, and it was never in any children's magazine.
You heard, even back when Reynolds was advertising in magazines, there was a restriction. You had to have a readership of 80 or 85 percent of people who were too old. And if they didn't have the data, they had to present it to us. You heard that today.
He wasn't asked about that on cross-examination, and you didn't hear any evidence to the contrary. So if that concerns you, then it will never happen again.
I would submit that in this case, based on the evidence, punitive damages are not necessary for the purposes that -- for which they are designed, to punish people to make sure that they are deterred from doing things again.
Remember, the money that you award woulc
not go to any stop smoking fund, it would not go to cancer research -MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge. Counsel can't tell the jury how much -THE COURT: No speaking objections.
MR. HAMMER: Improper argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: This money will only go to the plaintiffs, to the single group of plaintiffs in this one single case, out of all the other smokers that counsel talked to you about.
That's where it would go. It will not make cigarettes safer, or it will not help public -it will not improve public health. And most importantly, there is nothing that they have pointed out to you that we're not doing that we ought to be doing now.
Now, they did suggest that we're marketing to kids because of that thing out in Oregon. But now you know the truth about that. And you know nobody said that, no agency, no attorney general.
They have not been able to come in and put on a witness who says no, wait, this is what you ought to be doing. Other than go out
of business. They did say that. But other than go out of business, they haven't said anything that we ought to be doing that we're not doing.
They had a chance to ask Dr. Borgerding anything they wanted to ask him about what Reynolds today is doing. And what do they do? They ask him about Reynolds position on stuff back in the '40s and '50s and '60s. The fact is, there is nothing in this case that you've heard that Reynolds should be doing today that it's not doing to be a socially responsible tobacco manufacturer.
I think even back before -- slide 18, please. This is the story. This is what they want you to punish Reynolds for. We started researching elements of smoke in the '50s, we invented the technology that was used to be able to find out what is in cigarette smoke.
We funded thousands of articles related to smoking and health.
We sponsored and -- we had sponsored and internal research that was recited and relied upon and bragged about by the Surgeon Genera of the United States. We worked for ten years
with the public health community and the United States government to try to find a safer cigarette, from '68 to '78.
And you remember the Green Monster, which the industry partially funded; 6,000 articles that the Surgeon General complimented in his report about being an excellent source. That's what you heard about in the earlier phases.
That's what you heard about. But again,
I'll remind you that the question is -- and, in fact, if you remember the one jury instruction -- can we look at slide 4 again, please?
See, this is why it's important. This instruction from the Court is the reason that it's important for you to determine whether or not this is a new company today. Because the Judge will tell you that you may consider whether there is a continuing need for deterrence in light of any changes in the conduct of the defendant from the conduct on which you based your determination that punitive damages were warranted.
Counsel hardly spoke to you about the new Reynolds. All he spoke to you about was the
conduct upon which you based your determinatio that punitive damages were warranted. That's all he talked to you about. But the Judge is telling you and has told you that you may consider whether we have changed the conduct. And that's what I've been talking about.
And that's what Dr. Borgerding talked about. And they didn't ask him any questions about that. All they wanted to do was ask him questions about the conduct on which you based your determination. Well, that's not the test now. The test is, the company is being punished. It's Reynolds Tobacco Company in 2012. In 2012.
I would submit that punitive damages are not required because of all of the evidence that you've heard.
Now, counsel told you this morning that he was sure I would tell you if I thought his number was too high or things like that. I wouldn't -- I would not invade your province and tell you how to decide that number, if you decide that a number is warranted.
And I understand that's -- you may decide that. And I understand that. But I would
maybe suggest to you a way to maybe think ab it. You found that Mr. Calloway was about 20 percent at fault, in your verdict. And you found that my client was 27 percent. So if you figure out what that 20 percent represents from your earlier verdict, that would mean that my client's share of that would be about a million dollars; and that million would be on top of the 20.5 million that you already awarded.
You can consider any way that you like, obviously, but that's one way to think about it, to consider the 20 percent, so maybe put that back or something to that effect.
But I have to say that compensation in excess of what you've already awarded is not necessary now, when you consider all of the evidence.
Reynolds has been punished. It is paying billions of dollars to the citizens of the states of this country through its representatives, indefinitely.
You heard that there are other smokers that have been ill out there. I don't know what state they're in or what status they're in, but you've got to take that into account as
well, that there will be other claimants.
But I think the bottom line is that you have to consider the manner in which Reynolds does business in 2012.
Can we see the next slide?
Today we tell smokers that the products are dangerous. We tell smokers to look at the public health authorities. We try to keep our products from becoming more dangerous. We try to make them safer when we can. And we try to help smokers quit.
I want to leave you with this thought.
Whatever you believed that my client did that was wrong, that led to your verdict in the first phase, it should be clear now based on everything that you've heard, all the other evidence, it should be clear that that behavior will never happen again. And I want to ask you to consider that fact in determining whether, as the Judge will tell you, the change in this company warrants no punitive damages.
With that, I'll sit down. And I, again, thank you for your attention. My client thanks you, and we will await your verdict.
