MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Judge. May it please the Court.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
We've been here now for a long time; a lot longer than you all expected, I know that.
We really, truly, appreciate the time you've given. I can't thank you enough.
Marvine can't thank you enough; Starr; the entire family.
Put up Number -- the photo, please.
This case is about Johnnie Calloway.
These are photos that were introduced into evidence.
Johnnie loved life. That's what everybody said. He loved Marvine, he loved Starr, he loved Tamara. He loved his kids.
The last thing Johnnie wanted out of life was it to end. He didn't want that. And yet we're here because that's what happened.
And it only happened for one reason. It only happened because he smoked cigarettes, developed heart disease, developed bladder cancer, and it killed him.
And we're not here, today, looking for your sympathy. We're not here, today, asking you to feel sorry for Marvine or Starr, the rest of the family. They've got each other. They've got each other, and you saw how strong they are. You saw that close-knit family come together.
You heard from Starr on the stand, you heard from Tamara, you heard how they've been there for each other all these years. That's important. And that's what Johnnie instilled in the family. That's something really
special.
What we're here today to talk about is compensating Marvine, compensating Starr, measuring their loss, measuring the great value that Johnnie had in their life. And it was pretty great. I think you can pretty much say that. You saw the family; you saw how special they are.
We're asking you, today, to measure the loss that Marvine has from 20 years ago.
Twenty years. Measure the loss that Starr has, growing up without a father. And, yeah, that's a terrible thing; it's horrible. She missed her father all through high school, through graduation. She missed having her father walk her down the aisle. That's something special to a girl. It's her dream. And it was shattered.
Now, I'm going to talk to you a lot today about the damages aspect of the case and about why you should award money. And, unfortunately, we're here asking for money because nothing we do is going to make anythin; better. Nothing we do is going to bring Johnnie back. Nothing that we do here today is
going to change anything unless you all make that change, because in this courtroom, today, we're also going to ask you to consider punitive damages against these defendants, because what they did should not be tolerated. What they did for over 50 years should not be tolerated. And, really, what they did in this courtroom over these last five, six weeks shouldn't be -MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: To bring in a witness -MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: -- like Mr. Jupe -THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. REID: Same objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: A corporate representative, Mr. Jupe, he represented the industry.
MR. REID: Objection. That's a misstatement.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, rely o your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed, counsel.
MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Judge.
And he comes in here and he tells you, my job is risk assessment. My job is working on a safer cigarette. And in the same breath, he tells you there's no such thing as a safer cigarette.
Well, sure there is. A safer cigarette would be one that you can't inhale; a safer cigarette would be one that doesn't addict somebody. That would be a safer cigarette. We all know that. I mean, we've heard all about that throughout this trial. And we learned they can take the nicotine out. They did.
And, in fact, Mr. Jupe talked about, well, we had this product, this Next product, and the other companies have had products whe they've done these denicotinized cigarettes and we put them in these test markets. Remember, he said we put them in a test market in -- on the west coast, in Tampa?
And when he was asked to explain what happened there, what did he say? Well, we didn't -- it didn't work. It wasn't acceptable.
Well, it didn't work because they weren't making the money they wanted to make. That's
what this really is all about. This is really all about money. You know, and in America, you know, corporations -- a corporation's goal is to make money. That's what it's all about, that's the American way, and there's nothing wrong with that. That's a great thing.
That's what makes America great, that we've got corporations that make products that the American public can rely on, that they can count on working -- working properly.
We've got some of the greatest corporations in the world here in America. America is built on that. That's important.
And, you know, it's important, if you're going to be a corporation, you got to follow the rules.
And even as little kids we're all brought up with certain rules that we should all follow. You know, and we learn in school, in church, from our parents, you know, respect your neighbors, you know, look out for the other person, act responsibly, have the courage to follow your convictions; those kind of things are instilled in us.
And you saw that Johnnie Calloway
instilled that kind of -- those kind of values in Tamara and in Starr. That was important.
So much so that they went on and got their own education. They became what they became tod because of Johnnie. That's important.
But, you know, corporations have to do that, too. They have an obligation to act responsibly. They have an obligation to do the right thing. If they're going to make a product, they ought to make a product that's safe, they ought to make a product that is a good product that's not going to kill people, that's not going to hurt people, that's not going to rip families apart.
You know, if a corporation learns that their product isn't safe, they've got an obligation, right? The obligation is to either fix the product or stop making it.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor. It's improper.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: And, in fact, if you recall, that's exactly what the tobacco industry told the American public for years and years and years. They said, our product's safe, but
if -- if it's found to be unsafe, we'll take out the bad stuff. And they even went as far as telling the American public, we'll stop making it.
Remember, you heard that. It's in evidence, that document. James Bowling: If our product is harmful, we'll stop making it.
Vice president of Philip Morris.
Now, there's something wrong with that.
You know, if you make a promise to America tha you're going to make your product safe, then do it. It's not a lot to ask. If you're making a product that's killing people, stop doing it.
That's not a lot to ask.
So, they bring in Mr. Jupe, who tells you, you know, I'm working on these safer products and we're trying to find the thing that's going to make our product safe.
And, remember, Mr. Schlesinger asked him: Well, Mr. Jupe, the whole idea -- you know, you were talking about -- well, if we take the nicotine out, then you lose the taste. Well, so, what you're saying -Basically, what he was saying is, well, people -- in his mind and in, I guess, the
tobacco industry's mind -- they smoke for taste.
Well, if that's the case, as Mr. Schlesinger pointed out during his cross-examination, there's no taste buds in your lungs.
So, if smokers are really smoking for taste, like the tobacco companies want you to believe, well, then, make it taste really nice; take the nicotine out. So, don't make it inhalable, because there's no need to inhale it if all you're really doing is smoking for taste. And make it safe, because the truth of the matter is, a cigarette that's not inhalable, a cigarette that's not addictive, is a lot more safer.
Is it ever going to be totally safe? No.
But it's a lot more safer. And, see, that's why the product has been found to be defective because when it's used as intended, it kills people.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. HAMMER: That, in and of itself, is a defective product.
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MS. GALLAGHER: It's commenting on the findings; pure speculation.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. HAMMER: I mean, you want to take responsibility, then live by the findings.
Don't argue the findings. But they won't even do that. They won't even take the responsibility to say, you know what? These findings are the law and we accept it. They won't even do that.
They come in here, into this courtroom, and, sure, they are entitled to it, because, in a courtroom, you can challenge anything you want, you can make any claims you want, you ca defend those claims, you have a right to do that; but, you know, if you're going to do it, do it the right way.
You know, they come in here and they bring in an addiction expert, and, sure, they're entitled to challenge whether or not Mr. Calloway was addicted; but bringing in an addiction expert like Dr. Abramson and have him take the stand and say, when he's asked, is nicotine addictive -- that's about as straightforward a question as you could ask,
right? And his response: It can be. Really?
Well, the findings tell us nicotine is addictive. Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. Not -- the finding wasn't it can be addictive; the finding is, it is addictive.
And yet they bring in an expert who's been paid lots and lots of money, who's been trained by them, who's been trained to follow that script that they write, who's watched his own testimony on the camera -- they're recording this right now -- and what he told us is -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: May we approach?
MR. HAMMER: He's watched his testimony on the camera.
THE COURT: Counsel, can I see you sidebar, please?
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Excuse me, Counsel.
Ready, ladies?
You may proceed.
MR. HAMMER: So, they bring in Dr. Abramson, and he acknowledges on the star that, yeah, the videotape of the trial that they do -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor; counsel referring to the -THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you're to rely on your own recollection. These are Counsel's comments, his argument, his attempt to persuade you to reach a verdict in his client's favor, but you are to rely on your own recollection of what the evidence was.
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: And the evidence was that Dr. Abramson came in here and testified that, yeah, I look at my testimony, I looked at my testimony in a previous trial, we went over it, and they told me what worked and didn't work.
That's what they bring to you.
And they brought to you Dr. MacIntyre, who told you, I would give them a couple of answers and they would pick out which answer I should say to the jury. Really? That's what they bring to you?
This case is about conduct. This case is about responsibility. This case is about accepting responsibility for conduct.
And you know what? Marvine is coming in here, and she said, you know, I accept some responsibility on behalf of Johnnie. I accept some responsibility, based on the fact that, yeah, he smoked and, yeah, he tried to quit many, many times, but he didn't.
And maybe he could have tried harder, although we heard from Dr. DiFranza, who said this guy was hopelessly addicted. And, you know, maybe today, with the advent of the pharmaceutical drugs and such, maybe today, he would be able to quit.
But Marvine said, you know, I accept some responsibility on behalf of Johnnie, because maybe there were some things he could have don differently that might have changed things.
Maybe there were.
And, so, for that we're accepting some responsibility. But, you know, she acknowledged that acceptance of responsibility; and yet the tobacco companies come in here an don't accept any for their behavior over the past 50-plus years. There's something wrong with that.
And they're entitled to stand their ground and say, hey, we've done nothing wrong; we haven't done a thing; we're okay, we're a good company; in fact, we'll bring in Mr. Jupe, and he'll tell you all these great things we're doing right now. Except that they are still making a deadly product.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you. The objection's noted. This is closing argument.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: And if they really cared, they would do things differently.
And if they really wanted to accept responsibility, they would come in here and Mr. Jupe would look at Marvine and Starr and say, you know, what we did for 50 years was
wrong -MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: -- but we're changed now.
MR. REID: Violating an in-limine, I believe.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Proceed.
The objection's noted. It's overruled.
MR. HAMMER: But we're changed. Really? How have they changed? They haven't changed one bit.
And that's why, in this phase of the case, we're not only going to ask you to consider giving money to -- awarding money to Starr and awarding money to Marvine for their pain and suffering for their loss, but we're going to ask you to impose punitive damages to punish the companies for their behavior, because it was just wrong. It's wrong. It's wrong to do that.
And, you know, they knew what they were doing was wrong a long time ago. What number is that before you put it up?
MR. GDANSKI: Number 19.
MR. HAMMER: They formed this TIRC;
remember, we heard about that? They formed the TIRC, with the advent of the Frank Statement.
And in 1957, July 1957, a letter to
Mr. Hahn, the president of the American Tobacco Company, which is basically R.J. Reynolds, said: If this committee, TIRC, had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. The TIRC has been a successful defensive operation.
And that's interesting because, remember, in the Frank Statement, they said we're forming this organization to do scientific studies because we accept a responsibility for our smokers and we're going to form this scientific group to start looking into whether all the science that's out there is true, because we promise our smokers that if anything's bad there, we're going to fix it.
And yet their own documents say if they hadn't formed this company, the TIRC, the committee, the industry -- the industry as a whole -- not just R.J. Reynolds, but R.J.
Reynolds, Philip Morris, Lorillard, Liggett -the entire industry would be in a deplorable position.
And they've been a successful defense to what was going out there. They acknowledge that inside, but what were they telling the world? What were they telling Johnnie Calloway?
They were telling everybody, hey, we're working hard, we're working with the scientists to find out what's wrong with our cigarette and make sure that it doesn't cause cancer, becaus we care. That's what they're telling everybody: We care. And yet, in reality, it's been nothing but a defensive operation.
And when you talk about the world "deplorable," you know what would have been deplorable? For them it would have been deplorable because it would have cost them a lot of money. That's what they mean by it, they would be in a deplorable position.
But you know what? It would have cost them some money; but just imagine the lives it would have saved if they were honest, back in the 50's. Back in the 50's.
And in 1957 -Think about this: Johnnie Calloway was born in 1932. In 1957, he was 25 years old.
He had been smoking about nine years by that time.
He was smoking, according to the testimony, a pack, maybe even less than a pack a day at that point. He wasn't hopelessly addicted like he was years later, like Dr. DiFranza said. He was addicted, but he was smoking less than a pack a day at that point.
Imagine what would have happened if the tobacco companies, in 1953, when the Graham/Wynder studies came out -What number slide is that before you put it up?
Imagine in 1953, if the tobacco companies said, you know what? We've got all the science out there -- you know, Dr. Graham and Wynder, they've got these mouse-painting studies linking our product, the cigarette, to cancer. That's really bad. And, you know, we really ought to do the right thing here, because if our product is causing cancer, killing people, well, then, we should tell the world.
And we've got these doctors in our company that basically are confirming all this science, and so let's get together, PM, and RJR
and Lorillard.
Now, Liggett wasn't part of the original agreement, so I don't want to mention them yet, so I've got to give them credit for a little bit, but Liggett was doing their own mouse-painting studies, too, and they confirmed that it caused cancer. And we saw a document about that; there was discussion about that from the witnesses.
But, you know, these three companies, instead of saying, hey, let's do the right thing, let's do the responsible thing, let's do what -You know, they want to be treated like an individual. Remember that's what Mr. Reid said to you in his statements? You know, corporations should be treated like an individual; we shouldn't be treated differently because we're a corporation.
Well, you know what? You want to be treated like an individual, like a human being? Then act like a human being. Because human beings are supposed to care about one another. They're supposed to care about one another.
They're not supposed to say, geez, you
know, our product's killing people, let's all get together and form this conspiracy and assure the smokers that our product is safe.
And let's tell the people, in 1954, that we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business. We care about you folks. And we believe our products are not injurious. They don't hurt you. And we're going to cooperate closely with the people whose job it is to safeguard you, our customers, the public.
Well, imagine if they would have taken out an ad that said, A Frank Statement to smokers, you know, the studies are out there, our product causes cancer, we recommend to our customers that you stop smoking now, because it's going to kill you.
Imagine if a full-page ad was taken out in 450 papers across the country saying that. What impact do you think it would have on somebody who wakes up every morning and read the newspaper cover to cover, a person like Johnnie Calloway?
Imagine if Johnnie Calloway saw that in
1953,	1954? 1954, he was 22 years old. He had been smoking for six years at that point; smoking less than a pack a day.
Imagine, after smoking for six years, if Johnnie Calloway would have gotten the messag from these people saying, hey, our product has been linked to cancer, our product has been linked to killing people, we recommend to our customers that you stop, stop smoking, because until we are sure that our product is safe, we don't want you to use it any more.
Imagine if that message went out in 1953,
1954,	the impact it would have had; the death and destruction they would have avoided, the devastation that would have been avoided to families for years to come. Imagine that.
That's why these folks should be punished for their outrageous behavior, because that's not acceptable. That shouldn't be acceptable. That's not the American way.
You know, Johnnie Calloway worked really hard to get where he got. Think about this:
We heard about Johnnie. He grew up in Mississippi, in the 30's.
We heard from his brother, Frank. I
mean, basically seeing Frank here, that's like seeing Johnnie. They're like one and the same people. Frank told you that.
Frank described their life growing up.
They had a happy life and yet they had nothing. Absolutely nothing. To play football, they had to put together rags in a sack to play football. To go to the bathroom in their house, they had to walk outside to an outhouse. And yet they were happy.
That's saying something. That's saying something about the quality of man that Johnnie Calloway was. And he instilled those qualities in Starr and Tamara. And he made Marvine's life complete with those qualities.
And because of their actions, because of what they could have done in 1954, but didn't, Johnnie kept on smoking.
Would it have made a difference? Remember, we talked about the scales and greater weight of the evidence and more likely than not?
Use your common sense. More likely than not, if the tobacco companies took out a full-page ad in every paper across the United
States, saying, hey, folks, there's -- the science is out there, stop smoking, because we care about you, because we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to the mighty dollar, so we care, stop smoking. Imagine if they did that.
Johnnie would have done it. He would have stopped smoking. We all know that. More likely than not, he would have. And we wouldn't have to be here. But they made a choice not to do it that way. And they continued those choices.
It's amazing. You know, they made choices that are really reprehensible. They made choices that fit -- absolutely fit the definition of punitive damages. I mean, that law was basically written for what they did over the years. It really was.
In 19 -- Number 31 -- in 1953, in this forwarding memo from Hill & Knowlton that's in evidence: Boy! Wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. Not, hey, let's do the right thing and stop making it; but wouldn't it be wonderful if we could make a cancer-free
cigarette.
That, in and of itself, tells you they knew exactly what they were doing in 1953.
They knew their product caused cancer.
And guess what happened? It caused cancer in Johnnie Calloway and he died from it. And millions of other Americans over the years.
You know, they talk about the fact that nicotine is the product that they sell. And they know it. They know it.
And Mr. Jupe, here, told us that, yeah, the nicotine comes out of the product, but, oh we have to put it back in because it just wouldn't be acceptable.
Well, the truth of the matter is, they know that people smoke for nicotine. It's been in their documents for years.
Number 10, please.
We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. That was in 1963. 1963. And yet we saw what happened in 1994, when the heads of all their companies stood before Congress and swore and said our produc is not addictive. And yet, 1963, they acknowledged inside, internally, without
telling the public, we're selling an addictive drug.
And there's a lot more documents like that. We put in a bunch of documents for you guys to look at that talk about nicotine. They knew it. These are their internal documents; documents that they hoped to God would never see the light of day. But they did. And they only did because of cases like this.
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: And, you know, the fact of the matter is -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: What's the objection, Counsel?
MR. REID: It's irrelevant.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: The fact of the matter is, the six of you got to see inside a company, how they operate. That should be a scary thing to you. It really should be.
The fact that a company could operate like this for years and years and years, influence the government, influence Congressmen --
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: -- influence -THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. REID: Noerr-Pennington; and it's irrelevant.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you a to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. The objection is noted; it's overruled.
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: Influenced the American public, influenced people like Johnnie Calloway. Horrible, horrible conduct. And they hoped that people would never see these things. But you six, you're seeing it. Very rare opportunity.
You know, these documents, they're on websites and they're on -- in books now. You saw Dr. Proctor come in; he wrote this thick book about the internal documents. You know, but the public still doesn't know. People didn't know before they came into this courtroom, you know?
And I talked about, during voir dire, that you're probably going to get an education,
and I hope you all did. I hope it opened up your eyes to a lot of things, because this is mind-blowing that a company would behave this way. It's offensive. It's reprehensible.
It's inexcusable. And it needs to be punished.
It's as simple as that.
You know, the whole idea of punitive damages are to punish the company for their behavior, but also to make sure other companies don't behave that way. That's the whole idea.
We don't want our companies, our American companies, to behave the way that Tobacco behaved.
MR. REID: Objection as to "other companies," Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: We want companies to do the right thing.
MR. REID: Same objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, can we approach?
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. HAMMER: Judge, the instruction on punitive damages says exactly that. It's a
matter of deterrence, not just for this company.
MR. GDANSKI: It's not at all deterrence for this company; it's just deterrence to others.
MR. HAMMER: It's deterrence to others. That's exactly what the definition is. So, that's a proper argument, Judge. It's deterrence to other companies. That's what the purpose of punitive damages is. Punish this company for their behavior, and deterrence to other companies, so that they don't do the same thing in the future. That's exactly what it is.
MR. REID: Our position is to the contrary. It is deterrence of the defendant in the case. The jury doesn't know any evidence about these other companies, what they did -THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. HAMMER: Judge, I would just ask the Court to look at the legal instruction. That's exactly what the instruction says.
THE COURT: It says "deterrence to others."
Go ahead.
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
MR. HAMMER: You know, it's the jury instruction. You've got it. The Judge read it to you. You read along. And it says in the jury instruction, "deterrence to others."
"Others" meaning other companies, so that they don't behave that way.
You have the power, such power in this courtroom today, to say, hey, you know what? What you did, what you did, what you did, what you did, what your companies did, that's wrong. We won't tolerate it. And we don't want it ever to happen again. We don't want another company to think that they can do what you did, all for the sake of money, because we value human life. I mean, we all do. They don't; we do.
And you got to value human life if you're a human being. That's just the American way. And you can't tolerate other companies doing it, and that's the whole idea behind punitive damages, to make sure it doesn't happen again And you've got the power to say don't let it happen again. Don't let it happen. It's wrong
what you guys did.
And other companies out there, other individuals out there, other people out there, don't you ever do -- even consider doing what these companies did for 50 years. That's what your verdict will say in this case. That's the whole idea behind it.
Now, you know, they had so many opportunities, but, instead, they chose to make misleading statements.
Slide Number 9, please.
And they knew, back in the 60's -- they knew, back in the 60's, that our position in the cigarette controversy -- that's what they called it, a controversy, that they created -is that we may be subject to the charge and ma be subject to a finding that we're making false or misleading statements.
And guess what? What does the Engle findings tell us? That they made false and misleading statements, that they've been found guilty of. It's a finding by the Florida Supreme Court that must be followed in this courtroom.
They knew it and they were concerned
about it. The Tobacco Institute, all four of them were members by then. Liggett, who, remember they made an issue about the fact that they weren't part of the Frank Statement?
Well, guess what, folks? They joined this group. And what makes their conduct even worse is they joined it once they already knew what was going on.
They saw how well it was working for the rest of the companies, and they made the decision, hey, you know what, let's not get left behind, our own scientists have confirmed everything out there and we got some problems, so let's jump aboard, let's jump aboard the tobacco industry and join ranks with the other guys.
That's why they're part of the conspiracy, and that's why they should be looked at just as harshly as the others, maybe even harsher, because they joined at a point where it was already going.
They saw the profits that these other companies were making; they said, hey, I want part of that, too, let me in. And they willingly joined. That's wrong.
You know, what's amazing is there's a finding that nicotine is addictive, and, as I already covered, they brought in Dr. Abramson to say, well, nicotine can be addictive.
And even Mr. Jupe kind of wavered a little bit and said, well, yeah, it can -yeah, it can cause -- and then, finally,
Mr. Schlesinger made him say and acknowledge that it is addictive.
Remember, there was going back and forth; he finally said, well, just answer the question, is it addictive, "yes" or "no"? Remember how long that took to get Mr. Jupe to acknowledge that, their company rep?
And even Mr. Reid, in his opening statement to you -This is your verdict form, signed by the foreperson. Bigger version of your verdict form, the exact verdict form that you guys signed, that you guys sat -- after hearing evidence for a couple weeks, you sat in there and thought long and hard about the evidence presented to you, and you guys made a finding. You made a finding that said, yes, Johnnie Calloway was addicted, and, yes, he had heart
disease and bladder cancer caused by those cigarettes, and, yes, he died as a result of those cigarettes. You made a finding.
And in his opening statement to you,
Mr. Reid said: In this phase, you will not hear anybody on our side -MR. REID: Excuse me, Your Honor. This isn't evidence.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: Okay. Take that down.
You know what he said to you? He said you guys found him to be addicted, presumably Presumably? Really? No. You guys affirmatively found him to be addicted, and you found his addiction caused his disease, and you found that he died from his diseases caused by their products. There's nothing to presume here.
So, even in this phase, they don't accept it. They can't accept their own -- the findings that are mandated. It's incredible.
And in this phase, I know what's going to happen -- because this has been their argumen the entire time -- is that, hey, it's all Johnnie's fault because he chose to smoke.
Well, really?
Slide Number 31, please. He chose to smoke. It was his own choice. Nobody made hi smoke. Well, except that the Surgeon General, in 1988, said there is no indication in any advertisement that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him but becomes a matter of need. The Surgeon General said that.
And the Surgeon General's report is in evidence; you can take a look at that. And, in 1980, eight years before the Surgeon General said it, the tobacco industry said: We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
Well, folks, you found that Johnnie Calloway was addicted. They've tried to defend the case on free choice, even though their own documents said we can't or we shouldn't, and they're going to do it in this argument, today, to you.
They're going to stand up here and say, it was Johnnie Calloway's choice, we did nothing wrong, what if we do? He chose to continue smoking our -- as they like to call
them, they pointed out in the movies -- cancer sticks and coffin nails. I mean, everybody knew it was bad for you. Come on. Really?
Well, if everybody knew it was bad for you, well, then, how is it possible that they go on TV and say it's not?
Their argument makes no sense whatsoever They argue to us everybody knew, you know, it's out there in the newspapers, everybody knew; but, then, in the same breath they say, but our executives didn't know.
Everybody knew it was addictive; and yet our executives stand before Congress, in 1984, two years after Johnnie's dead, and swear to tell the truth and basically say, no, it's not addictive and appear on TV throughout the years, saying our product doesn't hurt anybody but, if it does, we will take the stuff out or we will stop making it.
So, how can they stand in this courtroom and say everybody knew; but, then, in the same breath say, but our executives didn't know?
Well, they can't. You know why? Because their executives knew; they just lied. They lied. And that's conduct that should not be
tolerated. That's reprehensible conduct.
That's the definition. Lying for what? For nothing but money. It's horrible.
Let's go to Number 4, please. And give them Number 5, too. Let's put up Number 4 first.
You know, they talk about filters and the light cigarettes; and yet they knew, they knew it didn't work. The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact -- as the fact of filtration.
And Mr. Jupe comes in here and tells you, oh, well, you know, we put these filters on and they work. Really? Then why are millions of people still dying if they work?
How many times did Mr. Schlesinger have to ask about, well, with a filter don't people compensate with the light cigarettes, don't people compensate? And he's like avoiding the answer. We all know the answer. Yes, they do That's the whole idea. They don't work. It's a fraud. It is a fraud. But they continue to do it.
Instead of telling the American public, hey, look, our filters don't really do much,
they might take some stuff out, but guess what, folks, you keep on smoking even the filtered ones, it's going to kill you. Do they say that? No.
And what do we hear from Frank Calloway?
Slide Number 5.
They switched to light cigarettes because they believed it. They believed it. They believed the fraud and deceit and the lies that these companies were telling them.
They switched to lights because they thought that they were healthier. He told Frank that in the 60's and 70's, and he told Starr that, when Starr asked him, in 1985, hey, dad, what's that "light" on the cigarette pack?
And Starr's testimony is -What slide is that?
Remember, Starr told us -- she testified; she took the stand. She said, yeah, I asked my dad, you know, why does it say "light"?
Because they're better for you. And she said, yeah, but it's still a cigarette. But what did Johnnie say? They're better for you. He believed it. He still believed it as late as 1985.
Frank and Johnnie bought into what they were telling them, just like the rest of the American public. They counted on that. They bought into it.
And, so, according to them, well, that's Johnnie's fault. I mean, he should have known better. Right? He read every day, he -- he should have known better. He shouldn't have believed us. I mean, we sell the product; why should a consumer believe us? That's what the would have you think.
Well, because the American concept is that if you're going to make a product and you're going to tell the American people you're making it better, well, then, you really are.
At least that's how it used to be.
Now we're a little bit more skeptical about big companies, you know, and you hear about people -- you know, companies getting indicted all the time and -MR. REID: Objection, irrelevant.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. HAMMER: And, you know, it's a different world. Back then, in the 50's, 60's, 70's, America actually trusted -- trusted
companies. And these companies violated that trust.
TECHNICIAN: Mr. Hammer, it's ready now.
MR. HAMMER: There -On the verdict form, there's that slot that says before 19 -- before May of -- May 5th of 1982 and post May 5th, 1982. You saw it on the verdict form. Well, that's because there's a difference between that time period and, of course, the defendants would like you to say, oh, no, after a certain period of time, he knew what was going on.
Well, guess what? After May of 1982, he still didn't understand the reality, because the reality was that those lights didn't work, but he was still buying into it.
The verdict form, which you haven't seen -- I guess you haven't seen yet -- where is it? -- is going to ask you some questions.
It's going to ask you -MR. REID: Excuse me. Is this the one that -- I thought it was going to be retyped and brought back today. Is this the current version?
THE COURT: My understanding, Counsel.
Is that correct, Mr. Hammer?
Oh, I'm sorry. Are you all right?
MR. REID: I haven't seen it yet, so I don't know.
MR. HAMMER: Yeah, the questions are correct, Judge. Absolutely.
MR. REID: Thank you.
THE COURT: Mr. Reid, you're more than free to go -MR. REID: I don't have a copy of it. It was being typed and brought back in, that's why -THE COURT: Understood.
MR. HAMMER: You're going to be asked to talk about the responsibility -- I'm going to talk to you more fully about that -- but one of the questions you're going to be asked is the concealment or omission of the information by each defendant concerning the health effects of cigarettes, whether addiction -- addictive nature -- was that a legal cause of death of Johnnie Calloway.
Well, you've already determined that Johnnie Calloway smoked those cigarettes, tha he was addicted -- thank you -- you've already
determined that he died, his death was caused by those cigarettes.
So, now the question is, the fact that they concealed information from him; the fact that they told him and the rest of the world that our filters make it safer; that if we find something bad in it we'll take it out; the fact that they told him that in their ads, that, hey, filters, they work; the fact that they told him, our light cigarettes, they're better for you; the fact that, in 1985, as late as 1982 -- excuse me, as late as 1985 -- because that's when Starr was born, in '75; she was about ten or 11 at the time, so '85, '86 -- as late as that, he's still telling Starr, well, they're better for you.
That is him prior to and after. The fact that he continued using their products based or their representations that they were better, that the filters would work, that the lights were healthier -- he relied on those statements.
Did those statements cause his death?
Did those statements cause him to continue smoking the way he did, in addition to his
addiction? Yeah. Of course, they did.
And that's why you should check off "yes" to each and every one of these companies, because he smoked each and every one of their cigarettes throughout the years.
And then there's a question with regard to their agreements. Did their agreement to conceal -- and this agreement runs through all the defendants -- did their agreement to conceal this information regarding the health effects or their addictive nature -- was that a legal cause of death?
Did Johnnie continue smoking, in part, because of that agreement that they made all the way back in 1953 and continued all throughout the years? Sure.
Because if you think that, more likely than not, the message that they sent out to the world and to Johnnie Calloway, in 1954, that started this whole agreement and continued throughout the years -- including Liggett, when they joined up; if you believe that those -that that agreement -- Johnnie would have done something different, more likely than not, well, then you've got to check "yes" to these
boxes.
It's as simple as that. And, of course, the agreement impacted his decision, along with millions of other Americans who have since died. That's what they counted on. They counted on their agreement, they counted on their concealment, they counted on their frauds and omissions for people to keep on smoking their cigarettes.
And guess what? Johnnie did. Johnnie did. So, yeah, of course, you check off "yes" to those boxes.
Now, you're also going to be asked a couple of questions not having to do with the fraud and concealment but more directly with the product itself and with the negligence of each defendant.
Now, the findings are that the tobacco companies were negligent, tobacco companies were negligent. You got the instructions as to what negligence is.
Did they act as a reasonably prudent person or corporation? Is that what you expect a reasonably prudent person to do, the way they acted? Of course not.
The negligence by them behaving the way they did, did it cause Johnnie to continue smoking? Of course it did.
I mean, you already found by your first verdict that he was addicted, that his addiction was the cause of his death.
Well, did their negligence, their actions, their irresponsibility, did they contribute to Johnnie Calloway's death? Of course. That's an easy question to answer.
And probably the easiest question to answer here is whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarette, whether th was the legal cause of death of Johnnie.
Well, you've already made that determination by virtue of your verdict in Phase I, because -MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: -- according -MR. REID: -- misstatement of the law, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Counsel, proceed. This is argument.
MR. HAMMER: Because according to the findings, the cigarette is defective by
definition. Your verdict in Phase I said the cigarettes that Johnnie smoked was the legal cause of his death.
So, common sense tells you the defective, unreasonably dangerous cigarettes that were placed on the market by each of these defendants, because he smoked each of their products -- is that the legal cause of death?
Of course. That's the easiest question of them all.
The cigarette is defective; did the cigarette cause his death? Yes.
Did the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarette cause his death? Yes.
And did Johnnie Calloway smoke each of their products? Yes. Yes.
Johnnie Calloway wasn't loyal to a brand; he wasn't loyal to a corporation. He was loyal to nicotine because he was addicted.
And these companies banded together, conspired, agreed and decided -- decided -- to target young smokers like Johnnie Calloway throughout the rest of his life. That was their decision.
So, let's talk about that. For years --
Slide Number 61 -- doubt, confusion and fraud. We've talked about it, but just look at the documents over the years.
And remember these videos? And we'll play them in a minute so you can hear them again, but remember these videos?
All the tobacco representatives saying, our product hasn't been determined to be unsafe; but if it is, we'll take out the bad stuff. Oh, it hasn't been proven, there's no cause and effect. Oh, it's -- you know, come on, really?
Time and time again, in 1957, 1964, 1966, 1968, 1969, time and time again, doubt is our product. The most important type of story is that which casts doubt. Obviously, the key word is confusion. We must give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
That's all they did, doubt and confusion; giving them psychological crutches to continue smoking. That's exactly what they did with Johnnie Calloway and the rest of the smokers.
Slide Number 7.
Continued into the 70's. 1970, let's
face it, we're interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. CTR and the industry have publicly frequently denied what others find as truth.
In 1972, creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it.
1978, the TIRC was set up as an industry shield, in 1954. Shield, with quotes, their own language. They knew they were setting up the shield. And the CTR, special projects, has acted as a front. All throughout the years, doubt, confusion, fraud.
They had so many opportunities to tell the truth and to save lives.
Number 20.
Starting in New York, in 1953, at the Plaza Hotel, all the way through 1994, when they stood before Congress, and all those years in between, they had every opportunity to tell the truth. But what did they do instead? They lied, they conspired, they agreed to conceal the truth from everybody.
Number 29.
The defendant's actions, conspiracy,
their collusion -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
Take that down, please. Take it down.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. REID: I have no objection to the evidentiary parts. I have an objection to the part that says Johnnie Calloway was one life of the 450,000 lives lost each year. It's irrelevant; it has nothing to do with Mr. Calloway.
MR. GDANSKI: It's in evidence. It's conduct of reprehensibility.
THE REPORTER: I'm sorry, Mr. Gdanski -MR. GDANSKI: I'm sorry.
That's in evidence. It's conduct of reprehensibility. It's absolutely in evidence through multiple witnesses. And this is argument.
MR. REID: It's also Williams; harm to others.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Additionally, Your Honor, we just want to assert a
Williams/State Farm objection, as well.
THE COURT: The objection's noted; it's overruled.
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
MR. HAMMER: They put their own jobs an money over human life. That is reprehensible. That is conduct that should not be tolerated by you. That's conduct that should not be tolerated by this country.
That's conduct that you got to tell the rest of the companies out there, the rest of the individuals out there, that will not be tolerated by us. That is inexcusable, that's conduct that is wrong, that's conduct that led to people dying. And you didn't care. Your companies didn't care that you were killing
450,000	people a year. And you didn't care that you killed Johnnie Calloway. That's what you'll be saying by your verdict.
You know, and then -Slide Number 30. Baron, what's the other number?
THE TECHNICIAN: 30.
MR. HAMMER: Yeah.
MR. REID: The objection is relevance,
Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. HAMMER: Not only were they concerned about addicting smokers and keeping them smoking; they were concerned about replacement smokers, because they knew, hey, if our product is killing people, and they -- and people stop smoking, how are we going to get new smokers? We got to replace them.
And we'll replace them, because we know that the younger people start smoking, the better off we are, and then we got customers for life because when they start smoking younger, 90 percent of them get addicted.
Ninety percent of the smokers are under 18. So, let's target the young adult smoker.
And they say, you know, in the future, use the term "young adult smoker," because it's not good to talk about teenagers. Use the term "young adult smoker."
In 1960, the young adult market, 14 to 24. Really? The young adult market, 14 to 24? That's their own documents.
So, what were they doing? That is
conduct that's reprehensible. Because you know what? When they know that only five percent of smokers start out after the age of 24, and they know that less than one-third of the smokers start after the age of 18, when do all those other smokers start? Way before 18. From 14 to 24. Really? That's their target in the 60's?
How old was Johnnie when he started smoking? Sixteen. That's the kind of conduct that's reprehensible.
And, you know, they stand up here and Mr. Jupe said, well, it's a legal product.
Well, if you really want to make your product safer, why not do something to make it safer?
Like maybe make sure you don't target the age group of 14 to 24. Like maybe make sure that young people, young adults, don't start smoking so they become addicted. Because we've all heard testimony about the human brain; the young brain, the 15-, 16-year-old brain is still developing. Still developing. We already heard that testimony.
And they took advantage of it. They knew full well what they were doing. They knew what
they were doing. And they made the choice. And the choice they made is totally irresponsible, reprehensible, and has to be punished so that another company, another individual, doesn't ever think to do what they did. That's why punitive damages must be awarded in this case.
And, so, you're going to be asked under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against any of the defendants listed below.
Well, yeah, Liggett, Lorillard, Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, for years they conspired together to hide the truth. For years their action killed people. For years their actions targeted young people to get replacement smokers. For years they lied. And they continued lying even after Johnnie was dead an in the ground as they stood before Congress an lied.
And it was all about one thing. Number 52, do you have that?
"Who ain't for more money?" Their own document. "Who ain't for more money?"
MR. REID: Excuse me. May we approach, Your Honor?
MR. HAMMER: Judge, this document is in evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Take it down, please.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. REID: This title is from a document that was excluded from evidence specifically.
It was the BAT document; and I object to the "money."
There's no cite -- that cite -- that title is from a document, the "bigger bags of money." They tried to get it in and you excluded it and now they've put it -gratuitously put it onto a slide.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, we can call our slide whatever we want; it's argument. That's number one.
Number two -- excuse me, Counsel. Numbe two, it's a demonstrative that's got "money" on it, and it's argument. And we can make our argument any way we want. That's an exact quote from a document in evidence.
THE COURT: Well, excuse me, this phrase is not in evidence. This is -You're saying this -MR. REID: It's from another document, yes, sir.
THE COURT: Anything else?
MR. REID: That was excluded.
THE COURT: This was excluded?
MR. REID: Yes, sir. The document that contains the "bigger bag of money" was excluded. It was the BAT document.
MR. GDANSKI: This is commentary and argument.
THE COURT: This was on a document that' not in evidence?
MR. REID: Correct.
THE COURT: Is that agreed or not?
MR. HAMMER: Yeah, but we're not saying that's from a document. We're saying that this is from a document.
THE COURT: Thank you. Proceed. But don't show the slide unless you take that off. Thank you.
(Whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:)
MR. REID: Excuse me, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Take it down. Thank you.
MR. HAMMER: 1969; February 19th, 1969,  confidential document -Do you have it, Baron?
A confidential document, it's in evidence. I'm not sure of the exact number of evidence, but it's in that big stack. And right in the document, "Who ain't for more money?" That's what this is all about.
And, yeah, that's the American way; that's corporate America. Yeah, corporations are in the business of making money; but if you're going to do it, do it the right way.
That's all we ask.
Our position should obviously be supportive of Jet's for the primitive reason of who ain't for more money? Do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? It is, of course, but there are dangerous FDA implications if we agree that it's a drug.
Who ain't for more money? That's what this is all about. And the defense will tell you, well, this lawsuit, it's all about money.
That's like talking out of two sides of your
mouth, because that's what their business is.
They didn't care about human life, they didn't care about the effect that it would have on the American public, they didn't care about the fact that they killed Johnnie Calloway and
450,000	other people a year, millions of people over the years, they didn't care because who ain't for more money? That is reprehensible conduct. That's conduct that must be punished
You know, they had so many opportunities to tell the truth.
Number 27.
Opportunities to tell the truth, to save lives, accept some responsibility for their conspiracy and lies.
In 1954, with the Frank Statement, all they had to do was be honest and take out a different full-page article, telling the American public, stop smoking our product because -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor. May we approach?
Take it down.
THE COURT: What's the objection, Counsel?
MS. GALLAGHER: It's improper to characterize testimony in this courtroom as a conspiracy.
THE COURT: Thank you. The objection's noted. It's overruled.
MR. HAMMER: They had an opportunity with the 1964 Surgeon General report, but, instead, what happened? We saw it. Mr. Cullman went on TV -Do we have that clip, the Cullman clip?
It's in evidence. Sixty-four, please.
Remember? What did he do? He goes on, on TV, and this is what he tells the Johnnie Calloways of the world, the rest -(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's committee.
VOICE: In our studio this afternoon, following the Surgeon General's news conference, CBS News Correspondent Richard C. Hottelet put some questions to one of the leading spokesmen for the industry, Howard
Cullman, president of the Tobacco Merchants Association and a long-time director of the Philip Morris Company.
Mr. Cullman, prominent in the New York theater and civic affairs, is a third-generation member of a tobacco family.
VOICE: I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon Generals, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed. But at this point, we do not know...
MR. HAMMER: How great would it have been if Mr. Cullman went on that news program and said, you know, the Surgeon General was appointed by John F. Kennedy because of John F Kennedy's concern for the American public; the Surgeon General just came out with this big report, talking about smoking and health -it's in evidence, you can go through it--linking our products to lung cancer.
It was pretty conclusive. How great would it have been if Mr. Cullman went out there on TV and said, listen, folks, we got to
be honest with you, we've had scientists working for years, and, unfortunately, we've confirmed what everybody else is saying and what the Surgeon General is saying: Our product does kill people, it does cause cancer, it does cause heart disease. So, please stop smoking. If you're addicted and you need help, we'll set up programs to help you stop. How great would that have been if that's what that man said? What kind of impact would that have had? That would have been the responsible thing to do.
But they chose to do something else. And they did it again in 1988, when the Surgeon General's report came out on nicotine. They did it again in 1994, at the Waxman hearings.
And Mr. Jupe, instead of doing the right thing, telling you, hey, we're a changed corporation, we're going to take the nicotine out, because, really, we know that all smokers want is a -- is good taste, so we are going to make it not inhalable and we are going to take out the nicotine so you don't become addicted and just give them the taste they want -- no, didn't even do that.
You know, over the years -- Number 32 -the ads, more doctors smoke Camels, Santa Claus, fun, making it fun, making it look like, hey, a bunch of healthy, young people having fun, smoke our product, you'll have fun, too.
And then, after 1982, the magazines,
Ebony and Jet -- they're in evidence; you can see them -- cool stream; Newport, alive with pleasure.
Really? "Alive with pleasure"? Johnnie Calloway, dead from bladder cancer. He's not alive with pleasure. Marvine is not getting any pleasure out of this; Starr is not getting any pleasure out of this. It's been horrible for them for 20 years. And it will be still.
It's gotten better, it's gotten better.
You saw Starr take the stand and you saw raw human emotion. You saw Tamara; you saw Marvine. They told you what it's done to them. That was real. You saw drama as -- like you've never seen before.
And Hollywood couldn't have written it better. It was incredible. And that wasn't rehearsed. That wasn't like following a script like Dr. Abramson and Dr. MacIntyre and their
experts. That wasn't following a script where I had a notebook up here and I was asking them questions and I told them what to say. That wasn't looking at their testimony before and trying to make it better. That was from the heart. That was from deep inside. That was real emotion. That was real.
And what's going on in this courtroom for the past several weeks has been real. You've seen the real side of these tobacco companies; a side that most people don't get to see, a side that -- I would like to think you guys learned a lot -- a lot -- in this trial, things that you never knew before, things that I would think that you couldn't even imagine happened in corporate America, but that's what happened in this case. It's horrible.
I'm going to be asking you, on Page 3 of the verdict form, to award money in this case.
But I want to go through this verdict form one by one.
Defective, unreasonably dangerous cigarettes, is that the legal cause of death of Johnnie? He smoked each and every one of the company's cigarettes.
Dr. Soloway told you each cigarette causes the disease, it's a dose response. Remember Dr. Soloway, our expert, he explainec that to you. It's a repeated dosage, time, time, time, time and again. And that's what Johnnie did. Smoking each one of their cigarettes.
And, so, yeah, you should say "yes" to each of these defendants, because their product, their cigarette, caused his death.
Was their negligence the cause of his death? Absolutely. Their irresponsibility.
Did they act reasonably and prudent? Of course not. Each one of them, "yes," "yes," "yes," and "yes."
On Page 2, with regard to those first two questions, you're going to be asked to determine their responsibility for Johnnie Calloway's death that you charge to Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, Lorillard, to Liggett and to Johnnie Calloway.
Now, there's an agreement that each of these cigarettes that Johnnie smoked was made by each of these companies. Now, Marvine has accepted responsibility on behalf of Johnnie,
in combination with their actions.
So, what do you do? How do you divide this up? This is up to you. It's got to total 100 percent.
And you can decide that Philip Morris is more responsible than R.J. Reynolds or Lorillard or Liggett; that's your decision.
But he started smoking R.J. Reynolds' products when he first started smoking. And the vast majority of the cigarettes that he smoked over the years were R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris products. They sustained his addiction; they continued his addiction.
The vast majority of the documents that you saw in this case are R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris documents.
So, I would suggest to you that I think Philip Morris and Reynolds probably share the bulk of the blame, the bulk of the responsibility. It was their representatives, for the most part, that you saw on TV and in the press and that responded to all these different things.
Lorillard and Liggett, they were the smaller companies. I would submit to you that
they should share the blame. They share quite a bit. Lorillard, I think, is probably more responsible than Liggett because Liggett did join the conspiracy later on. They weren't part of that initial meeting, but they're definitely involved.
But before I break them down, what about Johnnie? How do you put a number on Johnnie'; responsibility? Does he share equal blame to these companies? Of course not. Did he know what they knew? No, of course not.
Had he known what they knew back when they knew it, would things have been different? Most likely. More likely than not, yeah, and we wouldn't have to be here, if they had just been honest with Johnnie and the rest of the American public.
But, you know, I would say Johnnie -fair assessment -- would be, maybe, five to 10 percent, but that's your decision. That's your decision.
With regard to Lorillard, I would say they're 20 percent. And with regard to the Liggett Group, depending on what you give Johnnie -- if you give him five percent, I
would say Lorrilard is 15 percent. If you give Johnnie 10 percent, I would say Liggett is 10 percent.
I think that's fair, because we accept our fair share of the blame, but it's a fair share of the blame, not an equal share of the blame; a fair share.
And what Johnnie knew, when he knew it, pales in comparison as to what they knew and didn't tell anybody. The concealment issue we talked about.
And I certainly think we presented evidence, both before and after; and did they conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects? Yeah, it's already been determined they have. Was that a legal cause of death of Johnnie? Of course, it was.
Had they not concealed that information, things would have been different, more likely than not.
And they're all at fault for that, both before and after May of 1982. Their agreement to conceal, the conspiracy that they developed, they've already been found to have agreed and concealed that information regarding the health
effects and addictive nature.
Was that the legal cause of Johnnie -their agreement before May '82 and after?
Yeah, it was. All four of them. And you should check these off.
It really should not be a difficult decision for you. It really shouldn't, not with the evidence that we presented in this case.
The total amount of damages sustained by Marvine for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection, for her pain and suffering, how do you put a number on that? How do you put a value on what Johnnie meant Marvine? It's a tough question. How do you do that?
How do you put a value on the damages sustained by Starr for the loss of her father, his companionship, his guidance?
You know, she said, it's every girl's dream to have her daddy walk her down the aisle, and she was deprived of that. Her dad was so proud of her and everything she did; he had always complimented her, always gave her, you know, the encouragement to do better.
And she did great on her own, but it was only because of what -- the values that Johnnie instilled in her.
The support and services, that talks about as a result of Johnnie's not being here, what did they have to do to make up for it financially? Well, that number is not nearly as big as this number, because it's not measuring pain and suffering.
But I would suggest to you that for Marvine Calloway, who lost her best friend, lost her husband, lost her soul mate, lost the person that she was looking forward to retiring with once the kids were out of the house so they could travel and do the things they always wanted to do, that they always talked about, that Johnnie worked so hard for all his life -What should she get for her pain and suffering? What should she get? I think $15 million is a fair number. It's a fair number in a case like this where, at age 59, in the prime of his life, he was ripped from her arms. The pain, the suffering that she's gone through all these years, she's entitled to that.
You know, in today's world, we pay athletes millions of dollars to play in a single game; we pay actors millions of dollars to act in a movie. Money is like nothing these days.
How do you put a value on somebody's life? How do you put a value on pain and suffering? I think that's fair. But you can say, you know, I think that's too high, or you can say that's too low. That's in your discretion. But this is what I would suggest,
$15 million. I think that's fair.
You know, Starr, in comparison, she had it horrible. She didn't have her father to walk her down the aisle, she didn't have her father to watch her graduate from college; but, you know, Starr found her dad. She told you she married her dad. That's something special. She looked for the man that could fit in her dad's shoes and she found him.
She's moved on a little bit differently than Marvine has. Marvine hasn't moved on. She's strong, she's tough, but deep inside she's still hurting. You heard Tamara describe it. You heard Starr describe it.
But, for her loss, I think it would be fair to award seven-and-a-half million dollars to Starr.
Because how do you replace a father? She was daddy's little girl. She was a teenager.
She saw him collapse to the ground, she saw hi: eyes roll back in his head, and then she saw the paramedics revive him and she got hope, he's coming back, but he never did.
And for the next several years of her life, what did she tell you? She ate herself -- gaining 123 pounds since his death. She was active, she was in the band, she playe< sports, she buried herself in food. And that was hard for her to acknowledge to you. That was heartfelt; that was real.
This figure, as I said, is a lot less.
The damages over the years -It's been 20 years -- it's been 20 years, Marvine's had to work and struggle. Johnnie provided for that family, provided for Marvine.
She worked to make some extra money cutting hair; but once he was gone, she had to work. She had to pay bills, she had to manage the house, she had to do things she never
thought she would have to do. She worked hard She still works hard today.
What's fair there? Certainly, I think, over the years -- it's 20 years -- 20 years -Well, Johnnie was making good money. He owned his own company. He pulled himself up out of the Depression years. Out of Mississippi, came down here, picked fruit in the groves, worked at Cape Canaveral and mad himself into quite a man, owning his own construction company.
That's something big to be said about somebody like him. He worked hard and he deserved it. He was a productive member of society.
He was -- he was a man that took care of his family, a man that cared, a man that loved his family. A man that provided for Marvine and Starr.
What's fair here? Certainly, I think, for 20 years, at just $50,000 a year, that's a million dollars over the past 20 years. I think that's fair.
And for Starr, fortunately, she has a husband now to take care of her. But I think,
for Starr, certainly it would be fair, for the years that she had to drop out of Tuskegee and go to Florida State and do -- go on the work study program, pay her way through school, do it on her own, $250,000 for those years, I think that's fair.
You know, and the only way -- the only way to have an impact on these defendants, the only way, is in their pocketbook, because they don't care about anything else. That's been proven throughout this case.
And the last question you're going to be asked on the verdict form, before your foreperson signs it, is: Under the circumstances, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against any of the defendants listed below.
Should they be punished for their actions? Is it clear that what they did is wrong? Is it clear that what they did is reprehensible? Is it clear that what they did should not be tolerated and should not ever happen again, should not ever be done by another company or individual in this country?
Tell them it's unacceptable what they did. And the only way you can tell them that is by your verdict. Because the only thing they care about is money. That's the only thing they care about.
So, check off those boxes "yes," and let us proceed on to the punitive damages phase. And I assure you, that phase won't take very long, not even a day. We're not going to put on any evidence other than reading some things to you. You're not going to hear any witnesses, nothing like that, not from us.
It's a quick decision for you to make.
So, don't think that, oh, you know, if we do this, we're going to be here another week.
I promise you that will not be the case. I promise you.
Let your verdict speak loud; be proud of your verdict. Be as proud as Johnnie Calloway is of his daughters, Starr and Tamara, for what they've done without him.
Be proud of your verdict so when you go back, years later, you can look back on this experience and realize, wow, what I did made a difference. What I did was important. What I
heard in that courtroom, that was unbelievable stuff, something I never thought I would ever hear about a company in our country, in our great country. I never thought a company could do that and get away with it for 50 years.
It's incredible.
Be proud of your verdict, so that when you look back on this today, you realize you've done the right thing; you've found justice, you've given Marvine justice, you've given Starr justice. Because that's all we want. We want justice; that's why we're here.
We appreciate all the time you've given to us. It's been incredible. The amount of attention you've paid, the questions you've asked of these witnesses, have shown how important this is to you.
It's important for Starr, it's important for Marvine, it's important to these companies, it's important that you check off the "yes" box here (indicating) so that this does not happen again.
When they sat around at the funeral, they honored Johnnie. They continue to honor Johnnie to this day. You saw the honor and
respect they have for him. Don't let that honor and respect go unnoticed. The man deserves the respect; he's earned the respect.
These companies took advantage of that; they killed him, their product killed him, and they knew it would. They knew it would kill him and 450,000 Americans every day (sic) and they continue to do it. Put a stop to it.
Only your verdict can do that.
Thank you.



MR. SCHLESINGER: Hi, folks.
So it's late. It's even later this time than it was last time when I came up to talk to you, and the total amounts of time are even greater than they were before.
So if you'll indulge me, I'll try to do the best I can to make some points. It's a lot of information that came at us, and I'm trying to think about it, but right out of the box, I really think that you hear how the different sides to the dispute characterize or attend to that which they want to focus on. Fair enough.
But I was thinking about a scene I saw in the movie Apocalypse Now. And I do a lot of thinking in terms of movies and they come up
and some of them I can't repeat because they're not appropriate. And I'm looking, I'm saying: These people never give up. There are no corporate representatives here.
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They are just lawyers.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Mr. Reid -THE COURT: I'll sustain the objection.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Mr. Reid has been trying these cases since Engle. He tried the Engle case in the year 2000.
MR. REID: I object. My history of being in litigation for any client is not relevant to this case.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection sustained.
Move on, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The first thing that Mr. Reid said to you was that this is a rush.
We are in a rush. My client is dead for 20 years. We're in a rush? We've been in trial for seven weeks. We're in a rush? There is an endless series of hurdles being put in front of
us as if this case has to be tried over and over and over again, when in fact, the Engle findings, that is the result of a lengthy lawsuit.
Mr. Calloway was not allowed to benefit from the Engle findings until you all decided he was a member of the class. He wasn't entitled to tell you that they have already been found responsible and at fault. Those determinations are the law in the case you all are obligated to apply.
So folks, if -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor, misstatement of the law.
THE COURT: Objection noted. This is argument, Counsel.
You may proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I want to talk with you about that a little bit so we can keep things clear. This trial came in phases. That means multiple trials. Generally we would not know you folks anymore. You would be gone. You would have gotten your little jury certificate and you would have gone about your business and we go to our next obligation to our next
client.
But we give you a trial. We have a trial with you. You come back with a verdict and we have another trial. And so far not a single solitary human being on this side has said: I accept some responsibility.
Not an iota of it, not a percentage point, nothing. Johnnie Calloway, through his family -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- seeking justice -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor, that's improper. Defendants don't have to accept responsibility.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MS. GALLAGHER: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jurors disregard the last comment.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They could, they are able to, and they are completely free to say: Some percentage of the fault is ours -MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- percentage of fault.
THE COURT: Objection is overruled.
Proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They don't have to, but they can.
And all Johnnie Calloway, through his wife, through Starr, is saying: You know what?
We want to be reasonable people. We want to accept our fair share of the blame, in combination with what they did. But Johnnie Calloway's fair share is only insofar as everything he did was in good faith, as a gentleman depended upon the nicotine in cigarettes.
All those cigarettes he smoked, that's the overwhelming proof that he only smoked them for one reason. He's the perfect example, as a non-brand-loyal customer, of smoking cigarettes for one reason: Nicotine dependence. The sine qua non of cigarette smoking.
What does sine qua non mean? It's Latin.
It means: Without which there is nothing.
That is what cigarette smoking is. That's all it is. There are no corporate representatives here. There are lawyers here.
MR. PEDROSA: Objection, Your Honor, move to strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They didn't -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There could have been -THE COURT: Jurors disregard the last comment.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The corporate representative is a party. A corporation is represented through people because corporations are people, my friend. And they are people.
And the Judge has given you instructions they should be treated like people. If you want to be treated like a person, act like a person.
Behave like a person.
Marvine got on the witness stand. She submitted herself to cross-examination.
MR. REID: Your Honor, may we approach?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Starr got on the witness stand -THE COURT: Counsel, come sidebar, please.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
MR. REID: There is an in limine motion
about commenting on this. It was deferred. It wasn't to be brought up until it was cleared with the Court ahead of time. Counsel keeps bringing it up, we object, you sustain it, he keeps bringing it up in total disregard.
THE COURT: Mr. Schlesinger, the objection is about not having corporate representatives in the courtroom.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Fair game.
THE COURT: It's not fair game. I sustained it. All right. Thank you?
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. SCHLESINGER: They have the obligation to call any witness they want and submit them for cross-examination so we can talk to them and listen to what they have to say. They have the ability to accept or to acknowledge to you that there is some percentage of fault that they -- can I get the big verdict forms, please?
So do you remember, what is a conspiracy? A conspiracy is the convening together of multiple actors who act improperly, and in so doing are all coequally responsible for what
they've done.
Now the Engle law, the findings in Engle specifically start from the fact that you found Johnnie Calloway to be a class member. He was not entitled. That's why we phased the trial, because we wanted you to be insulated. We wanted you to be pristine. We wanted you to be clear that before you heard the evidence of conduct that these tobacco companies are responsible for, before you heard the findings of fault from the Engle trial that might persuade you or prejudice you in some way to unfairly determine that Johnnie Calloway got the benefit of those findings or that you are obligated to apply those findings to him, you first had to find that he was a class member.
So that we insulated you.
And we overcame that hurdle. You said:
You know what? We agree he was dependent. We agree he died from smoking cigarettes because of his dependence on nicotine. So you checked those off and made that determination. We said, well, that's a threshold determinations.
Let's get to Phase II and we will show you in Phase II what it is that they did so you can
start comparing conduct.
So Phase II is about their conduct.
Phase II is about what they did.
Now Robert Proctor wrote a book. The book is 800 pages long. Okay. When the running back hits the gap, and Ray Lewis is standing there, you don't get yardage, you get stopped cold.
And it isn't the documents we did put in.
You saw what it took to get every single one of the documents we got in put in, and Dr. Proctor testified that doesn't include the thousands of documents that were destroyed.
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: If I offered to put this book into evidence -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's in evidence.
MR. REID: And object to the use of the book. It's being used inappropriately based on the prior rulings of the Court.
THE COURT: That objection is overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Proctor. 6849. And how many documents are you aware of that
have been destroyed?
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, there have been thousands of documents that have been destroyed.
That's evidence in this case. Sworn testimonial evidence in this case by a qualified gentleman who spent an inordinate amount of his life researching in a multi-multimillion-dollar document database that's going to take 100 years to fully digest.
Web crawling as best we can some of the documents.
Can you imagine the documents you saw if they said what they said? Can you imagine what the ones that have been destroyed said? Do you think we got them all? Do you think we would have the time to go through an 800-page book and show you all the documents?
You learn what you learn in this courtroom subject to the rules of evidence. Nothing stops you from learning more when you leave this courtroom. That will be your decision if your interest is piqued. You all can talk to anybody you want about this case or
not talk to anybody you want about this case.
You can research and learn more about this case. A reporter could come down to you and say: How did you give such a big award to this family? How did you give so many millions of dollars to them? And you can say: Go down and ask Jaz to show you that evidence and see for real what these folks did.
This conduct was reprehensible. That's the concept we're talking about. Reprehensible conduct. There's two phases -- there's three phases to this trial. These people never give up.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There's three phases to this trial. We have to overcome -THE COURT: What is your objection?
MR. REID: It's irrelevant that we have phases. That's not the responsibility of one party or the other. The Court ordered phases.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There was one trial, the Engle trial, resulted in findings, ruling, law, the law of this case. This is called a
post-Engle progeny case. It talks about this determination that smoking cigarettes causes bladder cancer, that the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
And here is the important thing. You didn't even get to hear those Engle findings in the first phase. We had to prove them to you, and then we also got them to say: We're not going to dispute that.
Everything is always: We're not going to dispute it. But they don't come right out and say it's true. We -- there is no other product in the world like tobacco. When used as reasonably intended, it kills you.
The only things that keeps folks smoking is the addiction to nicotine, and the only people that replace the smoker that die are their children? And they call a 14-year-old a young adult? That's the kind of corporate doublespeak, the Orwellian way in which a corporation runs roughshod through our country.
America is this industry's ashtray. They stub out 450,000 smokers a year -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- that they kill.
MS. GALLAGHER: Williams.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection is overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They smoke the smokers, and they are addicts. They are addicted to money, not by the hundreds of dollars or the thousands of dollars, or the millions, but the billions. Do you know how much power that industry has?
MR. REID: Object.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jurors disregard.
Move on, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So. Sorry. I'm a little bit of a -- I guess I'm your late-afternoon espresso. I don't mean to get so fired up. Sorry. But I know, I keep you awake. All right.
So the defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false, or misleading, or failed to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
This is the law in the case. They are still denying it.
The Judge is going to tell you, you apply this law. They've already been found in Engle to do it. Johnnie Calloway's family, Marvine and Starr, they get to benefit. They are entitled for ya'all to apply those findings.
You don't go back there. You don't have to go back there and say: I don't know if tobacco did anything wrong; I don't know if they were negligent. I don't know if the product was defective.
For the class of smokers -- for the class of smokers in which Johnnie Calloway belongs, he belongs to a narrow segment of smokers during a period of years, going back to the '90s, that class of smokers in which you decided Johnnie belongs, he is entitled for you to believe, for you to apply, for you to conclude that he smoked defective cigarettes; that those cigarettes were unreasonably dangerous; that when used as intended, they killed him.
That is why these folks didn't talk about Questions 1 and 2, because Questions 1 and 2
are, at this juncture, just a formality. You have already decided by your first part of your verdict -- would you guys put this up on a -you already decided by the first part of your verdict that Questions 1 and 2 in the second part of the verdict are yes, as to all defendants, because the Court is going to tell you it's is a negligently marketed product.
They were negligent in what they did. That was careless.
But more importantly, that it's a defective product. That's what is called strict liability. A manufacturer of a defective and dangerous product is strictly liable for the harm that it does. Strictly liable.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor, it's a misstatement of the law by leaving out legal cause.
THE COURT: Thank you. Counsel, this is argument.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So that's just -that's the nature of it. So it goes right here that because all of these defendants, you know,
it doesn't state -- it doesn't say state whether or not the product was defective an unreasonably dangerous. You guys don't have to make that decision. That decision was made years ago. The Engle case was approved by the Florida Supreme Court. Certiorari denied by the United States Supreme Court, the highest court of this land. It is the law of the land.
And now you guys, now the power shifts.
They are powerful. They fought it to the
United States Supreme Court. The Supreme Court
denied it. And now the power shifts.
And so in this country, thank goodness, we have a jury system. And a jury can match up with a corporation or any person, no matter how big or how small, and do the right thing. Do what's right under the circumstances. Right?
And what did Edmund Burke say? The only way that -- I had it written down. The only way that evil can prevail or that tyranny can prevail is for good men to do nothing.
And now you good people are able to do something on behalf of this family to make right longtime wrongdoing.
Responsibility and taking responsibility
means to be accountable for what you've done and to remedy the wrong, to remedy the consequences.
Ms. Gallagher, she only refers to me as the plaintiff's lawyer. I am dehumanized by her. I refer to her as Ms. Gallagher. But that technique is the plaintiff's lawyers -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor. MR. SCHLESINGER: -- and she says to you -THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: She says to you: Oh, I'm not going to apologize for some of the things those guys said back then. Well, it's wrong. But they did wrong. They did intentional wrong.
Johnnie Calloway was an innocent. They are blaming a victim. We say his human weaknesses, his -- the inadequacy of his willpower contributed somewhat in the face of some of the information he knew that this stuff must be dangerous.
But how is it the pivot, how is that pivot from 50 years of denying the harms, 50 years of denying the addiction, nobody ever
said it wasn't addicted. The seven dwarfs, that's what we call the CEOs when they raise their hand at the Waxman hearing and said:
It's not addictive.
50 years of denying it, all of a sudden, in the year 2000, when it all comes out, when the documents come out and they have to change their position and admit it, they go from saying there's doubt, there's controversy, we don't know, it hasn't been proven, we will give our smokers a psychological crutch to keep smoking, and then they pivot and now it's the year 2000 and 10 years later saying: Everybody knew. Everybody knew. Don't -- Johnnie Calloway never had to listen to us. What, was he ignorant? How did he listen to us? He listened to our advertising.
Why do you think they advertise?
Billions and billions and endless billions of dollars for endless advertising because it gets results. It's not that we look at advertising which inundates us. We are washed in it. The ubiquity of it is everywhere. It has an effect. It isn't even always at the conscious level. The man is dead. That's pretty
convenient for these guys.
They're telling you everything they know about Johnnie Calloway. What do they know about that man, going back 65 years to the '40s, when he started smoking. They know nothing about that man.
And a few statements from the depositions they took, about whether or not he blew into a handkerchief and said it was brown. Yes, we agree. We said that first to ya'all. That's the first thing Mr. Hammer said. He knew it was dangerous, but he was addicted.
He had some knowledge, but he didn't have all the knowledge. I don't know when he would have quit or how he would have quit, but they had choices to make just like Johnnie. If they wanted to do the right thing, they could have, instead of making a conspiracy, that the Court is going to tell you that they made, instead of making a conspiracy, they could have said: You know what we're going to do? We're coming out, we're saying -- well, either we're making good on our promise to stop making it or we're going to come out and say: This stuff is deadly dangerous and it's super addictive. And so
what we're going to do is, if you're a smoker and you smoke and you're 30 years old and you go, you know what, I started when I was 15,
90 percent of the people started as kids. It's just not fair. 15-year-olds.
A teenager? They know everything, and they know nothing. Anyone who knows anything about a teenager knows they know everything and they know nothing. A kid doesn't have the long-range thinking to know what is going to happen to him when he starts smoking. They don't think they're going to be smoking for 30 or 40 years.
You want to make a choice, you want to do the right thing? You say: This is deadly dangerous, highly addictive. We're not going to stop making it, but you know what we're going to do, we're going to make sure, it's our responsibility, nobody, nobody underage is going to get these cigarettes. Nobody.
And we know now that children are children until they're at least 21. No one under 21 is going to get these cigarettes. No way. That's going to be the responsibility of the cigarette manufacturers.
So we take that responsibility and we keep folks away from cigarettes until they're that age, we're not going to have as many customers, but we'll still have a business.
And then if someone did start when they were young or do start when they're a adult, the small percentage of folks who do start in true adulthood and then they are 30 years old and they say: You know, I want to have a family now. I'm smoking, I'm dependent. It's time for me to get off these things, can you help me. They would have taken it as their responsibility to take their customers and help them get off the cigarettes.
However they can do it. There is a million different ways they could do it.
Smoking cessation, cigarettes without nicotine, cigarettes with less nicotine. Nicotine -cigarettes at a level -- with nicotine at a level that will not sustain and support addiction.
Because that is the only reason folks smoke cigarettes. That is -- we've proved that in Phase I. I don't want to continue to repeat it. But I do want to touch base on what they
did instead.
And what they did instead was, and you heard about the doubt and controversy and saw some of those documents, what they did instead was they embarked on health reassurance campaign.
So there's a couple of things that make up this point to get this money, to be able to continue to sell their product. You've got to addict children at a young age because they are the most vulnerable and then you've got to keep them smoking.
And when the health hazards and harms began to come out, they had to reassure the smokers with health reassurance, so they phonied up the filters. Dr. DiFranza was the first person, the addiction expert, that told you filters were a sham. And when we say they are a sham, they are. You can't shave a couple of scraps of led off a 38 bullet and make it any less dangerous.
This nonsense about expanding tobacco. The stuff -- it isn't just every bit as dangerous. It's more dangerous. More deadly. And I'm going to prove it to you. I'm going to
prove it to you right now. And this is in evidence.
This is the Surgeon General's report 2010. The water is rising. They've done really well for a really, really long time.
The tide is rising. They don't have as many places to go anymore.
When the Surgeon General reports keep coming out, more knowledge, more evidence, specific at the genetic level, they are finding the genes that cause addiction. They are -they know, down to molecular level, specifically how these TSNAs, those nitrosamines cause cancer.
It says right here: Whereas squamous cell carcinomas had been the predominant form of lung cancer by the late 20th Century, adenocarcinoma of the lung was becoming increasingly common, presumably reflecting deeper inhalation of smoke that was facilitated by ventilated filters, as well as other factors in the manufacturing process, the cigarette manufacturing process that could lead to increased concentrations of tobacco-specific nitrosamines.
People are smoking cigarettes nowadays like people smoke a joint of pot. They are sucking it in and holding it in to get that nicotine, because it's a lighter cigarette. So they've got to suck it in harder, hold the smoke in longer, and because the filters are making the particles more teeny, they are getting deeper into the lungs and they're making nastier tumors. The lung cancer rate hasn't gone down in this country, it's gone up. MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor -THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The National Cancer Institutes has concluded that the evidence does not indicate a benefit to the public health from changes in cigarette design and manufacturing of the last 50 years.
Today there is a scientific consensus that changes in cigarette designs from the '50s to the '80s to reduce machine-yield tar yields did not result in decreased morbidity and mortality. Morbidity means sickness and illness, mortality means death.
In sum, it took decades to recognize the changes to reduce machine-measured tar and nicotine yields in cigarettes did not have a measurable beneficial impact on public health.
And who knew? And who duped the government? And who fooled even the Surgeon General, who by the way, our expert,
Dr. Cummings, one of the first fellows to testify, has contributed extensively to Surgeon General's report, the truth and the real information, and so has Dr. DiFranza.
And as far as Dr. Proctor is concerned, that man is doing the right kind of work. That man is a hero, what Dr. Proctor's done. His book is a revelation, just comes out in February.
But this is what the industry knew. And this is Surgeon General's report 2010. In contrast to industry -- in contrast to industry awareness, the various ways that cigarettes were physically modified and the nature and level of compensation response to design changes were not well understood by parties outside the tobacco industry itself.
Public health officials had little basis
to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow smokers to draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes than was represented in machine-measured yield; of tar and nicotine.
It was not until the turn of the 21st Century that it became increasingly clear that no -- 21st Century, that's the year 2000 -increasingly clear that no relationship existed between machine-measured tar and nicotine levels and the risk for most categories of cigarette-related diseases.
Other changes during the past 50 years have included efforts that have made cigarettes more addicting through the use of flavors, chemicals treatments to alter the smell and appearance of cigarette smoke and methods to mask noxious sensory effects and control of the nicotine dose.
These product modifications have the potential to increase the risk of addiction by contributing to increased risk of initiating use of the product, increasing ease of smoke inhalation, decreasing noxiousness of smoke and increased brain nicotine exposure.
I like this stuff so much I have six copies of it. Sorry.
It's such good truth. It's so definitively truthful. It shows that the tobacco companies knew what they were doing. They didn't do it accidentally. There was no good faith. They weren't really trying to help the public learn anything.
What they were doing was they were trying to sustain their business, and they had to give their smokers a psychological crutch and a reason to keep smoking.
They have created the illusion of filtration. It was pretty callous. They went as far as to work on designing a dye that would start out to be white -- it's in this document -- and it would be a color-changing dye on heat. When you smoked the cigarette, the heat would make the color-changing dye look brown. They wanted the color to be brown so that it looked like something was being taken out of the smoke.
So that's one of the documents in evidence that we're going to use a dye. That has nothing to do with filtering anything out.
And when you draw on the cigarette and that warmth comes through the filter paper, whatever it is, the dye would be heat-activated, change colors, preferably brown, so it would look like something bad was taken out of the smoke and people would think: Hey, I'm okay.
Now it's super-important in this verdict form, as we go through it, and I want to help guys -- I want to help you go through the verdict form so you can get to where you want to be. Because when we shift the power to ya'all, you have to be able to understand some of the whys and wherefores of this extraordinarily complicated verdict form.
Is this the second page?
MR. HAMMER: Yes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So the first two questions for all the companies are yes, because they are all defective, they are all unreasonably dangerous. That's easy.
MR. REID: Objection, misstating the law.
THE COURT: Thank you. This is argument, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So then you get to percentages. And we know each other since
we're 12 years old, Steve and I, and you know,
I don't completely agree with his numbers, but I'm going to accept them. And I was thinking the only thing I want to say about the numbers, the only thing I want to say is that when it comes to relative degrees of fault or acceptance of what I like to say your fair share of the blame, and that the tobacco industry, the cigarette makers, they will not do anything except by force. It's only going to be what you make them do in this courtroom for the Calloway family.
However you do the numbers, if you agree with our position, if the evidence has come through in a way that you know what's right and just, and it favors our side, I recommend that as to any cigarette manufacturer, whatever the percentage distribution is, that you show to Starr that Mr. Calloway's fault is less.
Even Liggett, who is the only one that to this day voluntarily puts cigarettes are addictive on its package, and they are the little guys over there and they are the only ones that do that -- and the rest of those guys hate them for it. They don't do it. There's
no -MR. REID: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- other cigarette manufacturer -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Disregard.
MR. SCHLESINGER: No other packages of cigarettes that say smoking is addictive -MR. PEDROSA: Objection.
MR. REID: Objection, preemption.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: When they say that smoking is addictive and we talk to folks about that, it's smoking can be addictive. And Mr. Reid said maybe presumably you found he w addicted.
Liggett is the only one that puts that on there. They may be the lowest number.
I ask you through your verdict, if we're right, if you believe us -- it's only your decision, it's your power. This is our last chance to give you this idea. I'm the clean-up hitter right now. Make his percentages lower than whatever their numbers are. If you think
we're right. You may change it around.
This is not the first one of these trials and different juries come back with different degrees.
MR. REID: Objection, relevance.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Johnnie Calloway has never demonstrated to be the kind of guy who was seen to be smoking because he enjoyed smoking. There is no evidence of that.
And because he's passed, we can't hear what he has to say. And that's pretty convenient when you start assigning his intent, his wants, his desire, his state of mind.
I don't know if that's completely accurate or fair. We are covering 60 years. There is a lot of this. You infer it. There are reasonable inferences to be drawn by the evidence.
We know advertising works. We know the industry gap combined together to put out a constant message of doubt and controversy or half-truths to confuse the public, keep them smoking, and then give them things that will reassure their health, like those cigarettes
with filters on them that are every bit as deadly and as a matter of fact are even more deadly because now those small particles are going deeper in the lungs and making nasty tumors that folks don't have the first chance of surviving when it gets in the lungs. Let alone the bladder.
Do you think teen-age kids had any idea that the smoke that they were taking up here was going to make tumors erupt in their bladder and make blood come out of their urine down here. Some of you all probably didn't even know that smoking caused bladder cancer when you came into this courtroom. So how well known could these facts be? How fully informed?
You see, and that's -- Mr. Reid is a good lawyer, he gives a good closing argument. I mean, these guys fight like Comanches. Okay? They fight.
But the fact is, when he said to you, the first time he said to you that -- I forgot my point.
MR. HAMMER: Fully informed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: First it went to be
fully informed, that he was fully informed.
And now he's partially informed. I lost the point. It was a good point.
Anyway, so hopefully I can get you guys to think about putting a low number for Johnnie because of this.
Everything you want to know about the damages in this case, every single thing you want to know, Starr told you. You know, I was sitting over there and I was bawling, I don't know why -MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- it's been an emotional trial. But for a moment there was a moment of pure unadulterated courtroom revelation of truth. What Starr said about her father, what Starr said about her life, to me revealed everything you need to know about the damages in this case.
And so it tells you everything you need to know about Johnnie Calloway the man, Johnnie Calloway the father, and the daughter he raised as a reflection of his guidance. And the confession she made, the outpouring, the
speaking from the heart, the truths, the forgiveness that she gave, even to the tobacco companies, saying: Thank you so much just for getting me this far, just for letting me know my dad didn't leave me. He didn't choose to leave me.
Just saying to her, we recognize that this man was deeply, deeply dependent on this incredibly powerful drug that is more addictive than heroin and cocaine; the Surgeon General's report says so. She thanked you for that. She said: And I soldier on. I turned the corner because of what I learned from my dad. Not only did she -- the whole essence of that, that moment, that courtroom truth, it was so meaningful to me. I learned so much from it. Because it showed you who she is. But it showed you who Johnnie Calloway was. It showed you what he's left behind.
Wouldn't he be proud? Wouldn't he be proud to hear what she had to say about her dad?
He was an older father, but a younger man. I have a daughter the same age. I will be 59, I will have a 17-year-old. Same age.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I would like to think -THE COURT: Talk about the evidence.
Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Any parent should be proud to hear what she accomplished and how she soldiered on. And Marvine as well.
And there is a dignity there. There's honesty. It wasn't scripted. It wasn't -- did you hear them play "America the Beautiful" in this courtroom? They played "America the Beautiful" in this courtroom. They heard it, they knew it. You know how? The rolling fields of tobacco, that image on the PowerPoint. Do you think it was an accident?
That in the background there was a gorgeous sunset and a purple sky and the amber waves of grain, and the purple mountains majesty. They literally had an image. They are such great advertisers. They are such great marketers, that I expected Farmer John to come in here with a straw hat on and a tobacco leaf in his mouth, to make it sound like this is a natural
product as opposed to the most highly engineered small device on the planet, a killing machine, a portable gas chamber.
It only does one thing. It kills people dead. Half of the users. Johnnie Calloway smoked half a million cigarettes. That's how many it takes to kill you. It's a truly astonishing thing in our country that hides in plain sight. It's more dangerous to teenagers than all of the things we worry about, that they're going to have unprotected sex, that they're going to take illegal drugs -MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- that they're going to do things that are inappropriate. In plain sight. The number one killer of -- is our children.
I heard Mr. Jupe and he's got an English accident. Made me think of Pink Floyd.
What can you do? What can you do? You can't put them out of business. All we're going to do is get to Phase III, and we're going to tell you the net worth of the company and ask you to award a punitive damage amount
that is for Johnnie Calloway as punishment and deterrence for wrongful conduct that they haven't admitted, they haven't paid for, they are obligated to do. And it's intentional wrongful conduct. It's not criminal, but you punish them. If they should be punished, if they've done wrong, then you punish them.
I heard that -- the man with the English accent made he think of the song "The Wall" by Pink Floyd. And all in all, you're just another brick in the wall. You're not the wall. They are the wall. That wall is coming down. You're one brick in the wall. But every brick matters. All in all, you're just another brick in the wall. Be that brick. We will be the mortar, you be the brick. Let's build it.
And you know what else? When they say, "Hey teacher." Hey, Tobacco, leave those kids alone. Shame on them.
It doesn't say whether or not concealment and omissions of material fact. Concealment and omissions of material fact. The CTR, the TIRC, the TI, all of these -- I don't want to be in their matrix. I don't want to be in their matrix. I don't want them to consume me
or my kids or any other kids in this country.
When it comes to considering reprehensibility, you are saying: Did they do wrong? Was it on purpose? Did they make a fatal and a horrible calculation to consider money for human life? Intentionally, money for human life.
If you decide they did that, and you come through here and say their concealment and omissions of material fact regarding the addictive nature was a legal cause of the death of Johnnie Calloway, remember, a legal cause.
It's the -- a lifetime of combination of what they did that causes or contributes to cause death.
We already know the cigarettes killed him. And now we know from the Court that these folks are definitively guilty of these wrongs.
As a matter of fact, one of the things that Mr. Reid did when he was cross-examining Dr. Proctor with all the additional documents, he put up one of the former Surgeon Generals up there, Terry or one of the ones that said,
Verdict on Cigarettes: Guilty as Charged.
I thought: I'm going to shove that up his nose. Why did he put that there? They are
guilty as charged. That's what you should find. The Court is going to tell you they are guilty as charged of all the concealment.
All of these findings are not whether they did it; they are the law in the case that they did do it. The agreement to conceal or omit information about their addictive nature.
This is important. You've got to say "yes" to after 1982. There is before '82, after '82. It was continuous, and it went on and on to 1992 when the gentleman died.
Nobody admitted anything from a cigarette company. They hadn't come clean, they hadn't put that we agree it causes cancer and that it's addictive until 1999. But it's super important, the way the law is set up right now, because it's evolving, this case. And you all are entitled to know about the legal effect of your rulings.
See, there are two questions here.
There's before '82, and after '82. Even though the question is broken down, if you want to find that their wrongfulness was important in this case, and you want it to have a legal effect, you have to for sure find after 1982
along with before 1982. And that's one of the reasons why Mr. Hammer made sure to remind you. Because he had done it in Phase I. But he reminded you with Starr, what was that business about you telling him something about the light cigarettes? What was that about?
And Starr explained her age at the time.
So it would have been in the mid '80s, '83 or '84, maybe '85, I think. '85, based on her age and how old she was, 10 or 11 years old when she said to her dad: What are those light cigarettes?
You'll remember a lot of those ads we showed, showed lights. Because for decades it was all about lights. And we didn't know, none of us knew. I didn't know. Lights. Sounds good. Light is good. Light food you don't get as heavy. Light cigarettes. They are not as dangerous. You've got a filter and the lowest tar and nicotine. It's written all over the labels of the old cigarettes. It seems like it's light.
Well, he said, as everyone said: These are better for me. The tobacco companies knew, they knew that everyone believed it was better
for them.
The lady in the advertisement, the tennis playing lady: After all I've heard, I decided I would either quit or I'll smoke True. So I smoke True.
MR. PEDROSA: Objection, outside the evidence.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of what's in evidence. Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In any event, after 1982 is an important finding that gets you to be able to not only compensate the family for their loss -- and when you do that, what you're doing is you are measuring the magnitude of the harm to the family. You can't bring Johnnie back. But you also can't say, and the Court will not give you an instruction which says:
Well, no amount of money is going to bring him back, so why should we give him any money?
That's the not the basis. The basis is the love and companionship, the parental guidance, the human realities of what life is all about. Life isn't about the money that Marvine had to make to make up for what Johnnie
was providing. That's why the support and services are for smaller amounts.
Life is about being out there and smelling the roses, those 5,000, 10,000 sunrises or sunsets that you didn't get to have with your family. The little baby that he got to spoil because he was an older father, as a younger man, only 59 years old. And as we get older, we realize that 59 is not that old.
So the wrongful death damages, measure the magnitude of the harm and then you tell the family, with your verdict, by the amounts that you decide are appropriate and it's completely up to you. We make a recommendation. But you tell the family, through your verdict, if you respect our position in this case, we place great value on your loss.
You measure the harm, and you say: We place great value on your loss. And it respects what real humans, real people, regular folks lost.
Greatest marketers in the world, greatest advertisers in the world. They can put on some beautiful spokespeople. The guy looked like central casting. That gray hair, that goatee,
just beautiful. He looked great. Okay?
He's got nothing to do with anything. He ought to be in the department of useless futility, okay? We're making a safer cigarette by popcorning the tobacco and -- come on. That's nonsense. These guys haven't changed, not one wit. Not one wit, they haven't changed.
And you're just a brick in the wall. You can't do it alone. You can't do it yourself, but you can contribute your brick in the wall by saying -- after you've determined that there is a compensatory loss, the loss of the love of a husband, of a good man.
A good man?
THE PLAINTIFF: Yes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Get us to the next phase. I beg you to get us to the next phase.
There is a limit. You can't punish the guy with unlimited amounts of money. There is going to be a limit. We're going to explain it to you.
But under the circumstances of the case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are
warranted against any of the defendants listed below.
Because they all conspired. They all got together. It is these questions, the first questions about the concealment and the conspiracy and everything, and the fact of those things that is that intentional wrongful conduct, the recklessness towards human life, the indifference towards human life. That which though, not criminal, virtually is criminal. And if you kill somebody for money -MR. PEDROSA: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- that's criminal.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: If you exchange a human life and make a decision -- you know, back in the day they had that big case about the Ford Pinto and it caught fire -MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained. Jurors disregard the last comment.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Sometimes grisly calculations take place in the corporate world.
MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In any event, if you find this conduct is sufficiently reprehensible against society, against what people ought to do. You want to be treated like a person, act like a person. If it's against that common decency, if it's a callows indifference to folks. "Some women would prefer to have smaller babies," these kinds of comments, these statements about, who ain't for more money, and this business about, we're all going to lose our jobs if we take the nicotine out of the cigarettes, no one is going to smoke them.
And then the decision to just go ahead and come up with a way to fake out the country for 40 years and make tons of money. If you make that exchange, that grisly calculus that only the cigarette industry has done that.
Only the cigarette industry. Then you say, you know what? You haven't been responsible. You haven't been held responsible, not as far as Johnnie Calloway is concerned. And you ought to be. So we're going to find that punitive damages are warranted.
By clear and convincing evidence.
Now, in the documents when you see the intent, when you see the definitive statements that were made, and they're in evidence and I may get a chance to read a couple of them to you, again, that's why it's clear and convincing.
Before, we talked about the burden of proof and the greater weight of the evidence.
But when they say what they say in the sampling of documents that we were able to get in front of you, it's clear that what they were doing, they did on purpose, with malice aforethought.
It's clear.
So that would justify -MR. REID: Objection, that's not the standard.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: One of the documents that I wanted to read was a September 1980 confidential Minnesota tobacco litigation document that got revealed. And it talks about what they're going to do about this business that -- the fact that the National Institute of Drug Abuse wanted "addictive" added to the
cigarette warning. And that made them get concerned. It was a surprise story that the National Institute of Drug Abuse wants "addicted" added to the cigarette warning.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, preemption.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So they said here: As Shook Hardy reminds us -- this is the law firm that represented tobacco years ago and continues to represent -- as Shook Hardy reminds us, I'm told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We cannot defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted.
So this memo was written for folks just like you, 32 years ago, in anticipation of this day, of this event; that these folks were taking that action to stay out of these courtrooms and to be held accountable.
Wrongful conduct should be held accountable.
What did Dr. Cummings say? The statements by the TIRC and the CTR and the TI, which the Judge will instruct you, their
wrongfulness -- because they were bought and paid for and created by the cigarette industry as a front and a shield, propaganda, false statements -- that they were interrelated lobbying groups. The industry made them out to be independent medical research centers, but they were run by lawyers and advertising men and had nothing to do with independent or honest medical research.
That was what Dr. Cummings told you a month and a half ago. In the videotape we played, when an avalanche of this evidence was pouring in by that man, who is very, very knowledgeable about tobacco misdeeds.
The lawyers were running what was supposed to be the independent medical research center.
And then what did Frank Calloway tell you? Back -- do you remember lawyers came to your house, Frank Calloway?
You may not remember this. This was a while ago.
Did they tell you who they represented?
No they did not.
Did you eventually learn who they
represented? Yes.
Who was that? The tobacco companies.
That was before he heard anything about a lawsuit, and he had to call Marvine and ask her about it. And she didn't really give him any information about it.
Those two lawyers from the tobacco companies that came to you, who are you referring to?
Those are the two ladies I eventually found out that came from the tobacco company.
Now, one of the first things Mr. Reid did -- it's interesting. You guys have a different level of stress than we do on these things. We are cats on a hot tin roof. And every single thing that happens, we are trying to be good poker players and pay attention. Look, the way we dress, the way we act. We're trying to be neutral. I don't want you to think anything about me because of the way I look. We're always being super careful.
One of the things Mr. Reid did was jumped up, got after Frank. And he is a good lawyer. He's a tough lawyer, he's scary, you know? But he got up and got after Frank right out of the
box. It was early in the case and we lawyers, we have a mountain of data in our head. It's like getting ready for final exams. It's fixing to spill out of your ear, okay, and he came after Frank, and he came after him hard, and he came after him a little too hard. And you guys saw it -MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In any event, when he cross-examined Frank and tried to suggest that Frank had maybe done something that wasn't as candid as it should be -- and I submit to you, that gentleman was a candid, honest fella from his demeanor, demeanor is so important. He looked like the kind of guy that was being believable and truthful -- I hope you agree.
But what Frank was challenged with by Mr. Reid right out of the box was, you talked to Mr. Hammer about your testimony before you came here. You discussed what you were going to talk about with Mr. Hammer. Which, by the way, is what any good lawyer does. You're obligated on behalf of your client to know what your case is about. I'm not talking about
scripting it or rehearsing it on television but getting to know what your client's family members have to say is appropriate. But Mr. Reid challenged him with it.
But he didn't say to you that before anybody from Marvine's team of counsel and representatives -- and we've got a good team that have worked to help this nice lady -- that before we ever met, ever met Frank Calloway or ever spoke to Frank Calloway, lawyers showed u at his house, unannounced, unidentified and talked to Frank.
And you know what he would have told them? You know what he told them. He told them just what he told you in the courtroom.
Yes, my brother smoked a lot. I guess he didn't have the same kind of willpower as I did. He told you: We tried to use those filters. We thought they would help us cut down. If my brother told me he was going to do something, he was always honest with me and I believed him.
So the closest living analog to Johnnie is Frank. And you can see in his brother, in Frank, you can see some of Johnnie. And Frank
knows Johnnie better than the folks telling you about Johnnie do. He knows him best. But lawyers were out at the house. Unknown to Mr. Calloway, and obviously there was nothing he told them there that contradicted anything he said to you here, or they would have whipped out a statement to challenge him.
So it's an honorable thing to -- it's an honorable thing, it's a great privilege to be able to stand before you all and make these arguments, and it's a great responsibility and obligation. And some of the things that you've heard about in this courtroom you don't hear that much about the roles that some folks that are legal counsel play that maybe are not as savory as they should be. And you have heard some of that in this courtroom. And you have seen a little bit about what that -- what the industry has done and how they've used these Shook Hardy lawyers to get it done. And that's in evidence. And you can consider it.
Let me see. Let me see ...
One of the things that we always think about and we try to deal with the idea of how can I be just, you know? That's what Paul
Newman said in the movie The Verdict. How can I be just?
That's the challenge for the juror. And everybody knows -- we all know it's inside of us. In one way or the other, whatever your faith, whatever your religion is, everyone knows that amongst Adam and Eve and the serpent, the serpent is blame ridden. And that's one of the questions you need to ask.
In the temptation of the fruit of these nicotine-laced drug delivery devices -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- is the cigarette industry blameless?
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Is the serpent blameless?
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Counsel, I sustained that analogy, so move on.
MR. SCHLESINGER: One of the things you can't ever do here is turn back the clock. So when you talk about compensating the family,
you know if you could turn back the clock they would give back every single dollar that you could ever award and run out of here the happiest people on earth, but -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor, golden rule.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: One of the things that Proctor said, Dr. Proctor said, it was one of the very last things, the questions that he was asked by Reid I thought was pertinent was -- I guess Mr. Reid was trying to discredit him somehow.
He said: You're hoping the plaintiffs win the case as you testify. And what Dr. Proctor said was: I hope people who have suffered from tobacco get justice. And if that means plaintiffs winning, so be it. Because no industry has killed more people in a more reckless and irresponsible fashion than the tobacco industry. So I do actually hope that people who have suffered do get some compensation.
I think that was, from Dr. Proctor, a reasonable statement to make under these
circumstances.
Folks, thanks so much. It's late. I'll say the same thing to you now that I said to you last time. Thanks for paying attention. I wish you good luck in delivering justice in this case. Thank you.
