MR. HAMMER: Thank you, Judge.
We're here today, today, about punishment, punishing these companies.
For two months, basically, you sat here and you heard evidence about what they have done and how it impacted Marvine and Starr and how it killed Johnnie Calloway. We're here to punish them for that conduct.
Your award, your compensatory damage award, which included the pain and suffering, which included the support and services, that
compensated the family. Now we're here to punish these companies. That compensatory damage award wasn't part of punishment. This is part of punishment. And these companies deserve to be punished. You made that determination. You found that by virtue of your verdict before.
This is your verdict. You said that there was clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages were warranted against each one of these defendants. And why were they warranted? Because for years and years and years, they lied, they deceived the public, they killed thousands, millions of people -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, State Farm.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. HAMMER: -- all for money.
And the fact of the matter is, you can take that into consideration as part of your reasons for punishment; not as part of your reason for damages, but as part of your reason for punishment.
The damages are to -- are based upon the harm that it caused Marvine and Starr and Johnnie. Johnnie paid with the ultimate
sacrifice, his life. These companies killed him. They killed him. They killed him with their lies, they killed him with their deceit, they killed him with their years of conspiracy. They killed him, and they deserve to be punished for that.
They come in here -- let's play that tape, please. They come in here and say they have changed. This is what they did for years. This is a little montage -(Whereupon, a Video was played to the jury as follows:)
VOICE: If we find anything considered harmful -- and so far we have not -- we will remove these from smoke.
VOICE: I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements.
VOICE: We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous.
VOICE: We don't know what causes the elements that have been attributed to cigarette smoking, such -VOICE: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
VOICE: No causal relationship between
cigarette smoking and heart disease?
VOICE: No, as a matter of fact, there are studies that, while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces.
VOICE: We don't know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship, which is has yet to be proven.
(Video was concluded.)
MR. HAMMER: Guess what? We know what causes cancer.
What causes cancer are all of these things, this cigarettes that these companies make. That's what causes cancer, and they know it. They've known it for 30 years plus.
And they come into this courtroom, today, and bring in Jupe and Dr. Borgerding. You saw Jupe two weeks ago. They bring him in, they bring both those guys in, who are with their company, who are working on a risky -risk-conscious project that they're working on.
They can't even tell us that their cigarette kills people. They won't even acknowledge that today in court.
You heard Mr. Gdanski ask questions:
It's a deadly product, isn't it?
Well, it's risky.
They still use that word, "risky."
Really? They've changed?
Seriously. Come on, folks.
This is company conduct that has been exhibited for 50 years. It's still exhibited today.
Look at these cigarettes. Camel Crush? Really? Camel Crush. Inside you saw that blue thing. It's a piece of candy. You bite it, and it releases mint. This isn't designed for kids? Really? They're still marketing to kids. It's unbelievable. They haven't learned their lesson.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. HAMMER: It's unbelievable.
MR. REID: May I have a standing objection to the marketing issue?
THE COURT: Objection noted; overruled.
MR. HAMMER: Marketing, unbelievable.
Look at this. Look how pretty this is. Let's bite it.
We've got candy now. Unbelievable. Look at these colors. They're beautiful. Beautiful colors. Mmm, yum. Taste me. That's their marketing. They are appealing to kids. They are appealing to kids for 50 years, during that conspiracy. They're doing it today. It's disgraceful, and they need to be punished.
They need to be punished.
And you know, they come in here and say: Oh, well, we've already been punished. Really? You haven't been punished for what you did to Johnnie and Marvine and Starr, have you? No, you haven't.
That's why we're here today. Because what they did to this family was disgraceful. What they've done for 50 years and continue to do today is disgraceful. It needs to be punished. It's tolerate -- it's intolerable behavior, it's behavior that's reprehensible; it's behavior that is totally inhumane. You don't treat people like that, you just don't.
What they did to this family is horrible, horrible. Horrible. You saw what this family
is made of. You saw Starr, you saw Tamara, you saw Marvine. And you saw Frank Calloway, so you really saw Johnnie.
These people were ripped apart by their product, ripped apart by their product, ripped apart by their lies, ripped apart by their deceit. It's disgusting what they did. It's inhumane.
And you know they talk about we've already been punished by the MSA, and we're paying fines here and we're paying fines there. And then they come in here and say we're in compliance with the FDA. Yeah, you're in compliance with the FDA, really?
Well, did you put those warnings on the pack? No, you filed a lawsuit to keep from putting the warnings on the pack.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, preemption.
MS. HURWITZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MR. HAMMER: Have you done anything you should do? No.
You came in here, Hey, we developed this new cigarette, this next cigarette that is safer. But when we put it on the market nobody
bought it. Wait a minute. They've got the ability to make a safer cigarette. They've got the ability to make a safer cigarette, but why don't they have it out there? Because they don't make money from it. And yeah, you know what? Corporations are here to make money.
MR. REID: Objection. That's a complete misstatement, Your Honor.
THE COURT: This is argument, Counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the testimony. This is counsel's chance to persuade you to reach a verdict in plaintiff's favor.
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: In America, corporations, it's a great country. They're here to make money. But you know what? If you're going to do it, do it the right way. Don't lie, don't cheat, don't deceive the public. Don't kill people.
If you can stop killing people, then do it. Do it. Don't wait until the government -to hand down rules like the FDA and the MSA ai all these other things to make you do things.
Do it yourself. That's what a true real
company does, an American company. That's \ we expect.
And because they don't do it, they deserve to be punished. For what they did to Marvine, for what they did to Starr and for killing Johnnie, they deserve to be punished.
It's clear. I mean, that's as clear as it gets, folks.
And you know Mr. Schlesinger talked about it in that brief opening that we gave, about $16 million. You know where we came up with that figure? You guys placed, after deliberating for a day and a half in there.
You guys placed the value of their -- you measured their loss. You measured their pain, their pain and suffering, Starr's and Marvine's. That totaled $16.1 million.
We're not talking about the support and services that you awarded. That was stuff -that was money that you awarded because Johnnie would have otherwise taken care of them with that money. We're talking about their pain and suffering. $16 million. And they should have to pay $16 million, $16 million, $16 million,
$16 million, each one of them, as a penalty.
Based on what you found to be fair and just compensation for the pain that these people went through. That's the least they should have to do.
Did you hear about how much money they spend on advertising? Billions of dollars on advertising. Billions on -- billions of dollars -MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Objection.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: -- on creating a new product.
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Outside the record.
THE COURT: Overruled. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. HAMMER: You heard Dr. Cummings tell you they spent billions of dollars, billions of dollars on advertising.
You heard Dr. Proctor tell you they spent billions of dollars on creating this nicotine delivery device.
You heard Borgerding tell you today they
spend billions of dollars on technology. Well, guess what? He also told you they've been fined millions and billions of dollars.
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: Well, you know what -THE COURT: Excuse me. What is the objection?
MR. REID: Nothing in the record that we've been fined millions and billions of dollars.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: So guess what, folks?
$16 million from each one of their pockets, it's not going to mean a whole lot, unfortunately. But you know what? You can't bankrupt the company. And it's got to be based on the harm that was done to Marvine and to Starr and on Johnnie.
So you know what? $16 million for each one of these companies, it's not a lot of money. It's not a lot of money. It's a fine.
It's like a speeding ticket for them.
You know what? They're sitting up there in their offices and they're wondering what you guys are going to do today. They're scared of you. They're scared to death, I promise you.
MR. REID: Objection, beyond the record.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. HAMMER: And the fact of the matter is, what you do today, it will be heard. It will be heard by these four defendants. It's going to be heard around the world. Because you know why? People are waiting to hear what you guys have to say.
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: What you're doing today -MR. REID: Objection.
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. REID: What people are waiting to hear is irrelevant to the case.
THE COURT: Thank you. This is argument. Sustain the objection, though.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: People are waiting to hear
because you know why?
MR. REID: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: Because it's a deterrent to others.
MR. REID: Objection. Your Honor, objection. You just sustained it.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MR. REID: He said the same thing.
THE COURT: Proceed, Counsel. I sustained the objection.
MR. HAMMER: It's a deterrent to others. What you do today is a deterrent to others.
It's to punish them and to deter other companies from doing what they did.
You know what? To punishment them for $16 million each, means nothing to them, means nothing. They made that kind of money in the week that we were off.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Objection.
MR. REID: Objection, outside the record.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. HAMMER: Think about this. A million dollars. A million dollars. You know how long
that takes to spend? If you spend a dollar a second, it takes them 11 days to spend that, at a dollar a second. A billion dollars takes 32 years. That's the difference between a million and a billion. That's a lot of money, folks.
And that's what these companies make.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Objection, outside the record.
MR. HAMMER: That's what they spend on advertising -MR. REID: May we approach?
THE COURT: Excuse me. The objection -no, Counsel. No sidebar now. Counsel -Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you are to rely on your own recollection of what the evidence was. Thank you.
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: A billion dollars spent on advertising, spent on product development. Well, guess what, folks? $16 million for each one of them, a drop in the bucket to them.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: A drop in the bucket.
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Outside the
record, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you. Again, this is argument.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. HAMMER: What these companies did years and what they continue to do, they come into this courtroom, and they can't even answer a direct question. Can't -MR. REID: Objection, as to the defense of this case. That's been excluded, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: They can't even answer a direct question when they're asked on cross-examination. Why, why not? Why not?
And if they really, really cared, if they really cared, bring in a scientist that's going to tell you -- not Dr. Borgerding who was sitting back there throughout the course, he wasn't sitting there at the table. He was sitting in the corner there. He comes in and tells you, this is all the work we're doing.
We're doing some great stuff for R.J. Reynolds, and we're in compliance with the FDA. And
we're doing everything right now. We're following the law now.
Congratulations, you're following the law? And they're not even doing that. They're fighting everything, tooth and nail. They're not doing anything voluntarily.
And when they finally come out with a product that might help people from dying of cancer, they say: Well, no one is buying it, so we're not really going to market it.
MR. REID: Objection, Your Honor. That's not in the record.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. HAMMER: We tested it in three markets. Three markets, you test a product like that? A product that could actually save lives, you test in three markets? Really?
And you heard in Phase -- in Phase II, Jupe told you the product they came out with, they tested in it Tampa. In Tampa. A major market?
Why not test it in New York City or Miami or LA, where people are? Up in Tampa on the
west coast? That's going to be their test market to see if it works. Come on, folks.
They did that, you know why? So they could come in here and their witnesses could take the stand and say: Oh, we're in societal alignment now. What is that? Societal alignment? Who ever heard of that? Who ever heard of that?
They won't say "we've changed" because you know why? If you say you've changed, it means you were doing something wrong before. Societal alignment? Every -- you know, everything they do -- everything they do, every word out of their mouth, is time tested. Everything they do. It's amazing. It's amazing. Look at this. Camel Crush.
It was already pointed out to you. Camel Crush. Little girls have crushes on their boyfriends. Little girls have crushes on their boyfriends. Hey, little girl, do you want a Camel Crush with some candy in it?
That's what they're doing, they're marketing to kids, even today. It's disgusting. It's disgraceful. It's reprehensible, and it needs to be punished.
And you know what? It would be great if you could impose a fine of a billion dollars, a hundred billion dollars and put them out of business. But we're not here for that today, because you can't do that. And we're not here about banning cigarettes today, because we can't do that, not in this courtroom. That's for another day, hopefully.
In this courtroom today we're punishing them for what they did to Marvine, for what they did to Starr, and for killing Johnnie.
And they deserve to be punished for that. The fact that they come in here and say: Now we're okay, now we're good; we don't deserve to be punished.
Come on, folks. You know better than that. You know better than that. Today is your opportunity to do the right thing, to speak for Johnnie, to speak for Marvine, to speak for Starr and say: You know what? What you guys did was wrong. What you did was wrong. You killed a man. You killed millions of people.
MR. REID: Objection, move to strike.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen -- than!
you, Counsel. Rely on your own recollection of the evidence, ladies and gentlemen.
MR. HAMMER: You killed millions of people, 450 million -MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. HAMMER: 450,000 people a year, excuse me.
MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, State Farm.
MR. HAMMER: You can consider that in rendering punishment.
THE COURT: Overruled. Proceed.
MR. HAMMER: Not the amount. But consider that in rendering punishment. Do they deserve to be punished for that? Of course they do.
Does every company in this United States deserve to hear about your award so that they say, Hey, you know what? We better not do wha these guys did, because what they did is wrong. It's wrong.
You don't kill people for money. You don't do it. Not here.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. HAMMER: And you people -THE COURT: What's the objection?
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Your Honor,
"kill people for money." It's inflammatory.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MS. ST. PETER-GRIFFITH: Improper.
THE COURT: Objection noted. It's overruled.
MR. HAMMER: It sure is inflammatory.
MR. REID: Objection, move to strike.
MR. HAMMER: It should -THE COURT: Why don't you come sidebar for a second.
(The following discussion was held sidebar:)
THE COURT: How much more do you have?
MR. HAMMER: About five minutes.
THE COURT: All right. Tone it down.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. HAMMER: What they did and what you saw in this courtroom, it should inflame you.
It should burn you up. It should burn you up that they can come in here and say that we're societally aligned now. Really? Really? If
you were societally aligned, you know what you would do? You would have a division in your company that deals with making the product not inhalable. Because you've already heard all the testimony in this courtroom. What makes the cigarette a killer? What makes it a killer is the fact that you can take this thing, light it, and inhale it, and draw it down into your lungs.
Make it non-inhalable. Because, you know why? They say it's all about the flavor.
People smoke for flavor. They enjoy it.
That's what they want you to believe. They don't smoke for the nicotine? Really?
That's exactly why people smoke. That's the only reason people smoke, and they know that because that's why they won't take it out. And we know they can take it out. If they really cared, if they really cared today, they would have a division that would make a non-inhalable cigarette that was not addictive. That was not addictive.
It might cost them a few dollars, but it would be the right thing to do.
It might cost them a few dollars, but it
would be the right thing to do. Because you know what? They wouldn't be killing people every day. They wouldn't have killed Johnnie Calloway if they did the right thing. They need to be punished.
Here is the verdict form that you're going to have. And again, I talked about the fact that you guys, you made a decision. You thought long and hard about the money that you were going to award Starr and Marvine for their pain and suffering. And, again, I'm taking away the money that you talked about for the support and services, because that was part of what Johnnie would have provided to them. The pain and suffering, just give that same amount of money as a penalty, as a fine. A fine. And for them, like I said, nothing but a speeding ticket for them.
You know what? That's a lot of money. That's a lot of money, $16 million. Means nothing to them. Nothing.
But you know what? Other companies out there, when they see this, when they read it, the idea of punitive damages is to punish and to deter others. That's the law the Judge just
gave you. It's in your packets that you have there in front of you.
You can guarantee when people read about your verdict, and they will, when they read about your verdict, they're going to hear about this, and they're going to be saying: Wow.
This jury, they did the right thing. They -they meted out a punishment to these companies that is rightly deserved.
In fact, they should have even been punished more. But we all know that, unfortunately, bigger punishments get taken away. Makes real nice press -MS. GALLAGHER: Objection, Your Honor, improper.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. REID: Move to strike.
THE COURT: The jury is to disregard the last comments.
MR. HAMMER: We want to make sure what you do today resonates around the world, and it will. And it will. They will hear it and every company that does business in America will hear it. And everybody, every individual, before they start a business and before they
think about doing something that's going to hurt somebody, they'll think about your verdict.
And in years to come, you're going to look back on this and be proud of what you did. You should be proud of what you did the past two months in rendering that verdict in Phase I and II. You're going to go home and feel good about it tonight, and you're going to feel even better years later when you look back and you realize you were just another brick in the wall helping -- helping towards moving these companies to maybe doing the right thing one day. Maybe. Because they're still not doing it. Thank you.
