MR. FURR: May it please the Court, counsel,
Mr. Cheeley. Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
ALL JURORS: Good morning.
MR. FURR: Boy, have I been anxious to get up here. Because you know one of the things that we all -- we all have this human tendency to -- we hear one side of the story and it starts making us think in
a certain way.
But just like we talked about during jury selection when we were talking about talking to teachers or listening to our children, you have to wait and suspend your judgment until you hear both sides of the story. So I appreciate you giving me your attention very much.
I want to begin by thanking you for your service and you've been extraordinarily patient, but let's talk about why you’ve had to be so patient. Most of this trial was devoted to evidence that's not going to be much help to you as you decide the issues in this case.
Take yourselves back to last Monday. Last Monday we had opening statements, and we had Dr. Proctor,
Dr. Henningfield, and Dr. Cook. They took through Thursday, and the Plaintiffs never asked them a single question about Georgia Cheeley. Not one question.
You didn't hear a witness that discussed Georgia Cheeley until Friday afternoon when Dr. Villa came to discuss the medical case.
And as I hope to show you, Mr. Bayuk's examination of Dr. Villa actually destroyed the Plaintiff's medical case in this for Georgia Cheeley. But I'm going to show you that evidence. But the
point is you’ve had to be really patient. And just like this morning, you know, there was a lot of rhetoric, a lot of argument, the Plaintiff attempting to infuse emotion and sympathy into this case.
They talked about all kinds of issues. They talked about cigarettes in general, and smokers in general, and bad things they say the tobacco companies
did.	But almost none of it is going to help you decide the issues that you have to decide in Georgia Cheeley’s case. Just like we talked about in the opening statement.
Because it’s really a pretty simple case if you keep your eye on the ball. And if you keep your eye on the ball, you’ll see that the case is only about one smoker. Georgia Cheeley. It’s not about all the other smokers. That was the class action. That’s over and done with.
The case is about only one cigarette. Unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes. Not about cigarettes in general. And I want to show you -- I want to narrow these issues to help you zero in on what it is you all actually have to decide, as opposed to these broad, general arguments that the Plaintiffs have made that I’m sure someone will make you angry with the tobacco companies. And I’m not challenging that, but they’re
really just a distraction to you. They’re going to distract you from the issues that you actually have to decide.
So I want to zero in on those issues. Could I have the Elmo, please?
First, you will see, and His Honor already read these to you, but you're going to see when you look at the verdict form, that every -- the first eight issues all have Mrs. Cheeley's name in them. All these have to do with whether or not any of this conduct can be connected up with having been a cause of Mrs. Cheeley's death.
And even when you get to the ninth issue -- and I won't look at all the issues now -- even when you get to the ninth issue, the question is not whether or not the tobacco companies could be punished in general, but whether they -- whether R.J. Reynolds should be punished under the circumstances of this case.
So I think that helps us zero in on a little bit, and I think there's a couple instructions that I think are really helpful to start out with. Because this is a case in which very specific legal claims are being made. It's not a morality claim. It's not a question of whether you like the tobacco companies or dislike the tobacco companies, but -- or whether you feel
sorry for the Cheeley family. All of us feel sorry for them for their loss.
But that's really not the issue in the case. There's very specific legal issues, and there's a couple things I ask you to keep in mind. First, you have instruction entitled: Weighing the evidence.
This is page 3 of your instructions.
And you will see that the Court has instructed you that the evidence in this case consists of the sworn testimony of the witnesses, all exhibits received in evidence and all facts that may be admitted or agreed to by the parties.
And then down below, you see -- but you are allowed to draw inferences from those facts; you're instructed you should not guess about things that were not covered here. The point being that your decision should be guided by the evidence as you got it from the witnesses, not by the lawyers' rhetoric.
Respectfully, the closing argument of the Plaintiffs today was used by the lawyers to try to fill in gaps in their evidence that they just don't have about Georgia Cheeley.
So please keep in mind distinguishing the arguments made by the lawyers, which the Court has told you are not the evidence, and what the evidence
actually shows.
Second, I think it’s -- the Court mentioned this to you, but I want to look at this again. Very briefly, on page 11 of your instructions, you’ll see the instruction: Burden of proof on issues.
The Plaintiff in this case has the burden on each of these issues, to prove his case by the greater weight of the evidence. If the greater weight of the evidence does not support the Plaintiff’s claim, your verdict will be -- should be for Reynolds.
So let’s make sure we focus on where we are. Specific legal claims, all involving Georgia Cheeley, that need to be decided based upon the evidence, not upon lawyer’s arguments and assumptions, and claims that the Plaintiffs bear the burden of proving to you. They have to come forward with the proof.
You might remember, during jury selection, the Court explained burden of proof to you by saying: If we stopped right now, and I gave you your verdict form, your verdict would have to be for the Defendants because you haven’t heard any evidence.
So that’s how the burden of proof works. The Plaintiffs have to prove their case to you.
Now, with that background, let’s -- and I’ll go back to the computer, please. Let’s now really get
started on what the evidence was, and what it shows you as to how the claim should be decided.
Because, ladies and gentlemen, I respectfully submit that there has been a complete and total failure of the Plaintiff to carry their burden of proof on the liability issues in this case.
Specifically, the Plaintiffs have to prove to you that Ms. Cheeley was a class member. It's not a matter of us excluding her. That sounds like as though she's already in the class. They have to prove to you with evidence that she should -- that she is a member of the class, and I'm going to show you the evidence here in just a moment. I'm going to try to do this very -- in very short form first, to show you there are some pieces of evidence in this case that they can't get past. They cannot get past and carry their burden of proof.
After I do that relatively quickly, we'll go back and a little bit more methodically march through the verdict form and look at the totality of the evidence. But there's some evidence in this case that I really submit to you, I could sit down in 20 minutes and it's over because this evidence prevents them from carrying their burden.
They haven't proven medical causation that she
was addicted, or addiction causation, and I'm going to show you why I say that. And they haven't proven concealment in this case.
First, Dr. Villa, the medical witness that came last Friday, during the cross-examination of Mr. Bayuk, Dr. Villa admitted to you that there was no definitive diagnosis of the cell type and that he did not have any of the pathology materials that he would need to actually offer an opinion on cell type if this were a case in which he was being consulted to provide a second opinion.
Perhaps more importantly, he told you that because the records were so sparse and contained so little information, that there was simply no definitive cause of death. He told you there were many details missing about what actually caused her death. And finally, when you put those two together, if you don't know what caused her death, you can't know whether smoking caused her death or not.
Let's look at what else Dr. Villa told us. He told you that autopsy is the gold standard for determining the cause of death. In fact, I'll jump forward for a moment.
Dr. Villa actually told us that autopsy -- it is his view that you should not even be allowed to bring
a civil lawsuit if you don’t have an autopsy because it’s with the autopsy -MR. ALVAREZ: Excuse me, Judge. Objection. Mischaracterizes the evidence.
THE COURT: Once again, if the evidence differs from the arguments, you’ll be guided by what you heard as evidence.
You may continue.
MR. FURR: Thank you. It’s the autopsy that provides to you the type of information you need to make a definitive diagnosis of cause of death. And you know, there’s no dispute that there’s no autopsy here. You know, one of the things the Plaintiffs didn’t show you this morning, that -- they didn’t show you any testimony.
Again, they relied on lawyer’s rhetoric to fill in the gap and make assumptions. As we go forward,
I’m going to show you what the testimony was on a lot of these things. And what Dr. Villa told you -- and this first quote is from Dr. Villa. There were a lot of details missing about what actually caused her to
die.	A lot of details missing. That’s medical causation.
Addiction, again, the Plaintiffs have completely failed to prove their addiction claim. First, there’s
no dispute among any of the witnesses that not every smoker is addicted. Some are and some aren't. So how do you distinguish between the smokers who are addicted and aren't.
Well, we can look to the medical records. But she was never diagnosed as addicted. Her treating physicians, when they were treating her for her cancer and they knew she had been a smoker, never diagnosed her as addicted.
And then finally, ladies and gentlemen, I submit this is the biggest gap in the whole case -- and this is why Plaintiffs have completely failed to prove their case. In the case where they are asking you for seven and a half million dollars in which the claims are based and centered and depend on, proving that she was addicted and that addiction caused her disease, they don't bring you a witness. They did not bring you an expert witness to provide that opinion to you.
During the cross-examination of Dr. Castro,
Mr. Paige made the point: There's a smoking cessation clinic at the University of Miami and that there are a large number of highly qualified experts on smoking cessation and nicotine addiction. The type of people that could have been called here to provide an opinion that Mrs. Cheeley was addicted.
But they didn't call anybody, they didn't call anybody. They knew where the experts were. They knew where to find them. They obviously know how to bring an expert to the courtroom, but they didn't bring an expert on the central issue in the case.
You have to ask yourself why that is. Why is it they were unable to produce to you a qualified expert to provide you opinions that she was addicted or that addiction caused her disease.
Instead, they come in here and with all due respect, they really ask you to do a self -- it's like -- if you've ever had the unfortunate experience of going to IKEA and buying furniture that you have to assemble at home, that never turns out too well for me. I don't know about you.
But that's analogous to what you're asked to do here. You're asked to do a self-assembly of the addiction diagnosis. And Mr. Paige has really asked you to accept his judgment as to whether Georgia Cheeley was addicted under the DSM, as opposed to Dr. Castro's judgment.
You know, the attack that was made on Dr. Castro, you have to decide what you think about that. He's a highly qualified professional who spends his life working at the University of Miami helping people.
And you get to judge his demeanor and whether you think he was being truthful and whether he should have been treated the way he was and whether Mr. Paige should be asking you to accept his opinion over the opinion of Dr. Castro.
Let’s talk about what Dr. Castro told us.
Dr. Castro told us that the DSM is the gold standard for diagnosing addiction; just like the autopsy was the gold standard for diagnosing cause of death.
Now, Mr. Paige stands up here this morning and tells you that his cross-examination destroyed Dr. Castro on this point and suggests to you that Dr. Castro changed his opinion about what’s the gold standard.
Do you remember what happened? I mean, it’s a small point, but it illustrates volumes about the lawyers’ rhetoric about what was in the evidence.
Dr. Castro looked at what’s on the board and said: Mr. Paige, you’re misinterpreting what that means because it said: The DSM cannot be independently accepted as the gold standard and Dr. Castro told you that what that means is it has to be combined with your professional and clinical judgment and experience.
That’s how -- that’s the consensus of how
addiction is diagnosed by psychologists and psychiatrists, the medical professionals who are expert on this.
And Mr. Paige wants you to accept his analysis of the DSM as opposed to the reason, experience, analysis, of a man who has treated thousands of people with substance abuse problems, who teaches medical doctors, who teaches psychiatrists how to apply the DSM using clinical judgments and expertise.
That's the biggest gap in their case, and that prevents them from being able to establish, to carry their burden of proof that Mrs. Cheeley was addicted.
Addiction causation. It's the same thing. You know, Mr. Alvarez -- excuse me, Mr. Paige told you that whether someone can quit or not has nothing to do with whether addiction was the cause of disease.
We're going to explore that a little bit as we go forward, but one thing is clear. All the experts agreed that any smoker can quit. Being addicted does not mean you cannot quit, and you heard in this case -- you heard Mr. Cheeley -- and by the way, let me say something about Mr. Cheeley. Very nice man. Very nice man. And I'm sure you find him to be the same way.
And I feel awkward when I talk about his
testimony in here as though he’s not here. It seems a little rude to talk about him in front of you all, but I mean no disrespect. I’m just trying to draw your attention to where the evidence came from. So please don’t think I’m being disrespectful to Mr. Cheeley in any way.
But anyway, you heard that Mr. Cheeley admitted that his mother, Georgia Cheeley, was -- had the responsibility to quit and that her failure to try harder and more often to quit was a legal cause of her death, a legal cause of her death.
That’s evidence that you are entitled to consider with respect to whether or not -- bless you, ma’am -whether or not it actually -- whether or not addiction also played a role. You’re entitled to consider all the evidence to determine what was the legal cause of her death.
Finally, it’s the same issue -- I won’t belabor it -- he said this is a very serious case, and he ridiculed Dr. Castro and said Dr. Castro trivialized these important scientific issues relating to addiction and addiction causation.
Well, again, in this very important serious case, in which the Plaintiffs are asking for seven and a half million dollars, they failed to produce to you an
expert witness that could provide you an opinion about whether addiction was the cause of Georgia Cheeley's lung cancer and death.
Because that's what the case is about. It's not about smokers in general, it's not about a do-it-yourself home assembly diagnosis; it's whether the Plaintiffs have carried their burden of proof to prove Georgia Cheeley's case.
Here are things Mr. Cheeley told you that I believe completely refute the Plaintiff's addiction causation claim. He told you that Georgia Cheeley did not take any steps to quit between 1969 and 1993 and I want to show you the transcripts here in a minute because you kept hearing: It was a constant struggle. She tried to quit over and over.
These people lived with her, they were the closest people in the world with her, and nobody saw her try to make a quit attempt, and we're going to talk about what that means.
In addition, Mr. Cheeley told us that his mother quit cold turkey in 1993 without the assistance of anybody or anything, and she didn't suffer any withdrawal symptoms. And all the witnesses in this case told you that there was nothing different about Mrs. Cheeley in 1993 that enabled her to quit smoking
when she could not have quit before. That there was no difference other than that was when she chose to quit smoking.
So we're going to demonstrate to you, ladies and gentlemen, that it was her choice not to try to quit and not to quit smoking, that was the only legal cause of her cancer and death, if her death was from cancer. Although, Dr. Villa, as he told us, he has a lot of -there's so much information missing, it's hard to be definitive about that.
So, ladies and gentlemen, we're going to talk about this later more. I submit to you that the Plaintiffs have failed to carry their burden of proof on all three elements of class membership. They haven't proven she was addicted, they haven't proven that she died from lung cancer caused by smoking, and they haven't proven that even if she had lung cancer caused by smoking, that it was caused by her addiction.
Next issue. This concealment claim, which Mr. Alvarez describes as the road to punitive damages. There has been a complete failure of proof on the concealment claim also. It does matter what she knew. The argument was made to you this morning that it's not what she knew; it's what was concealed to her,
defies common sense.
How do you conceal something from someone who already knows it? If she already knows that smoking causes lung cancer and can lead to death and is addicting and hard to quit, that information can’t be concealed from her and what more do you need to know, what more do you need to know than what you’re doing is addicting and it can ultimately lead to death from cancer? What more do you need to know to make a decision about whether to continue or quit smoking?
But there’s even more. Even if you believed that she did -- and the evidence is overwhelming that she knew from the late ’60s on -- we’re going to look at that evidence -- absolutely overwhelming that she knew that lung cancer and death were a consequence of smoking, possibly.
Even if you believe that she didn’t know, they still have a burden of proof to demonstrate to you that she doesn’t know because she relied on a statement by R.J. Reynolds to conceal those matters; that’s their burden. And you’ve seen that there is zero -- let me back up -- I’m getting excited also now.
Because I want to highlight just a couple pieces of evidence for you that take this whole concealment
claim off the table. Again, Mr. Cheeley -- he's very forthcoming with us on these types of issues. He told you that between 1969 and 1982, when Ms. Cheeley was a member of the Mt. Zion Baptist Church, that after attending funerals for church members who died from diseases that she considered to have been caused by smoking, how could she not know if she was telling her son that these church members as friends, members of her congregation, died from diseases caused by smoking?
Of course she knew that smoking could cause cancer. In fact, on cross-examination, Mr. Cheeley admitted it. He told us, yes, he agreed that she knew, while attending Mt. Zion Church that continuing to smoke cigarettes could result in lung cancer and death. And she attended that church in 1969 to 1982 time frame.
A second piece of critical evidence about her knowledge. The suggestion has been made to you that she didn't know and accept it until the 1985 warning came on. But here is the testimony. And it's undisputed. The Plaintiffs have admitted that the 1970 warning label read: Warning. The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. There's no dispute about
that.
But let's look at what Mr. Cheeley told us. I asked him: Sir, you told us earlier that you felt like that your mother came to accept that smoking was dangerous when the label changed and she saw the label that smoking is hazardous to your health. The language of the '70 warning. Do you recall that?
He said: Yes.
And I said: Do you have a distinct memory of that, sir?
And he said: Yes.
No equivocation, no saying it wasn't until 15 years later, and you saw how the trials work.
The lawyer responsible for the witness has a chance to do a redirect examination. Mr. Alvarez could have asked Mr. Cheeley: Did you make a mistake? Did you get that wrong when you said that? He didn't do it. He didn't do it. This is the undisputed evidence in the case that Mr. Cheeley admitted that when that warning label changed from ”may cause” in 1969 to ”is,” that that's when his mother came to accept that smoking is dangerous.
Another important issue in the case, I think. Again, we have to separate the lawyer's rhetoric and arguments from the evidence. You've heard two claims
this morning that it was concealed from Mrs. Cheeley that because Pall Malls were longer, they were more dangerous because there was more smoke being inhaled.
And because Pall Mall had more nicotine, that they were more addictive. That’s the lawyer’s argument. That’s their gloss on the documents. They brought one expert who they’ve told you is highly expert and has devoted his life to it -- we’re going to look at his transcripts in a few minutes -- that Dr. Proctor, on my cross-examination, admitted that between 1950 and 1994, unfiltered Pall Mall were no more dangerous than other conventional manufactured cigarettes on the market.
And I went ahead and we’ll see the transcript, but I asked him, does the extra length make a difference?
And he said: No. That doesn’t make a difference. They’re no more dangerous.
So now we’re back to this other issue. They claim they have more nicotine. I asked him: Between 1962 and 1994, were Pall Mall cigarettes any more addictive than other cigarettes on the market?
And he said: No, that they were the same as other conventional manufactured cigarettes.
Now, to this reliance issue. Because, again,
even if she did not believe that smoking was dangerous and addictive, which the evidence is overwhelming she did, it would have to be because she relied on something that R.J. Reynolds said.
And there is zero evidence -- zero, nothing, not a syllable of evidence that she relied on tobacco company statements. Nobody testified that she became a smoker because of advertisements or tobacco company statements, or that she determined not to quit because of tobacco company statements, or that she even selected her brand, unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes, because of tobacco company statements. Another complete gaping hole in the Plaintiffs' proof that they want to fill with arguments by the lawyers and asking you to make assumptions about things that aren't in evidence because the proof is just not here.
You know, this argument made this morning: Oh, it was a long time ago. People's memories fade; that's their burden of proof. That's their burden of proof. You shouldn't bring claims that you can't prove because the evidence is gone.
So, ladies and gentlemen, again, there's just been a complete failure by the Plaintiffs to prove that concealment was a cause of Ms. Cheeley's death because that's their burden. They have to take these
Engle findings, and with evidence, they have to demonstrate to you, one, she didn't know. They got to prove to you she didn't know because you can't conceal somebody to somebody that knows.
And, two, that she didn't know because of some concealment by the tobacco companies and they brought you nothing, zero, nothing but lawyer arguments.
What did they do instead?
Instead what the Plaintiffs did was they spent the whole case reproving the Engle findings. They talked about smokers in general, about the historic conduct of the companies, about cigarettes in general. None of which had anything to do with Georgia Cheeley. It was done to make you mad, to make you angry, to distract you from the issues.
The Engle findings don't answer the questions you have to answer in this case. The Court's instructions tell you that, and of course they don't. If the Engle findings answered the questions you're here, respectfully, you wouldn't be here because you're here to answer questions that the Engle findings don't answer. They talk about their application to Georgia Cheeley. That's why we've all spent two weeks together here.
How did they try to prove their case? With
generic evidence. I mean, again, we spent the first four days on generic evidence. Dr. Proctor gave generic testimony about history. You remember asking, did you try to learn anything about Ms. Cheeley to know whether or not she knew that smoking was dangerous and when she learned it and how she learned it and whether this concealment affected her.
He said: No.
He said: Did somebody stop you?
He said: No, I chose not to learn anything.
He made $15,000 the week he was here to testify and he chose not to learn anything that would help you decide the issues in this case. He was getting $5,000 a day to stand up here and give his history lesson that he could not connect to Mrs. Cheeley because he chose not to learn anything.
Dr. Henningfield, he’s told you he’s their addiction expert. Well, he testified about generic addiction issues and never mentioned Georgia Cheeley. Again, not one word, not one word from Dr. Henningfield that helps you decide Georgia Cheeley’s case.
Same thing with Dr. Cook. He was asked about generic cigarette design issues, but he wasn’t asked any questions about whether that extra length of the
unfiltered Pall Mall cigarette made it more dangerous or addictive; he was just asked general issues.
Ladies and gentlemen, if you search your memory,
I think you'll find that in those whole first four days, the Plaintiff's counsel did not ask these witnesses one question that included the name Georgia Cheeley.
The only questions that Dr. Proctor,
Dr. Henningfield, and Dr. Cook were asked about Georgia Cheeley were questions that the defense asked.
Now, again, let's keep our eye on the ball. I've told you. Pretty simple case. Georgia Cheeley and unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes. I mean, as you listen to Plaintiff's arguments, as you consider the evidence, if you use that test, if you ask yourself, does this evidence help me decide Georgia Cheeley's case? Does this evidence pertain to unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes?
If you use that test, you'll be able to cut through the mountain of unrelated evidence that has been put before you and get to the heart of this matter and decide these questions pretty readily.
Because I suggested to you before, ladies and gentlemen, there's only a few facts you really need to know to decide this case. I don't mean to encroach on
your space here, but it's the same board from opening.
MR. PAIGE: Okay.
MR. FURR: The only facts you need to know is that Mrs. Cheeley didn't start or continue smoking because of anything the tobacco companies said or did; that she wasn't confused about the dangers of smoking.
I'm going to show you the transcript that demonstrates she fully appreciated that smoking could be dangerous, caused lung cancer, was addictive, for decades before 1982; that despite knowing that smoking was dangerous Mrs. Cheeley continued to smoke. I'm going to show you the transcripts, again.
Nobody saw her try to quit. Lots of discussion about she was always trying to quit. How did nobody see it? The people that lived in her house, her blood relatives. Nobody saw her try to quit.
And finally, the evidence demonstrates that she had the ability to quit smoking. And if her death was caused by smoking and was from lung cancer, she could have prevented it by quitting. And I'm going to show you Dr. Villa's testimony, what he told you, that if you quit smoking, your risk goes away.
He told you that had she quit as late as 1976, she would not have died from lung cancer. And had she quit as late as 1986, she would have had a
substantially reduced risk from dying from lung cancer. Look at Dr. Villa’s testimony.
Well, now I’m going to go in the methodical part. I’m going to submit, ladies and gentlemen, that with those facts I just put before you, those are all the facts you’re going to need to decide the issues in the case.
Class membership. Plaintiffs have the burden of proof. They have to bring the evidence to you to prove that she was -- that her death was caused by lung cancer, that she was addicted, and that addiction was a legal cause of her death.
I want to look at just a couple instructions with you again. Could I have the Elmo? You’ve been told this, but it’s really important to emphasize again because like I suggested to you during voir dire, we played a dirty trick on you.
We put these Engle findings out in front you, and then told you: Now go in there and forget them. Put them aside until you’ve decided other issues in the case. But that’s what you’re asked to do.
On page 14 of your instructions, you’ll see effective title: Engle instructions and the Court instructs you, first, you must not consider these findings in determining whether Ms. Cheeley is a
member of the Engle class, which means that you must not consider the findings in determining whether Plaintiff has proven that Mrs. Cheeley was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that such addiction was a legal cause of Ms. Cheeley's lung cancer and death.
That's their burden. That's what they have to prove to you to put her in the Engle class so that she then -- you then evaluate whether or not the findings had anything to do with her death. That's the threshold question for you.
The second -- on the next page, on page 15 of the instructions, you'll see that the findings that I just read to you do not establish that Reynolds is liable to the Plaintiffs in this case. Nor do they establish whether Ms. Cheeley was injured by Reynolds' conduct or the degree, if any, to which Reynolds' conduct was a legal cause of Ms. Cheeley's death. Again, that's their burden. That's what they have to prove to you.
They can't just reprove the Engle findings and say it must have had something to do with her, make assumptions. They have to bring you evidence. They have to bring you the evidence that they use to connect the dots between these findings and Ms. Cheeley.
Medical causation. First thing they have to prove to you is that she died from lung cancer caused by smoking. Again, Dr. Villa, very nice man, learned gentlemen from down -- University of Miami, everybody liked him.
But it's what he admitted on cross-examination that is really important in this case because he told you this: He told you that nonsmokers get cancer of all cell types, that not all lung cancer's caused by smoking, that 85 to 90 percent of smokers do not get lung cancer, and that smokers get cancer that is not caused by smoking. Smokers get cancer that is not caused by smoking.
And here is the key takeaway from Dr. Villa.
It's not scientifically valid to assume that smoking caused an individual smoker's lung cancer. So that's where we start. Just because someone smoked, you can't assume it caused their lung cancer.
So we have to look: Did Plaintiffs bring you anything other than that assumption? Dr. Villa's testimony. The only diagnosis Georgia Cheeley ever received was non-small cell carcinoma, not squamous cell carcinoma. Georgia Cheeley's cancer was not the type most strongly associated with smoking.
He told you that some types aren't associated
with smoking. Most types are. But that hers was not the type that is most strongly associated with smoking. He also told us this on cross-examination, that, again, no medical record -- no medical record states that her death was caused by smoking. The treaters who are caring for her, who knew her, who knew her history, nobody ever reached a conclusion that her death was caused by smoking.
As the Court instructed you today, you can’t rely on the death certificate. The death certificate is not prima facie evidence of what actually caused someone’s death. You have that instruction in your packet. And, in fact, Dr. Villa told you the same thing. He told you that it is not sufficient. The death certificate is not sufficient.
He told you again, to know what caused her death, he needed an autopsy. That the gold standard, the autopsy, was what he needed to have definitive proof of what caused her death.
Again, he told us the autopsies are so important that they should be a required prerequisite before bringing a lawsuit. That that’s what Dr. Villa told you. And he didn’t have it.
As a result, he told us this. He said: There are a lot of details, a lot of details missing about
what actually caused her death. Here we are in a case where plaintiffs have the burden of proving to you what caused Mrs. Cheeley's death and the only expert that they brought to you conceded on cross-examination that a lot of the details were missing about what caused her death.
Why were they missing? Because the original pathology materials, the original films, and most of the original medical records were lost. He didn't have the radiology, he didn't have the CT scan or the MRI scan. He didn't have the tissue where he could independently evaluate the psychology or the histology. No testing was done. That material was simply gone.
And I'm not saying it's any fault of the Plaintiffs that was gone. Things disappear over time. But the point is they have the burden of proof, they have the burden of proof. You shouldn't bring a lawsuit if you don't have the records to prove it.
Finally, this whole issue of brain metastasizes that sort of took on a life of its own, this suggestion that she died from brain metastases. You remember at one point, one of her doctors thought that's what she had and they started treating it with Decadron, and Dr. Villa latched on to that record and
Mr. Bayuk pointed out to Dr. Villa: But did you read the discharge summary in which the treating physician discontinued the Decadron because all of the radiographic studies, all of the CTs and MRIs and x-rays, they all came back negative. Nobody ever saw a metastasis in her brain; it's just not there.
When they get back up here, they won't show you any record where anybody saw a metastasis. So nobody really knows what the metastasis had to do with her death. So, ladies and gentlemen, Plaintiffs haven't been able to cure their burden of proof on this -this very first, one of three prongs, class membership. They even can't even prove that her disease was caused by smoking because they don't have the evidence. They don't have the evidence.
Addiction. The second part of what they have to prove for class membership. Here is the testimony.
We asked Dr. Henningfield: Not everybody who smokes becomes addicted, do they? He said, that's correct. That's their addiction expert.
And then Dr. Castro: Does everybody who smokes, who uses nicotine, become addicted? No, no. Not everyone who smokes becomes addicted. It's a little bit like we just talked about a moment ago, just because somebody smokes, does that mean it causes
their lung cancer?
Dr. Villa said: No, you can’t make that assumption. Same thing here. Just because somebody smokes, does that mean they’re addicted? No, you can’t make that assumption.
Instead of relying on that assumption in Georgia Cheeley’s case, the plaintiffs have to bring you evidence of whether she was addicted or not. Here is what we know. Her treating physicians never diagnose her as addicted; it’s just that simple. No medical record describes her as having been addicted. She never received any treatment for nicotine addiction at any time in her life.
And I won’t revisit this whole thing, but the biggest gap in the evidence in this whole case is that in the case based on addiction and addiction causation with the University of Miami experts right down the road, the Plaintiffs don’t go get one. They don’t get an expert and bring it to you. Instead they ask you to do your self-assembly at home nicotine diagnosis.
And you saw Dr. Castro explain how the DSM works and how you have to use your clinical judgment and professional experience and how people spend years understanding the nuances of those questions and how to apply them to reach a valid diagnosis.
Dr. Castro, the only expert in the case that testified about Georgia Cheeley, the only expert that provided an opinion about whether or not she was a nicotine addict, told you she didn't meet the DSM criteria.
Not only did she not meet the criteria, you might remember there's a threshold consideration about whether smoking causes significant clinical impairment, and that's what I think when Mr. Paige was suggesting to Dr. Castro: Oh, it's just a checklist. Come on. We can just ask Mr. Cheeley some questions and throw this up here and we can check the boxes ourselves.
And Dr. Castro, you know, told us over and over and over again that's not how it works, that's not how professionals diagnose addiction. You have to use your clinical judgment and experience and assess whether or not there was any significant clinical impairment. We also know that, with all due respect, you know, they keep saying that addiction is a compulsive disorder and suggests people weren't able to control themselves.
We know that Mrs. Cheeley was able to control herself when she wanted to. She spent a lot of time in her church, a lot of time. Sometimes every night
of the week, as Willie has the unfortunate recollection of. And they would be there for hours because that's the nature of their services. They would be for four or five hours, up to seven days a week sometimes, and she never smoked. I mean, she never left for a smoke break, never went to sneak one. She was able to control it when she wanted to.
What else did we learn about her smoking?
Dr. Castro told us that, in fact, she liked the taste of smoking. The Plaintiffs are ridiculing this notion that people would smoke because they liked the taste. Georgia Cheeley told us she liked the taste. She would tear off filters if it affected the taste. She liked the taste of her cigarettes.
The plaintiffs admitted that smoking relaxed her. We know she didn't try to quit for all those years and we'll look at the testimony. She also quit cold turkey with no symptoms. But the important thing for you is: Look, in a case where you're asking for millions of dollars, you should not ask the jury to do a self-assembly diagnosis of addiction and addiction causation. You ought to bring an expert to prove up your case. The Plaintiffs didn't do it.
And the only expert -- the only expert that you have, Dr. Castro, told you that she did not meet the
clinical diagnostic criteria for nicotine addiction.
Addiction causation. I’m not going to summarize all this. These are things we just talked about. Again, there’s just a big gap in Plaintiff’s proof. They simply didn’t bring you the proof that you need to decide whether she was addicted or not. They want you to make an assumption.
Addiction causation. It’s an odd term, addiction causation. Talking about a concept you probably never thought about before you came here, whether addiction caused somebody’s disease.
That’s what Plaintiffs have to prove. And I want to suggest to you there’s a common sense way to think about this. A common sense way to think about this is: Was Georgia Cheeley rendered powerless by nicotine addiction so that she was unable to quit and prevent her death? If the plaintiffs had proven to you that she lacked the ability to quit and prevent her death, they’ve proven to you addiction causation, there would be no dispute. But they haven’t proved any of that.
So apply this test to the evidence. What do we know? Can addicted smokers quit? There’s no doubt about that, is there? Between 1955 and 1965, 17 million smokers quit.
30 million quit between '64 and '79. And that's an important time frame. You remember that plaintiffs talked about -- Dr. Proctor talked about this was the era in which people were being given a psychological crutch.
And just this morning, they argued that this was the era in which Ms. Cheeley would have been exposed to all this information and would have had a psychological crutch about not to quit. This was the heaviest period of quitting in the United States. It didn't stop people from quitting.
Five million people quit every year for those five years, those six years. That's 5,000 people a day. 5,000 people a day were quitting during the years in which they claimed the defendants were preventing people from quitting because of a psychological crutch. All of the experts agreed, same type of issue. I won't belabor this.
Most of the people that quit during the era would have, according to Dr. Henningfield, been addicted. They would have had these brain changes that are actually more a description of how our brain works because we work through neurotransmitters, as opposed to addiction.
They've all been exposed to the advertising and
potentially exposed to the public statements of tobacco companies, and yet 5,000 people a day were quitting.
I tried to wrap my mind around what it means for 60 million to quit, and I got to admit, I like football. And so I went over and looked at the stadium where the Dolphins and Hurricanes play. It holds about 80,000 people.
So I tried to translate that into what 60 million smokers mean. 60 million smokers would fill the Sun Life Stadium 748 times. 748 times. It would be as though the stadium were filled every Sunday from 1940 until today, completely to capacity. That's how big the number is, 60 million people, a huge number, hard to wrap your mind around, but I thought that might be an example that would sort of focus what it meant.
How did these people quit? I mean, there's a big effort today to create -- again, create the appearance that nicotine addiction was some kind of like death trap, that once you started smoking and became addicted, you were consigned to a lifetime of smoking and a smoking-related disease and it was something that people just couldn't break.
Their own expert told you, the majority of people quit cold turkey; that's how they do it. They put
them down, they never pick them up again, they quit cold turkey.
And so the next argument the Plaintiffs went to is: Well, that’s the light smokers. That’s not the heavy smokers like Georgia that smoke a pack a day.
Dr. Henningfield -- excuse me, Dr. Proctor’s cross-examination again. He admitted it wasn’t just light smokers who were quitting. A lot of detail, but the bottom line is Dr. Proctor told you that in the ’70s and ’80s, the average smoker who quit actually smoked over a pack a day. The average smoker to quit smoked over a pack a day; just like Ms. Cheeley did.
If you put together all the witnesses in this case, they all zero in on one conclusion. Any smoker can quit. Heavy smokers can quit. In fact,
Dr. Proctor told us that tens of millions -- tens of millions of heavy smokers quit, and Dr. Castro explained to you how any smoker can quit, if they’re motivated to quit and if they’re persistent in their efforts to quit.
What does it take? Well, again, the Plaintiffs have tried to create this awful picture about how devastating nicotine addiction is, and they’ve tried to stitch together documents with lawyer rhetoric to try to create this image.
But Dr. Henningfield, their witness, told us this on his direct examination, that the American Cancer Society has a tool; it's called "Smart Move,” a stop smoking guide. And he told us that this is what the ACS said you use to evaluate whether someone is ready to quit.
First question: Do you want to stop smoking?
Are you motivated to? Yes or no?
Second, are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? Throw away your cigarettes, throw aware your ashtrays, avoid queues, avoid places that remind you to want to smoke.
Third, are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping?
If you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking. I'm not minimizing this. I know that some people struggle more than other people, but everybody can quit, regardless of how the differences between us all.
If you're motivated and persistent in your efforts, you can quit smoking; that's what the evidence was. Well, why didn't Ms. Cheeley quit? We know the answer to that.
Let's approach it from this way: 60 million people quit. Was she any different than the 60
million who quit? Were the cigarettes she was smoking more addictive? No. Dr. Proctor told us that.
Was her brain affected differently than other smokers? No, there's no evidence of that.
Was she exposed to different advertising or different company statements? No.
Did she smoke longer or more than the smokers who quit? No. You just saw it was a pack a day people on average who quit. The only different reason she didn't quit is that she didn't try to quit after 1969.
Before that, all she had done was this tarrying thing. And, you know, Dr. Castro and Mr. Paige debated a little bit back and forth about whether those were real quit attempts.
But I think the important thing that Dr. Castro told us is that when someone really wants to quit smoking, it's not a sometimes thing. It's not like I'll try to tarry, and if that doesn't work, I won't do anything for a while. They try at different stages in their life.
Dr. Castro told you: It's a daily thing. You try different techniques, different approaches, different environments, different times. That if someone is really motivated, that's what you do, as opposed to this tarrying thing.
And I’m not belittling the tarrying thing. I’m sure it’s an emotional experience for her, but it wasn’t reflective of a true commitment on her part to really, really, really want to try to stop smoking.
So, again, I’ll ask you to think about this whole nicotine addiction causation thing, whether nicotine addiction caused her death this way. Was she rendered powerless by nicotine so that she was unable to quit and prevent her own death?
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. That’s not the standard, whether she was rendered powerless. That’s not the legal standard.
THE COURT: Once again, the legal instructions are what you are charged on. You’ll follow those instructions as I have given you.
Go ahead, sir.
MR. FURR: As you consider the Plaintiff’s evidence about nicotine addiction/causation, ask yourself: Was she really rendered powerless so that she couldn’t quit, prevent her own death? Or did she have the ability to quit at any time and prevent her own death if she really chose to do so. And we know the answer to that because Plaintiffs have admitted that her acts and omissions, or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of her efforts to quit
smoking are a legal cause of her death.
Now, they throw in this extra bit about in combination with the acts of the Defendants, but that's really -- that's an allegation. They can't admit fault on behalf of the Defendants.
This is the core of their admission, and I want to ask you to think a little bit about what does this mean? What does this really mean? Under what circumstances would someone be willing to say that their mother's failure, that the acts, omissions relating to frequency and duration of her efforts to quit were a legal cause of her death?
Well, I submit, ladies and gentlemen, you would never do that if your mother didn't know that she should quit.
So Plaintiff's admission, when you think about what the -- what has to underlie that admission, what's really implicit in what they're saying, they're saying she knew that she had the responsibility to quit, that she had the ability to quit, and that she had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented her death.
You would never make the admission that her failure to quit sooner was a cause of her own -- legal cause of her own death if it was a nullity, if it
wouldn't have accomplished anything.
So when you think about that admission, they're really saying a lot. They're saying she knew she should quit, she could have quit, she could have prevented her own death, but she didn't do it. That's what that admission really means when you think about what has to be behind it.
Here is what Mr. Cheeley told us. We asked him. Sir, do you believe it was your mother's responsibility to try to quit smoking, don't you?
He said: Yes, I do believe that was her responsibility. I do believe it, yes. I did at the time.
I want to talk about why some people quit and some don't. Remember Dr. Castro told us the difference between words and actions, and you know he used a pretty familiar example of New Year's resolutions. We all make New Year's resolutions that fall away pretty quickly because it's not the words that matter; it's the actions that matter.
You know, another way of saying this: Talk is cheap. People can say they want to do something or want to do something, but talk is cheap. It's the actions that matter. Did somebody actually take actions to back up what they claim they want to do?
Dr. Castro explained that to you, but he wasn’t the only one. Dr. Henningfield told us that just because someone expresses a thought that they would like to quit doesn’t mean that they have taken any steps towards quitting.
You know, everybody wants to lose weight, everybody wants to lose weight. But do you change your diet? Do you start eating different foods? Do you exercise more? Do you actually take steps? Or do you just hope it’s going to evaporate? Because we all want to lose weight. But do you actually take action? That’s what we’re talking about here.
And, again, Mr. Cheeley was very forthcoming. He told us what happened. He told us that she only said that she needed to quit between ’69 and ’93, but he doesn’t remember anything she actually did. Just doesn’t remember anything she did, doesn’t remember that she quit for a single day, and he doesn’t remember any steps she took to try to quit.
But here is perhaps even more important evidence because, again, this is critical, critical evidence because you’re going to hear the rhetoric, the Plaintiff’s argument that she wanted to quit, that she struggled, it was a constant struggle over and over and over.
But when we asked her family members, her loved ones: Tell us about that. Here is what they admitted on cross-examination:
Mr. Cheeley, I meant to ask that question like this: Isn't it true, sir, that you never saw her attempt to quit between 1969 and 1993?
His answer was: No, I didn't. Nope. Sure didn't.
Iola, whom this morning Mr. Alvarez told you lived almost her whole life with her mother. That was what he told you this morning. She was asked: Is it fair to say, Ms. Cheeley, that you don't remember ever seeing your mother try to quit smoking?
And her answer was yes. She lived her whole life in the same household with the mother, and she doesn't remember her mother ever trying to quit.
And then her brother, James Glover, the military man, who testified by deposition, was asked: From the time you were five -- and he was born in 194 9 -- so that would have been 1954 or '5 or so -- from the time you were five or six until 1997, do you have any specific recollection of your sister ever quitting smoking.
His answer was: No, no, other than at the last part of -- I think it was '95, '93, '95 -- '94, '96,
her final quit attempt, we all know that, when I was told she had stopped smoking. And this was the gentleman who warned her graphically, specifically with detailed information and begged her to quit and told her if you don't quit, smoking is going to cause you lung cancer and death. He had no memory of her ever trying to quit.
Let's look. Is there any evidence that Ms. Cheeley did the things people do when they want to try to quit. Did she seek help from family and friends? No. Medical assistance? No. Throw away ashtrays or lighters? Attend smoking cessation clinics? Ever go a single day without smoking? She didn't do any of those things. Because as we just saw from the family members, she didn't even try to quit.
And, again, I can see that you can interpret those tarrying efforts pre-1969 however you think is best, under all the evidence as explained by Dr. Castro. But nobody saw her try to quit after that. Nothing.
Why is it important? Why do we place so much emphasis on quitting and why is quitting so important whether addiction caused her disease?
Here is what Dr. Villa told us. Had she quit smoking in 1964 when the Surgeon General's report came
out, she wouldn’t have developed lung cancer. Had she quit smoking in 1966 when Willie and James talked about the new warning on the side of the pack, she wouldn’t have developed cancer.
Had she quit smoking in 1976 when her brother James Glover was warning her about what he had learned in the military, she wouldn’t have developed cancer. She could have even have quit in 1986 after the 1985 warning and significantly have reduced the cancer risk. That’s the undisputed testimony of the only medical witness that testified in this case.
Why didn’t she quit? Their own witness told you: There’s simply people who smoke and enjoy it and they want to keep smoking. And that’s what Dr. Castro told you his experience was. There are smokers who know that smoking is dangerous, but do not want to quit because they’ve done their own risk analysis. They’ve said: I know I’m taking a risk. I’m an adult. It’s my decision, I’ll make this decision for myself.
How do we know Ms. Cheeley can quit? It’s simple -- well, I skipped one. Here is Mr. Cheeley again. I was questioning him at this point about the discussion he had with his mother about that 1970 warning label that he told you was when she came to accept the risk.
And she told you: I'm smoking because I make my own decisions as an adult; correct? Yes. Just like Dr. Castro told you. People know and accept the risk but they make the own decision. We're adults. We get to make our choices, but we're responsible for choices that we make. How do we know she could have quit? Simple. She did quit.
And here is what we know about her quit. She quit and Mr. Cheeley told us all these things in 1993, after that fainting episode at Marshall's, she quit without the assistance of anyone or anything. She didn't tell anybody that it was difficult for her to quit.
And Mr. Cheeley told us he doesn't know any reason why she could not have quit sooner than 1993.
In fact, all three of the witnesses who address this issue Mr. Cheeley, Iola, and Dr. Castro told us that her ability to quit in 1993 was no different than it would have been in the '60s or '70s or '80s.
The only thing different was she decided that she was really wanted to quit as opposed to trying to do things that other people asked her to do in the '60s. Now, here's something that you're going to need to evaluate, and that's this.
The evidence in the case is this: That for their
mother who was so tortured by smoking, who struggled with it, it was such a big issue in their life, that no one noticed when she quit. Mr. Cheeley told us that we finally realized months later that she had stopped smoking and we hadn't even noticed it, that she had stopped smoking.
Iola said: I don't remember. The woman who lived with her every day said I don't remember her quitting in 1993. Think about what that must have been like. I mean, think about somebody who's smoking daily in a house and what that house is like and how it's different when they stop smoking.
First of all, when she stopped smoking, obviously, no one saw her smoking any longer. No one saw her lighting cigarettes or buying cigarettes, there was no smoke in the air, no cigarette smell, no cigarette butts in the ashtray, nobody talking to her about her smoking, no more trips to the store to buy cigarettes, no more asking her family members to go buy her cigarettes, no lighters or ashtrays with anything in it.
It's puzzling. You're just going to have to decide how could this be. How could she be smoking between one and two packs a day, it being a big family issue, and she quits and nobody notices until she
starts gaining weight months later? How could it be?
You’re just going to have to think about it.
What does that evidence really tell you? What does that evidence really tell you about what went on? Ladies and gentlemen, with all due respect, Plaintiffs have failed to carry their burden of proof to prove that Ms. Cheeley was a class member.
They didn’t prove that her cancer was caused by smoking; they didn’t prove that she was addicted, they didn’t prove that addiction caused her disease.
In fact, ladies and gentlemen, if smoking caused her death, the only thing that caused her death really was her decision to continue smoking for decades without even trying to quit.
So I respectfully ask you, ladies and gentlemen, when you get to Verdict Form Question 1, you check no. And you’ll see following that, the instruction that says if you’ve checked no, please sign and date the form, the case is over, and you don’t even consider any of the other issues because they failed to prove that she’s a class member.
May I inquire where we are at on time?
THE COURT: You have gone an hour.
MR. FURR: Okay. The next question is concealment. Again, you can’t conceal something from
somebody that already knows it. That doesn't make any sense. All this argument this morning about it's not what she knows; it's what she doesn't know that matters. You can't hide something from somebody if they already know it.
The plaintiffs have to prove to you that she didn't know it and she didn't know it because she relied on some statement from Reynolds. Well, let's talk in general. Were the dangers of smoking a secret? Was this just some information that was unavailable to her, that smoking was dangerous?
I'm going to go through this quickly because I've taken a little bit longer than I intended to on the first part. Because frankly, I spent so much time on the first question because the answer to that question is no and the case is over after answering that question.
But obviously I need to talk about the other issues with you. Were the dangers of smoking a secret? I'm not going to read all of this. But Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Proctor, the Plaintiff's witnesses, told you that people had been talking about smoking being dangerous and hard to quit, and causing cancer for a long, long time.
But I'm going to put that aside. Because what
really matters is what folks are saying and talking about when Ms. Cheeley was smoking. We don't need to look at ancient history. I never read that John Adams letter, and I have never talked about it. I don't even know what it says. We're going to look at during the years that she was smoking.
Well, in the very year that she became a regular pack-a-day smoker, as you heard, there were hearings in the United States Congress. And the number one public health officials in the United States testified under oath to Congress that the Surgeon General said: Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and TV.
The director of the National Cancer Institute said essentially the same thing. The public health authorities were all over it. They were doing their job, providing the information to smokers so that smokers can make their own decisions. And it was working.
Dr. Proctor told me that in the 1950s, people began quitting by the millions in the 1950s. And the reason they were doing it is the public health message had gotten through. People knew they made their choices about whether to face that risk or whether to
quit, and people began quitting by the millions.
Of course, in 1964, we had the Surgeon General’s report. And the Surgeon General’s report, you know, was highly, highly publicized story. We talked about it being front page of the Fort Lauderdale Sentinel, the very afternoon that it was published, cigarettes/cancer link. You know, it’s above the fold, you don’t have to subscribe to the paper to read it all. If you walk by, this is what you see.
Same thing the next day. Smoking called grave hazard. Even published again that afternoon with the actual data about the dangers in it. So the message was everywhere.
The Florida Health Notes, the leading public health publication in Florida at that time, said the very next year: Nearly all Floridians have heard about the Surgeon General’s report on smoking and health, which was released in 1964. The message was everywhere.
Dr. Horn, with his memorable quote that we all heard. You can stand on the roof top and shout "smoking is dangerous” at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they didn’t already know. People knew. People knew. And I’m not going to go through all this right now, how do we know
they knew? Where is the real proof? People began quitting by the millions.
We've looked at all those people that quit and how they quit right during this period when the public health community was publicizing the dangers, notwithstanding the tobacco companies were debating a risk and they were taking public positions that hadn't been established. It didn't stop people from getting the message and quitting if that's what they chose to do.
So let's focus on Ms. Cheeley, because that's what's important, obviously. The question for you really, when you consider Questions 5, 6, 7 and 8 on your verdict form, which are concealment and conspiracy to conceal questions.
The question for you to consider is: Did she die because she didn't know that smoking was dangerous and addictive? And did she fail to know those things because she relied upon something that the tobacco companies said? Well, here's what we know, ladies and gentlemen. You don't have to go past the testimony of the family members to answer those questions.
Mr. Cheeley told us that he warned his mother about smoking a lot more than 20 times starting in 1965. We talked about the 1966 warning also. The
1966 package warning was the first warning that went on cigarette packs and here was the testimony you got.
James Glover, her brother in the army, told you by deposition that he discussed it with Georgia more than once. And importantly, Georgia told him that she understood. She understood. And she never said anything that suggested that she did not believe what the warning label said.
And then Mr. Willie Cheeley told us that he talked to Georgia about it, and she told him: I've already seen that label. Remember, Willie was coming home from the store, ten-year old -- this is how accessible the information was. Although ten-year old Willie reads the label and points out to his mom, said: Mom, it said on the side of the pack these things can hurt you.
She said: I've already seen the label. I've already seen the label. I'm grown. I do what I want to do.
Mr. Cheeley also told us that he has no doubt that he saw public service announcements about the dangers of smoking on television with his mom in the late 1960s, but that he didn't even bother talking to her about it because he said she heard it with her own ears. She heard it with her own ears.
Remember some of those public service announcements we saw about warnings, how you should follow warnings, and how quitting helps you, all that information was there and she saw it and heard it with her own ears.
Again, when they were going to church, what Mr. Cheeley told us is when they would see church members, she would go to funerals of church members that were believed to have died from smoking. And when she would come home -- and this is straight out of Ms. Cheeley's mouth -- she would come home and tell him: These people are dying from smoking from cancer and stuff, from cancer and stuff. How could the information have been concealed from her if she was coming home from church members' funerals and telling her son: These people are dying from cancer and stuff?
Again, Mr. Cheeley told us, he admitted, he admitted on cross-examination, that when that happened, she knew that continuing to smoke cigarettes might result in lung cancer and her death.
She knew then that the concealment had no effect on her. There's no link between the tobacco companies' denials and her knowledge base because her family had told her, and she had seen the PSAs and she
believed her fellow church members were dying from it.
There is no doubt in her mind. No confusion created by the tobacco companies. The 1970 warning label, we already discussed that that was the one where Mr. Cheeley told you under oath, without any redirect examination, that that’s when she came to accept the dangers of smoking.
He also told you that when they talked about it, she said: I’m smoking because I make my own decisions as an adult. This is the slide we saw before about the 1970 warning. I won’t go through that again.
And then in 1972 when Mr. Cheeley was a senior in high school, you might recall that he went to his mother and said: You got an addiction. You need to get some help. And he told her the pack warning. He said: Look at the pack warnings. The pack warnings are telling you that the product you’re using would -can kill you. And that he repeatedly told her that she was addicted and that she needed to get some help.
And when she got mad at him and told him to quit bugging her, he told her, I’m just trying to help you save your life. I’m just trying to help you save your life. But he also told us that notwithstanding those conversations, when he told her she was addicted and needed to get some help, that she never went and got
any help. Because we know after 1969, she never tried to quit.
Her brother, James Glover, the career military man, took a class in the military in the mid- '70s and came home and gave her clear, powerful, detailed, unequivocal information about the dangers of smoking.
He told her that cigarette smoke contains carcinogens, that cigarette smoking causes cancer and death. That nicotine is a powerful pharmacological agent and highly addictive.
But he also told her that people can quit if they're motivated and persistent. But finally he told us that he asked her to quit nearly every time he saw her and that he told her if you do not quit, if you do not quit, you're at risk of dying from lung cancer.
The claim is that she died because she didn't know that smoking was dangerous? The evidence is overwhelming, that she was told and knew and accepted that smoking was addictive and could cause cancer and could cause death long before the 1982 date. I mean, this was happening in the '60s and '70s.
So plaintiffs, in response, say, oh, but the tobacco companies were debating this, and they were. And the findings are where they are. But every witness was asked whether Ms. Cheeley ever said that
she had read, seen, heard, or relied on any statement by any tobacco company or any of the entities associated with the tobacco companies, like the CTR or TIRC. And every single time, they told us: No, there was no such evidence.
There is nothing -- you know, there could be a case where somebody said I was confused, I heard a tobacco company statement. I thought there was a debate or I listened to both sides. You could have that type of case. That's not this case. This is not a case where somebody says they were confused. This is not a case where somebody said: I heard the tobacco company message. Leave me alone. The debate is still open.
This is not that type of case. She never told anybody that she was influenced by anything that anybody did. This campaign of doubt that they keep talking about had zero impact on Ms. Cheeley. There's just no evidence of it.
You know, this psychological crutch is sort of an inflammatory term that's thrown around, but there's no evidence that she ever relied on some psychological crutch and that she had -- was confused and accepted the message that maybe it wasn't proven.
She repeatedly acknowledged that smoking is
dangerous. She told her son when church members would die from smoking, these people are dying from cancer and stuff. She wasn’t confused, she wasn’t in doubt.
The tobacco company message had zero impact on Ms. Cheeley. Another way we know that -- I should say that when you sort through this, just ask yourself: Have the plaintiffs produced any evidence that Ms. Cheeley -- that the statements by the tobacco companies, including their advertising, caused her to start smoking or continue to smoke or choose not to quit or affect their brand selection; there’s nothing on any of those issues. It’s just an assumption they want you to make.
This argument could be made about every smoker in the world in the history of time; that’s the argument that’s really being made there. But that’s not proving Georgia Cheeley’s case. Those are the generic issues. Those are the class action issues. They haven’t brought you anything that proved Georgia Cheeley’s case.
What about all this advertising? Well, one thing for sure, it doesn’t appear that Ms. Cheeley was affected by advertising because the advertising changed in the ’60s and all the advertising dollars went to filtered cigarettes.
Dr. Proctor told you that. That from the '70s on, there was virtually no advertising for nonfiltered cigarettes. All the ads were for filtered cigarettes. And, in fact, he told them they made health claims.
If you switch to these they're less risky.
There's zero evidence she ever switched. In fact, in the case of tobacco company advertising saying filtered cigarettes are better for you, when she happened to bum one, she would tear the filter off. She would tear the filter off because she liked the taste. She liked the taste of an unfiltered cigarette.
Now, I do want to go back to this because I told you I would, because in this final sort of last-ditch effort to try to manufacture some fact that was concealed from Mrs. Cheeley, the Plaintiffs have made claims that she didn't know that Pall Mall cigarettes were more dangerous and more addictive, and she didn't know that.
Well, there's only one expert that addressed those issues, and that's Dr. Proctor. I asked him, sir, isn't it true that the historical record demonstrates, between 1950 and 1994, that there were no conventional factory-made cigarettes on the market that were any safer or less dangerous than Pall Mall
unfiltered cigarettes?
And his answer was: I think that's generally true, yeah. This bit about being longer is a complete red herring. It's an argument that has been created by -- you know what a red herring is? It's a mythical fish. It's used to designate something that is not real. It's designed to confuse you, it's designed to take your eye off the ball and follow the red herring, as opposed to following what you should be following. That's what this is. Their own expert told you that this extra length made no difference.
The same thing about this bit about Pall Mall being more addictive because it had more nicotine. Again, I cross-examined Dr. Proctor.
I said: Sir, you had one document where you showed the nicotine levels in a series of brands of cigarettes, including the unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes. Do you recall that?
His answer was: That's right.
Sir, would you agree between 1962 and 1994, unfiltered Pall Mall cigarettes weren't any more addictive than other brands of cigarettes, were they?
His answer was: I agree.
Red herring number two, going down the same path as the other red herring, designed to get you to take
your eye off the ball. These design changes made no difference. Made no difference in whether the cigarette was more dangerous, more addictive, so there was nothing that could be concealed because it didn’t exist anyway. The danger in addictiveness was a red herring.
Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming that she knew decades before 1982 that cigarette smoking could be dangerous and addictive.
Her family members told her, she accepted that.
And there’s zero -- again, zero evidence that even if she had not known, they still would have had to prove to you because it’s something the tobacco companies did. There’s zero evidence of that. Can I have the Elmo, please? So these concealment questions are questions 5, 6, 7, and 8 on your verdict form.
And I respectfully suggest, ladies and gentlemen, this is a pretty easy question. You know what she knew, you knew she wasn’t misled, and the answer to all these questions should be no, even if you get to these question, you won’t get to them unless you find she’s a class member. We’ve already discussed that.
The plaintiffs failed on all three elements of their proof as to whether she was a class member. So the answer to that question should be no. In fact, we
talked about the -- when you put your no there, then the case is over, you sign and date the verdict form. There are just a few more issues that I have to discuss with you because, of course, I don't know what your verdict is going to be. You could reach other issues, and so I'm obligated -- it's my responsibility to address the additional issues with you. How long do I have, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Another 15, 20 minutes.
MR. FURR: Thank you, sir.
One is this issue of comparative fault. This issue of comparative fault. And there are a few things that are important for you to understand about the legal issues involved in the comparative fault analysis.
The first one is the comparative fault is not a global comparison of conduct. It's not what do I think about Georgia's conduct versus the tobacco company's conduct? It's the comparison of actions of the two parties that were a cause of the death. It's a very narrow inquiry, the cause of the death. Can I have the computer back? Thanks again, Baron.
VIDEOGRAPHER: You're welcome.
MR. FURR: So you'll see in your instructions -I'm not going to keep going back to them because it's
taking me a little bit too long. But you'll see the assignment of fault relates only -- only to actions that were a legal cause of Georgia Cheeley's death.
So first of all, it has to be -- you know, you may have seen things the tobacco companies did or said that you don't like -- and I'm not defending all that conduct that had nothing to do with the issues in this case.
There are things said and documents written that were wrong, should never have been thought, should have never been done, should have never been acted on, but that's not the issue. The issue is whether it affected Georgia Cheeley. So you got to funnel it down. You have to funnel your focus to what was a legal cause of her death.
And second, Reynolds can't be assigned any responsibility for these other actions. You might have found that something Reynolds did was wrong and you don't like it, but if it's not connected to Georgia Cheeley, it can't be part of your analysis under comparative fault.
Second, we've already talked about this. The Plaintiff has admitted that Georgia's acts or omissions related to frequency and duration of her efforts to quit were a legal cause of her own death.
That’s already been admitted. And this Court told you, you have to assign some responsibility to her.
Well, I want to -- I have got another board here I want to look at that I think might help you in this analysis of comparative fault. That’s this. Think about all of the opportunities that Ms. Cheeley had to quit smoking and prevent her own death, if it was due to smoking.
Let’s just sort of go through them chronologically. First, we know she was born in a house that prohibited smoking. Her brother told us that. Smoking by children was prohibited in the household. She could have chosen to never start smoking. She could have chosen health. She chose to start.
Although we don’t have the specifics, we know that schools were warning during this time frame and we know that there are at least generalized warnings. Maybe she wasn’t in the specific -- she didn’t get those specific Pentecostal bulletins we talked about.
I’m not debating that point, but we know it was taboo at her church to smoke, and we know there was a discussion about not smoking. She could have chosen to quit then, but she continued to smoke. Warnings from the Surgeon General and media.
You know, you have seen all the media was all over this, people were inundated with the information. The Surgeon General's report were everywhere. She could have chosen to quit then. Dr. Villa told you that had she quit then, she would have never developed any lung cancer.
Her son Willie and her brother James, we just looked at the information where they discussed the 1966 pack warning with her. She could have chosen to quit then, she could have chosen health, but she chose to continue smoking, the PSAs.
Again, she could have chosen to quit then, she could have chosen health, but she chose to keep smoking. There's no evidence that the tobacco companies' statements were any part of her analysis about whether to continue smoking.
There was just zero evidence that any of her decisions were made in reliance about anything the tobacco companies said. The 197 0 pack warning when she came to accept the dangers of smoking and Mr. Cheeley admitted, that was a golden quitting opportunity right there. Even he admits she accepted it then. She could have chosen to quit. She could have chosen health. She chose to continue.
Her daughter, Iola, you know, most of her
testimony wasn't very specific, she didn't have a lot of detail. But she did tell us that she warned her mom a lot. Those were all opportunities she had that she could have chosen health. She chose to continue.
Again, I submit to you that perhaps some of the most important evidence in the case is from church and friends died from smoking-related diseases and she told Willie: These people are dying from smoking, from cancer and stuff. Golden quitting opportunities. Golden quitting opportunities.
She could have taken those opportunities and avoided getting a disease. Warnings from Willie that we just looked at that she was addicted, the explicit warnings from her brother James that we looked at, where they told her about the carcinogens that if you keep smoking, you're at a risk of dying from lung cancer and death. That's a decision time from her, she could have chosen to quit -- she could have chosen to quit. She continued.
Warnings from Willie about the '85 pack warning. Even then Dr. Villa, you know, right up to here, right up to the time that James warned her, Dr. Villa unequivocally said had she quit, there wouldn't have been any disease. She could have quit then and avoided any lung cancer.
Even in ’86, she could have quit and substantially reduced her health, but she never chose to quit, even though she had the ability to quit at any time.
Instead, after all these warnings, for decades and decades and decades and decades, she continued smoking, developed lung cancer, and then the decision was made to sue R.J. Reynolds, to blame R.J. Reynolds for all the decisions she made throughout the years.
Here are her own words, in her own words as told to us by her family members, she took responsibility for her own smoking decisions. Again, cross-examining Mr. Cheeley: And she told you I’m smoking because I make my own decisions as an adult; correct?
Answer, yes.
And among the things your mother said to you when you read her the warning was: I make my decisions; correct?
Yes. She made her own decisions.
There’s nothing that R.J. Reynolds could have said or done that would have prevented her death.
What could the company have done? Had it gone out of business, she just would have smoked somebody else’s brands of cigarettes. She had all the information she needed.
She knew there were carcinogens, that it could cause lung cancer, that it could cause death, that nicotine was a powerful pharmacologic agent, that it was addictive, that it's hard to quit, she had all that information, she didn't lie from any lack of information; only Ms. Cheeley, respectfully, had the ability to make a difference in the outcome of her life. She's the only one that could have chosen to quit. And had she chosen to quit, she would have avoided any lung cancer, even if she had done it in the late '70s.
Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence demonstrates -- not the lawyers' rhetoric, but the evidence demonstrates that Ms. Cheeley is 100 percent responsible for the choices that she made. Can I have that again, please?
If you get to this question -- and you won't get there if she's not a class member -- if you get to this question, ladies and gentlemen, I suggest to you -- the right answer here is that 100 percent of the fault for her death is Ms. Cheeley's responsibility because she's the only one that was a "but for” cause.
She's the only person, the only party that could have done something to make a difference because
there's nothing Reynolds could have done because she wasn't relying on anything Reynolds said anyway.
Back to the computer, please. Okay. I'm sorry.
I misspoke, Baron. I need the Elmo again. I want to turn to this final issue of punitive damages because I'm going to spend a few minutes talking about the law with respect to punitive damages because punitive damages are concept that we don't all walk around thinking about all day, every day. It's not something that most people ever encounter in their life.
And there's specific legal rules that are different than the legal rules for the compensatory damages claim. So we need to look at that to sort of give you all a frame work because remember, this is a specific legal decision.
Your obligation is to find the facts as you find them and apply the law to the facts you find, not make assumptions about how things should come out. You have to follow the law and everybody agreed they would do that during voir dire. You start with punitive damages, you start with what the law is, what the law tells us.
I'm going to do one more thing first. I'm sorry. I'm going to talk about compensatory damages for just a minute. I wasn't going to. I don't really like to
talk about compensatory damages. But because Mr. Alvarez asked for seven and a half million dollars, I feel like I need to address that just a little bit.
And first let’s start with looking at the instruction, which is on page 18 of your instructions. This is one about compensatory damages. I just want to highlight the first phrase, which is "any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence."
In other words, you can’t just pull a number out of the hat. You have to have some evidentiary basis for your request for damages.
Second, that the purpose of an award of compensatory damages is not to punish or penalize Reynolds for its conduct nor to make an example of Reynolds for the public good.
So, again, this is just to compensate -compensatory damages are restricted to compensating the Cheeleys for any loss that you find to have been proven by the evidence, not to punish Reynolds.
That’s the punitive damages phase.
So if you award any compensatory damages, there shouldn’t be any component of those damages that -you shouldn’t increase them because you want to punish Reynolds; that’s not what this phase of the case is
about.
So with that understanding, just a few words of compensatory damages. Back to this, please, Baron. Thank you. Important to understand what's not being asked for here. The Plaintiffs are not asking you for any damages related to economic loss.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. That's not even an issue in the case.
MR. FURR: I'm allowed to describe it, though, Judge.
MR. ALVAREZ: I object to this slide, to the first two. It's not an issue in the case.
MR. FURR: That's what I'm allowed to explain.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection.
MR. FURR: Okay. Take that one back down. I'll go forward one. Let's approach it from the other side.
The only thing that you're being asked to compensate the Cheeleys for -- and I'm not minimizing it, but to focus the inquiry, what you're being asked to compensate them for is a loss of parental companionship, instruction, and guidance. You're not being asked to compensate them for anything else. That's the nature of what you're being asked to compensate for. Any award you make has to be just in
light of the evidence in this case.
So you have to decide whether seven and a half million dollars has any evidentiary basis for it in this case. You know, they've asked you for a huge amount of damages, a huge amount of damages. Where does that come from? Where does it come from? They didn't give you any reason weight to get there.
They're asking you -- but if you take even a step back, they're asking you for millions of dollars, millions of dollars because their mother chose to smoke cigarettes for over 35 years, knowing that they were dangerous for the last 30 years of her smoking, knowing they were dangerous and not trying to quit and they want you to award them seven and a half million dollars for that.
All I can say is, if you get to this question, please use your reason and your common sense. Now I'll talk to you about the punitive damages. A few things to keep in mind and I won't go to the instructions because my time is short.
Punitive damages are awarded only for the concealment claims. In other words, you only award punitive damages -- you only get there if you answer yes to questions five, six, seven or eight. You don't get there if all those answers are no.
Second, punitive damages can only be awarded to Ms. Cheeley’s estate, her personal representative.
Said differently, you can’t award them to the American Cancer Society -MR. ALVAREZ: Judge, this is inappropriate at this stage of the trial. This is just about whether it’s warranted.
THE COURT: All right. I’ll overrule the objection, but the issue is framed in the instructions in the verdict form as to whether punitive damages are warranted. You may continue.
MR. FURR: I won’t belabor it. They can only be awarded to the Cheeley family, and they’re in addition to compensatory damages.
If you find Reynolds to be liable and you compensate the Cheeleys, you will fully compensate them, and this is really their request that you award them more money. Okay.
The judge also told you that the Engle findings cannot be considered in any way. If you get to this question, it has to be based on evidence introduced to you in this case. Just like the verdict form question tells you, you can’t base a punitive award on the Engle findings, they can’t be considered by you at all.
Let's talk about what they're seeking punitive damages for. They're seeking punitive damages only for the concealment claims. And you know clearly R.J. Reynolds debated and denied and argued about whether smoking was dangerous. There's no dispute about that.
And I'm not here to defend that, but that wasn't all they did. Although they took positions about whether smoking was dangerous, they also funded research to get additional information and put it in the public arena so that everybody could look at that additional information and debate about what it means, so they sort of -- they were sort of schizophrenic.
On the one hand, they were denying it and arguing about it way too long when they shouldn't have. And I'm not defending any of that. The documents and their statements, you know, they shouldn't have made those statements. But it wasn't all they did, you have to look at the whole picture. They also, also were funding the research.
You know, Dr. Proctor said that this CTR was a distraction research and designed to mislead people. But look at what the CTR actually did.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. You can't dispute the findings, Judge.
THE COURT: The objection is overruled. You may
continue, sir.
MR. FURR: Mr. Alvarez gets up here and shows you five or $600 million and says, they were using all this five or $600 million to confuse people. That's not what CTR was doing with five or $600 million.
Dr. Proctor told you that CTR awarded $350 million of that money to fund independent scientific researchers who used that money to research issues including issues directly on point regarding the dangers of smoking, so that they published 7,000 -- 7,000 scientific and medical articles were published with CTR money.
The claim was made: Well, that didn't have anything to do with smoking and health, it was all distraction, it was designed to get people to think about everything else.
But Dr. Proctor told you that 600 times, the Surgeon General of the United States has cited CTR-funded research in its assessment of the dangers of smoking. We were told that they funded research at reputable institutions all over the country, including U of M, Florida State, University of Florida, and that they funded ten people ultimately won Nobel prizes, many of those prizes having had their origin, the work they did, in CTR-funded research.
Dr. Proctor told you more than that, though. He called it distraction research, but you might remember we got up and we wrote down epidemiology, toxicology, chemistry, the type of research that CTR was funded was the type of research that Dr. Proctor said was the pillars of consensus.
These were the lines of evidence that the public health community used to determine whether smoking was dangerous or not. And Dr. Proctor admitted that the CTR -- those types of studies were being funded with CTR money.
THE COURT: Five minutes, Mr. Furr.
MR. FURR: Thank you, sir. You remember when Dr. Cook testified. Dr. Cook came by video. Most of it didn’t have very much to do with the issues in this case. He was the guy with the English accent that had been a scientist at Brown & Williamson and then R.J. Reynolds.
But he did talk about one thing that was really important. Here is a slide from his testimony that was shown to you. The American Tobacco Company, the maker of Pall Mall cigarettes, funded medical research at the university -- at the Medical College of Virginia in Richmond, with American Tobacco Company money, the Medical College did research that, in
addition to all the CTR things, resulted in 200 publications and also they funded something called Larson, Haag, and Silvette.
You didn't hear a whole lot about it. It probably went by you pretty fast, but it's really important.
As Dr. Cook testified in his examination, these were large volumes of research that reviewed comprehensively the world's scientific literature.
The first one was done prior to the 1964 Surgeon General's report and was relied upon by the 1964 Surgeon General's committee in reaching its decision that smoking caused cancer.
So, again, American Tobacco Company is disputing it on one hand but funding the research on the other. That's the Larson Haag slide. And they also said the companies hid the ball from the Surgeon General in 1964.
But, again, I cross examined Dr. Proctor and he admitted in 1964, the Surgeon General relied on information from R.J. Reynolds about the carcinogens in tobacco smoke in reaching his conclusion.
Dr. Rodgman was a scientist at R.J. Reynolds.
You were shown the website. You know, the claim is that R.J. Reynolds should be punished for
concealment. Well, you're shown the website today.
You see what the company says today. Here is the website shown during Dr. Cook's examination.
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company believes that individuals should rely on the conclusions of the U.S. Surgeon General, the Centers For Disease Control, and other public health officials when makes decisions regarding smoking. Links to the website to the Surgeon General and other public health officials provided below.
So if you go to their website, you don't see a dispute or a debate or anything like that. They tell smokers: Rely on the public health authorities.
That's what you need to do. They also tell consumers: No tobacco products have been shown to be safer without risk, and that quitting smoking is what you should do if you're concerned about the dangers of smoking.
Ladies and gentlemen, if you get to the last question, Question 9, which you won't get to if you don't find concealment, if you get there, the answer to the question is no. If it's not, we will come back for another phase of trial, presumably tomorrow.
One more topic to talk to you about, and that is, I want to see if we can get past this mountain of
words and evidence and facts and figures and numbers that all three of us had the poor judgment to inundate you with today and see if we can’t cut to heart of the matter because the heart of the matter is this:
Smoking has always been viewed as an issue of personal responsibility in this country, and I want to go back to some statements that you saw during the trial from a long time ago to show you the way that smoking has always been viewed in this country.
This was Dr. Hammond, one of the early researchers on that See It Now program.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s ability.)
MALE SPEAKER: In my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. What they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.
(End of video.)
MR. FURR: 1955, smoking is dangerous, people need the information, and they get to make their own decisions. Harry Reasoner, 1964 on that famous CBS broadcast about the surgery.
(At this time, a video was played in open court and taken down to the best of the court reporter’s
ability.)
MALE SPEAKER: In this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it.
(End of video.)
MR. FURR: Same message, same message. And Mr. Cheeley acknowledge that that's the way things work in the United States. Mr. Cheeley told you, she was an adult and it was her decision. That's what he told you.
Ladies and gentlemen, in America we have freedom. We have freedom to make choices. We get to choose how to live, but we have to take responsibility for the choices we make.
And that's what we teach our children. You know, that's what we expect out of our loved ones. That's what we hope we'll get from our neighbors and coworkers and friends, and everybody around us because that's how this all works so well in America. People get freedom and they take responsibility.
I'm finished. Now, I'm going to have to sit down and I'm going to have to sit over there while
Mr. Alvarez or somebody gets back up for 15 minutes, and I don't get another chance to talk to you.
But I'm going to suggest to you two things. When you listen to him, listen for two things because if they prove these things to you, they've proven their case, but if they can't prove these things, they haven't proven their case.
As you listen to him, see whether he proves to you Mrs. Cheeley didn't know that smoking was dangerous and addictive and see whether he proves to you that Mrs. Cheeley just couldn't quit and had no choice but to smoke until she smoked herself to death.
If you can prove those two things, he's proven a case to you, but if you can't prove those, under the law and facts we've just reviewed, they haven't proven their case and your obligation under the law is to return a defense verdict.
I thank you very much for your time and attention. It's been a privilege working before you and before this honorable Court.
Thank you, Your Honor.