MR. BOYCE: Thank you.
May it please the Court.
Thank you for indulging me. Sorry, I needed a minute break there.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to take a moment at the outset to thank each and every one of you for your attention and your patience during this trial. It's been a long trial with some remarkably complicated issues, big words, and each and every one of you has been
attentive, and for that everyone here is grateful.
At this point this case boils down to two issues; it boils down to causation and personal responsibility.
MR. WICHMANN: Just let me object, Your Honor. I think we already determined causation in Phase I.
THE COURT: Counsel, the verdict form, each question discusses that. The objection is overruled. Legal cause is an issue in the case.
MR. BOYCE: The first issue of causation is one that we talked about during the very first day of jury selection. And you will remember there were a variety of people here who knew smokers who had gotten sick from smoking, knew someone in their family who had smoked and gotten sick. And we asked them, do you blame the cigarette companies for that, or do you blame cigarettes? Almost all of them said, I blame cigarettes, I don't blame the cigarette companies. And that concept, that issue is at the heart of this first issue, which you just heard from Your Honor. And it's called legal cause.
You decided in Phase I that cigarette smoking caused Mr. Ciccone's injuries, but that didn't settle the matter. If it did, we wouldn't be back here. Legal cause, what we're focused on in this phase, is whether Reynolds and Reynolds alone did something wrong that caused Mr. Ciccone's injuries. Some of you may be thinking, well, he smoked Reynolds' brands, he got lung cancer, Mrs. Ciccone should get money, but the judge is going to explain to you that that's not the law in this case, that's not the law in this country. There has to be more of a connection. Plaintiffs have to prove to you that something Reynolds did that was wrong caused Mr. Ciccone's injuries.
The manufacture and advertising and sale of cigarettes is a legal activity in this country.
And you're going to hear this in the jury instructions in a few minutes. But you cannot base your verdict simply on the fact that Reynolds sold cigarettes, that Reynolds advertised cigarettes, and that Mr. Ciccone smoked those cigarettes. If that's all this case was about, it would have been over in Phase I, just like Mr. Wichmann wants you to
think that it was, but it's not, there's something more, and the more starts with this concept of legal cause.
This is the instruction that you'll get from the judge. And we've left it blank because you're going to hear several different times what legal cause means. But it states quite clearly that "Something is a legal cause of loss if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss so that it can reasonably be said that but for that loss would not have occurred."
And what that means here is, would Mr. Ciccone not have smoked and not have gotten sick if Reynolds never existed?
What plaintiffs have to prove to you is that but for Reynolds and Reynolds alone, not the industry, not the Tobacco Institute, not CTR, Reynolds, Plaintiff has to show to you that but for Reynolds something would have been different. I would suggest to you that in this case you have seen that plaintiffs cannot meet that burden. If Reynolds never existed,
Mr. Ciccone would have still smoked.
Remember how he started smoking, he got cigarettes that weren't made from Reynolds by his brother-in-law Norman. They were Kent cigarettes. His brother-in-law gave them to him against his parents' rules. Reynolds didn't cause that behavior. Reynolds didn't cause Mr. Ciccone to start smoking.
You heard that for more than 20 years his main brand was Chesterfield King. That's not made by Reynolds. Is it fair to say that Reynolds is a legal cause of Mr. Ciccone's smoking brands that Reynolds doesn't make?
Finally, you heard that he smoked pipes and cigars and chewed tobacco. He smoked so many pipes that his friends started giving him pipes as gifts. He had a pipe collection that he gave to his daughter. Reynolds is not a legal cause of that.
But if you look at it the other way, if you look at the other side of the coin, the other side of legal cause, you'll see that there is one thing that could have changed this, and that's Mr. Ciccone. That's why plaintiffs and their witnesses never want to talk about Mr. Ciccone, the man he was, and the life he
led. If Mr. Ciccone had been different, if he had felt differently about smoking, if he had had more of a desire to quit, then he could have avoided his injuries and we would not be here. But for Reynolds, Mr. Ciccone would have still smoked; but but for Mr. Ciccone, we may very well not be here.
Now, that leads to the second point. And that's personal responsibility. And on this there really should be no doubt. You heard this from Mrs. Ciccone yesterday. I asked her, specific to smoking, you wanted your children to look at it the same way that you and Mr. Ciccone did and that you had to take responsibility for it.
And she answered emphatically, "Oh, yeah."
When I asked her how she and her husband looked at smoking, her answer was, "We took personal responsibility for it. We taught our children to take personal responsibility for it."
And this answer right here, "Oh, yeah," says a lot about how the Ciccone's viewed their own smoking in the real world outside of this courtroom. And there's only one reason the
Ciccone's would take personal responsibility for their smoking outside of this courtroom. It's because they know it was their choice to make, their decision to make.
No one is criticizing the Ciccone's for smoking. No one is blaming them for smoking.
It is their right to make that choice for themselves in this country. That is a freedom that we have here that many people do not have. And you heard this from a variety of witnesses, there are cigarettes available for sale in this country that are not available elsewhere, the very cigarettes that Mr. Ciccone liked. Some countries have decided to take that choice away from their citizens, but things are different here. Things are different in America. The freedom to determine your own life is important to us as a society. And that freedom includes the right to make your own decisions about smoking, your own decisions about what brands t use, and your own decisions about what to do with your own behavior.
I have mentioned this before, but when you think about how Mr. Ciccone looked at his smoking, remember the period around 1998 and
1999. We saw yesterday how in 1997 Reynolds' CEO testified that smoking plays a role in causing lung cancer. That was publicized throughout the state. The settlement agreement was signed 20 miles away in Palm Beach.
In 1998 Mr. Ciccone started to develop problems with his PVD. He was diagnosed with PVD around that time, and his doctors told him if he didn't stop smoking he could lose his legs.
Look and see if his behavior changed. When you go back to deliberate and you consider the issue of legal cause, look and see what happened after 1998 and 1999. Did you see a history of quit attempts that failed because of addiction?
No.
I understand that you have determined that addiction is one of the reasons Mr. Ciccone smoked. I accept that verdict. But now you have to look at all the other reasons. All of the evidence that you heard in Phase I relates to these issues, because you have to determine legal cause and you have to determine responsibility.
Remember how Mr. Ciccone responded after his
PVD surgery in 1999, he didn't sue anyone. It was his right to sue if he wanted to, but he didn't want to. He didn't file a lawsuit, he didn't blame anyone.
And this was unanimous from witness after witness. We heard from Mark Laliberte. I never heard him blame RJ Reynolds for his smoking.
That's his own son. We heard from his friends, Oscar Chaires, and his sister Pauline and his sister-in-law Debra Tisi: Did he talk to you about suing the tobacco companies?
No.
When you knew George, did he ever say anything to you about suing the tobacco companies?
These are people who knew him when he smoked without trying to stop. These are people who knew him after 1999.
And remember as you think about this, there's been a warning label on the side of the pack since 1966. Plaintiffs have tried to suggest that that warning label is inadequate throughout this trial, but the judge is going to tell you in a few minutes that that is a claim that is not allowed in here. Those warnings are
adequate as a matter of federal law. Complaints with those warnings go to the United States Congress, they do not go to Reynolds. You cannot base your verdict on their allegations that something more should have been said or that what was said was inadequate.
Debra Tisi said after he became sick George never told you he blamed the tobacco companies and it's the same for Mrs. Ciccone. Mr. Ciccone did not blame the tobacco companies. That was never brought up. I asked Mrs. Ciccone yesterday, did you ever talk about suing? And she said no. That includes 1999, 2000, 2001 as well as 2002.
And finally, his brother Paul, clearly this is a man who took responsibility for his actions, and if those actions caused a problem he would accept responsibility for it and not blame someone else.
Throughout this trial you've heard me called the tobacco lawyer. I used to object to it.
They did it so much I finally just gave up. But I want you to understand something. I'm proud to be the person that stands up for personal responsibility in this case. And there's one
simple reason for that. I believe the evidence shows that Mr. Ciccone felt the same way about his smoking. He took personal responsibility for it. And I'm proud to be the one person to stand up in here and point that out to you. Because I think he would agree with the position that he knew what he was doing and he wanted to do it. If they want to call me names, that's fine.
I believe that Mr. Ciccone felt the same way about his smoking that I'm going to describe to you right now.
I want to show you the verdict form. And I know that's hard to see, but we'll go through these questions here one at a time. And for now I want to focus on the first two, and that is,
Was the negligence on the part of RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company a legal cause of Mr. Ciccone's death?
We'll switch to the Elmo.
Can you switch me over to the Elmo, Baron.
I know that's hard to see.
What's interesting about this verdict form is what's not on there. As I suggested in opening statement, so much of Plaintiff's case
has no connection to Mr. Ciccone, and that includes all the stuff Mr. Wichmann just talked about to you for an hour, white papers, CEO testimony, all of that stuff has no connection to Mr. Ciccone, in large part because he never saw and heard it.
And we'll talk about what reliance means in a moment, but for now I want to point out there's no question on this verdict form whether The Frank Statement was true or not. There's no question on this verdict form whether you think a Reynolds executive said something objectionable on TV. There's no question on this verdict form that asks you to vote your opinion on the Tobacco Institute. And that's legal cause.
Legal cause is a requirement for those first two claims, and when we get beyond those the requirements get even more stringent, because those are intentional torts. That's where they claim that Reynolds did something on purpose to hurt Mr. Ciccone. And that's where reliance comes in. But for now I want to talk about the first two claims.
The first is the design defect issue.
Cigarettes are dangerous. I told you this in my opening statement in Phase I. Cigarettes are addictive, cigarettes cause lung cancer and a variety of other diseases. That's not enough. Plaintiffs have to show you that something that Reynolds did that was wrong caused Mr. Ciccone's injuries.
And as you look back on the evidence in this case, what was it? It was more stuff related to other people, other products, other allegations.
Dr. Cummings came down here and testified about filters for hours. Mr. Ciccone never smoked a filtered product. They talked about low tar products, no connection to Mr. Ciccone. This case is not about whether cigarettes are safe or unsafe. It's about whether Reynolds' conduct is a legal cause of the injuries.
And we brought Dr. Gentry down here to talk to you about all of the things Reynolds has done to address the risks associated with smoking.
He told you about selective reduction, they try to get a specific compound out of the cigarette smoke. He told you about general reduction, they try to take everything out and reduce tar levels down. They've reduced tar levels in
cigarettes without filters. They've worked in conjunction with the public health community. They've published their research. They listened to and responded to the recommendations from the Surgeon General in developing all of these products. You saw the reconstituted tobacco.
And let me just talk about that for a moment. Reconstituted tobacco, every witness agrees, reduces the tar and nicotine in cigarette smoke. And you all understand that the bad stuff in cigarette smoke is in that tar.
Less tar has to be better.
The reconstituted tobacco Dr. Cummings wants you to believe is nicotine spiking, that's what he called it. They take the juice out and they put less nicotine back. There's more nicotine in the tobacco when they buy it from the farmers than there is in the cigarettes that they sell.
That manufacturing process, which is designed to ensure uniformity of product and quality control, like anything else, we heard this from Dr. Cummings, and I think Mr. Wichmann misspoke because the witness that talked about caffeine and chocolate was Dr. Cummings during my cross-examination. And he said that Coca-Cola
makes sure there's the same amount of caffeine in every can. He told you that Hershey's makes sure there's the same amount of sugar in every candy bar. That's what's going on in the manufacturing process.
But remember that Dr. Cummings himself, no fan of tobacco and we'll talk about him in a moment, but he admitted that when they take the nicotine out and manufacture it, less goes back in. More nicotine in the tobacco when it comes to Reynolds than when it leaves Reynolds.
You learned about the products that heat tobacco instead of burning it. All of the bad stuff associated with cigarette smoking is a function of burning organic material. And you're all junior chemists now. And, again, appreciate your patience as we went through all of these technical issues. But you understand how these compounds that cause disease are created. And Reynolds addressed that concern as well. Reynolds developed Premier and Eclipse, products that Dr. Cummings admitted were safer than conventional cigarettes. Dr. Cummings told you that. Those products are safer than conventional cigarettes.
On the first two questions, how can Reynolds be the legal cause? Reynolds responded to the: allegations. They developed different products, they developed alternative products and Mr. Ciccone wasn't interested in any of them.
And that was his choice, but remember this fact as you look at these first two questions. Is there something that Reynolds did or should have done that they didn't do that caused Mr. Ciccone's injuries? And that's what you heard from Dr. Gentry, that they did respond, they did develop safer products, and they did address the concerns raised by the public health community.
And you heard it -- can you switch me back over, please, Baron?
This is Dr. Russell. Dr. Cummings told you that this is a man who's been researching cigarettes and health for decades, reputable scientist, famous in that community. He wrote that "It's unlikely that any single measure has saved more lives or done more to reduce smoking-related disease than the switch from plain to filter tipped cigarettes which began in the late '50s and continued throughout the
1960s."
Mr. Ciccone wasn't interested in filtered cigarettes. In the 1990 Surgeon General's Report, Differences in reductions in risks followings cessation have been investigated, a lower risk of lung cancer has been observed for smokers of filter cigarettes compared with smokers of nonfiltered cigarettes.
You heard several times about what Reynolds did to reduce tobacco specific nitrosamines, but think about how that story came out. When Dr. Cummings came down here the first time, he had a videotape of farmers with the propane gas. He told you, that's like your gas grill, that's what they're doing to tobacco and that's where these nitrosamines come from. And then we had to drag it out of him on cross-examination, wait a minute, Reynolds discovered where that was coming from. Reynolds published what they found. Reynolds then took the next step of paying the farmers to retrofit their barns.
That's Reynolds' conduct. None of that conduct harmed Mr. Ciccone at all. It offered him different choices about brands and different choices about products, but he wasn't
interested. And, again, that is his right. But it shows that on those first two questions for negligence and design defect your answer has to be no.
You've heard about Reynolds' publications.
You heard how Dr. Rodgman spent eight years studying cigarette smoke and when he was done Reynolds took a giant list of carcinogens and gave it to the Surgeon General's Report and that a few years after that Dr. Rodgman gave a speed to the American Chemical Society where he drew pictures of the compounds, had them listed by name and had drawn pictures of what those bad compounds were in case other scientists wanted to see. That work is not a bad thing. That work is something that could have offered a benefit to Mr. Ciccone if he was interested in it. But the fact that he wasn't interested in those products does not make Reynolds a legal cause of his injuries.
It's the same with TIRC and CTR. You've heard repeatedly that these organizations funded high-quality science from high-quality scientists around the country. In order for you to accept Plaintiff's allegations you would have
to believe that everyone that signed the Frank Statement, including the Warehouse Group, the Larus Brothers, cigar manufacturers, were all in a league with Reynolds and that that expanded to Yale University and Harvard University and seven Nobel prize winners.
CTR funded seven Nobel prize winners. You heard that they published thousands of papers. We showed you some of them. Some of them saj that nicotine is addictive. Some of them address the health risks of smoking. Thousands of papers published by TIRC-funded scientists and CTR grantees.
The scientist who held Dr. Cummings' job before him worked with CTR. His work was published. 6 to 700 articles funded by CTR are cited in the Surgeon General's Reports. All of this information shows that on those first two questions, negligence and design defect, your answer has to be no.
Reynolds' conduct did not cause Mr. Ciccone's injuries.
I want to spend a minute -- if we can go back to the Elmo, please, Baron.
Before we move on to reliance, to talk about
gross negligence. Because gross negligence is something different. And the judge will explain this to you. But gross negligence requires plaintiffs to prove that Reynolds did not exercise any care at all, "Failed to use even the slightest degree of care."
That's what gross negligence means.
I would submit to you that Premier and Eclipse end your inquiry on gross negligence. Developing products like that, putting them out there for smokers to have the option to choose, that is care, that shows that there is not gross negligence on the part of Reynolds. They have exercised care. They have exercised responsibility.
But gross negligence is something much more than negligence. It requires proof that Reynolds didn't care at all. And those two products and the efforts that went into developing them will not let you make that determination in favor of plaintiffs.
Now, the next two, interrogatories number 4 and 5, both require that Mr. Ciccone reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement made by Reynolds or a statement that Reynolds did not
make.
Can you switch back over, please, Baron?
Thank you.
The judge will explain reasonable reliance to you, but I would submit to you that your inquiry starts with what Dr. Cummings told you yesterday. And Dr. Cummings came down here and said, there is no way that you can rely on something that you never saw and never heard.
"Of course not."
I asked him, is there any way to rely on something that you don't see or hear?
He said, "Of course not."
You saw Dr. Cummings and I go back and forth at each other over a few days. I promise you he's not the kind of man that would say this lightly. He's testified in over 50 trials. He travels around the country with his own set of documents. He's telling you that if Mr. Ciccone didn't see it, that if Mr. Ciccone didn't hear it, then he can't have relied on it. And that's why your answers on 4 and 5 have to be no. And here's why.
All of the stuff we talked about,
Mr. Ciccone never saw. White papers, Jed
Clampett, World War I, Superman 2, women's tennis, billboards at race tracks, on and on and on. We have the sources of information chart.
It's right here. CEOs.
Remember the videotape of the governors from the south that he played? Mr. Ciccone never saw or heard any of this. Because he didn't see it, because he didn't hear it, because he was never exposed to it, he can't have relied on it.
That's Dr. Cummings telling you that, and the judge will confirm it for you in your instructions. There has to be a connection. In order to rely on something, you have to see it, you have to hear it. It's actually quite simple.
But, again, the white papers, the CEOs, they have Joe Camel up there. Joe Camel started in 1987. 1987. Mr. Ciccone was 41 years old. He never smoked Camel filters. He smoked unfiltered cigarettes.
We've got Virginia Slims tennis, and up at the top is the billboards.
You've heard this from me and you will hear it from Judge Tuter in a few moments, but you cannot base your verdict in this case on what
might have happened to other smokers other thar Mr. Ciccone. This case is not a referendum on the tobacco industry. This case is not an opportunity for you to vote on what you think about tobacco companies. And I know that some of you had views about tobacco companies before you ever came in here, but you all promised to set those aside and decide this case on the basis of the evidence, the evidence and the facts that plaintiffs prove for Mr. Ciccone.
And you just heard it a moment ago, 400,000 deaths, 400,000. They want you to focus on everyone but Mr. Ciccone because they cannot connect all the stuff they want to complain about, from white papers to CEOs, to Mr. Ciccone. He didn't see them.
This is what I was talking about in Phase I.
This is a lawyer story, secret documents, CEO testimony, that's not real life. That's not the life that the Ciccones led.
And don't you think there would be evidence of it? Don't you think that there would be evidence if Mr. Ciccone had made a decision based on an advertisement or a statement? His friends would know this, they would know that it
mattered to him. But time and time again, whether it was his own children, his colleagues, his own brother, his own wife, they all admitted the same thing, he never told me he saw or heard The Frank Statement. He was seven years old when it ran. He never told them that he had heard of Tobacco Institute or CTR or TIRC. In fact, he never told anyone that he had heard a statement from RJ Reynolds. He didn't smoke because of ads. He didn't smoke because of statements. And he didn't smoke because he didn't know the risks.
You have to focus on Mr. Ciccone. It's your duty as jurors. You have to focus on the evidence that plaintiffs have tied to him specifically. And the evidence in this case is clear that plaintiffs have not met that burden.
The drawbridge that we talked about the very first day is still wide open. They haven't met their burden of proof.
We talked about this a moment ago, but you have an interesting opportunity in this case because you can look at how Mr. Ciccone smoke< before the CEOs testified about the risks of smoking and after. And remember that that
started in 1997. From 1997 to 1999 that's when all this stuff started. That's when the CEOs admitted the health risks, that's when the documents started to go up on the Internet.
That's when the websites started to change.
You've heard about Bennett LeBow from Liggett, he lives right down the road in Miami.
His position was all over the news. You have an opportunity to see as you judge whether the story that Mr. Wichmann has told about the tobacco industry affected Mr. Ciccone by looking at what the smoking was like before '97 and after '97. And I would submit to you that it's the same. This is a man who liked smoking and was not interested in stopping.
And no one knows it better than his own wife. A year after the Reynolds CEO admitted the health risks of smoking and it gets reported in the press down here, Mrs. Ciccone fills out a form where in her own handwriting she says, he's not interested in stopping, not that he can't, not that he doesn't know that he should, but he's not interested.
And it's the same after 1999. "Did Mr. Ciccone do anything that led you to believe
that he wanted to quit smoking at that time?"
And her answer was no.
That's after all the doubt that plaintiffs want you to think existed was removed. And it's because of this real life evidence of Mr. Ciccone, because of the real life he led and the real evidence that is proved from outside this courtroom that Dr. Feingold came down here and told you, "I don't think he ever made a significant quit attempt."
And, again, there is nothing wrong with that. No one is blaming Mr. Ciccone for it. It is perfectly natural for all of us to sympathize with Mrs. Ciccone's loss. It's human and it's natural. Each of you has promised to set sympathy aside and decide this case on the facts and evidence.
It's also perfectly natural for Mrs. Ciccone to look back and wish that her husband had different priorities, that he had had different views about quitting, that it had been important to him to stop. But this says it all.
You'll remember that Dr. Feingold described himself as the world's most desirable expert witness. He does not say stuff like this
lightly. He was not throwing me a bone so that I could make a chart in closing arguments. He says this because he has to, because the evidence outside the courtroom, the real life evidence of Mr. Ciccone's life forced him to say it.
One last point on reliance. As you heard from Dr. Cummings, there were periods of time when Reynolds and the public health community said the same thing to smokers. Mr. Wichmann wants you to focus on the time when Reynolds and other tobacco companies said something different than the Surgeon General, but there were plenty of times where they said the same exact thing.
One of them is on the use of filtered cigarettes. There were decades when Reynolds and the other tobacco companies and the Surgeon General said, if you don't want to quit, smoke filtered cigarettes. Lost on Mr. Ciccone.
Whether the message came from the government o the public health community or a tobacco company, it didn't matter to him. It's the same with low tar cigarettes. Reynolds says try a low tar cigarette, public health community says try a low tar cigarette, Mr. Ciccone doesn't try
a low tar cigarette. Is it fair to say that Reynolds is responsible for those choices? Is it fair to say that Reynolds is responsible for the 40 years of smoking that he engaged without ever trying to quit? Don't forget he started smoking in 1958 and the first time he tries to stop is 1990. Who's responsible for the decades and decades of smoking where he's not intereste in stopping? Reynolds didn't cause him to smoke. Reynolds didn't cause him not to try to stop.
Now, I want to spend some time talking about Dr. Cummings. He described himself as the foremost expert on nicotine cessation. And he came down here yesterday for six hours and he never mentioned Mr. Ciccone's name once, not once. First question I asked him. You were here for six hours, you didn't mention the man's name one time. That should tell you all you need to know about Dr. Cummings.
But there's one more point about him. He describes himself as the world's foremost expert on nicotine cessation and he never once offered to help Mrs. Ciccone quit. This case was filed in 2004. Mrs. Ciccone was smoking then. From
2004 until yesterday he never once offered his help to her and she never once asked him for it. And that says a lot about the way the Ciccones looked at their smoking. They didn't reach out to experts that their lawyers hired in this case.
I asked him yesterday, Well, what did you do last night? He went to dinner with the lawyers. And he said, well, I would love to help Mrs. Ciccone. And so I asked him, well, why didn't you do it between Phase I and Phase II? And he didn't have an answer. It's more important to him to testify for Mrs. Ciccone than it is to help her stop smoking. And that says a lot about his priorities and the kind of witness he is and the weight that you should give his testimony in the jury room.
I also want you to think about whether Dr. Cummings struck you as the kind of person that would paint a fair picture. He just mentioned that he travels around the country with his own set of documents, he's always available to testify, he never says no.
But think about what he showed you. As you've heard time and time again, Reynolds is
three companies in this case. It's the American Tobacco Company, the Brown & Williamson Tobac Company, and RJ Reynolds. And they want to focus on 60 years of conduct.
You've heard the term pack year, pack a cigarettes a day for a year, I would encourage you to use the term "company year," three companies times 60 years is 180 company years. That is tens of thousands of employees, tens of thousands of employees at three different companies over a period of 60 years. And Dr. Cummings waves his hand and says they were all the same, they were all bad. They never did anything right.
And how did he do it? He showed you a handful of documents. Look at this chart. He has 60 million pages of documents available to him in Buffalo. 16 million of them have been coded, but the total is 60 million.
There are 40 documents from those three companies in evidence in this case, and you've actually just been told about 23. There's a few more in evidence that you haven't seen. 23 documents. Three companies, 60 years, tens of thousands of men and women. These are three
American companies. The people that work there are American working men and women, and we're talking about 60 years of conduct, and they want you to believe that 23 documents is a fair way to judge that. I submit to you that it's not.
That's not a fair way to judge anything.
Ask yourself if Dr. Cummings struck you as the kind of person that would paint a fair picture. Would he come down with a fair representation of documents, or would he pick the most inflammatory documents he could find based on his review?
Think about what he was like on everything else. Think about the battles we had to fight.
I had to fight with him to get him to admit that 1964 came before 1966, back and forth. He is a zealot. He told you that he wants to ban cigarettes. He doesn't understand why anyone would choose to smoke. He thinks that everyone who has made a choice to smoke has made a mistake. And he has decided that his opinion is more important and that he would take the choice away from every man and woman in this country and he would ban them. That's who he is. But he showed you 23 documents.
It's the same with the videos. He has 6,000 videos indexed up there. You've seen a dozen. You've seen the same one three times. They cannot play the videotape of that Philip Morris executive enough. They played it once, then they said it was garbled and they played it again. And then when Dr. Cummings was here, he read a document about it. That's to distract you from the fact that none of this has any connection to Mr. Ciccone, the life he led, and the choices he made.
I want to skip ahead for a moment.
Excuse me, I always feel bad about drinking water.
I want to skip ahead for a few moments and talk about punitive damages. And this is where Plaintiff's will ask you for money above and beyond the money that they want you to award to Mrs. Ciccone to compensate for her for her loss.
And just to remind you, Mr. Wichmann was up here a few moments ago and he asked you to awar 25 million dollars to Mrs. Ciccone, 25 million dollars in compensatory damages. And then on top of that they want you to punish Reynolds.
But there's a difference here. Here the burden
of proof is different. The burden of proof on whether Reynolds deserves to be punished is clear and convincing evidence, and the judge will explain this to you, but that means evidence that is clear and precise and explicit.
It has to produce a firm belief or conviction.
This is not more likely than not. This is a much tougher standard, and it has to be firm, precise evidence. Before Reynolds can be punished, that's the standard you have to apply on the entitlement interrogatory.
But there's one thing that is the same. Reynolds can only be punished for harm to Mr. Ciccone specifically. If you think Reynolds did something wrong and it may have affected another smoker, that can't be the basis of your finding on entitlement to punitive damages in this case. Just like every other claim, you have to keep the focus on Mr. Ciccone.
But the only person that can be awarded punitive damages in this case is Mrs. Ciccone. And it's right here. She's the only person that can receive punitive damages in this case. You can't award them to the public health community or a smoking cessation clinic or any other
entity. These are damages that will be above and beyond any compensatory damages you award and they're only going to go to Mrs. Ciccone.
But there are only two reasons that punitive damages could even possibly be appropriate. One is for punishment and one is for deterrence.
And I want to go through them one at a time.
On punishment I want you to remember two things. Every person that you've heard about in this case is gone. CTR is gone. TI, gone.
Robert Heimann, Robert Heimann died in 1990. When he gave that deposition, he had been retired from the American Tobacco Company for a decade. Jim Johnson, gone. The Tobacco Institute, gone.
Dr. Cummings would have you believe that the only two men who ever worked at any of these companies were Claude Teague and Alan Rodgman. Think about the names you heard, it's always Teague, Rodgman, Teague, Rodgman. Teague's be gone for decades. Rodgman's been gone for decades. Those men are gone. Ed Horrigan has been gone for decades. The only people left for you to punish are the men and women who work for RJ Reynolds today. And you heard about them
this morning. There's about 5,000 of them.
It's an American company, hasn't outsourced a thing. They're in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Those are the only people left to be punished.
I want to remind you that Reynolds cannot be punished for selling a legal product. It has inherent risks that can't be eliminated and that's not a basis for punitive damages under the law.
Now, I want to spend a moment and talk about Reynolds' financial resources. You heard that last year Reynolds made around 930 million dollars and Reynolds is not going to plead poverty in this case. But I want you to remember how many lawsuits are out there. A punitive damages award is not a drop in the bucket to Reynolds. There are 8,000 cases pending against them. Every single one of those people has the right to seek punitive damages. This company will be gone in the blink of an eye if they start being punished for conduct that has no connection to the real plaintiff, to the real life they led.
Let me spend a moment on deterrence. First,
deterrence is designed to change conduct. It's designed to make sure that stuff that may have been objectionable doesn't happen again. And you've heard about how Reynolds is a different company now. They want you to think about Came No. 9 and Vogue Magazine. Mr. Ciccone never smoked Camel No. 9. Reynolds is now regulated by the FDA. The FTC controls the advertising.
All of the information that plaintiffs want you to think were missing from Mr. Ciccone is available on that website, new management, new goals, new products. They sell everything from an unfiltered Camel to nicotine replacement.
The company has changed.
THE COURT: Your 15-minute notice.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you.
On punitive damages I want you to remember a few things. And I'll move on to the responsibility portion of the verdict and conclude my remarks.
Reynolds is committed to producing cigarettes under its harm reduction strategy.
You've heard that from Dr. Gentry. You've heard that from Mr. Adams. Cigarettes are a legal product in this country and they will remain a
legal product after this case. But the way that Reynolds makes those products is responsible and there's nothing left to deter. They encourage those who don't want to quit to migrate to different products. They encourage those who are worried about their health to quit. And if the FDA will approve it, Reynolds will sell nicotine replacement therapy in this country, everything from an unfiltered cigarette to a nicotine replacement. That's the Reynolds of today.
And secondly, all of this now is under the jurisdiction of the FDA. The FDA controls the manufacture of cigarettes, it controls the ingredients in cigarettes, and don't forget the federal government has known about the ingredients in cigarettes for 25 years, never suggested that something be taken out, not ammonia or urea, or any of them, not licorice or cocoa, not a single ingredient ever, 25 years.
But today all of it is under the jurisdiction of the FDA. And that may be the most important reason why punitive damages are not appropriate in this case.
There is nothing left to deter, the company
is different.
Now, I want to turn now to the fault allocation part of the verdict form, and you saw this when Mr. Wichmann was up here. There's tw lines on there, there's one for Reynolds and there's one for Mr. Ciccone and his estate, which is represented by Mrs. Ciccone in this case.
Now, this is another area where plaintiffs cannot meet their burden, because they want you to think that Reynolds should be 90 or 95 percent responsible for what happened. You heard that from Mrs. Ciccone yesterday. They've admitted some fault, they've admitted some responsibility, and they want Reynolds to take responsibility for the remaining 90 or 95 percent of Mr. Ciccone's behavior.
But the evidence is clear in this case that Mr. Ciccone always knew what he was doing with cigarettes, and it goes back to the very beginning. His parents had rules against smoking. His mom told him that it would stunt his growth. His brother Paul and he said from the very first time they started smoking they knew it had an effect on their body.
Mr. Ciccone learned about the risks of smoking in the Navy. He knew about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report. He knew about the 1966 warnings. He called cigarettes cancer sticks. When you call cigarettes cancer sticks, what else is there to know? That is a personalized documentation of awareness of the risks of smoking. And his brother told you he would use that term back in the '60s. He saw the 1970 warning labels. He saw the public service announcements with brother Paul in the early '70s. 1971 his father died of a smoking-related disease. In 1975 -- excuse me, in 1971 the warning label went in every advertisement. In 1980, close family friend, Boot Spirling, died of lung cancer. In 1984 the warning labels changed. In 1985 his brother Matt lost a lung to smoking. In 1988 the Surgeon General stated that nicotine was addictive. And in 1990 Dr. Hirsh told him he needed to quit.
On none of those occasions, other than 1990, did Mr. Ciccone even make an attempt to stop, not in 1964, not in 1970, not in 1980, not in 1985. And that's his choice, but it is not fair to say that Reynolds is responsible for decades
of smoking where Mr. Ciccone had no interest in stopping. Perfectly fine to smoke and not want to stop. And addiction is one of the reasons he smoked, but it's not the only reason. Nothing shows that more than all of the smoking in the '50s and '60s and '70s and '80s where he was not interested in changing his behavior.
He quit smoking for two days in 1990, and we talked about this. But this is a timeline that shows you the brand he was smoking and the quit attempts he made. And remember that in 1990 he didn't go back because of withdrawal, he didn't go back because he couldn't make it, he went back because Mrs. Ciccone encouraged him to go across the street and buy a pack of cigarettes.
We've talked about but-for causation. Is Reynolds responsible for him resuming smoking in 1990? Reynolds wasn't there. Mrs. Ciccone was. But for Mrs. Ciccone, he may have quit in 1990.
We would not be here. But we won't know becausi Mrs. Ciccone encouraged him to go and smoke. She didn't want to stop smoking herself, she didn't quit smoking with him, and she admitted to you that she didn't encourage him to stay quit.
You learned in this case that every smoker can quit. And I'll go through these quickly.
THE COURT: Mr. Boyce, I gave you a warning too early, so you have until 3:30. So I don't want you to rush. If you wish to take it.
MR. BOYCE: Let me slow down then for a moment.
I want to make sure that you understand that the evidence in this case has been that every smoker can quit. That is beyond dispute. You heard it from Dr. Cummings, Dr. Feingold, you heard it from Dr. Abramson.
And this is Dr. Cummings' publication about what it takes to stop. And the first question is: Do you want to stop smoking?
From 1958 to 1990 Mr. Ciccone's answer was no. For two days in 1990 his answer was yes anc then we saw that in 1998, eight years later, his wife answered the question for him: No.
There's nothing wrong with that. Nobody is blaming him for that, that was his life, his choice.
Remember, Mr. Ciccone was proud of his smoking. He wore cigarettes to the doctor's office. This is man for whom cigarettes were a
part of his wardrobe. That is not evidence of a person who is unable to control their behavior, that is evidence of a person who has made a choice, is comfortable with their choice and proud of the life that they want to lead.
Now, you also heard from Dr. Cummings that it doesn't matter how much you smoke. Heavy smokers can be told with confidence that they are as likely to succeed as light smokers once they make a choice to quit. You can smoke three packs of unfiltered cigarettes, you can smoke half a pack of low tar cigarettes, once you set your mind to quitting, according to plaintiff's own expert, everybody quits the same.
We've talked about monograph 15 repeatedly. The difference between the people who keep smoking and the people who stop smoking canno be explained by addiction. And the reason addiction can't explain it is, this is what addiction boils down to for the plaintiffs in this case.
Once you get past experimentation, plaintiffs want you to believe that Mr. Ciccone is caught up in that cycle of addiction, like it's a washing machine that he can't get out,
spinning around and around and around again for 40 years. But we know that real life is not like that. We know that every single day he smoked he made a choice to smoke and he made choice not to try to stop.
And it was his right to make those choices.
The problem is when plaintiffs try to characterize those choices as being caused legally by Reynolds. And the reason they want you to focus on all of the things that have no connection to Mr. Ciccone is so you skip over this part of legal cause. But remember what happens when you take it away. These are the symptoms associated with not smoking. Loss of concentration, irritability, anxiety, nausea.
Since when did loss of concentration and irritability become an excuse to do something or not do something in this country?
Where would any of us be if anxiety got us off the hook for 40 years of behavior? Because that's what it boils down to. This is what they say keeps him in that circle. But we know that's not real life. Life is like a highway, every day is an exit on the highway of life where Mr. Ciccone could have gotten off.
We just talked about all the awareness that he had, but here when you look at what happens when he went without nicotine, you see that the symptoms are inability to concentrate, anxiety, nausea, difficulty concentrating.
Think about your high school years. If you want to know what I was like on a Sunday night before Monday in high school with a lot of homework, I promise you I was irritable, difficult to be around, I was anxious. Our society expects kids to put up with that for four years so they can graduate high school. Four years, 13-year-old, 15-year-old, four years of high school. Here the plaintiffs want you to consider this is an excuse for 40 years of behavior. Four decades. And that's what it comes down to.
But this is the important chart. These are all the people that broke out. There are 60 million former smokers in this country. There are more former smokers than there are current smokers. And those 60 million include people close to the Ciccones, their relatives, their children and Mr. Ciccone 's coworkers William Jones and Oscar Chaires.
Remember what Mr. Jones and Mr. Chaires said when they were in here, they both told you:
Mr. Ciccone knew I quit. I told him I used to smoke. I told him I quit. So I asked him:
Well, did he ever ask you for help or pointers or tips on how he might make the same decision you did? And they all said the same thing, they all said, no, he never asked me. He knew I quit. I got the impression he wasn't interested in it.
He smoked. Didn't hear any of them say, well, I remember when Mr. Ciccone told me that he kept smoking because he saw a southern governor in a press conference or because of a TI white paper. That's not real life. That's not the man he was. That's the story that has been created for this lawsuit.
Remember that it's not just Mr. Ciccone smoking, too. Mrs. Ciccone smoked with him.
She told you when she came in that she smokes today and she never quit, just like her husband.
And she told you why when she came in here. She said, cigarette companies meant nothing to me.
If I liked the taste, I smoked their cigarettes.
She said, we were not the kind of people who
would sit down and read the pack, we'd pick up the pack and smoke.
Is it fair to say that Reynolds is the legal cause of that behavior? Is it fair to say that Reynolds should be fully responsible for those decisions and those lifestyles and those choices?
But I want you to remember, it's not just Reynolds who says that smoking is a choice, that's a decision our society has made, but it's not just me, it's not just the defendant in this case. It goes all the way back to 1955. And here's Dr. Hammond, we've seen it before, but this is 1955.
(Video clip played.)
VOICE: In my opinion people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned What they want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business.
(Video clip ended.)
MR. BOYCE: That's 1955. 1955 is 55 years ago. 55 years ago. It's almost impossible to think how long ago 1955 really was. That is 14 years before we walked on the moon. The first Super Bowl was in 1967. In a world before
Super Bowls, the head of the American Cancer Society said people are being warned and it's up to them to make their own decisions.
The warnings went on the pack in 1966.
1966. And you heard from Mrs. Ciccone, it didn't matter to Mr. Ciccone, knew they were there, wasn't interested, didn't want to stop.
Mrs. Ciccone actually came in and testified that she had never even seen the 1985 warning labels. Think about that for a second. Those warning labels were on every pack of cigarettes since 1985, they're on there today. They've also been on every advertisement since 1985. She wants you to believe she never saw a single one of them, not one.
You get to decide what weight to give testimony like that. It's either unbelievable or it shows that health and quitting and changing behavior was not a priority for them.
If it was, they would have seen the labels and paid attention to them and taken affirmative steps to change their behavior. And that's why Mr. Ciccone in his choices in his life break the link of causation between Reynolds and his injuries. He's the man in the middle. He's the
one that if but for something was different we might not be here, not Reynolds and certainly not Reynolds alone.
It goes on in 1966, the American Cancer Society says the same thing, there's the warning label on the pack, the next step is yours.
We go forward. In 1978 the Surgeon General is calling smoking personal choice health behavior.
Same thing in 1982. A personal choice behavior is impossible to randomize; i.e., you can't dictate smoking behavior. Ultimately that's what this case is all about. No one can dictate smoking behavior, not Reynolds and not the Surgeon General and not Dr. Cummings. It is up to the individual.
Cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, according to the Surgeon General in 1986. And the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
It continues to Dr. Koop today, the choice is always yours. And remember Dr. Koop is the individual who was behind the change in the definition of addiction. We'll get to that in a second. He is the man that was responsible for
the definition that led to nicotine being classified as addictive. And here he is today. Ultimately you are the one who has control over your behavior.
And Dr. Cummings told you the same thing. The smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit. Addiction does not change this. Addiction is not an excuse not to take responsibility for your own life and your own behavior. Addiction is not a reason to blame tobacco companies.
Now, we've talked about this fault admission a bunch. And the only reason we're here is because plaintiffs want you to apportion responsibility. This is their admission. From the very first day of this case in the very first pleading they admitted that Mr. Ciccone bears some measure of fault, but less than 100 percent of the fault for causing his respective smoking-related injuries. And then they say the defendant's acts or omissions -- excuse me -decedent's acts relating to the frequency and duration and his attempts to quit were a partial proximate cause in combination with the acts and omission of defendants.
That's it right there. They're saying that he knew he should quit, the power to quit, he's at fault for not doing more to quit.
But I want you to think about it this way.
We talked about all of his awareness, what he knew about the risks of smoking, it goes from his mother telling him it would stunt his growth through cancer sticks, through close family friends having smoking-related problems, all the way up to Dr. Hirsh and Dr. Pearl in 1999.
He knew the risks of smoking.
You heard from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Feingo that all smokers can quit. And that's the power, that's the ability. Mr. Ciccone could have stopped if he wanted to.
The last part is responsibility. I spent a lot of time this morning talking about Reynolds' responsibility, what Reynolds did to the products, how Reynolds is responsible for the health and human service department with its ingredients, how Reynolds developed alternative products, things that heat tobacco and don't burn it. Put all of that stuff out on the market if Mr. Ciccone was interested and he wasn't. But that's Reynolds' responsibility.
You heard from Mr. Adams that Reynolds is responsible to the state of Florida. They make five times as much off a pack of cigarettes as Reynolds does. You heard that Reynolds is responsible to the federal government. They make six times off a pack of cigarettes as Reynolds does. We've talked about Reynolds responsibility. This phase of the case, this part of your analysis is about the responsibility that Mr. Ciccone is going to bear.
And with all due respect, we do not apportion responsibility for behavior that is within your own personal control in this country. If you know you should do something and you have the power to do it and you admit that you're at fault for not doing it, there's no apportionment. There's no allocation. You are responsible. And addiction doesn't change this. Look at it this way. Imagine if an alcoholic said, I'm addicted to alcohol. I know I shouldn't drink and drive. I obviously have the power not to drink and drive. I'm at fault for drinking and driving, but I think Johnny Walker should take 30 percent of the
responsibility. I'll take some, but not all.
That is the best evidence in this case about how this is a construct for a courtroom. This is a lawyer story. This is not real life.
Nobody would accept that from a drunk driver and it's the same with smoking.
Mr. Ciccone knew the risks, Mr. Ciccone had the power to change his behavior. The plaintiffs have admitted he's at fault for not doing so and that equation adds up to personal responsibility.
And as I said at the outset, it is my opinion that Mr. Ciccone -MR. WICHMANN: Your Honor, let me object tc opinion.
THE COURT: Okay, both sides again, I said the lawyers' opinions don't matter. It's the evidence. You can comment on what you think they should do on the evidence, Mr. Boyce.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you, Your Honor.
Every single witness in this case told you that Mr. Ciccone took responsibility for his smoking. Every single witness in this case told you that he never blamed the tobacco companies And you heard from every other witness that
Mr. Ciccone accepted the risks of smoking for himself. And nothing shows it better than the chart we talked about a couple days ago.
His brother Paul said, "I don't know how else to answer that. I mean, no matter how you word it, it comes out the same way. We knew better and we still did it. I mean, he knew what he was doing. He knew what he was smoking. He knew it wasn't good for him."
If we go forward 40 years to 2002 and, remember, June of 2002 is when Mr. Ciccone's doctors told him he had cancer. We talked about this in Phase I, but in June of 2002 he met with Dr. Hirsh. Mr. Ciccone knew he had cancer and this is what Dr. Hirsh wrote, "Patient refuses to stop smoking. Aware of the risks of cancer and death and accepts these risks."
And here's the chart. From 1962 to 2002 Mr. Ciccone accepted the risks of smoking himself. It's only in here in this lawsuit where plaintiffs want 25 million dollars that they would pretend that this man was different than what this chart shows.
Now, I want to talk a moment about what would be fair and adequate compensation. I
would suggest to you that 25 million dollars is not.
I've told you why I think Mr. Ciccone is responsible for his behavior, but I want to suggest something that I think would be fair and appropriate if you do decide to consider compensatory damages in this case. You heard that the medical records are $200,000. You can start right there and you can double it. You can then add $50,000 a year for the 20 or so years after that that Mr. Ciccone was going to live and you would have a figure somewhere around 1.5 million.
But this is not a lottery ticket. 25 million dollars is a staggering amount of money.
If you have a regular job and make $50,000 a year, it takes you 20 years just to earn a million dollars. Think about what 25 million dollars means in terms of normal jobs and normal lives and the normal men and women who work a' RJ Reynolds.
It is Reynolds' position that Mr. Ciccone is responsible for his behavior and that an award is not appropriate, but just as the judge is going to instruct you, you have a duty to make
sure that any award you give is realistic and reasonable and appropriate.
When this case is over you'll get some additional instructions and you'll be told that each and every one of you has to reach your own decision on the evidence in this case. As a jury, in order to reach a verdict, you have to reach an agreement, but the judge will explain to you that each of you has to draw your own conclusions about the evidence and that you shouldn't sacrifice your own view of the evidence simply for the sake of a verdict. It's up to each and every one of you individually.
And as I conclude my remarks I want to thank each and every one of you individually for your service in this case.
I can't tell you how much we have enjoyed the questions you have asked of the witnesses. As a group you've been attentive, you've been engaged and that's something that you should be proud of. This is a remarkable sacrifice you have made for our system of justice. We wouldn't be able to have the system of justice that we have in this country if it wasn't for men and women like you. And you should all be
proud of what you've been willing to do. But you also need to understand that in this country responsibility is important. We have made decisions for ourselves that other countries haven't made. We have made decisions for ourselves that involve not banning products, not setting limits, not living lives for individuals. In this country we leave it up to the individual to live their own life, to make their own choices, to make their own decisions. It's a tremendous amount of freedom, but with that freedom comes a price. And that price is responsibility, responsibility for your hands and your behavior and your life. And that's why I told you at the outset that I'm proud to be the person to stand up for personal responsibility in this courtroom. I'm proud to be the one that shows you that Mr. Ciccone neve blamed anyone when he was alive, never sued anyone, never took a step to sue, never told anybody he wanted to. He took responsibility for his actions and at the end of the day what Reynolds is asking you to do in this case is reach the same conclusion about Mr. Ciccone's smoking that he reached for himself. It was
something he wanted to do, it was something he knew was not good for him, but it was something that he was not interested in stopping.
Thank you again, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of our whole team, Mr. Faxon,
Ms. McKinnis, Mr. Kaufman, Mr. Riddles. Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your verdict.
