         MS. SHAMP:  First, I want to thank you.  I -- I
    know this has been a long two weeks, and I know that
    you-all have been paying attention.  I see you've
    been writing notes, and on behalf of myself and my
    team and my client, I want to thank you for the
    attention that you've paid.
         In 1953, R. J. Reynolds knew that the studies
    tended to confirm the relationship between heavy and
    prolonged tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung.
    They also knew that benzopyrene and benzo(a)pyrene,
    both carcinogens, were identified in distillates of
    tobacco smoke.
         At that point, R. J. Reynolds hit a fork in the
    road.  What were they going to do?  They had two
    choices.  At that point, they could have chosen to
    come clean, to publish the information that they
    knew, to give it to the Surgeon General, to tell
    people.  They could have warned their customers, put
    labels on packages.  They could have gone to their
    advertisers and talked about advertising responsibly based on the information that they knew.  They could
    have made efforts to try to reduce the addictiveness
    of their products.  They could have made efforts to
    directly avoid marketing their products that had
    carcinogens to children.
         Or they could have chosen to deny that smoking
    caused lung cancer, to conceal the information that
    they knew and to try and reassure their customers
    that there was nothing wrong with their product,
    that there was a controversy out there, that doubt
    existed when they knew it didn't.
         They could have chosen to go get replacement
    smokers for the ones who had chosen to quit.  The
    only replacement smokers were kids, ones not able to
    make as informed a decision.  And they chose to
    manipulate the nicotine in their products to sustain
    addiction.
         The presidents of all the tobacco companies met
    at the Plaza Hotel in 1953.  And there, they made
    their decision which fork they were going to take.
    They decided that the industry could most
    effectively face this problem by jointly engaging PR
    counsel, a public relations firm, and from that day
    forward, they engaged in a campaign of deception to
    the American public that has cost millions and millions of lives.
         They decided at that time not cigarettes but
    doubt was their product.  And they were trying to
    sell that to the American people.  They made a
    choice that was intentional.  It was conscious.  It
    was a choice that they made at that time.  And here
    and now, ladies and gentlemen, here and now, is the
    time that they need to be held responsible for the
    choices that they made.
         Judge McCaulie began this trial, you'll
    remember, by talking about the ancient tradition of
    the right to a jury trial.  You remember he talked
    about how it was back when the Magna Carta was
    signed, and he told you that it is a precious right
    that is found in the Seventh Amendment of the United
    States Constitution and that the two weeks that you
    have spent thus far serving as a juror is one of the
    highest rights and honors of citizenship because
    you, and only you, now decide what to do about the
    evidence that you've heard.  You decide collectively
    what choice you're going to make as a jury.  You
    decide whether to hold R. J. Reynolds responsible
    for its conduct.
         This is my closing argument.  And I will not
    spend the time going through all of the evidence that's been presented in this case because I know
    you were paying attention.  I saw that you were
    taking notes.  But what I do want to do this
    afternoon is talk to you about how all of this
    evidence proves the plaintiff's entitled to a
    verdict in her favor.  And I've been thinking about
    it all for the last two weeks of how to best present
    it to you, and it seems the most obvious choice is
    to start with the verdict form.
         On the verdict form, as the judge told you,
    there's six questions that you're going to have to
    decide, right?  And so what I'm going to do this
    afternoon is I'm going to discuss the evidence that
    is presented as to each of those questions that you
    have to decide.
         Now, before I do that, I want to talk for a
    minute about the burden of proof that the judge just
    instructed you about.  And what the Court said --
    and you'll have this back in your instructions with
    you -- is that plaintiff needs to prove the elements
    of her claim by a greater weight of the evidence, a
    greater weight.  And since we're in a courtroom, I'd
    like to describe it as like on the scales of
    justice.  You put the evidence on one side that
    proves something and the evidence on the other side proves the other.  Which is heavier?
         So as I go through each of these issues that's
    on the verdict form, I'm going to talk about that.
    And it's important that I do that for two reasons.
         One is that you've taken an oath in this case
    to consider the issues based only upon the evidence
    that is presented in this courtroom.  Not allowed to
    speculate, to talk about something else or not talk,
    but only based on what the evidence is that has been
    presented here in the courtroom.  So that's why it
    makes sense when you talk about what evidence goes
    on one side, what evidence goes on the other.
         But, two, when you go back in the jury room,
    you'll only have one job.  That is, of course, to
    decide what your verdict is going to be.  But you
    have two jobs and that is each of you individually
    has a right and obligation to deliberate and discuss
    why you hold the positions you do on each of the
    issues and what facts and evidence was presented to
    support the position that you're going to take back
    in the jury room.
         So I'm going to set forth what the evidence is
    through each question on the verdict form as to each
    side each, and I'm going to ask Mr. Geise to do
    exactly the same thing.  Because that's what you're here to base your decision on, and that is the
    evidence that is presented.
         Now, you'll have basically four kinds of
    evidence upon which you can base your decision.
         The first is you'll have internal documents
    from R. J. Reynolds, American Tobacco Company,
    Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company, as well as the
    Tobacco Institute, TIRC, Hill & Knowlton.  Internal
    documents.  Every document that I have discussed
    throughout this trial has a number on it, and I
    talked about that number many times.  Everything I
    go through today will have a number on the bottom of
    it.  That is the number of that exhibit.  The
    exhibits are in binders.  They will come back with
    you.  There will be a index in the front so you can
    try and figure out where they are.  All right?  So
    that is evidence that you have, the internal
    documents.
         You'll also have government documents and other
    kinds of documents from the FTC, from the Surgeon
    General.  All of those documents are evidence that
    the Court has allowed to be admitted into evidence.
    So when you take those documents back, you may
    consider that as evidence that supports any of the
    issues involved in the case.  And the judge is allowing it to go back with you, that it is proper
    evidence for you to consider, all of it, government
    reports, FTC documents, internal documents from
    R. J. Reynolds.
         Testimony of witnesses.  You've heard from a
    lot of witnesses.  That is evidence that you have
    that you can rely upon.
         And finally you have the medical records of
    David Clayton.  You have, as you know, volumes of
    that.  You'll have all of those back there with you
    as well, and all of that is the evidence upon which
    you can base your decision in this case.
         So let's get to it.  The first issue that you
    have to decide on the verdict form is whether David
    Clayton was a member of the Engle class, and you'll,
    of course, remember we talked about the Engle class.
    The Engle class action was when the jury listened to
    over a year's worth of evidence, made certain
    findings.  You remember, we talked about what a
    class action was, where a few people who pursue a
    claim on behalf of a greater number of people.
         So what you're called upon to decide in
    Question 1 on the verdict form is whether David
    Clayton is a member of that class.  And if he is,
    he's entitled to the Engle findings.  I'm not going to go through and talk about the Engle findings
    right now.  I'm going to talk about them later.
         First I want to talk about what class
    membership means.  The judge just instructed you on
    that.  To prove David Clayton was a member of the
    Engle class, plaintiff must prove by the greater
    weight of the evidence that David Clayton was
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if
    so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung
    cancer and death.  Pretty straightforward.
         This is actually Question 1 on the verdict
    form.  Was David Clayton addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction
    a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?  Yes or
    no.
         Now, that question actually has sort of three
    parts to it, and I'm going to discuss what the
    evidence is with respect to each part.
         The first part is addiction.  Was David Clayton
    addicted to nicotine in cigarettes?  And you've
    heard a lot of evidence about that.  The question is
    not, however, whether he could quit.  That's not the
    question you have to decide.  You have to decide
    whether he was addicted because everybody has said
    addicted people can quit.  Addicted people quit all the time.  So you don't have to decide whether or
    not he could quit.  You don't have to decide whether
    he tried hard enough to quit.  That's not relative
    to the question of whether he was addicted.
         You don't have to decide whether he was
    motivated to quit, whether he quit in 1993 or
    whether he quit in 1994, whether he smoked one pack
    or three packs.  The question of addiction, as you
    heard in the testimony, is a medical question.  Was
    he addicted?  Plain and simple.  Did he have an
    addiction to nicotine?  All of these other questions
    about what he -- his personal decision-making, his
    motivation, that can be talked about later.  That
    goes to a different issue.  You've heard them talk
    about comparative fault.  We'll talk about that
    then.  This issue is plain and simple.  Was he
    addicted?
         So what is the evidence of addiction?  First,
    the evidence is is that nicotine is an addictive
    drug that changes the brain.  We learned, of course,
    that nicotine is a drug.  That's undisputed.
    Nicotine is addictive.  I think finally even --
    Mr. Giakas finally admitted that today on cross
    examination.  Dr. Werner talked about that.  And, of
    course, one of the Engle findings, nicotine is addictive.
         And we know that nicotine changes the brain.
    That's undisputed.  Both Dr. Giakas and Dr. Werner
    talked about that.  They talked about the changes
    that nicotine actually makes to the brain itself.
    And you'll remember that Dr. Werner described it,
    that you have nicotine receptors in the brain, and
    when someone gives the dose of nicotine, more
    receptors are actually created.  And once those
    receptors are created and they get empty, that
    causes a physical reaction.  People crave the
    substance.  And they actually have PET scans which
    show that -- that when a smoker gets a PET scan --
    you'll recall from an addicted smoker that when they
    smoke, those nicotine receptors get filled up, and
    that gives them the sense of satiation, but then
    when they get empty, they start having a craving,
    the urge, the drive to smoke.  It is a physical
    reaction in the body.
         So we know that it's a drug.  It's addictive
    and it changes the brain.
         We also heard testimony that 80 percent, 80
    percent, of smokers try and quit every year.  But
    only 5 percent are successful, less than 5.  We
    heard from Dr. Werner that the longer you smoke, the more you smoke, the greater the likelihood that
    you'll have trouble quitting.
         We also heard from Dr. Werner that beginning
    smoking in the early teens increases the likelihood
    of addiction.  And you'll remember this drawing and
    you'll have this back in evidence, P-957.  And this
    is a drawing of the adolescent brain and how the
    prefrontal cortex is not fully developed and that
    when you put a substance on it, it causes these
    changes to the way the brain actually develops.  And
    the studies show that if a substance is started
    using when the person is in adolescence, then
    they're more likely to become addicted.
         So we know this.  This is evidence of
    addiction.  Nicotine is an addictive drug that
    changes the brain.
         You also had evidence of David Clayton's
    smoking, right?  You heard from Lee Bonner, his
    childhood friend.  And you might have wondered.  We
    kind of put them up in different order based on how
    the witnesses would be.  But I think if you look at
    them, you'll understand what we're trying to do is
    give you the entire story.
         We started from the first person in the 19- --
    I guess 1940s who knew him in Moultrie, Georgia, when he was a child.  Then we went to Smith Gavin,
    who met him when he moved to Jacksonville in 1963,
    and they were buddies and smoked together.  And then
    after he got married, he was exposed to Gloria
    Clayton and her two children.  So we brought in the
    two children to talk about his smoking habits.  We
    even brought in her -- his former daughter-in-law,
    Juanelecha McCullough, to talk about it.  And, of
    course, we brought in Gloria Clayton.
         And what did these witnesses all say?  They
    claimed he was a heavy smoker.  Many of them
    described him as a chain smoker.  Most of them
    described him as smoking one cigarette right after
    another cigarette.  How much he smoked, over a pack
    and a half a day.  And as you know, there's varying
    testimony about how much it was.  But every single
    person, every single witness who described his
    smoking called him a heavy smoker.  Mr. Bonner,
    Mr. Gavin, Ms. Parker, Willie McCullough, Jr.,
    Juanelecha, all the people.  There was no person
    that came in to testify that he was not addicted,
    not one bit of evidence.
         He smoked for more than 45 years.  That's
    undisputed.  He started when he was 14 and he
    stopped in 1993 or '4.  He smoked for over 45 years, began smoking at 14 and smoked all throughout the
    day.  The evidence is undisputed on that.
         Smoked first thing in the morning when he got
    up.  Smoked throughout the day, smoked in the
    evenings, watching television, when he went to bed
    and even got up in the middle of the night and
    smoked.
         So your evidence of addiction is that
    nicotine's an addictive drug that changes the brain.
    David Clayton's smoking pattern.  The evidence is
    undisputed that David Clayton suffered withdrawal
    symptoms.  You heard it from every witness.  You
    heard it from Smith Gavin.  When he didn't have
    cigarettes, he would be anxious.  You would see him
    shaking.  You would see him fidgety.  You heard it
    from Vanessa Parker.  You heard it from every
    witness.  You heard it from Juanelecha.  You heard
    it from Gloria.  Every witness described withdrawal
    symptoms.  And Dr. Tonia Werner talked about what
    those symptoms were and that's exactly what she said
    would happen when you withdraw from a substance and
    the nicotine receptors aren't full.
         Now, we also have evidence that he meets the
    DSM-V criteria for addiction to be, and you remember
    Dr. Werner going through all of the different checklists for a diagnosis of addiction under the
    DSM-V, that he used larger amounts over a longer
    period than intended.  It is undisputed.  He ran out
    of cigarettes frequently, and that testimony came
    in, again, from almost every lay witness.
         His desire -- he had desire or unsuccessful
    efforts to cut down or control use.  And you heard
    that testimony, that he would say he couldn't.  He
    couldn't quit, though he tried, used the patch.
         A great deal of time spent in activities
    necessary to obtain or use the substance.  If you
    think about it, if you just are talking about a pack
    and a half a day, that's 30 cigarettes.  If you're
    awake for approximately 16 hours a day, sleep eight,
    that means you're smoking more than two cigarettes
    every single hour of every single awake day, if
    that's just a pack and a half.  So certainly spent a
    great deal of time in activities necessary to use
    the substance.
         Had a craving or strong desire to use tobacco.
    Think about the evidence that you heard about that.
    From Smith Gavin, when he would talk about when they
    were playing cards, and he would tell somebody to go
    get them for him.
         Now, as you heard, Dr. Werner said she didn't have enough information for Number 5 or 6 and so she
    didn't credit those.
         But Number 7, social or recreational activities
    given up or reduced because of substance abuse --
    substance use, how he went down in the basement, how
    he left Thanksgiving dinner -- oops -- use despite
    knowledge -- recurrent use in situations where it's
    physically hazardous.
         You heard testimony from a couple of people
    that he smoked in bed, that -- that several people
    warned him about catching fire to the house.
         Use despite knowledge of physical problems
    caused or exacerbated by use.  You heard
    testimony that he had gastritis and that his doctor
    told him, it's not -- it's going to exacerbate your
    condition, cut back.  But he continued to use it
    despite that.
         And then tolerance.  Dr. Werner talked about
    that, how after time you have to use more and more
    of the substance in order to get the same amount of
    satisfaction from it and withdrawal.
         So Dr. Werner went through all of these with
    you, one by one, and checked off nine of the eleven.
    And you remember what she said.  If you had six or
    more, that means severe addiction.  So he meets the DSM-V criteria for addiction, severe.
         And then, of course, we have Dr. Werner's
    opinion.  And she testified that David Clayton was
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.  And
    Dr. Werner is a vice chairman of the department of
    psychiatry at the University of Florida.  She is
    assistant professor and director of the forensic
    psychiatry division at the University of Florida.
    She actually teaches medical students about
    addiction, and she teaches them about the DSM and
    how to use the DSM.  She's published journal
    articles on addiction in publications used by
    doctors.  She even testified that she's been
    appointed by the governor of the state of Florida to
    review certain inmates on it and make
    recommendations.
         Dr. Werner came in here, all the way from
    Gainesville, and testified that David Clayton was
    addicted.
         But then you also have this evidence,
    R. J. Reynolds' own documents, which talk about
    addiction.  Their own documents describe nicotine,
    their own product, as a potent drug.  This is from
    an R. J. Reynolds' internal document.  "The tobacco
    industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the
    pharmaceutical industry, the drug industry.  Tobacco
    products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a
    potent drug."
         Their own documents state it is the sine qua
    non.  Now, that's Latin.  It simply means without
    which there's nothing.  Without which there is
    nothing.  Nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking.
    That is their own words.  It is the reason people
    smoke.  They also recognize that their customers
    have a requirement every day of how much smoke --
    how much nicotine they need to get to satisfy their
    addiction.
         That's P-222.
         And even this, from one of the directors, "It's
    fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they
    can't break."
         They know that their customers are addicted.
         So in addition to Dr. Werner's opinion, we have
    R. J. Reynolds' own documents, but even more, we
    have statistical proof.  Remember?  It is estimated
    between 80 and 90 percent of regular smokers have
    nicotine dependence.  Between 80 and 90 percent are
    addicted, which means 25 percent of the entire
    United States population may have nicotine dependence as of 1994, which is when this was
    written, which is when David Clayton stopped
    smoking.
         So let's weigh it.  All right?  Put the
    evidence on one side, the evidence on the other
    side.  The evidence that he was addicted -- DSM,
    Dr. Werner's opinion, statistical proof.
         So what is the evidence that he is not?
    Dr. Giakas.  Dr. Giakas came in today and yesterday
    and told you that he wasn't addicted.
         Now, the Court instructed you about the
    believability of a witness, and I want to read that
    instruction for you.  In determining the
    believability of any witness and the weight to be
    given the testimony of any witness, you may properly
    consider the demeanor of the witness while
    testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of
    the witness, the intelligence of the witness, any
    interest the witness may have in the outcome of the
    case, the means and opportunity the witness has to
    know the facts about which the witness testified,
    the ability of the witness to remember matters about
    which the witness testified and the reasonableness
    of the testimony of the witness, considered in light
    of all the evidence in the case and in light of your own common experience and your own common sense.
         So let's talk about Dr. Giakas' testimony that
    David Clayton was not addicted.  Dr. Giakas is in
    private practice.  He's never taught anybody.  He's
    not at a university.  And he testified that
    addiction requires extreme circumstances, and I
    wrote some of them down.
         Oh, I want to back up.
         One of the things you can consider is whether
    the witness had knowledge of the facts, so I wrote
    down today some of the things that Dr. Giakas said.
    First, he said that David Clayton was an outgoing
    guy.  Testimony from all the witnesses, he's a quiet
    guy.  He said that he was a supervisor and he
    supervised people.  Testimony was he was a laborer.
    Testified that he was a disciplinarian.  Did y'all
    catch him saying that?  There's no evidence of that.
    In fact, the evidence is just the opposite.  He
    wasn't a disciplinarian.  He was a soft guy.
         When I listened to his description of David
    Clayton, it didn't sound anything like the David
    Clayton that we've learned throughout the testimony
    of this case, through the witnesses who actually
    knew him.  It sounded like somebody was trying to --
    to describe a person in a certain way to suit their needs, which wasn't the truth.  All right?
         He then testified that addiction requires
    extreme circumstances, and I wrote some of these
    things down, that only people who are so rude that
    they will break the rules.  Remember, he talked
    about that, that they would break the rules?  And he
    also testified that every -- that he -- it had to be
    a clinically significant impairment or distress, but
    he neglects to actually read what the DSM-V says.
    Okay.  The DSM-V says "A problematic pattern of
    tobacco use leading to clinically significant
    impairment or distress, as manifested by at least
    two of the following."
         The clinically significant impairment and
    distress is not as Dr. Giakas talked to you about,
    that it has to be somebody who gets fired from their
    job or fights with their wife or loses a job or
    loses -- it's manifested by two of these things.
    Withdrawal symptoms, one of the things on there.
    Tolerance.  These are the 11 criteria.  If you get
    two of them, that's evidence of significant
    impairment.  Dr. Giakas twisted this document in
    order to try and suit his needs, but this is what it
    says, "as manifested by at least two of the
    following." But what did he actually say?  Some of the
    stuff he said, I agreed with.  He said that he
    believed only 50 percent of smokers are addicted.
    Remember him saying that, that the 2013 studies --
    study now says that.  But remember what he also
    said, that 50 percent have withdrawal.  I agree with
    that.  If 50 percent are addicted, then 50 percent
    have withdrawal.  Yeah, addicted smokers have
    withdrawal.
         All -- all the evidence in this case shows that
    David Clayton suffered withdrawal.  Not one shred of
    evidence said that he didn't.  So even under
    Dr. Giakas.  Dr. Giakas also said that somebody
    who's addicted would be somebody who smoked all day
    long.  Dr. Giakas said somebody who's addicted would
    be somebody who's a chain smoker.  That's David
    Clayton.
         Dr. Giakas is a hired doctor.  I was
    astounded when he said that he spent 160 hours on
    this case alone and made over $70,000 just for that
    one.
         So what is the evidence of addiction?  That's
    what you've got.  Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence
    is overwhelming that David Clayton was addicted.
    The only evidence is from Dr. Giakas, and he has nothing, no testimony of any witnesses.
         The second part of the question, addiction
    causation.  Did his addiction cause him to smoke?
    You have the -- you will have the Surgeon General's
    Report from 2010 back with you, and you've seen that
    a couple of times.  Nicotine addiction is the
    fundamental reason that individuals persist in
    tobacco use.  It is the fundamental reason.
         R. J. Reynolds' own documents -- this is
    P-301 -- "For the typical smoker, nicotine
    satisfaction is the dominant desire as opposed to
    flavor and other satisfactions," their own document.
    "We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if
    the person was addicted," their own document.
         They know addiction is the reason people smoke,
    and they design their products because of that.  To
    now come in in this courtroom and argue that David
    Clayton smoked for some other reason than addiction?
    No basis.
         You have R. J. Reynolds' own documents.  You
    have the Surgeon General's Report.  You have all of
    the evidence of his smoking behavior, which shows
    somebody who was trying to get nicotine in order to
    satisfy his nicotine cravings.  What is the evidence
    that he smoked for a reason other than addiction? And I suspect that Mr. Geise will get up here
    and say he smoked because he wanted to, because he
    wanted to.  What's the evidence of that?  Where's
    this evidence that he smoked for some reason other
    than nicotine addiction?  Not a shred.  Where is the
    evidence?  Where is the evidence he was smoking
    because of addiction?
         Third, smoking caused lung cancer and death.
    This is going back all the way to last week.  We
    talked about Dr. Wright's testimony.  You'll
    remember Dr. Wright coming in and showing the actual
    slides from the lung tissue we looked at.  And the
    kind of cancer that David Clayton had is squamous
    cell.  You remember that.
         You're going to have the medical records with
    you as well as the pathology slides that he showed,
    the pictures of the slides which show the squamous
    cell.  And you're going to have the testimony of the
    witnesses.  The cytology report comes from the
    medical record from 10/4/05, that he had squamous
    cell carcinoma and that is the most -- the most
    closely associated with cigarette smoking.
         And a note from the date of his death, that he
    had end-stage lung cancer and he was dying from it,
    with COPD, pulmonary embolus, PE, pulmonary embolus -- you remember, that's a blood clot in the
    lung -- and pulmonary infarct, family requests
    hospice care.  This is from the date of his death,
    on 9/14/06.
         You'll have all the medical records from that
    year where he was getting treated for chemotherapy
    and radiation and how he just continued to spiral
    downward and kept getting infections and pneumonia,
    and you heard the testimony from the witnesses on
    that.
         What is the evidence that something other than
    smoking caused his lung cancer?  None.  Defendant
    could have put on witnesses that talked about cause,
    no.
         MR. GEISE:  Objection, Your Honor, not our
    burden to put it on.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MS. SHAMP:  There was no evidence that smoking
    was caused -- that his lung cancer was caused by
    something other than smoking cigarettes.  Where is
    the evidence that something other than lung cancer
    caused his death?  No expert witnesses testified to
    that.
         Dr. Wright, you'll recall, said he died from
    lung cancer, no question about it.  He died from lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes, no doubt
    about it.  There's no medical record that said he
    died from something other than lung cancer.  No
    medical record says that.
         The only thing that the defendant relies upon
    is the death certificate.  All right?
         Now, I want to point out one of the jury
    instructions when you're considering that, and that
    is the jury instruction that said that in order to
    be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction to
    smoking cigarettes need not be the only cause.
    Okay?  Need not be the only cause.
         So even if the defendant argued that pulmonary
    embolism or COPD or something else contributed to
    it, as long as lung cancer was a cause of his death,
    plaintiff has satisfied their burden.  It need not
    be the only cause.
         So what is the evidence that he died from lung
    cancer?  Dr. Wright's testimony.  And you know
    Dr. Wright has done however many autopsies.  He's
    done thousands of autopsies in the state of Florida.
    He's worked with every Medical Examiner's Office,
    actual involvement in just about every kind of
    various organization that he worked with, 82
    publications.  And he actually looked at the slides. And he talked about that and he looked at all the
    medical records.
         But in addition, you had the testimony of the
    family members who watched -- Gloria Clayton watched
    after his diagnosis, how he never got better after
    his diagnosis with lung cancer.  You have the
    medical records saying it was squamous lung cancer.
         What is the evidence that lung cancer played no
    role in his death?  I suspect that the defendant
    will argue that it's Dr. Rice's death certificate.
    You'll recall, of course, Dr. Rice had seen him
    maybe one time before in March and then saw him on
    the date of death, and that was the first time he
    had seen him in six months.  He was not his treating
    doctor.
         He was a hospital doctor who came in and saw
    him.  But even Dr. Rice's own notes say he was dying
    from his lung cancer.  So even Dr. Rice's death
    certificate does not prove that lung cancer played
    no role.
         The evidence is overwhelming that David Clayton
    died from lung cancer.  There's really very little
    dispute about that issue.  So those are the three
    issues.
         I want to comment for a minute about how very versatile R. J. Reynolds Tobacco can be.  And you'll
    remember Dr. Proctor's testimony about -- I remember
    he kept saying -- he would say, they got blocked
    here, go around.  Right?  When they were blocked
    from -- from advertising on television, they went
    around it, right?  And then they would put signs on
    the Winston car, and they would -- then that's going
    to be shown on television.  They're versatile.  They
    would go around, right?
         They're doing the same thing here.  Because
    originally they argued that nicotine wasn't
    addictive, right?  Nicotine's not addictive.  Well,
    2000, they finally -- all right, now, we have to
    admit it.  The Engle findings, we have to admit
    nicotine's addictive.  We'll admit nicotine's
    addictive but nobody's actually addicted, right?
    But, okay, you blocked us on that, when maybe --
    maybe he wasn't addicted.  But even if he was
    addicted, well, that's not why he's addicted, right?
    He smoked because of personal reasons, even if he
    was addicted.  They're versatile.  They're trying to
    move around.
         But I'll ask you to weigh the evidence on each
    of these things.  Was David Clayton addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of lung cancer?  The answer
    is yes.
         So as we know, if David Clayton's a member of
    the Engle class, you check yes on Question 1.  The
    plaintiff gets the benefit of the Engle findings.
    Cigarettes cause lung cancer.  Nicotine in
    cigarettes is addictive.  R. J. Reynolds placed
    cigarettes on the market that were defective and
    unreasonably dangerous.  You'll have these back with
    you.  R. J. Reynolds concealed or omitted material
    information not otherwise known or available,
    knowing that the material was misleading -- false or
    misleading or failed to disclose a material fact
    concerning the health effects or addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes or both.
         Conspiracy.  R. J. Reynolds agreed with other
    tobacco companies to conceal or omit information
    regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their
    addictive nature with the intention that smokers and
    the public would rely on this information to their
    detriment.  R. J. Reynolds was negligent.
         The judge instructed you, these findings may
    not be denied or questioned, and they must carry the
    same weight they would have if you had determined
    them yourselves. The second question on the verdict form is:
    State whether R. J. Reynolds' concealment or
    omission of a material fact about the health effects
    or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both
    were a legal cause of David Clayton's death.
         And Question 3 -- I'm going to talk about these
    two together because they're related -- State
    whether their agreement to conceal was a legal cause
    of David Clayton's death.
         So what is legal cause?  The judge instructed
    you about that.  And it says was a -- David
    Clayton's reliance on R. J. Reynolds' fraudulent
    concealment or omission of material information
    concerning health effects or the addictive nature of
    cigarette smoking is a legal cause of injury -- of
    loss, injury or damage when it directly and in the
    natural continuous sequence produces or contributes
    substantially to producing the alleged loss, injury
    or damage so that it can be reasonably said that but
    for such reliance, the loss, injury or damage would
    not have occurred.
         Material information is information that is of
    such importance that a reasonable person would have
    considered it in their decision-making process.
         So this is a very important one.  So what is the evidence that defendant's fraud was a cause of
    David Clayton's death?  So the question is, one of
    the first ones:  Did David Clayton know about the
    health effects or addictive nature of smoking
    cigarettes?  Right?  Did he know?
         Well, we can speculate.  All right?  Lots of
    people speculate and it's hard when you're in 2014.
    We talked about this in voir dire.  Everybody thinks
    everybody knew or always did know.  All right?  But
    that's speculation.  That's speculation.
         Let's talk about what the evidence is about
    whether David Clayton knew, not speculating, not
    guessing, not saying based on 2014, I guess, what
    was the evidence.
         Smith Gavin's testimony.  You heard from the
    witness who said that David Clayton told him, "It
    won't hurt me.  I don't think it's going to hurt
    me."  And he said he told that to him many times.
         Gloria Clayton's testimony that David Clayton
    did not think smoking was harmful.
         And the FTC report of 1981.  And you're going
    to have this back with you.  And I encourage you,
    this is an important document to look at on this
    issue and it's a fact document.  It's P-367.
    Because it sets forth -- and this is evidence.  It sets forth what public knowledge was in 1981.
         Let's me see if this comes up.  Raegan, would
    you bring up 367?
         And there's an entire chapter on what public
    knowledge was.  There's the date on it.  Federal
    Trade Commission report of May of 1981, and there's
    an entire chapter on what the public knew about
    smoking and health.  All right?
         All right.  There we go and you'll bring that
    paragraph up.
         And this is what the conclusion is of that
    paragraph.  "Based upon an analysis of all the data
    reviewed in its entirety, staff has concluded that
    there appear to be such significant gaps in consumer
    knowledge that a substantial portion of the
    population does not know how dangerous smoking is or
    whether the dangers of smoking apply to them and,
    therefore, does not have an understanding of the
    health hazards of smoking.
         More significant" -- "more specifically, the
    data suggests that a large number of consumers do
    not know what diseases are related to smoking.  A
    substantial number seriously misunderstand or
    underestimate the risks.  Many seriously
    underestimate or are unaware of the severity.  And a significant number of consumers incorrectly do not
    believe that these health consequences have any
    personal relevance to themselves."
         And they actually did a chart.
         If you can show me 130.
         And it talked about the difference between what
    smokers knew and reported and what the rest of the
    population did.
         I think -- oh, there we go.  Right.
         And the question was:  "It's been said that
    smokers have more of certain illnesses than
    nonsmokers.  Would you say this is definitely true,
    probably true, possibly true or not true?"
         And you look over at the smokers, 55 percent,
    the majority, said either that it was not true; they
    didn't know or was only possibly true that people
    who smoked had more of certain illnesses.
         I think if I can get you back to the
    PowerPoint.
         "The data also indicate that smokers are more
    likely to have incorrect beliefs about the
    relationship between smoking and lung cancer than
    are nonsmokers.  And among all smokers, 28 percent
    did not believe smoking caused lung cancer while
    among heavier smokers." David Clayton falls in this category.  Among
    heavier smokers, a pack a day or more, nearly a
    third did not believe or know about the link.  In
    the Yankelovich study, 38 percent of smokers
    believed that they still haven't proven a link
    between lung cancer.
         This is evidence that you will have about
    whether David Clayton knew.  So you not only have
    evidence from Smith Gavin, Gloria Clayton, but you
    also have public knowledge documents that you can
    look at and I encourage you to.  But you also have
    the Engle finding you can utilize now, which says
    that they concealed or omitted material information
    that was not otherwise known.  What they were
    withholding, everybody didn't know.
         So what was the evidence that he knew?  It's on
    the other side, right?  Reader's Digest?  I suspect
    that Mr. Geise will stand up and show you Reader's
    Digest.  Well, you don't have any evidence that
    David Clayton ever saw a Reader's Digest.
         In fact, you have evidence of just the
    opposite.  Smith Gavin said he never saw him with a
    Reader's Digest.  His wife said she never saw him
    with a Reader's Digest.  There's no evidence that he
    ever read or saw a Reader's Digest article.  Daniel Horn, the guy who said if you shouted from a
    rooftop, you wouldn't be telling anything you don't
    know, that anecdotal testimony?  Newsweek, the
    caution label?
         Well, what's the evidence about whether the
    caution label was informing people?  You will have
    that as well, P-269-08, which is the FTC report
    after the caution label was put out.  And you
    remember what the caution label said.  "Caution:
    Cigarette smoking may be hazardous."  May be
    hazardous?  There's virtually no evidence that the
    warning statement on cigarette packages has any
    significant effect.  If cigarette sales are viewed
    as an index of the effectiveness of the warning
    statement, one finds that in 1966, more cigarettes
    where sold than ever before.  That is what the
    evidence is.
         So then you have to say why didn't he know?  If
    he didn't know, why didn't he know?  And that's
    where we talked about the campaign that the
    cigarette manufacturers engaged in for decades, to
    put out this information, to conceal what they knew
    and you heard tons of it.
         Now, I am not going to go through all of it
    today.  But the Frank Statement that they put out, which said, we believe the products would make it
    not injurious to health, when they knew otherwise.
    There is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of
    the causes of lung cancer.
         You heard all of this and you will, in fact,
    have this back with you.  Howard Cullman saying,
    there is no proof.  Bill Dwyer saying, these are
    scare tactics.  Ed Horrigan saying, there's no
    proof.  You'll remember Joseph Cullman on Face the
    Nation; we believe our products are not injurious.
    This is a campaign.  Ann Browder and even the
    president of R. J. Reynolds in front of Congress.
    This is the campaign that they engaged in.
         Press releases.  You'll have press releases
    back there.  Some government officials maintain that
    cigarette smoking is the number one health problem.
    We believe the number one health problem is the
    extent to which these officials knowingly mislead
    the American public, when they knew their own
    products contained carcinogens.
         And then they put out these white papers, and I
    encourage you to take a look at these white papers
    that they sent out.  You'll remember what the
    testimony from Dr. Proctor was, that they sent these
    to -- they targeted these to doctors, and at this time, 50 percent of doctors were smoking.  All of
    these targeting doctors.  178,000 doctors were sent
    these.
         They engaged in a campaign of deception and
    denial for decades to encourage people to keep
    smoking, to create a false controversy and it
    worked.  The evidence shows that it worked not only
    in the population in general but in David Clayton in
    particular.
         And also they continued to advertise.
    Cigarettes are most -- are one of the most heavily
    marketed products in the United States.  They spent
    13.5 billion, in 2006, dollars on cigarette
    advertising.  That is $37 million per day on
    promoting their product.
         Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all
    Americans who can either read or understand the
    spoken word.  It is the most heavily advertised
    product in America.  They spent one billion dollars
    in 1980 to sell their product.
         The commission believes that the warning labels
    have not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent
    attitude toward cigarette smoking created and
    maintained by the cigarette companies through their
    advertisements, particularly the barrage of commercials on television, the commercials which
    portray smoking as a harmless and enjoyable social
    activity that is not habit-forming and involves no
    hazards to health.
         Why did David Clayton not know smoking caused
    lung cancer?  Because of the defendant's actions.
    Very -- this is their own document.  Very few
    consumers -- they know this -- are aware of the
    effects of nicotine, its addictive nature and that
    nicotine is poison.  They know this, that their
    customers aren't aware, and yet they do nothing to
    tell them.
         The True article, you'll remember that they
    hired somebody to write an article, by Stanley
    Frank, hired by them, that says "To smoke or not to
    smoke, that's still the question."  Are cigarettes
    hazardous to your health like the package says?
    Nobody knows.  They knew.  This is the most popular
    men's magazine, and they paid somebody to write the
    article.
         What the Court will instruct you is as to each
    of plaintiff's claims of concealment and conspiracy
    to conceal, I hereby instruct you that you may
    consider all of the evidence.  All right?
         Now, the defendant's going to want to try and say, you can't -- there's no evidence that one
    person said anything directly to David Clayton;
    there's no evidence that he read one of those
    scientific white papers.  But the Court will
    instruct you you can consider all of the evidence,
    all of the evidence of their marketing campaigns,
    all of the evidence of their campaign denial in
    order to determine whether plaintiff has satisfied
    the reliance requirement of those.  And you may use
    reason and common sense to reach conclusions and
    draw reasonable inferences from the evidence.
         The evidence that David's -- that defendant's
    fraud was a Claude -- a cause of David Clayton's
    death.  Smith Gavin's testimony.  Gloria Clayton's
    testimony that he didn't know smoking was harmful.
    The FTC report which showed the public prevalence of
    not knowing that smoking was harmful.  The FTC
    report of 1967, which is P-269.  RJR's campaign to
    instill doubt and their enormous advertising
    expenditures.  Okay.
         And on the other side, that he knew smoking
    caused lung cancer?  Reader's Digest?  The caution
    label?  Daniel Horn?  Where's the evidence that you
    have whether defendant's fraud was a legal cause of
    David Clayton's death? Again, they're very versatile.  They all move
    around.  Originally they denied they did anything.
    They denied that they were concealing anything.
    They denied it until the Engle Court found, no, you
    did.  Okay.
         Okay.  Now we admit it.  Now we admit it.  But
    if we did, doesn't matter.  Doesn't matter.
    Nobody -- nobody relied on what we said.  We spent
    billions of dollars on this campaign.  We spent
    millions of dollars sending out these reports.  But
    nobody listened to us, right?  Nobody heard us.
    Very versatile.  They wanted to ignore them.
         Today in this courtroom, you, the jury, have to
    hold them responsible for that conduct.  Don't let
    them get away with that.  We spent all of that
    money.  We did all of those things, didn't make any
    difference, didn't have any impact on David Clayton.
    The evidence does not support that.  The evidence
    does not support that.
         All right.  So we believe that the evidence --
    again, what's presented to you in this courtroom is
    what you have to rely on.  All right?  So we believe
    that the evidence is that R. J. Reynolds'
    concealment or omission of material facts about the
    health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of David
    Clayton's death.  We believe the answer to that is
    yes and that whether R. J. Reynolds' agreement to
    conceal or omit material, in fact, regarding the
    health effects of cigarette smoking was a legal
    cause of his death?  Yes.  They are responsible and
    the actions did have consequences.
         The next question that will be on the verdict
    form is comparative fault.  State the percentage of
    fault, if any, that was a legal cause of David
    Clayton's death that you charge to R. J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company for David Clayton.
         So what this is -- and we've talked about this
    before -- if there's going to be some discussion in
    the jury room that David Clayton made a choice; it
    was his personal choice, this is the place that that
    should be discussed, not on the earlier questions
    but on this one.
         So, again, you have to base your decision on
    what the evidence is with respect to what
    R. J. Reynolds did compared to what David Clayton
    did.  So let's stack them up.  R. J. Reynolds,
    findings tell us, I don't have to go through all
    that evidence again, they denied, concealed and
    reassured with the intent that American smokers would rely -- with the intention they would rely to
    their detriment.  Fortunately for us, it's a habit
    they can't break.  That's what R. J. Reynolds did,
    intentional conduct, deny, conceal and reassure, the
    choices that they made.
         What did David Clayton do?  He didn't quit
    sooner.  Started smoking as a kid when he was 14.
    Trusted them, what they were telling him, trusted
    them, that the product manufacturer would let him
    know.  And tried to quit.  Every year, 40 to 45
    percent of smokers try to quit and less than 40 --
    and less than 5 percent are successful.  He wasn't
    in the 5 percent.  That's what he did wrong.  There
    you go.
         Compare that to what they did wrong.  Compare
    this personal choice to keep smoking with his
    education, his background, what they were telling
    him, to what they did wrong.  We contend that
    R. J. Reynolds is responsible.
         But when Mr. Geise gets up and talks about
    choice -- and I expect he'll do that, choice is a
    personal choice.  Choice.  Ask yourself, was it an
    informed choice?  Did the manufacturer give him the
    information that he needed to make an informed
    choice?  No.  If he made a choice, it was not an informed one.  And we contend that R. J. Reynolds is
    responsible for that, that the responsibility has to
    lie at their door.
         They are very versatile, very versatile.  Okay.
    Well, even if you do find that we're at fault,
    mostly it's him, right?
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I think she's
    commenting on the defense of the case at this point.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GEISE:  Okay.  Thank you.
         MS. SHAMP:  Even if you do find that we were
    somewhat at fault, all of the things they do to try
    and keep that responsibility from laying at their
    doorstep.  Think about how much he talks about
    personal responsibility and choices David Clayton
    made and everything they will do to keep that
    responsibility from laying at their doorstep.
         You'll have the 2014 Surgeon General's Report,
    which tells you 20 million people have died from
    smoking cigarettes.  They will deny the
    responsibility on their doorstep for the actions
    that they took.
         So comparative fault, ladies and gentlemen, we
    contend that if David Clayton has any fault, that
    it's very minor compared to what R. J. Reynolds has done.
         Damages now I'll turn to.  On the verdict form,
    you'll be asked what is the amount of damages, if
    any, that Gloria Clayton has sustained for her
    mental pain and suffering as a result of her
    husband's injury and death, the loss of her
    husband's protection and companionship and the loss
    of her husband's support and services?
         Now, you remember you heard testimony from
    Mr. Spruance who came in and talked about trying to
    put a monetary value on that last one, support and
    services.  And he talked at length about how he goes
    about that calculation and that the number was
    $209,799.  Okay.
         On the verdict form, you will have three blanks
    to fill in.  There's no dispute about what the
    evidence is.  Mr. Spruance said it's 209,000.
    That's how you put a monetary value on that.
         These two, ooh.  That's a lot.  And I will say
    right now, I'm not an expert at it.  But I've
    thought about it, putting a value on someone's pain
    and suffering as a result of their husband's injury
    and death.  Your collective judgment on what that is
    worth is what the Court says should be your guide,
    your collective judgment.  But you do have some evidence, though, because you have evidence that
    David Clayton's death was -- that dying of lung
    cancer is very difficult to watch and that she had
    to watch that and suffer through it.
         And I'm going to suggest a number to you that
    should go in that blank.  But let me say it's
    neither the floor nor the ceiling of what you can
    decide is the appropriate number for that loss.
    We're going to suggest a number we believe from what
    a person would suffer from watching that kind of
    death.
         And then the second category is the loss of
    protection and companionship, which are different.
    Those are two different things.  One is her mental
    injury from watching the death from his injury, but
    the second is the loss of his companionship.  And
    all of the testimony in this case, ladies and
    gentlemen, is that David Clayton was a wonderful
    man, really, every single person who testified.  He
    was a good guy.  And got married when he was 46 to
    Gloria and that they were in love.  They never had
    an argument.  You never heard a single person come
    in here and say they fought or argued, that they --
    they were close.  In fact, you remember him [sic]
    saying he drove up to Waycross on nights that he wasn't working just to spend time with her because
    they liked to spend time.
         So I'm going to suggest for the pain and
    suffering as a result and the loss of companionship
    of $1 million for each of those.  As I said, neither
    the floor or the ceiling for what that value is
    worth, but that's what we're going to suggest for
    the numbers to award to those.  All right?
         The other question you'll have on Question 5 is
    what is the total amount of any damages lost by the
    estate for medical bills?  And you heard testimony
    from that, and you'll have two exhibits back.  It's
    P-02 and P-05.  The medical bills are 47,000 and
    something.  The funeral bill was another 3,000.  So
    that number's 50,874.05 and there's a blank for that
    on the verdict form.
         And finally I want to spend the last bit of
    time talking about the issue of punitive damages.
    And as I said in voir dire and I'll say again, it's
    a very important aspect of this case.  It's a very
    important aspect of this case.  And the judge will
    instruct you about what punitive damages are and how
    they should be awarded.  Punitive damages are
    warranted if you find by clear and convincing
    evidence that the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show a
    reckless disregard of human life and the safety of
    persons exposed to the effects of such conduct.
         The conduct showed an entire lack of care, that
    R. J. Reynolds must have been consciously
    indifferent to the consequences of what it was
    doing.  The conduct showed an entire lack of care
    that R. J. Reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly
    disregarded the safety and welfare of the public.
    The conduct showed a reckless indifference to the
    rights of others as to be equivalent to an
    intentional violation of those rights.
         I've talked about a lot of their activities
    that I think merited the award of punitive damages,
    but I'm going to limit my conversation to two.  When
    you consider whether punitive damages are to be
    awarded, the judge has instructed you you may
    consider similar harms suffered by other persons not
    parties to this lawsuit.
         So with respect to this, you can consider how
    many people have been injured by their conduct when
    deciding whether punitive damages should be awarded.
    You may consider that.  How many people has R. J.
    Reynolds hurt in assessing the reprehensibility or
    wrongfulness of the R. J. Reynolds' acts as proven in this case.
         So the two things I want to talk about, ladies
    and gentlemen, and I think merit it and there's a
    lot.  That's youth marketing.  I think this is so
    egregious that it merits your -- this jury today not
    giving them a pass in this, this jury today saying,
    we're not giving a pass on this.  This conduct is
    reprehensible.  Manufacturers have studied the 14-
    to 20-year-old market creating a fad, a fad for
    smokers who are 14 years old and this market is a
    great bonanza.  These are conscious, intentional
    actions to hook kids.
         Current youth jargon in high school, American
    history textbooks might be a good start at finding a
    good brand name and image theme.  Really?  They
    wrote documents that said for the pre-smoker -- that
    means people we haven't hooked yet -- the visible
    effects of smoking are largely unknown, unneeded,
    are actually unpleasant or awkward.  The expected or
    derived psychological effects are largely
    responsible for influencing the pre-smoker to try
    smoking and provide sufficient motivation during the
    learning period to keep the learner going, despite
    the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness of the
    period, psychological effects. Finally the older establishment is preaching
    against smoking.  The antiestablishment's sentiment
    discussed above would cause the young to want to be
    defiant and smoke.  Thus a brand aimed, a brand
    aimed, at the young group should not try and promote
    as a health brand but perhaps should carry some
    implied risk.  In this case, in this case, the
    warnings on the packages might be a plus.  We might
    be selling more cigarettes to kids because they have
    warning labels on it.  This conduct is
    reprehensible.
         And, two, they manipulated the nicotine in
    their products to keep people addicted.  You will
    have the evidence back with you.  Their own
    documents show that a tobacco product is, in
    essence, a vehicle for the delivery of nicotine.
    Cigarette smoke should contain sufficient nicotine
    to supply the necessary requirements and they
    manipulated the nicotine level in their cigarettes
    to keep people addicted.  You'll have the FDA patent
    information back, P-690, of all the patents that
    R. J. Reynolds applied for to increase the nicotine
    content in their cigarettes by adding it to
    different things, different types of acids that they
    can add, different types of various processes to try and add and manipulate the nicotine content.  You'll
    have document P-681, Lucky 100's, when it was
    treated with Compound W to yield 2.85 percent
    nicotine, a 21 percent increase.
         This is the P-435, which is the ingredient
    list, and you'll see all the ingredients in their
    smoke, including ammonia.  And you'll remember
    Dr. Proctor's testimony about what the purpose was
    of ammonia, to freebase so that the nicotine would
    have a higher impact for people who smoked them.
         Under the circumstances of this case, state
    whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive
    damages are warranted.  We believe the clear and
    convincing evidence shows that punitive damages
    ought to be awarded in this case.
         Now, remember, at this part of the trial, you
    don't have to decide an amount.  We're not talking
    about an amount.  All you have to decide is
    whether -- whether or not this conduct warrants the
    award of punitive damages.  And ask yourself, what's
    the evidence with respect to that question?  What's
    the evidence with respect to whether their conduct
    merits an award of punitive damages?
         And I ask you to hold them responsible.  As I
    started by saying today, your service on this jury is a historic right, which is critical to our system
    of justice, and your role in making a choice today
    whether to hold them responsible is an important
    role.
         Now, I'm going to sit down and let Mr. Geise
    get up and talk a while.  When he's concluded, I'll
    have an opportunity to come back and talk to you
    again for a little while just to rebut some of the
    things he says.  I want you to listen carefully to
    Mr. Geise, and I expect he'll talk a lot about the
    responsibility, talk a lot about David Clayton's
    responsibility.  Wonder if he'll talk about
    R. J. Reynolds at all?  He'll talk about David
    Clayton drinking beer on the weekends.  He'll talk
    about David Clayton's choices about smoking
    downstairs.  I wonder if he'll talk about
    R. J. Reynolds at all?
         We believe the evidence shows that plaintiff's
    entitled to an award in this case.  The evidence.
    It's not speculation.  It's not what you came in in
    this case thinking.  It's not what everybody around
    might think.  But what was presented here, the
    facts, the testimony, the documents, the evidence,
    we believe they prove the plaintiff is entitled to a
    verdict, and the plaintiff is entitled to some
    punitive damages award.  Okay?
         I appreciate your attention.  Thank you.


         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good morning again.
         When Mr. Geise was talking yesterday, I started
    scribbling furiously, taking notes on how to rebut
    various things that he said, and then I put down my
    pen.  Because it occurred to me that for most of his
    presentation, he was talking about things that
    aren't things you have to decide.
         I decided had -- he was kind of nibbling around
    the edges, talking about things like how many times
    Mr. Clayton stopped at rest stops on the way to Walt
    Disney World, talking about whether he stopped in
    May of 1994 or eight months earlier in August of
    1993.  These are issues that you don't have to
    decide.
         You have to decide the issues that are on the
    verdict form.  The question is not whether he quit,
    not did he try hard enough or whether he was
    motivated, whether he quit in 1993, '4 or whether he
    smoked one pack of cigarettes or three packs of
    cigarettes.  Those are not things you have to decide.
         Now, we can debate whether Gloria Clayton --
    there was a discrepancy in the way she testified in
    her deposition and the way she testified on the
    stand.  You'll remember when he was trying to
    impeach her, he turned to Page 580 of her
    deposition.  But that's not what you're here to
    decide.
         The simple question is was he addicted?  Did he
    exhibit the behaviors that addicted smokers exhibit?
    Did he need a cigarette first thing in the morning
    to stave off the symptoms of withdrawal?  Did he
    smoke throughout the day?  Did he exhibit symptoms
    of withdrawal when he wasn't smoking -- agitation,
    restlessness, anxiety?
         You know, that was one thing I actually learned
    in this trial, which I had not known before in
    Dr. Werner's testimony, and that is that the
    withdrawal symptoms from the drug are the opposite
    of the effects of the drug.  And so the effects of
    cocaine can make you up and excited, and then the
    effects of withdrawal are to make you down and
    depressed.  I didn't know that.  So the effects of
    nicotine are to relax you and calm you, and the
    opposite effect is the withdrawal that you see. You'd be anxious, moving around.
         You'll remember, Dr. Werner testified that when
    you smoke for a long period of time, for 45 years,
    and you start early that you've created these neural
    pathways that are deeply embedded, that force your
    body to want that substance.
         So in my closing, I talked about the evidence
    and I stacked it up.  And I was waiting for
    Mr. Geise to put some more evidence on the other
    side, other than Dr. Giakas's testimony.  And I
    noticed I said the word a lot during my
    presentation, the greater weight of the evidence.
    Where does the greater weight lie?  Notice Mr. Geise
    didn't use that phrase very much.  And he didn't use
    that phrase because he knows that if you stack up
    the evidence that he does not have the greater
    weight of the evidence on any of the issues.
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I object, beyond the
    burden of proof.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Overruled.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your -- the burden of proof of the
    plaintiff is the greater weight, and so you have to
    stack up the evidence.  And when you stack up the
    evidence, which side has the greater weight?  So
    that's why Mr. Geise was talking about irrelevant things, things that don't matter to what the
    decision is that you're called upon to receive -- to
    decide.
         But he did mention some things that I want to
    talk about because he kept saying things like that
    we only told you half the story.  He mentioned
    Exhibit 50.  Now, you remember that this was an
    exhibit that had smoking references, and you'll
    remember that Dr. Wright said it was created by us
    -- by counsel.  We made this one up and we went
    through every single medical record and wrote down
    on here in a chart that you will have every single
    reference to smoking in those medical records.  We
    didn't leave out the ones that said half a pack a
    day.  We have 100 pack a day -- I mean, a
    100-pack-year history, got everything.  We told you
    the whole story.
         When Mr. Geise put up his slides, did he ever
    put up a slide that showed the 100-pack history?
    Did he ever put up a slide that said he quit in 1994
    after he was diagnosed with lung cancer?  Those are
    all on our list.  And, in fact, over 25 times it
    appears in the medical records that he quit in 1994.
         But more importantly, what Mr. Geise forgot to
    mention about the packs he smoked a day was his own witness from the stand, Dr. Giakas.  And you'll
    remember when Ms. Bryan was cross examining him,
    Dr. Giakas said that he believed he had a
    pack-and-a-half-a-day smoking habit.  Mr. Geise
    didn't elicit that testimony from his own witness on
    direct, but on cross, he said that, a pack and a
    half a day, half of the story.
         We brought you witness after witness after
    witness.  We even went back to childhood friends
    from Moultrie, Georgia, and brought them in here.
    We brought an ex-daughter-in-law from Tampa to come
    here and testify to you and we went through each
    one.
         One thing that was shocking to me was when
    Dr. Giakas told you how much he relied on the DSM-V.
    You-all remember that.  DSM-V, he's been using it
    since May.  So did he walk through the DSM-V
    criteria with you?  In his testimony, he didn't even
    open to that page.  This document he says he needs
    and to rely upon, did he talk about symptoms of
    withdrawal?  Did he talk about whether the smoker
    smoked despite knowing about health hazards, the
    ulcer?  No.  He didn't walk through the DSM-V
    criteria because he knows that that would show David
    Clayton was addicted.  Half the story? Another thing Dr. Giakas said was -- and this
    shocked me as well -- smoking behavior hasn't
    changed between 1994 and 2014.  Remember him saying
    that, smoking behavior hasn't changed?  We know
    that's not true.  1994 -- in 2014, there's almost
    nowhere you can smoke.  You can't smoke in
    buildings.  You can't smoke in the office.  You
    can't smoke outside.  Our smoking behavior has
    changed enormously since 1994 because of
    restrictions, and those are discussed in the 2014
    Surgeon General's Report and how important those
    restrictions have been on reducing the amount of
    addicted -- of people who are addicted to cigarettes
    and reducing the number of smokers.  That's a huge
    shift in behavior.
         Now, one thing that surprised me, I guess, was
    when Mr. Geise was talking repeatedly about free
    choice, and he wasn't addicted because of his
    choice.  Y'all remember him talking about that, that
    he wasn't addicted because he chose to smoke.  I
    think he was forgetting their own document.
         Raegan, can you pull up 363?  Page 2.
         363.  You'll have this with you.  "Hardy
    reminds us, I'm told, that the entire matter of
    addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case.
    We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if
    the person was addicted."
         And that's the truth.  Defendant added nothing
    to it.  They didn't add -- Mr. Geise added nothing
    to the defense.  The greater weight of the evidence
    proved that David Clayton was addicted.
         I remember him also when he talked about we
    told half the story, he -- when he read to you what
    addiction was, the legal cause -- you'll have this
    very page -- he read you half the charge.  He read
    you the top paragraph.
         The second paragraph says, In order to be
    regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction to
    smoking cigarettes need not be the only cause.
    Addiction to smoking R. J. Reynolds cigarettes may
    be a legal cause of injury and death, even though it
    operates in combination with the act of another or
    some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the
    same time as the addiction, and the addiction
    contributes substantially to producing injury and
    death.
         He didn't read you that part.  So that even if
    somebody were to believe that he could have tried
    harder, addiction played a role in his continued smoking and it was a legal cause.
         Now, half the story.  Dr. -- he -- Mr. Geise
    told you that Dr. Wright had testified in 1500
    cases.  You remember him saying he's a professional
    witness?  What he forgot to tell you was
    Dr. Wright's a medical examiner.  He testifies in
    cases where the State is trying to bring a criminal
    charge, and he testifies about the cause of death.
    You've seen it on television.  It's always the
    medical examiner that they bring in to testify.
         And that's what Dr. Wright did and he had
    testified 1500 times because he was a chief medical
    examiner in Dade County.  For 30 years, he's been a
    medical examiner.
         Half the story.  Mr. Geise told you that
    Dr. Rice, the one who signed the death certificate,
    had treated him for lung cancer.  Absolutely false.
    Dr. Rice treated him -- when Dr. -- he got to
    Dr. Rice, he couldn't be treated for his lung
    cancer.  You have that note.  He said, we'll just
    try to make him comfortable at this point, while he
    died.
         The death certificate he talked to you about
    lists respiratory failure as the number one cause of
    death, which means, of course, he stopped breathing. Just saw evidence of it.  And it also lists
    pulmonary evidence, a blood clot in the lung, and
    COPD.  But the only evidence you have as to the
    cause of the pulmonary embolus is from Dr. Wright,
    who says the pulmonary embolus was caused by lung
    cancer.  The death certificate is technically
    correct, but it just doesn't say what caused the
    pulmonary embolus.
         And the only testimony -- I want to repeat
    that.  The only evidence you have as to what caused
    the pulmonary embolus is from Dr. Wright, that it
    was caused by lung cancer.  That's the only evidence
    in the record as to that.
         Now, Mr. Geise talked about whether David
    Clayton knew of the risks.  He knew that smoking --
    smoking caused lung cancer.  And that -- I told you
    he was going to talk about Reader's Digest.  He also
    talked about the Three Stooges episode.  But you'll
    remember, what we gave you is Exhibit 367, which is
    the actual polling data, the actual polling data
    about what people knew.
         He talked to you about Smith Gavin's testimony.
    Remember, about him coughing and gagging?  You heard
    Smith Gavin.  What Smith Gavin said, the rest of the
    story, Smith Gavin said, sounded like smoke was going down the wrong pipe, that he was coughing.
    And that's why he said, well, if he stops smoking,
    he'll stop coughing, right?  If he stops smoking,
    he'll stop coughing.
         And one important thing I want to mention was
    what Mr. Geise was telling you about things that
    were put out by public service announcements or
    things that were put out by Reader's Digest.  We
    didn't, of course, accept tobacco advertising.  But
    not one time did he tell you R. J. Reynolds was
    telling people what was in our own product.  David
    Clayton knew because R. J. Reynolds told people what
    was in our product.
         And you'll remember Dr. Figlar's testimony.
    Remember, he was the guy who testified by videotape?
    And he said this.  He said our obligation to inform
    about our product is not reduced by the fact that
    other people have told, by the fact that there's
    other information about that.  That does not relieve
    us of the obligation to talk about our product, to
    tell people what we knew.
         Mr. Geise didn't say one word about
    R. J. Reynolds telling people what was in their
    product, the people who made the product.
         Another thing that struck me was when Mr. Geise said that Dr. Proctor's testimony had nothing to do
    with David Clayton.  And I was struck by that, the
    certainty with which Mr. Geise said that.  It had
    nothing to do.  So who was this campaign of deceit
    for?  Who are they trying to convince?  Who are they
    selling doubt to?  Cigarette smokers.
         Can you show P-270?  Thank you.
         Now, I showed this document to you before --
    hold on.  Wait.  I showed this document to you
    before, and I showed you the top part of this
    previously.  And you'll have P-270 in.  And what it
    says here is --
         You can bring that part in, "reestablish the
    cigarette controversy," up top.
         "Reestablished the cigarette controversy."  So
    I was talking to you about what their campaign was,
    how they were trying to establish a controversy
    where none existed, but what I did show you is the
    bottom part.
         You can bring up the bottom part now.
         "This program must be massive.  We estimate
    that the pressure of the clearinghouse in media
    terms exceeds 50 million a year.  The chief
    executive officers of the tobacco companies are
    well-aware of the advertising principle, share of the money, share of the market.  This principle
    applies to the program of the tobacco industry.  An
    initial powerful impact must be made within eight
    months."
         They have spent millions, hundreds of millions
    of dollars on this campaign.  But Mr. Geise wants to
    argue, no.  He wants you to find that it had no
    impact, that they were just shooting this message
    out in the air, that it didn't impact David Clayton
    or any other smoker or any member of the Engle
    class, that these messages that they sent out have
    nothing to do with David Clayton smoking.  They
    spent millions and millions of dollars on
    television, but it had nothing to do with any
    smoker.  It doesn't make any sense.  That's exactly
    who they were talking about were smokers.
         He wants you to think it has nothing to do with
    any kid picking up a cigarette, nothing to do with
    all of the people who become addicted.  You'll
    remember, my -- first part of my closing argument, I
    told you how much they spent in advertising, and I
    put up those -- those figures, a billion dollars in
    1980 alone, $37 million a day in advertising.
    Mr. Geise wants to say, that had nothing to do with
    anybody smoking.  That doesn't make any sense. Common sense.  That was the point of these
    expenditures and it worked.  It worked.  Lots of
    people kept smoking.
         Now, Mr. Geise talks to you about the issue of
    reliance.  All right?  Did David Clayton rely on an
    omission?  And you'll remember what Dr. Figlar said
    about reliance.
         "Do you agree that just as you think it was
    reasonable for the tobacco industry to take the
    position, it was reasonable for your customers to
    rely upon that position, that there was an open
    controversy about whether cigarettes caused disease?
         "I think it was reasonable for the public to
    have considered what was being put out and what the
    industry was saying.
         "And do you think it was reasonable for the
    smoking public to rely upon what you put out?
         "I would say I think so."
         And you'll remember him giving that testimony.
    Dr. Figlar said it was reasonable for the smoking
    public to rely and they did rely.  There's evidence
    of their enormous campaign, this enormous amount of
    information they put out that made smoking seem like
    a harmless activity.  Do you remember the FTC saying
    that?  And that the smoking public relied upon it. And that's what Question 2 and 3 asks you about a
    legal cause of death is whether what they put out
    people relied upon.  And the evidence is
    overwhelming that they did.
         Finally, I want to talk about punitive damages.
    And, remember, Mr. Geise told you about they were
    manipulating the nicotine in order to make the
    product safer and that they're doing all this work
    to make the product safer?  You remember Dr. Cook's
    testimony.  Remember, one of the last questions they
    asked Dr. Cook?
         "Today, does Reynolds have a research project
    with the intent of making a less addictive
    cigarette?  Can you answer that question?
         "To the best of my knowledge, I don't believe
    we do."
         They're not working to make a less addictive
    cigarette.  You know, as I predicted, Mr. Geise
    didn't say very much about what R. J. Reynolds did.
    He talked a lot about David Clayton, what David
    Clayton didn't do, what David Clayton did do.  At
    one point, I wrote down, wow, wow, that evidence of
    fraud and a finding of fraud on behalf of your
    client, you're going to talk about that David
    Clayton didn't give up skim milk? MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, the findings are not an
    issue.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Overruled.  She can
    refer to them.
         MS. SHAMP:  You're going to talk about whether
    he drank iced tea?  You're going to compare drinking
    iced tea to smoking cigarettes?  Maybe it's hard to
    talk much about what the client did when you've got
    documents like this.  "It's fortunate for us that
    cigarettes are a habit that they can't break."
    That's fortunate for us because we can make a lot of
    money.  That's fortunate.  "Doubt is our product."
    That's what we're selling.  So maybe it's hard to
    talk very much about what your client did, and so
    you're -- you're forced to talk about David Clayton
    drinking milk.
         But he said one thing in his closing that
    really struck me.  You'll remember him saying it,
    both in his opening and in his closing.  He said
    there are some things they did that are just dumb,
    some things we wrote down that are stupid.  Remember
    him saying that?  Stupid or brilliant?  Stupid or
    brilliant?
         How many cigarettes did they sell as a result
    of this campaign that they engaged in?  How many more people did they keep smoking their product
    because of the false controversy that they created,
    that they established when none existed?  Then it
    hit me this morning.  That's exactly what he's doing
    today.  He's trying to create a false controversy
    about --
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I object.  This
    violates the ruling for the case.
         THE COURT:  Sidebar.
         (A sidebar conference was held outside the
hearing of the jury as follows:
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. GEISE:  We have a ruling in this case, one
    of the pretrial motions, as far as commenting on
    litigation strategy and using the documents to talk
    about what we did in this case to defend ourselves.
    I believe that's what Ms. Shamp is doing here, in
    violation of the court's order before the trial
    began.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, I think it's a
    fair comment upon him creating a controversy and
    I've --
         THE COURT:  All right.  I'm going to overrule
    the objection.  I think you can organize the merits
    of each side of the case and that's what everybody does.
         MR. GEISE:  Okay.  But the commentary would be
    to use the documents and say, this is what they're
    continuing to do, this is what they're doing.  It's
    in violation of the pretrial order.
         MS. SHAMP:  I heard him say he's creating a
    controversy where none exists.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         (The sidebar conference was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court, in the
presence of the jury:)
         THE COURT:  You may continue.  I'll overrule
    the objection.
         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you.  They're trying to
    create a controversy in this case where none exists,
    whether a person who smoked for 45 years, at least a
    pack and a half a day, that got up in the middle of
    the night to go get cigarettes wasn't addicted, that
    a man who was diagnosed with squamous cell cancer of
    the lung underwent chemotherapy, radiation, ended up
    in a nursing home, eventually not able to eat and
    died, didn't have lung cancer.  Trying to create
    controversies that don't exist.
         We brought in witnesses, Smith Gavin, Lee
    Bonner, people who had no interest in this litigation.  Mr. Geise is trying to make you believe
    that they weren't telling the truth, or there was
    something untruthful about the things that they
    said.  That's not right.
         But perhaps most convincing of all, lawsuit
    David Clayton, lawsuit David Clayton.  Is that a
    fair way to represent what we presented to you in
    this trial?  The David Clayton that we presented who
    was a good man, who loved his wife, who took care of
    his family, is that a fair way to represent him?
         A man who didn't start with many advantages,
    worked hard and made a good life for himself.  David
    Clayton didn't deserve to be called "lawsuit David
    Clayton."  Is that fair or right from the company he
    trusted, from the company he handed over his money
    to every day to buy those cigarettes?
         David Clayton lost ten years of life
    expectancy.  You'll remember, Mr. Spruance said
    that, ten years, ten years taken away from him and
    his wife.  David Clayton is dead, as are 40 percent
    of the people who have ever regularly used
    defendant's product.
         Mr. Geise talked to you about all the things
    that R. J. Reynolds has now done, right?  Disbanded
    CTR and produced all those documents.  Ask yourself this question:  Did they do any of that without
    being forced to?  Remember the testimony.  All of
    them, somebody made them do that.  That's what your
    role is here today.  They won't do it voluntary.
    They have to be made to do it.
         Mr. Geise asked for one of you to serve as his
    advocate, I think he said, in the courtroom -- in
    the jury room.  Let me ask all of you, all of you,
    to be the advocate of truth and honesty back in the
    jury room.
         The word verdict means "to speak the truth."
    "Ver" from veritas, truthfulness, "dict," like
    Dictaphone.  Verdict means to speak the truth, and
    we ask of you today something very simple.  We ask
    you to render a verdict based on the evidence that
    has been presented to you.  We ask you to render a
    verdict that places responsibility on R. J. Reynolds
    for their product.  We ask you to render a verdict
    that compensates Gloria Clayton for the loss of ten
    years of life with her husband, for watching her
    husband die.
         And finally, we ask for a verdict finding that
    the conduct that you heard about in this courtroom
    is unacceptable, a finding that says you sitting
    here as a jury find that conduct not okay.  I ask when you're discussing punitive damages back there,
    to base your decision, as the law requires, on what
    the evidence was in this courtroom about what
    happened.
         Mr. Geise truthfully has not put on any
    evidence to contradict it, to contradict their years
    and years and years of lying.  They didn't admit
    that smoking caused lung cancer until the year 2000.
    Base your verdict on the evidence about the
    reprehensibility of their conduct.
         This is what the charge says about punitive
    damages.  In determining whether punitive damages
    are awarded, you may consider similar harms suffered
    by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in
    assessing the reprehensibility and the harmfulness
    of their conduct.  We ask you to find that punitive
    damages are entitled in this case.
         I want to thank you again for your service and
    for your attention.  We look forward to your
    verdict.  Thank you.
