MR. GORDON: Thank you, Your Honor.
Ms. Clay, Mr. Norton, Mr. Denney. Mr. Bass is back there.
Ladies and Gentlemen, good afternoon. When we first began this trial you might recall that Mr. Norton, Mr. Rosenstein and I each had an opportunity to talk to you about this case. And in the three weeks since then, I know you've all been diligently taking notes. You've amazed us, frankly, with your attention to every witness through testimony that I imagine has not always been the most interesting of topics.
I want to let you know that I appreciate your service, and my team appreciates the attention that you have given all the parties and your efforts in your promise to listen to all the evidence before making your decision.
At the start of this case, you heard what the evidence would show. Now I have one last chance to talk to you again about this case and discuss what the evidence has shown.
Before I do that, as I did in my opening statement, I want to put this case again back where I think it belongs. As I said in my opening statement, this case is not about cigarette companies or the tobacco industry.
This case is also not about whether cigarettes should be legal or illegal. Cigarettes are a legal product, legal to manufacture, legal to advertise, legal to sell and legal to smoke.
So why are we here? What is this case about? This case is about one smoker, Janie Mae Clay, and whether defendants should be liable, whether these defendants should pay money to her family for the choices Mrs. Clay made.
This case is about Janie Mae Clay and her choices. Her choice to smoke. Her choice to
keep smoking and her choice to quit. The choice she made to smoke in the face of warnings, repeated warnings from her children and her husband, repeated warnings from her doctors,
repeated warnings in magazines, in the newspaper and on TV, and warnings on every single cigarette package she picked up and smoked from 1966 until she quit in 1998.
We know Mrs. Clay heard and understood these warnings. How and why? We know this because she told her own children not to smoke. Make no mistake about it, as I told you in my opening statements, defendants aren't here to second guess Mrs. Clay's choice to smoke or to somehow suggest that her choice was wrong. But she alone made choices concerning her smoking behavior.
We heard over and over about Surgeon General reports and we saw that even tne Surgeon General has said that cigarette smoking is a personal choice behavior. "Cigarette smoking represents a category of health problems that can be called personal choice health behavior. Cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior and the individual smoker must decide whether or not
to continue that behavior."
Mrs. Clay chose to smoke a legal product, a product with known health risks, but she had that right. In this country our government doesn't tell its citizens that they can't smoke.
Mrs. Clay had the right to choose to smoke and to keep smoking. She exercised those rights, but Reynolds should not be liable to Mrs. Clay's family for those choices.
Before we get to the main issues in this case, I also want to spend just a brief moment on burden of proof. As you heard during jury selection and as the Court will soon instruct you, plaintiff bears the burden of proof in this case. Plaintiff, not defendants, but plaintiff must prove nearly every one of her claims by a greater weight of the evidence. I'll discuss later that plaintiff's claim for punitive damages, as you heard, must be shown by a higher standard, clear and convincing evidence, a higher standard of proof.
The defendants have no burden in this case, no burden to prove or disprove anything. The burden rests with plaintiff and plaintiff alone.
Now, we've heard from many witnesses and
we've seen many documents. Let's return, however, to the three main issues in this case.
I showed these to you during my opening statement.
Could Mrs. Clay have quit smoking and avoided her COPD? Did Mrs. Clay know smoking was harmful to her health and could cause lung diseases such as her COPD? Did Mrs. Clay rely on anything the defendants said or didn't say? Did she rely on anything that the defendants did or didn't do?
Issue number one, could Mrs. Clay have quit smoking and avoided her COPD? The answer is yes. Mrs. Clay quit smoking at least twice when she wanted to do so. Once in 1997 for five months
and then again for good in November 1998.
Despite the evidence that Mrs. Clay quit, plaintiff would have you believe that Mrs. Clay was hopelessly addicted. You'll be instructed by the Court that you may accept expert opinion testimony, you may reject it, or give it the weight that you think that it deserves.
Everyone that testified before you had the exact same record to review, the same depositions of family and friends, and Mrs. Clay's medical
records. No one could interview Mrs. Clay, not Dr. Cummings, Dr. Burns, not Dr. Benowitz, nor any other experts that you heard from in this case, including Dr. Kaplan.
The difference, however, between plaintiff's experts and Dr. Kaplan was that plaintiff's experts only needed to know that Mrs. Clay smoked for many years and smoked first thing in the morning. That was it.
Dr. Cummings testified that he really only needed to know that Mrs. Clay smoked first thing in the morning to determine that she was addicted. What kind of science is that?
Dr. Burns testified that he had what he called a, quote, practical approach to say whether Mrs. Clay was addicted, not a scientifically valid measure or set of criteria like the DSM, mind you, just his own approach.
Dr. Scott, her treating physician, the only treating doctor you heard from, only needed to know that Mrs. Clay smoked for many years. That was all he needed to know. But remember Dr. Scott first saw Mrs. Clay two and a half years after she had already quit smoking for good.
But even though each of them labeled Mrs. Clay as addicted, they also each admitted that they would never tell a person that he or she could not quit smoking and that, of course, is the key here, whether someone can change or control their smoking behavior, as Mrs. Clay did.
Dr. Cummings: "You never told anyone who comes into your smoking clinic at Roswell Park that it was impossible for him or her to quit smoking? Answer, that's true."
Dr. Burns: "When you say that someone is addicted, that doesn't mean that they can't quit smoking, correct? No, it doesn't."
Dr. Benowitz: "Smokers can and do quit every single day, do they not? Yes. In fact, 3,000 people quit every single day in this country, do they not? Answer, yes. If we do the math, that means 1.3 million people quit every single year? Answer, yes. As we sit here today in January of 2009, as many as 60 million people have quit smoking in this country; isn't that true? Answer, yes."
Dr. Benowitz also told us that many of those former smokers would have met the criteria for being heavily addicted.
What does it mean to call Mrs. Clay addicted under any of the plaintiff's various different opinions? Nothing really because labels just don't matter. In fact, Dr. Benowitz told us that in his video testimony.
(Video clip of Dr. Benowitz played as follows:
"And whether you use the term addiction, habitation, dependence, the real issue as we've just talked about a moment ago is the control people have over their behavior, right? Yes."
(Conclusion of video clip)
You see, what is important is whether Mrs. Clay had control over her behavior and the ability to stop smoking, and we know that she did.
She didn't smoke while driving a school bus and while in church. She didn't smoke where it wasn't allowed. She quit for five months once and she reduced her smoking to just a pack every two and a half days or about eight cigarettes per day.
Dr. Cummings admitted that Mrs. Clay's daughter Jackie testified Mrs. Clay cut her smoking at one point to five and then two
cigarettes a day. "And her daughter Jackie Clay testified that at some time she cut down her cigarettes to five and then two cigarettes a day, correct? Answer, that's true."
Then, of course, Mrs. Clay quit for good in 1998 cold turkey without any assistance, almost three years before she was on portable oxygen at home.
We also heard a lot about how strong Mrs. Clay was, how she was the matriarch of her family, strong-willed and decisive. Mrs. Clay was not a victim and you shouldn't turn her into one now. When she made up her mind to do something, she did it. Her choices weren't constrained, as Dr. Cummings told us. She didn't somehow lose her freewill just because she smoked. This was a strong, capable woman. She made her own choices and decisions.
Is it difficult to quit smoking? Sure, it is. No one disputes that. But plaintiff's experts didn't want to address Mrs. Clay's smoking behavior. They just wanted to label her addicted any way they could.
Reynolds brought Dr. Kaplan here to testify about his conclusions about whether Mrs. Clay was
addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
While Dr. Kaplan was paid for his time to review thousands of pages of medical records and depositions of Mrs. Clay's family and friends, he is not a very well paid witness like Dr. Burns. He's not a self-described anti-tobacco advocate like Dr. Cummings.
Dr. Burns: "In fact, this morning you said that, quote, I am very well paid for this process, end quote? Answer, yes, I am very well paid."
Dr. Cummings: We met briefly. My name is Harold Gordon. Sir, in the past you've described yourself as an anti-tobacco advocate? Answer, yes."
Dr. Kaplan was here and gave us his honest assessment of the entire record. Dr. Kaplan testified that when he testifies for the defense, not the plaintiffs, but for the defense, in cases just like this one, he has found more times than not that the person was nicotine dependent or addicted.
"When you're in court testifying on behalf of the tobacco company, how do the percentages shake out, sir?" Dr. Kaplan answered, "That's an
interesting question. When I've been in court, I have found more times than not that the person was nicotine dependent in the times that I've been in depositions or trial testimony."
Dr. Kaplan looked at Mrs. Clay's smoking behavior and concluded that under the diagnostic criteria that he uses, the DSM-IV, which is the gold standard in forensic cases like this,
Mrs. Clay was not nicotine dependent or nicotine addicted.
Even though plaintiff's counsel made a big deal on Friday with Dr. Kaplan that he couldn't interview Mrs. Clay face to face, nor could Dr. Cummings or Dr. Burns, mind you, you now get to decide who presented you with a more complete and thorough review and evaluation of Mrs. Clay's smoking behavior, Dr. Kaplan or Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns.
As I mentioned, Dr. Scott admitted he never had any reason to ask Mrs. Clay how she quit smoking because he saw her for the first time two and a half years after she had quit for good.
As I mentioned, the real issue is this. Could Mrs. Clay control her smoking behavior? Could she quit smoking if she wanted to do so?
All the experts in this case agreed that any smoker can quit if he or she is truly motivated. Motivation, you see, is the key to success in quitting.
Dr. Benowitz, he didn't come here to testify live, as you recall. We heard some previous videotaped testimony. You may recall that Dr. Benowitz told us he didn't know anything about Mrs. Clay, the plaintiff here. He didn't know anything about her smoking habits, smoking habits of Mrs. Clay, Janie Mae Clay.
"Isn't it true that you do not have any personal knowledge about the facts of this particular case? Answer, that's correct." But he agreed, Dr. Benowitz agreed, that the two biggest factors that determine whether someone can successfully quit are, one, motivation and two, persistence.
Question, this is of Dr. Benowitz. "You alluded to a few of those a moment ago, but you agree that being motivated, being motivated to quit is essential to successfully quitting
smoking, right? Answer, yes. Question, you tel your patients that the two biggest factors that will determine their success in quitting smoking
is, number one, determination or motivation, and number two, persistence, right? Answer, yes."
Dr. Cummings told us that too, motivation is key. Remember, he runs the New York State quit line, while on the website this is what he tells smokers. "The first question says, do I really want to quit smoking, true?" This is my questions to Dr. Cummings on cross-examination. "Answer, that's what it says. Question, and 'really' is capitalized because the smoker has to be motivated to quit, correct? Answer, they do."
Dr. Burns: "Question, And individuals still had to be motivated to quit? Answer, Well, that's always true. It's always true that someone has to make the effort. It's a voluntary activity to quit, just as it is a voluntary activity to pick up the cigarette and smoke it."
Even if addicted, being addicted does not mean that you cannot quit smoking. Being addicted does not mean that you are compelled to smoke against your will. Being addicted does not mean that you lose the freedom to choose whether or not to smoke.
Dr. Benowitz also told us that every smoker can quit.
(Video clip of Dr. Benowitz played as follows:
"There's no cigarette smoker who without the right support or assistance cannot quit smoking? Yes."
(Conclusion of video clip)
Dr. Kaplan agreed. He testified that smokers can quit with sufficient motivation.
What did the record here show with respect to whether Mrs. Clay was motivated to quit?
Mrs. Clay's attempt to quit in May 1987 after her heart attack wasn't really a quit attempt. Even Finna Clay has some doubt as to whether Mrs. Clay really tried to quit then.
Mrs. Clay's first honest to goodness attempt was after her gallbladder surgery in October 1997.
She did quit then. She quit for five months after smoking for decades.
Plaintiff's counsel would somehow have you believe that even though she quit for five months, her brain was somehow permanently altered, that she had no choice but to start smoking again. That's simply not true.
How do we know this? Plaintiff's own expert, Dr. Benowitz told us. "Question, okay,
after a smoker stops smoking, is it true that the receptors you talked about in the brain go back to normal? Answer, yes."
He told us within a few weeks after a smoker quits smoking, the nicotinic receptors return to normal. You heard a great deal about nicotinic receptors, but as Dr. Kaplan told us,
there s nothing unusual about nicotinic receptors. We all have them. Even nonsmokers have them.
Dr. Kaplan also testified that within two to four weeks, the nicotinic receptors in the brain return to their presmoking baseline level. There is no permanent change as plaintiff's counsel would have you believe.
Dr. Kaplan also told us that within only two or three days after quitting, a smoker no longer has any nicotine in their system.
Dr. Benowitz agreed.
"Isn't it true that within roughly 72 hours, three days, all of the nicotine in the body of a smoker is gone if they have quit smoking? Answer, for the most part, yes."
Dr. Kaplan testified that if Mrs. Clay returned to smoking after five months, it would
not be for any physiological addiction reason.
She was not suffering from any nicotine withdrawal because the nicotine would have been long gone from her system and her receptors would have returned to their presmoking level.
Mrs. Clay's second real quit attempt was in November 1998. This was her final quit attempt. She was motivated and she was ready to quit. For good she quit cold turkey. She simply put her cigarettes down. That is undisputed.
How do we know Mrs. Clay could quit?
Because she did quit, not once but twice. What is the best evidence of whether someone can quit if they do quit, just like Mrs. Clay did.
I want to talk about the first question on the verdict form that you've already seen.
Before I do that I want to remind you of something, and that is before you leave to deliberate, the Court will instruct you on certain findings you heard about from the Engle case. These findings do not mean that the defendants are liable to Finna Clay. If they did, we wouldn't be here today. Just as important, you cannot consider these findings in answering this first question on the verdict
form.
Let me say that again. As difficult as it may be to disregard those findings, when you decide the first question on the verdict form, as the Court will instruct you, you must disregard them.
When answering this first question on the verdict form, "Was Janie Mae Clay addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her death?"You must decide two questions. There's really two questions on that first question on the verdict form. One is, was Mrs. Clay addicted to nicotine in cigarettes and then two, whether that was the legal cause of her death.
The answer to the first part of that question is no. Mrs. Clay was not addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. The answer to the second
part of the question is also no. Was addiction something that forced her toward death? Was it some sort of inevitable force, an irresistible force? The answer to that is no.
Even if Mrs. Clay was addicted to smoking, and we believe she wasn't, someone had the ability to break the chain linking that addiction
in a smoking-related death. That someone was Mrs. Clay, a strong-willed human being with the ability to make choices, including choices regarding her smoking.
It wasn't Mrs. Clay's addiction, but rather her choices and her choices alone that are the legal cause of her death. Mrs. Clay controlled her smoking behavior. Nicotine did not control Mrs. Clay.
Second issue. Did Mrs. Clay know smoking was harmful to her health and could cause lung diseases such as her COPD?
You heard that Mrs. Clay knew because she was told by her family that smoking was bad for her. You heard this from Finna Clay and from Teddy Clay.
"Question, after her heart attack, you had a conversation with her about her smoking?
Answer, yes. Question, and she told you in that conversation that the doctor told her she needed to stop smoking because that had been a factor in her heart attack? Answer, in her health, yes. Question, right. You heard your father tell your mother she needed to put the cigarettes down? Answer, yes. You also heard your sister Betty
tell your mother that she shouldn't be smoking? Answer, yes. Betty told her that cigarettes were not good for her? Yeah. Your mother told Betty that she knew she shouldn't be smoking? That's correct."
Here is Teddy Clay. "Over the years you told your children many times that smoking was bad for their health; is that right? Answer, That's right. And you also told your wife many times that smoking was bad for her health too; is that right? Answer, I sure did."
You heard that Mrs. Clay knew because her doctors also told her that smoking was bad for her and that she needed to quit. We've already been through the warnings from her doctors that appear in a number of her medical records.
We also heard that every cigarette carton or package that Mrs. Clay bought and smoked since 1966 carried a warning label. We know the warnings registered with Mrs. Clay because she passed them on to her children. We also know that the health risks and addictive nature of smoking were widely publicized throughout the 20th century. This was not an older generation that didn't know about the risks of smoking.
Even plaintiff's experts agreed.
Dr. Cummings: "In fact, the Reader's Digest articles published in the 1930s, '40s
50s, they referred to nicotine as a drug?
Answer, They did. And those articles also reported that people could be addicted to nicotine? Answer, They did."
Dr. Cummings agreed that Reader's Digest was referring to nicotine as a drug and reporting that nicotine is addictive in articles that ran in the 1930s, '40s and '50s.
Dr. Burns on the '64 Surgeon General's report. "In fact, the 1964 Surgeon General's report was perhaps one of the most widely publicized public health documents in history? Answer, That is generally thought to be true, yes."
We focused on the 1950s and '60s because as the Court instructed you at one point, you can't impose liability on defendants for a failure to warn after July 1st, 1969, over 40 years ago.
What was the other evidence? The Florida State Board of Health in 1906 was calling cigarette smoking addictive. "Today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the
very worst form of tobacco addiction."
The addictive qualities of smoking weren't being covered up or hidden. The public health authorities in Florida knew about it back in 1906.
Textbooks, the health risks were also being taught in schools in Florida and right here in Escambia County. How do we know this? Because the State of Florida required it as part of the course of study in school.
Was this information reaching students? In 1959 when Mrs. Clay was about 15 years old, Harvard performed a survey that showed that 95 percent of senior high school students had heard that lung cancer was caused by smoking.
95 percent. 1961 Gallup survey of high school students, three out of four sophomores thought that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer. That was only several years after Mrs. Clay allegedly started smoking and it was three years before the 1964 Surgeon General's report.
This was no secret that only the tobacco companies knew. It wasn't about who had superior scientific knowledge, as plaintiff's counsel suggested. The health risks of smoking were
widely known and people believed that smoking was bad for them.
We heard that Mrs. Clay enjoyed watching TV and that included the evening news. We've seen TV clips in this trial of See It Now, one of the most popular news stories of the 1950s, and the CBS Evening News, announcing the 1964 Surgeon General's report. We saw later clips from all three major networks discussing the health risks of smoking.
We also saw magazine articles including Reader's Digest which published numerous articles on the health risks of smoking throughout the 1950s. Since November 1924 tne Reader's Digest
has published 36 articles on smoking and health. The American Cancer Society has termed them a "profound influence" in creating public awareness of the risks involved in smoking. The risks of smoking and the fact that smoking was difficult to quit, these were not a secret. They were widely publicized.
We also saw the headline from the Pensacola News Journal in 1964, the front page above the fold story on the Surgeon General's report. This was big news, including here in Pensacola. We
know that Mrs. Clay was an avid News Journal reader and that she had a subscription and read it every morning.
Plaintiff's counsel at one point suggested that Mrs. Clay didn't read the paper until the 1970s and that somehow that means she missed coverage of this story or any of the other hundreds of articles discussing smoking and health that ran in the Pensacola papers. You should decide for yourself whether that argument is reasonable.
Plaintiff's counsel has also suggested that you should listen to the "public health side" of the story. Well, let's do that. What were the nation's leading public health authorities saying about the coverage of the health risks of smoking?
Surgeon General Burney, a top public health official in the United States, 1957, "Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV."
Dr. John Heller, director of the National Cancer Institute, federally funded agency, "Newspapers, radio, TV and other media have done
an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public."
The American Medical Association also obviously part of the public health community, 1964, "The health hazards of excessive smoking have been well publicized for more than ten years", that is going back to 1954, "and are common knowledge. Labeling will not alert even the young cigarette smoker to any risks of which he is not already aware."
Then we have Dr. Daniel Horn of the U.S. National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, 1968. "You could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know."
The public health officials who were saying back in the 1950s and 1960s that the public was aware of the health risks of smoking, knew what the tobacco companies were saying and their conclusion was that the public was being informed about these health risks. That's what the public health officials were saying. That's the public health side of the story.
Again, the health risks or addictive nature of smoking weren't some secret that only the tobacco companies knew about. There was a massive amount of information available to the public, including information before Mrs. Clay picked up her first cigarette.
Before I move on to the third issue in the case, I want to spend just a few moments on some of the other questions on the verdict form.
The first is this, "Please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of Janie Mae Clay's death that you charge to Janie Mae Clay, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and Liggett Group."
If you get to this question on the verdict form, and we believe you should not get to this question, but if you do, I want to make one thing clear. Plaintiff's counsel just told you that Mrs. Clay bears some responsibility here. The plaintiff admits that Mrs. Clay made choices and that she bears some responsibility for those choices. Because of that, if you get to this question on the verdict form, I would urge you to put a zero next to Reynolds and next to Liggett.
Millions of people choose to smoke,
Mrs. Clay chose to smoke. While we respect Mrs. Clay's choice to smoke and keep smoking a legal product, those choices were her choices and hers alone. She could quit and she did quit, and there was nothing, other than her choice to keep smoking, that prevented her from quitting smoking earlier.
The next series of questions, I know that's difficult to read, but I'll represent to you that the next series of questions on the verdict form ask what damages, if any, Mrs. Clay's estate and certain members of her family are entitled to.
Just like the last question we just discussed, defendants don't believe you should even reach these questions, but if you do, think about the following.
First, do you remember that plaintiff brought in Dr. Pacey, an economist, to testify about economic loss for Mrs. Clay's daughter, Janie Clay, and her husband Teddy Clay.
Dr. Pacey admitted that she was not here to say that defendants were liable. She was just doing the math on the loss to Mrs. Clay's survivors.
Her calculations had no bearing on whether any defendant here is liable to Mrs. Clay.
I put up on the screen a number of assumptions that Dr. Pacey had to make to get to her final figure. She agreed that she made certain assumptions that are reflected here on this screen.
She assumed that Mrs. Clay would have retired at age 67, not age 65. She assumed that Mrs. Clay would have lived until age 84. She assumed that Mrs. Clay's benefits equal 20 percent of her wages and that she would have
done 30 hours of household services each week until her mid 80s, and 14 hours of care for her daughter every week until the age of 84.
In response to my questions Dr. Pacey told you that if her assumptions changed, she would have to revise her final figures. For example, if Mrs. Clay only worked to the age 65 instead of 67, the number Dr. Pacey assumed, she would need to reduce her final figures. Remember, all of Dr. Pacey's assumptions had to be true to get to her number.
Dr. Pacey also made assumptions regarding Mrs. Clay's life expectancy, which I just mentioned, how long would Mrs. Clay have lived. This number is important because household
services, which were a big part of Dr. Pacey's final figure, were tied to Mrs. Clay's life expectancy. In other words, if Mrs. Clay had a shorter life expectancy than Dr. Pacey assumed, then the amount of money that Dr. Pacey calculated as a loss to Mr. Clay or Janie Clay would be less.
You'll also recall that Dr. Pacey assumed that there were not any other medical conditions that would have shortened Mrs. Clay's life span. So because of that, she simply used general statistics to determine Mrs. Clay's life expectancy and assumed that Mrs. Clay would live until she was 84 years old.
Even plaintiff's counsel didn't agree with 84 as a life expectancy. They used a U.S. vital statistics table of 24.2 years from the time of Mrs. Clay's death or 82.2 years old.
Secondly, Mr. Norton just asked you for millions of dollars in damages for pain and suffering to Teddy Clay and Larry Clay, who was nearly 24 years old when Mrs. Clay died. I don't think anyone in this courtroom would disagree that no amount of money can bring Mrs. Clay back. Her death was an awful loss for her family as
anyone who has lost a close family member knows. But to suggest that Teddy Clay and Larry Clay should receive the amount of money Mr. Norton has suggested, an extraordinary number by any measure, I would ask you to ask yourselves what is the basis for that number?
I think you'll find there is no basis for the number you heard for pain and suffering from Mr. Norton, and there needs to be a fair and reasonable basis for any damages awarded here. I say that again. There needs to be a fair and reasonable basis for any damages, if you choose to award them.
The third issue, did Mrs. Clay rely on anything the defendants said or didn't say? Did she rely on anything they did or didn't do? Go to the relevant question on the verdict form.
This question asks, "Was the agreement among R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Liggett Group LLC, other cigarette manufacturers, the Council for Tobacco Research and the Tobacco
Institute to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of the death of Janie Mae Clay?"
Once again, defendants believe that you should not get this far on the verdict form, but if you do, here is what the Court will instruct you concerning this question. "In order to be a legal cause of death, plaintiff must show that Janie Mae Clay relied on statements by either R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company or Liggett Group, LLC, or any of the other companies involved in the agreement to withhold material information concerning the health effect of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both made at any time during or after December 1953."
What does all that mean? What it means is that in order to meet her burden, in order for plaintiffs to meet their burden in showing that some agreement was the real cause of Mrs. Clay's death, plaintiff must show you that Mrs. Clay, not other smokers or smokers in general, but Mrs. Clay herself relied on something the defendants did or didn't say or did or didn't do. Not just that she heard a statement by a tobacco company, but that she relied on it somewhat in starting or continuing to smoke.
Is there any evidence here that Mrs. Clay actually saw a statement and said, quote, I'm
smoking because of this or I'm not going to quit because I heard this from a tobacco company? Of course not. There isn't a shred of evidence that Mrs. Clay actually relied on anything defendants said or didn't say or did or didn't do. In fact, the evidence shows just the opposite.
For example, Mrs. Clay's sister Bessie Mae Purifoy, when asked how Mrs. Clay chose which brand to smoke, said that Mrs. Clay chose her cigarettes, as you heard, based on price, not on any advertisements from tobacco companies, not on anything that tobacco companies said and certainly nothing the Tobacco Industry Research Committee or the Council for Tobacco Research or Tobacco Institute said.
"First of all, did you ever, other than just seeing her smoking certain cigarettes, did you ever have any discussions with her where you talked about the brands that she was smoking? Answer, No. We talked about the price.
Question, Was there a particular brand that she started smoking because the price was cheaper? Yeah. What was that? We went for the cheaper price. Okay."
Plaintiff, Finna Clay, also told us that
her mother didn't rely on any statements by the tobacco companies. "Your mother never told you that she had heard statements by Hill & Knowlton? Answer, She never told me anything like that.
She never told you that she had had heard statements by Liggett Company? No, she never
told me anything like that. Question, She never told you that she had read any statements by the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company? Answer, She had never told me anything like that. Question, She never told you that she had heard or read any statements by Philip Morris? Answer, No, she's never told me anything."
Plaintiff also told us that Mrs. Clay was not easily influenced by advertisements and that Mrs. Clay had never said anything to her, not once, about any cigarette advertisements.
"Now, your mother was not someone who was easily influenced by advertisements, correct? Answer, I would say she wasn't. Question, She never said anything to you about any cigarette advertisements? Answer, No."
Mrs. Clay never told her sister Bessie Mae that she had heard or relied on anything from the tobacco companies either. "Okay. Did you ever
have any discussions at all with Janie Mae about any particular cigarette company? Let's take my client, R.J. Reynolds. Did y'all ever talk about R.J. Reynolds? Answer, No. Or Liggett and Myers? No. Philip Morris? No. Or Vector? No. Brown & Williamson? No."
Teddy Clay, Mrs. Clay's husband, and someone who had known her from the early 1960s told us Mrs. Clay never blamed the tobacco companies for her smoking. The plaintiff's experts, Dr. Cummings, and the others also agree that there is no evidence that Mrs. Clay saw anything from any tobacco company, let alone relied on it.
Remember, when Dr. Cummings, for instance, showed you press releases, you've heard about some of those again this morning. What did Cummings say about whether there was any evidence that Mrs. Clay saw any of those press releases?
"Mrs. Clay certainly didn't see the press releases themselves, correct? Answer, No, I wouldn't suggest that she had seen the press releases. And if a newspaper didn't write about a press release, she certainly couldn't read about them, correct? Answer, No." No evidence
that she saw any of the press releases Dr. Cummings talked about.
Dr. Burns agreed that there was nothing to suggest that Mrs. Clay read or heard any specific statement made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. Questions put to Dr. Burns. "And there's nothing in any of the depositions that you've read in this case that establishes any specific statement made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company was read or heard by her in any newspaper? Answer, that's correct."
If plaintiff had any evidence that Mrs. Clay relied on anything Reynolds said or didn't say or did or didn't do, we would have seen it, make no bet about it, but we didn't because there is no such evidence and it's not just the absence of evidence. You should also
ask yourselves how did Mrs. Clay react when she heard from her family and doctors that smoking was bad for her health.
Did she say that's the first time I've heard it? No, she didn't say that. Did she say, but the tobacco companies told me smoking wasn't harmful? No, that wasn't her reaction. She knew smoking could be bad for her health. No
advertisements and nothing any tobacco company said or didn't say or did or didn't do kept her smoking or prevented her from quitting.
Plaintiff's counsel spent some time this morning showing you tobacco company documents. Some of those documents, mind you, weren't even from R.J. Reynolds. But he never gave you any evidence, none, not one shred that Mrs. Clay relied on any statement by a tobacco company or a tobacco company executive. There must be a link between those companies and Mrs. Clay, but there isn't such a link. If there was a link, we would have seen it and we didn't.
We also heard this morning about what the tobacco companies were writing in internal documents. But we never heard any link of that conduct, none, to Mrs. Clay in any way.
So if you get to this question on the verdict form, remember this absence of evidence of any reliance. Remember there's no link to Mrs. Clay and answer this question no.
There's one final question on the verdict form, and again we don't believe you should get this far down on the verdict form, but if you do, I want to spend some time talking about what
plaintiffs have to show in order to prove its claim for an entitlement to punitive damages.
As we discussed at the beginning, plaintiff must prove nearly all of her claims, all except this one, by the greater weight of the evidence. This claim, however, she must prove by clear and convincing evidence. Clear and convincing evidence, as I mentioned, is a higher standard than the greater weight standard.
Here is what the Court will tell you about clear and convincing evidence and what it means. "Clear and convincing evidence differs from greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive. Greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. In contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue."
Plaintiff, you see, has to show by clear and convincing evidence that Reynolds' conduct somehow impacted Mrs. Clay and it was wanton or flagrant or in reckless disregard for human life.
I would submit to you that plaintiff cannot meet her burden, the higher burden on this particular
issue.
What does the actual evidence show us? Remember that one of the things that even though the public was being informed of the health risks associated with smoking as far back as the 1950s, when it came to a scientific cause, the tobacco companies took a different position. This position was not unreasonable.
Even prominent public health officials like Dr. Heller, director of the National Cancer Institute, who we've heard a great deal about, said that causation had not been demonstrated.
Dr. Heller said in 1953 and 1957 that causation hadn't been proven, even Dr. Cummings acknowledged that.
"In 1953 the head of the NCI, the National Cancer Institute, Dr. John Heller said there wasn't enough proof that smoking caused lung cancer. Answer, it was Dr. Heller, you've corrected me. Is that correct? Yeah. Four years later in 1957 Dr. Heller of the NCI again took the position before Congress that a cause and effect relationship had not been proven?
Answer, that's true. And that was in sworn testimony before Congress? Answer, that's correct."
That's the federal government stating in 1953 and 1957 that the link between cancer and smoking had not been proven.
You also heard a lot about Claude Teague and his 1953 paper. Teague went to the library, he did a long book report on what he found in the library about smoking and cancer and publicly available articles. There was no new nonpublic research in that memo. Teague concluded the epidemiology or statistical studies tended to show a relationship between smoking and cancer, but that the cause of cancer was still unknown.
I want to take a look now on some other things defendants did just a few years later and since that time.
You heard that Dr. Burns agreed that before the 1964 Surgeon General's report the companies gave the Surgeon General a list of the compounds and carcinogens they had found in cigarette smoke. The Tobacco Industry Research Committee gave the Surgeon General a list of carcinogens. That's not reckless disregard for human life. If
you have reckless disregard for human life, if you wanted to intentionally violate the rights of others, you wouldn't give evidence about cancer causing chemicals and smoking to the Surgeon General. That's evidence of cooperation.
We heard from Dr. Figlar of R.J. Reynolds about all the studies Reynolds scientists have published over the years. I showed him this composite exhibit which had representative articles that Reynolds scientists had published of their research results in the 1950s and continuing through today.
We also heard about a massive encyclopedia,
this book right here, that contains thousands of smoking and health studies by Larson, Haag and Silvette. This book, this encyclopedia was financed in part by the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, by the tobacco companies through the Tobacco Industry Research Committee. It was handed over to the Surgeon General and used as a basic reference for the Surgeon General's 1964 report. That was voluntary conduct.
The Tobacco Industry Research Committee and the tobacco companies did not have to fund this encyclopedia.
As to the Council for Tobacco Research, which remember was the successor to the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, Dr. Cummings agreed that thousands of CTR funded studies were published in peer-reviewed journals, real research and real journals. So did Dr. Burns agree. Nobody here is calling the Council for Tobacco Research a public health authority, but if you publish research that even your critic, the Surgeon General says, is good enough to use in its reports and scientifically accurate, then I submit to you you're not acting wantonly or in reckless disregard to human life. You're not trying to harm people when you do that.
What about other cooperation between the companies and the government? Hard to read, but we heard from Dr. Figlar about something called the NCI Tobacco Working Group, the National Cancer Institute's Tobacco Working Group.
Reynolds scientists, we've highlighted two there, actively participated in this tobacco working group with the federal government. In fact, for ten years, Reynolds voluntarily joined with the government to research and design safer alternatives to conventional cigarettes.
Reynolds didn't have to do that. They voluntarily did so. If they were acting in reckless disregard for human life, Reynolds could have said forget it, we don't have to participate.
You saw that the government stopped the NCI Tobacco Working Group, the government killed that program. I went through this letter with Dr. Figlar. Tobacco companies didn't kill the program as Dr. Burns suggested to you. The government pulled the plug on it.
If Reynolds was acting wantonly or flagrantly or in reckless disregard, they would not, as Dr. Figlar described to you, devote a whole research and development program starting in the early 1950s with thousands of scientists to try and reduce tar and nicotine and other risks associated with smoking.
Dr. Figlar told you that Reynolds currently uses each and every one of its general harm reduction methods in designing and manufacturing its cigarettes. We went through that slide, as you recall, with Dr. Figlar.
The proof that Reynolds wasn't just going
through the motion, that Reynolds wasn't acting
flagrantly or in reckless disregard when it pursued each of these harm reduction techniques in cigarettes is this, also hard to read, but you'll recall what Dr. Figlar told us about this chart.
This is the Surgeon General's report card. This was in the 1979 Surgeon General's report.
Dr. Figlar told you that almost all of the methods that he talked about to make safer cigarettes were given a plus or even a double plus by the Surgeon General on significantly reducing tar and nicotine. The Surgeon General gave the companies positive feedback.
I'm not telling you that cigarettes are safe, make no mistake about it, and neither was Dr. Figlar. Cigarette smoking is very dangerous. When you light a cigarette and set a plant on fire and you breathe in that smoke, there's chemicals in that smoke. No doubt about it, it's dangerous. But Reynolds was not acting in reckless disregard or wantonly or flagrantly when it tried to make all these improvements and the Surgeon General gave them pluses across the board on so many areas on the Surgeon General's report card.
Dr. Figlar also told you that Reynolds, contrary to what plaintiffs have alleged, hasn't in years past and doesn't today follow some formula where every cigarette has to have a specific amount of nicotine such as 1.3 milligrams of nicotine.
What Dr. Figlar told you was that Reynolds manufactured cigarettes with a wide range of nicotine yields because the smoking public demands different cigarettes, from full flavored cigarettes to brands like Carlton, which deliver substantially reduced amounts of tar and nicotine.
What about tar yields? Dr. Figlar showed you the trend for tar yields for the very Winston cigarettes that Mrs. Clay smoked, and he showed you a pattern of significant decline in tar yields over the years since 1954. That was a direct result of Reynolds' efforts to design safer cigarettes.
Dr. Figlar also discussed the development of smokeless tobacco products in the massive undertaking and commitment by Reynolds to develop cigarettes like Premier and Eclipse. We saw substantial reductions in various compounds for
both of those products.
You may remember these slides about Premier, which compared to conventional cigarettes, reduce nicotine by 62 percent, reduced benzo(a)pyrene by 99 percent and after Premier, Reynolds pursued the Eclipse cigarette.
Dr. Figlar told you that Reynolds published the results of its testing of Premier in a 700 page book that it distributed. It gave this book
to public health officials and others. Why do that if you're a company acting in reckless disregard for human safety? You wouldn't publish the results of your cigarette technology and give it to the public health community for free.
Dr. Figlar even told you that he chooses to smoke the Eclipse cigarettes. He's aware of the dangers of cigarette smoking and when he smokes, he makes a choice to smoke Eclipse.
The development and manufacture of these products demonstrates that Reynolds was not acting wantonly, flagrantly or in reckless disregard. Instead, Reynolds research and development has been, and has been doing everything it can, to develop products that may significantly reduce the risk of disease.
And lastly, when you think about punitive damages, please consider this. The tobacco companies pledged that they would cooperate with the public health community in 1954. You saw the Frank Statement, which we discussed during the trial. But they did not pledge that no matter what the Surgeon General said, they would give up their rights as Americans and never disagree with the Surgeon General.
So when the Surgeon General changed the definition of addiction in 1988 for the first time in 50 years and said now cigarettes are considered addictive in the same class as heroin and cocaine, it was not a flagrant and reckless disregard for human life when the tobacco company said, wait a second, we don't think heroin addicts or cocaine addicts are the same as someone who smokes a pack of cigarettes a day.
You heard the Reynolds CEO in 1994, Jim Johnston, you've seen the video clip. He said cigarettes aren't addictive according to the classic definition of addiction. He didn't say that quitting smoking is easy. He just said, look, cigarettes aren't intoxicating. They aren't like heroin and cocaine. That was not an
unreasonable position.
The Court will instruct you that this conduct was protected under the First Amendment. The defendants had a right to appear before Congress and express their views, just like any other American.
The instruction will read, "During the trial you've heard references to defendants' appearances before Congress and various regulatory agencies. Under the law, Reynolds and Liggett have the right to petition, provide information and express their views to their governments on the issues of policy and legislation concerning smoking and health. These and similar communications with the government, advocacy efforts and government submissions are protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, as well as Florida law."
Defendants aren't liable for that conduct and they're certainly not liable to Mrs. Clay for
that conduct where there is zero evidence that she ever saw, heard or relied on any of those statements.
Finally, the mere fact that Reynolds manufactures, advertises and sells cigarettes
doesn't amount to wanton or flagrant conduct or reckless disregard for human life. Whatever your views are about tobacco companies, remember that is all legal conduct.
So with all that evidence in mind, all the cooperation Reynolds and the other tobacco companies pursued with the federal government, the massive undertaking Reynolds has made to make safer cigarettes, if you get to question nine on the verdict form, which asks whether plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages, we would argue that you should answer that question no.
We're nearing the end of a long trial obviously, and I'm almost finished with my closing argument. Before I sit down, I just want to remind you of a few things. Plaintiff will get the chance to talk to you again in rebuttal argument. They have the burden of proof, so they get the last word.
When they talk to you again, I want you to ask yourself two questions. First, is anything plaintiff's counsel telling me, does any of that mean Mrs. Clay could not quit smoking? The answer to that question is no. That's the first question on the verdict form. We know Mrs. Clay
could quit smoking because she did quit.
Because we know this, we ask you to answer no to the first question on the verdict form.
The second question I want you to ask yourself is this: Is anything plaintiff's counsel telling me about what the tobacco companies said or didn't say or did or didn't do, what does any of that have to do with Mrs. Clay; where is the direct link to Mrs. Clay? The answer to that question, question eight on the verdict form, should be no.
Let me also add that when you deliberate and discuss this case amongst yourselves, that you trust your recollection of the evidence, and that you have courage in your convictions and stick with your views of the case. You need not and you should not compromise your views in discussing this case in deliberations.
And remember, we all have sympathy for the Clay family. It wouldn't be natural if we didn't have sympathy for the Clay family. You'll hear that sympathy cannot be a guide in your deliberations. You must be guided only by the evidence and the law as the Court will give it to you.
I want to thank you for listening to me and for the patience that you have shown, the immense patience. It's really been remarkable, the immense patience that you have shown throughout this trial. Thank you.
