         MR. GEISE:  Ms. Shamp, Ms. Bryan, Mrs. Clayton.
         Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  Once
    again it's the bottom of an inning, and once again I
    want to start by thanking you all for your service.
    As I said in voir dire and opening statements, we
    could not have a jury trial without a jury.  So
    you're pretty essential to this process.
         The lawyers, we have to be here.  We choose to
    do this for a living.  Mrs. Clayton is here; she
    chose to file a lawsuit.  But you didn't choose any 2862
    of this.  You were drafted to seat here with us for
    a couple of weeks.
         And there is a range of ways that people can
    make a contribution in our country.  Some serve in
    the armed forces, they serve our country that way.
    Many of us vote on election day.  That's a small
    contribution.
         For the past two weeks you have contributed by
    serving on a jury.  So whatever you decide, whatever
    your verdict is, you can go home to your friends, to
    your family, to your co-workers, and you can tell
    them that you contributed to help making this
    country what it is, because you have.
         And because you did, and for the two weeks of
    service you've put in, I want to thank you on behalf
    of myself, Mr. Carter, our team, and my client.  We
    appreciate it.
         Now, when this case started last week I told
    you that this case is not about other smokers, it's
    only about David Clayton.  And in particular, this
    case is about the choices he made when it came to
    smoking.  As this case draws to a close that's what
    it is still about.
         Two weeks ago I told you you would hear an
    avalanche of information about things that have 2863
    nothing to do with David Clayton.  And you did.  In
    fact, you heard a lot of that again this afternoon.
         You heard about things that Judge McCaulie said
    had already been resolved in that other case, things
    that I told you in my opening statement weren't in
    dispute.
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Wright.  They spent a lot of
    time telling you that smoking causes lung cancer.
    You heard that from Judge McCaulie and from me on
    Day 1.  It wasn't an issue then.  It isn't an issue
    now.
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Werner spent a lot of time
    telling you cigarette smoking is addictive.  You
    heard that from Judge McCaulie, you heard that from
    me on Day 1.  It wasn't an issue then.  It isn't an
    issue now.
         And this case is also not about whether
    cigarettes should be legal.  They are.  They're
    legal to manufacture, they're legal to advertise,
    they're legal to sell.  Those are all legal acts.
    And in this case you heard Reynolds does that.
         Cigarettes are also legal to smoke.  Everyone
    has the right to smoke or not to smoke.  And smokers
    like Mr. Clayton make the choice to smoke
    cigarettes, and that's a legal act too. 2864
         Now, throughout my closing argument I'm going
    to walk through the evidence you heard.  Some of it
    I agree with Ms. Shamp, some of it I don't.  And I'm
    also going to revisit some of the things you were
    promised in opening statement to see if the parties
    kept their word.
         And if you recall, in opening statement I told
    you you would hear two versions of David Clayton's
    story, the lawsuit David Clayton versus the real
    David Clayton.  And you did.
         The plaintiff tried to tell you a story of
    lawsuit David Clayton as somebody who was out of
    control, who never quit until after he had surgery
    for his lung cancer.
         On the other hand, we presented evidence.  You
    saw lots of evidence about the real David Clayton,
    in his own medical records and in his own words,
    things he told his doctors to get treatment for the
    diseases he had at the time he had them.
         And we showed you that the real David Clayton
    was someone who made a number of unhealthy choices,
    including smoking, all against his doctor's wishes
    and orders.  And he didn't make those choices out of
    addiction.  He made those choices because that's
    what he wanted to do. 2865
         And I also told you in opening statement that
    the plaintiff would probably tell you half the story
    on a lot of things, and that you'd probably have to
    wait until the bottom of the inning to hear the
    other half.  The plaintiff did just that.
         The witness who had the most half stories to
    tell was Dr. Proctor.  And you remember him.  He was
    the guy, the million-and-a-half-dollar man.  He had
    the travel itinerary.  This was already his sixth
    trial this year, and we're just in March.
         Now, Ms. Shamp said Dr. Giakas is a hired gun
    because he spent 160 hours on this case reading
    thousands of pages to prepare to come here.  He's a
    hired gun.
         Dr. Proctor has made a million and-a-half
    dollars.  And how many hours did he tell you he
    spent preparing for this case?  Zero.  But Dr.
    Giakas is the hired gun.
         And Dr. Proctor came here, and he couldn't tell
    you anything about David Clayton, nothing about his
    story.  You recall I was going through a laundry
    list of things with Dr. Proctor:  You don't know
    this, you don't know that, you don't know this, you
    didn't look at that.
         And it is simple.  I said, all right, now, Dr. 2866
    Proctor, are you here to testify specifically about
    David Clayton?  He said, no, not at all.
         But nothing at all is sometimes better than
    half of it all.  And how many times did I have to
    show you the rest of the story with Dr. Proctor?  He
    would plant the nugget in your heads during direct
    examination and then wait to see if I bring out the
    other side of the story in cross.  So I did.  I did
    it often.
         You remember that Ms. Shamp, in her opening she
    talked about the Winston ad with the Flintstones?
    And I told you in opening statement there was
    another half to that.  Not deterred she talked about
    that ad with Dr. Proctor, planting the seed that
    Reynolds uses cartoons and advertisements with kids.
         But on cross you learned the other half of the
    story.  Dr. Proctor gave it up.  The Flintstones
    were originally an adult come modeled after the
    Honeymooners and aired in the evening, and the other
    sponsors on the Flintstones were Alka Seltzer and
    One a Day vitamins.  And I played you an ad that
    showed Fred and Wilma with Alka Seltzer and One a
    Day.  Dr. Proctor didn't tell you that.
         And you learned that Mr. Clayton was grown man
    when the Flintstones debuted.  You learned that 2867
    Reynolds never advertised on Flintstones after it
    moved to the mornings.
         And the last part of the story that they didn't
    share is there was no evidence that Mr. Clayton ever
    watched the Flintstones.  Another half story.
         Teague 53.  I think it was the first document
    that Ms. Shamp showed you in her closing argument
    today.  And it told you that Dr. Teague did this
    research project and found out all this information
    about cigarettes, and that he didn't make any of
    that research public.
         But on cross you heard that the research was
    already public.  Remember the 78 articles cited in
    Teague's 53 memo?  All public literature.
         Now, Dr. Proctor talked about that some of them
    were in a German journal, or some of them were just
    an abstract.  Well, I'm sorry Dr. Teague had to work
    a little harder to find those out there, but it was
    all public.
         Another example was kind of at the end of
    Ms. Shamp's closing where she talked about internal
    company research about nicotine, and she suggests
    that, you know, this research is a way to find a
    level to keep smokers hooked.
         But on cross-examination with Dr. Proctor you 2868
    heard there was another side of this nicotine story.
    You heard that some of this research was done at the
    urging of public health officials in conjunction
    with the National Cancer Institute and under the
    instigation of the Surgeon General.  And it was done
    as a way to try to find a less hazardous cigarette.
    That was the name of the NCI Tobacco Working Group
    program.  It was towards a less hazardous cigarette.
         The idea was if we can get the tar down and
    keep the nicotine up maybe that's better, because
    tar kills and nicotine is why people are smoking.
         Now, Ms. Shamp calls that nicotine
    manipulation.  But as you heard, the National Cancer
    Institute called it progress.  Dr. Proctor didn't
    tell you any of that on direct.
         Another misleading half story:  Joe Camel.  Do
    you remember hearing about Joe Camel?  Dr. Proctor
    alleged Joe Camel made people smoke.
         Now, since Dr. Proctor didn't know anything
    about Mr. Clayton, he probably didn't know that Mr.
    Clayton was in his 50's when Joe Camel debuted, and
    he hadn't smoked Camel cigarettes for years before
    it came out.
         But surely Dr. Proctor knew that his
    allegations had been investigated and shot down by 2869
    the FTC.
         You remember this slide that you saw?  The FTC
    investigated in 1994 and said:  Although it may seem
    intuitive to some that the Joe Camel advertising
    campaign would lead more children to smoke, or lead
    children to smoke more, the evidence to support that
    intuition is not there.
         Another half story, the Frank Statement.  You
    heard a lot, you saw a lot about the Frank
    Statement, probably a lot more than you ever wanted
    to know, and you're ready to forget about it.  But
    before you do, remember what Ms. Shamp told you in
    her opening she said the Frank Statement ran in
    every newspaper.
         At the time I thought that was a little bit of
    an overreach.  Dr. Proctor took the stand and said
    it ran in all these papers, hundreds of papers
    around the country.
         Okay.  That's probably accurate.  I think it
    was, but they left out a very important part of the
    story, the part of the story that has to do with
    David Clayton.  He lived in Moultrie, Georgia in
    1954.  So the obvious question is, did the Frank
    Statement run in the Moultrie Observer.
         Now, the plaintiffs have this exhibit.  I think 2870
    it may be their Exhibit 493.  It's our Exhibit
    ANS1405.  And I used it with Dr. Proctor.  And what
    did it show?  Let's take a look at it.  It showed
    that the Frank Statement ran in Atlanta, Atlanta,
    Augusta, Columbus, Macon, and Savannah.  But the one
    city that doesn't appear on that list is Moultrie,
    and the newspaper that doesn't appear on that is the
    Moultrie Observer.
         Ms. Shamp and Dr. Proctor knew that, but they
    didn't tell you that.  I had to do it when we got to
    the other half of the story.  So no matter how many
    times the Frank Statement comes up, we know David
    Clayton never saw it, and neither did anyone else in
    Moultrie, Georgia.  Again half the story.
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor showed you lots of
    memos from bench-level scientists and other
    employees at Reynolds.  But there was one, and I had
    to show Dr. Proctor, that he didn't show you.  Let's
    look at this.
         This is in 1968.  It's from the president of
    R.J. Reynolds to their head of research and
    development.  And this is their area of special
    emphasis:  In cooperation with others you should
    push the work concerning tobacco and health.
    Prepare a plan.  Foster any relationship with the 2871
    government.  If there is a safer cigarette let's
    continue and increase our efforts in this program.
    Please prepare a plan to carry it out.
         This memo wasn't prepared as a trial exhibit.
    It was a directive to continue.  That means the work
    had already started, and they wanted to increase
    their efforts to find a safer cigarette.  And you
    heard about some of those efforts, and we'll talk
    about that.
         So why did you have to wait until
    cross-examination to get the full story, the side
    the plaintiff didn't want to tell you?  The answer
    is simple.  To get you mad.
         Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor were not here to
    offer a single opinion about Mr. Clayton.  In fact,
    they couldn't, because they didn't know a single
    fact about Mr. Clayton.  They were here to get you
    mad in the hopes that you would decide the case
    based on emotion instead of the facts of Mr.
    Clayton's case.  Because if you focus on the real
    David Clayton, unlike Dr. Proctor or Dr. Burns, the
    plaintiff loses.
         The plaintiff loses because she can't meet the
    burden of proving what caused his death.  The
    plaintiff loses because the real David Clayton 2872
    wasn't addicted.  He maintained control over his
    smoking choices, and he smoked because he wanted to
    until he was motivated to quit.  The plaintiff loses
    because any addiction Mr. Clayton had was not the
    legal and substantial cause of his injury.  Instead,
    his choices to smoke, along with a lot of other
    things he was told not to do, were the legal causes
    of his actions and their consequences.  And finally,
    the plaintiff loses because she can't prove a link
    between anything Reynolds said or didn't say and any
    smoking decision Mr. Clayton ever made.
         Now, you might recall I showed this slide in
    opening statement.  These are the three burdens the
    plaintiff has, and I think Ms. Shamp went through
    them in her closing argument:  Smoking causation,
    addiction, and addiction causation.  And I agree
    with Ms. Shamp --
         Can we get the first question from the verdict
    form?  Do you not have it?  That's fine.
         I agree with Ms. Shamp that the first question
    on the verdict form basically includes those three
    issues.  Those are the three things that Ms. Shamp
    needs to prove.  And if they don't prove one of
    them, they lose.  Two out of three isn't good
    enough. 2873
         So you need to agree on each and every hurdle
    in order for them to prevail on the first question.
    If you don't agree on one of them, they lose.  And I
    think the evidence will show they lose on each of
    the three.
         Let's start with the cause of death issue.  I
    told you in my opening statement that the evidence
    about the cause of death may be a little bit
    confusing, and I think it was.
         Now, instead of hearing from any doctor whoever
    treated, whoever saw Mr. Clayton, you heard from Dr.
    Wright.  Dr. Wright is a professional witness.  I
    think he told Mr. Carter that he's testified over
    1500 times, and he said most of those cases deal
    with electrocutions.
         And Dr. Wright showed you certain pathology,
    pathology slides, and he talked about features on
    those that showed that David Clayton had been a
    smoker.  Then he said, as a result smoking caused
    his lung cancer.
         But Dr. Wright showed you pictures from Mr.
    Clayton's 1994 lung cancer, not from his 2005 lung
    cancer.  And Dr. Wright admitted that he was cured
    from his 1994 lung cancer, and that the 2005 lung
    cancer was a completely different event.  So the 2874
    slides that Dr. Wright showed you don't have
    anything to do with the 2005 lung cancer.  We don't
    know what those slides look like.  And there is no
    question that Mr. Clayton was diagnosed with lung
    cancer in 2005.  There is no dispute over that.
         And there is no dispute that Dr. Rice did treat
    him for that lung cancer.  You saw the medical
    records.  And I know I said it in opening that Dr.
    Rice was Mr. Clayton's pulmonologist.  That's just
    what Dr. Wright told us at his deposition.  If he's
    only an internal medicine doctor, so be it.  Either
    way, it doesn't change the fact that Dr. Rice
    treated David Clayton for lung cancer.  And no one
    claims that Dr. Rice didn't know that smoking causes
    lung cancer.  In fact, Dr. Wright told you that
    doctors have known that and warned their patients
    about it since the 1960's.
         So Dr. Rice knew he had lung cancer, and he
    treated him for it, and he even mentioned lung
    cancer on that medical record, remember, he filled
    out about an hour before Mr. Clayton passed away.
    So it was in his mind.  Even so, Dr. Rice did not
    conclude that lung cancer was one of the five
    potential causes of Mr. Clayton's death.
         Ms. Shamp talked about the evidence you have 2875
    and the records you have.  The only record that says
    anything about the cause of Mr. Clayton's death is
    the death certificate.  And you saw it.  It's signed
    by Dr. Rice, and it has -- there's four lines there,
    and Dr. Wright told you you can put four things
    there, and then you can also put something else in
    this box if you want.
         When Dr. Rice filled it out he said:
    Respiratory failure, pulmonary embolism, and COPD.
    He knew that Mr. Clayton had lung cancer, but he
    didn't list it.
         And what else did Dr. Rice say on the death
    certificate?  Let's look at the next slide.  He's
    asked specifically by the State of Florida:  Does
    tobacco, or did tobacco use contribute to death?
    Dr. Rice didn't say yes, Dr. Rice didn't say
    probably.  He said it was unknown.  Unknown does not
    equal proof.
         One other point about Dr. Wright's opinion,
    because it kind of came up during I think his -- in
    his direct examination Mr. Carter asked him about
    it.  But he said that, you know, that pulmonary
    embolism, that -- that -- I agree that could have
    caused his death.  And he suggested that that
    embolism could be related to the lung cancer. 2876
         Well, you saw a disability record back in the
    early 1990's that said that Mr. Clayton suffered
    from immobility because of that disability.  And Dr.
    Wright said that immobility from the lung cancer
    could have led to the pulmonary embolism.
         Now, Dr. Wright didn't talk about those
    disability records, because the plaintiff never gave
    them to him to review.  So we didn't get to ask him
    about it.
         So the plaintiff has the burden of proving what
    caused David Clayton's death, and the evidence may
    be a little bit confusing, but there is not a lot of
    it out there about Mr. Clayton, but we know that the
    death certificate from the State of Florida does not
    mention lung cancer, and we know that matter what
    the cause, whether it was COPD, or pulmonary
    embolism, or lung cancer, the doctor who filled out
    the death certificate did not say it was caused by
    smoking.
         If it wasn't proven to Dr. Rice, it wasn't
    proven to you either.
         Now, I told you in opening statement that you
    would hear two versions of David Clayton's story,
    and you did.  The plaintiff's version came from
    witnesses talking about events that happened 20, 30, 2877
    40, 50 years ago.  And the lawsuit version of David
    Clayton's story portrays him as a heavy, heavy
    smoker, compulsive, out of control, went from 2, to
    3, to 4 packs per day, and unable to quit until
    after he had lung cancer.
         But you saw a different version of David
    Clayton's smoking history, a different version of
    how much he smoked, when he stopped.  A version that
    showed a man very much in control of his smoking.
    And that version was told by Mr. Clayton himself.
         Although he wasn't here to take the witness
    stand, you know a lot about what he did from his
    medical records.  Years before this lawsuit he told
    his doctors things they needed to know in order to
    treat him.  These were statements taken at the time
    the events happened.  These are not memories
    20 years later for purposes of a lawsuit.  These are
    evidence of the real David Clayton.
         Now, Ms. Shamp talked about credibility and
    believability.  And there is a jury instruction on
    that, and you should read that.  And when it comes
    to witness' memories and testimony, please consider
    this:  When each witness walks in this courtroom and
    holds their hand up and they take an oath to tell
    the truth, that's the same oath each of these 2878
    witnesses took in their depositions.  But as you saw
    over and over, the story that the witnesses told
    about the real David Clayton in their depositions
    changed when they came to court to talk about
    lawsuit David Clayton.
         And some were kind of simple discrepancies.
    You recall Mrs. Clayton's daughter Vanessa.  She
    came into court and she talked about how close her
    relationship had been with her stepfather, but Mr.
    Carter had to show her what she said in her
    deposition where she said:  I appreciate what he
    done for us, but we wasn't close.
         There were more with Willie McCullough, Jr.,
    Mrs. Clayton's son.  Let's look at some of those.
    In his deposition he said Mr. Clayton said he
    enjoyed smoking.  Trial testimony, he didn't think
    so.  Before his first cancer he said that his mother
    told Mr. Clayton he should quit, but here he didn't
    think so.  He said Mr. Clayton used to tell him
    smoking was bad, but at trial said he didn't.  He
    said he only asked Mr. Clayton to pull off the road
    once or twice on that that trip to Disney, but on
    the stand he said they stopped at every rest stop.
    He said he never saw Mr. Clayton smoke after his
    lung was removed in his depo, but here at trial he 2879
    said he saw it once or twice.  And in his deposition
    he said, yeah, he drank 3 or 4 beers on Friday, 3 or
    4 on Saturday, but at trial he didn't know how much
    Mr. Clayton drank.
         Mr. McCullough said one thing in his deposition
    about the real David Clayton and something different
    at trial about the lawsuit David Clayton.  And so
    did Mrs. Clayton.  Let's look at the comparison of
    her testimony.
         Remember she told me that she saw him smoke
    after his lung surgery at trial, but then I had to
    impeach her with her deposition testimony where she
    said she did not.  She also at her deposition said
    there was no place he would not go because he wasn't
    allowed to smoke there, but at trial she said he
    refused go certain places.  She said she didn't
    notice any difference when he was chewing gum to
    quit in her deposition, but here at trial she said,
    oh, yeah, I noticed something, he looked tired.  In
    her deposition she said, I don't know what he knew
    about the harms of smoking, but at trial she said
    she knew he didn't think they would harm him.
         And this was the one that surprised me the
    most.  In her deposition she said her husband was
    intelligent.  But remember when I asked her that 2880
    question on the stand?  She wouldn't even agree with
    that.
         Now, one thing about the question of whether he
    knew cigarettes were harmful.  You also remember
    that Mrs. Clayton said at the beginning of their
    marriage in 1979 that's when she started to get on
    him about smoking.  And there were two reasons she
    got on him.  One, she didn't want him dropping ashes
    all over, burning up the house.  That was one
    reason.  The second reason was it was not healthy,
    harmful to him.  1979.  Again, one thing is said in
    a deposition about the real David Clayton, and
    something different was said at trial about lawsuit
    David Clayton.
         Ms. Shamp said you look to see if people are
    trying to describe the person in a certain way to
    seek their needs, or suit their needs.  I agree.
    Each time the story at trial is to support the story
    about lawsuit David Clayton that was completely
    contrary to the story in deposition about the real
    David Clayton, a story at deposition that came under
    the same oath that these witnesses took when they
    testified before you.
         So now let me talk a little bit about
    addiction.  And you'll need to decide what addiction 2881
    means in this case.  You heard expert testimony, and
    there is a lot of testimony about addiction, but the
    court and your instructions don't have a definition.
         Now, first of all, if you look through all the
    medical records you will not see a medical record
    from a doctor who treated Mr. Clayton that reveals a
    diagnosis of addiction.  You won't.
         And you heard that people who are addicted
    experience a loss of control, or as Dr. Giakas said,
    they become significantly impaired and distressed.
    Mr. Clayton's control over his smoking is documented
    in record after record from the time when he was a
    cigarette smoker.
         Let's look at these.  And I'm not going to go
    through these one-by-one.  I know you folks have
    been paying attention, and I know we put these up
    probably more than you wanted to see them in the
    last two weeks.
         You saw these.  From '79 to '93 every time Mr.
    Clayton reported his smoking it was one pack per
    day, or even less, sometimes down to 1 to 3
    cigarettes per day.  All of these are in evidence.
    You can look at them.
         I want to show you one from 1982.  It says,
    smokes half a pack per day.  And the reason I want 2882
    to show you this one is David Clayton signed this
    one.  It's not some random doctor somewhere who
    fills it out and he doesn't have any idea what they
    put down.  He signed the paper.  And over the course
    of 14 years, from 1979 to 1993, before he was
    diagnosed with lung cancer, before there was a
    lawsuit, he consistently told his doctors he smoked
    one pack per day, or less.  Over 20 years later in
    this lawsuit the witnesses want to tell you those
    records are wrong, even the one Mr. Clayton signed.
         The real David Clayton told doctor after doctor
    for many years when he was trying to get treatment
    for himself for his ulcers, for his stomach, that he
    didn't smoke more than a pack a day, that he
    controlled how much he smoked.  Now in this lawsuit
    they want you to think he smoked 2, 3, or even 4
    packs per day.
         Now, one point about the friends and family
    members that you heard from about his smoking
    history.  And I agree with Ms. Shamp.  I think
    everyone said he was a heavy smoker.  He would smoke
    throughout the day.  But the interesting thing was
    the only one of them who was a cigarette smoker
    himself was Lee Bonner.
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor. 2883
         THE COURT:  Hold on a second.
         (Sidebar conference outside the hearing of the
    jury.)
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Let's see here.  Yes, ma'am.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, we moved in limine to
    keep out evidence of other people smoking.  And so
    for him to suggest now that the only people that
    have evidence of cigarette smoking I think is
    improper.
         MR. GEISE:  She asked Mr. Bonner, did you smoke
    with him when you were growing up?  Yes.  They asked
    Mr. Gavin, did you smoke with him?  No, I smoked
    cigars.  They talked about the smoking history of
    those folks.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, it's improper to
    suggest that the only person who testified was a
    cigarette smoker.  That's not true.  That's a false
    statement by counsel.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, you know what?  I'll
    clear it up.
         You would agree that Gloria and Willie are not
    cigarette smokers?
         MS. SHAMP:  Yeah.
         MR. GEISE:  Okay.  And you agree Mr. Bonner 2884
    was?
         MS. SHAMP:  Yeah.
         MR. GEISE:  And Smith Gavin was not?
         MS. SHAMP:  Right.
         MR. GEISE:  Okay.  I won't mention anybody
    else.  I'll use those four or five names and no one
    else.
         THE COURT:  I think the door was opened in the
    testimony about it, and you can rebut if there's a
    discrepancy about his argument.
         MS. SHAMP:  He can rebut, but I don't think he
    can say --
         THE COURT:  No, you can rebut.
         MS. SHAMP:  I know, but I don't think he can
    say something that because of the court's ruling is
    actually just not true, and that was my complaint.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         (Following sidebar.)
         MR. GEISE:  May I continue, Your Honor?
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule the objection.  You
    may continue.
         MR. GEISE:  So of all the witnesses you heard
    from, I want to talk about Lee Bonner.  He was the
    one who talked about he was a cigarette smoker.  And
    Lee Bonner was Mr. Clayton's lifelong friend from 2885
    the time he was young until late in his life.  And
    he said Mr. Clayton was about a 1 to 1-and-a-half
    pack per day smoker, and he was not a chainsmoker.
         Now, I realize that Mrs. Clayton, who is not a
    smoker, and Willie McCullough, who is not a smoker,
    and Smith Gavin, who said he smoked cigars, not
    cigarettes, may have said something else.
         But Mr. Bonner knows smoking behavior because
    he is a smoker.  Maybe to non-smokers it may seem
    like Mr. Clayton was smoking two packs a day, but to
    a smoker like Lee Bonner it was only a pack to pack
    and-a-half.
         And that what's Dr. Giakas and Dr. Werner kind
    of agreed on, pack, pack and-a-half, two.  And they
    told you that the information in this case was kind
    of all across the board, sometimes down to 1 to 3,
    sometimes higher, depending on the deposition, but
    that's where they all came out.
         And the disparity about what Mr. Clayton said
    about his smoking history while he was being
    treated, while he was a smoker, and what he said
    years later, a decade after he quit, is pretty
    telling.
         You recall that the attorneys made a cheat
    sheet for Dr. Wright.  Instead of going through all 2886
    the records that had a smoking history on them, they
    just made a list of all of them for him.  I think
    this is Plaintiff's Exhibit 50.  And that cheat
    sheet shows what I'm trying to explain.
         Let's look at the first exhibit.  Before 1994,
    before Mr. Clayton is -- and at the time he's
    diagnosed with lung cancer -- and I cut it off here.
    Before that every record says a half pack per day,
    or one pack per day at the most back in 1979.
    Everything after that is less than a half pack per
    day.
         This is the plaintiff's exhibit.  This is their
    summary of it.  This is their cheat sheet for Dr.
    Wright.
         Now let's go to the back half of their exhibit.
    This is after 2005.  There's a couple records in
    2000 and 2002 that did say he's not smoking, but
    they don't say how much.
         After that, that's when they start to say, oh,
    it's a pack and-a-half per day, it's 100-pack-year
    history.  That's where those records are in there.
    And remember something.  These records never say 3
    or 4 packs per day.  They don't.
         And recall something else about these doctor
    visits.  This is the time when Mrs. Clayton said she 2887
    started going to the doctor with Mr. Clayton.
    That's when the numbers start to go up.
         So the plaintiff's cheat sheet makes it clear.
    It's proof that the real David Clayton, while he was
    a smoker, said one thing, and the story for lawsuit
    David Clayton is another.
         I told you during opening statement you would
    hear some simple facts about nicotine, and you did,
    facts about nicotine, nicotine addiction.  I'm going
    to put the slide up.  You saw these.  I don't think
    anybody disagreed.
         Ms. Shamp in her closing brought up brain
    receptors again, nicotinic receptors.  I think Dr.
    Werner finally agreed, and I know Dr. Giakas told
    you that those changes aren't permanent.  And while
    there are nicotinic receptors, you heard there are
    caffeine receptors, and everything else.  Any
    substance like that causes that.  You get up
    regulation, you stop using it and it goes back to
    normal.
         And I think when Dr. Werner talks about
    nicotine hijacking the brain, she said caffeine also
    hijacks the brain.  Substances work the same.
         Now, the one thing that is interesting is we
    talked about quitting.  Can smokers quit?  Yes, 2888
    every smoker can quit.  And what percentage of them
    are addicted came up, and plaintiffs put in some
    evidence on that.
         And it was funny.  When Ms. Shamp had one of
    her slides up in her closing argument, I don't know
    if you noticed it, there was a typo at the bottom of
    one and it said, statistical poof.  I think she
    meant proof.
         But I think statistical poof kind of funny,
    because they kept putting on the DSM-4 book saying
    80 to 90 percent of people are addicted.
         Well, the statistical poof is DSM-5 that says
    50 percent.  50 percent.  Half are, half aren't.
         They want to keep telling you everybody is, and
    you should assume David Clayton was addicted because
    80 to 90 percent of the people are.
         Well, maybe that was the science back then, but
    you have the benefit of the science today.  And you
    won't be instructed that you need to base your
    verdict on outdated science.  You can base it on
    science you got today.
         They show you the 2014 Surgeon General's
    report, the 2010 Surgeon General's report.  Look at
    the 2013 DSM-5.  And that says 50 percent of current
    daily smokers are addicted.  Half and half.  So when 2889
    they want to tell you about 80 or 90 percent of
    everybody's addicted, statistical poof.
         Now, Dr. Werner used the slide to depict the
    addiction cycle.  Remember that?  And one of the
    things she left off that I had to bring up is the
    fact that over 60 million smokers, including
    millions of addicted smokers, stop for good.  60
    million.  Mr. Clayton was one of them.  These are
    the facts.  These are the facts you have in this
    case.
         I want to talk a little bit about DSM-5.  Both
    Dr. Werner and Dr. Giakas talked about it.
         And I'm compelled to point out a couple things
    about Dr. Werner.  I appreciate that Ms. Shamp put
    up some of her qualifications, and she's at the
    University of Florida, and I don't knock what she's
    doing there.
         You saw Dr. Giakas' resume today where they
    tried to take a shot at him for apparently not
    putting that he was the chairman of the psychiatry
    department on his resume, until he pointed out where
    it was on his resume.  So he's had positions too at
    hospitals, and he's done lots of important things at
    those places treating people.  And his practice is
    treating people day in and day out. 2890
         But a couple points about Dr. Werner.  You saw
    her syllabus called The Addictionologist in Court.
    Do you remember that?  And I walked through some of
    the Power Point slides with her.  And she follows
    her own advice right down to what she wore to this
    courtroom yesterday.  And she tried, as it said on
    her slide, to control the cross.
         Remember she gave me a hard time?  It was a
    tough cross.  I mean, she wouldn't give me an
    answer.  I had to impeach her a lot of times.  I
    lost track of how many times I had to impeach her
    with something she told a different jury earlier
    this year, or told me in her deposition two months
    ago.
         Why?  What is she afraid of?  Why is she trying
    to control the cross?  Was she trying to divert
    attention away are from the fact that she lost the
    two questionnaires she had Mrs. Clayton fill out?
         She said she has three tools she relies on.
    Two of them aren't in her toolbox.  She lost them.
    Had her fill them out, and lost them.
         And then while she finally admitted that she
    doesn't know what's on them, she was confident,
    confident that they were consistent with the way she
    filled them out. 2891
         But let's look at her own Fagerstrom
    questionnaires.  Remember she filled out two of
    them?  She filled out.  Let's look at them
    side-by-side.  And I'm not going to go through all
    the questions.  I mean, sometimes she answers one,
    sometimes she doesn't.  But she answered it in
    September, if you add them up, 3 plus 3 is 6.  Add
    them up in January she comes up with 7.  Medium.
    High.
         It's interesting that as we got closer to trial
    and Dr. Werner filled out the Fagerstrom
    questionnaire again, that not only were her answers
    not consistent, but she found a higher level of
    dependence, making it higher for when the
    addictionologist came to court.
         Now, I also want to talk about DSM-5 and Dr.
    Werner.  And this story is either interesting or
    confusing.  She says that she can't use DSM-5 with
    her patients, despite the fact that it came out last
    May, and she explains that it's impossible to do it
    because the codes are different in DSM-4 TR and
    DSM-5.
         Well, after I pointed out that the code numbers
    are exactly the same and DSM-5 just has the ICD-9
    and ICD-10.  And Dr. Giakas told you he's been using 2892
    it since May, and he's not had a problem getting
    things reimbursed from insurance.  Dr. Werner comes
    back on redirect and says, oh, you know, I don't do
    the billing.
         Well, based on the fact that she lost
    Mrs. Clayton's questionnaire, we know she doesn't do
    the recordkeeping either.
         So here's some facts about DSM-5.  Came out in
    May.  Same codes as DSM-4 TR.  Dr. Giakas used it
    immediately in his clinical practice.  Dr. Werner
    still hasn't used it in her practice, but her
    attorneys asked her to use it in this case.
         And Dr. Giakas -- Dr. Werner told you that
    psychiatrists can look at the DSM-5, and using their
    clinical judgment and experience they can disagree.
    It happens, and it did here.  Dr. Giakas came up
    with a different opinion than Dr. Werner did.
         Dr. Giakas though used the same judgment
    experience approach he uses in treating his
    patients.  Dr. Werner used an approach she uses only
    in lawsuits.  And Dr. Giakas told you, in his
    practice he finds about 50 percent of his patients
    would be addicted.  It's the same number as DSM-5.
         So after telling you the DSM can't be used as a
    cookbook, Ms. Bryan and Dr. Werner did exactly that. 2893
    They put all the criteria up and they went down
    one-by-one and used it as a checklist.
         The interesting thing, when it comes to DSM-5,
    Dr. Werner has never used that checklist with a
    patient.  Only for trial.
         But even in trying to use this cookbook, Dr.
    Werner missed the first step of the recipe, and
    that's you need to have clinically significant
    impairment or distress.  And Dr. Giakas told you the
    reasons why Mr. Clayton was not clinically
    significantly impaired or distressed.  And in
    addition, Dr. Werner didn't even follow the recipe
    the right way.
         There's a part that Ms. Shamp didn't show you
    when she showed you the top of the criteria.
    Remember the part that says you need to observe it
    within the same 12-month period?  Did Dr. Werner do
    that?  No.  She took this bit of information from
    the 50's, or this bit of information from the 70's,
    she put it all together, and that's how she formed
    her opinion.  But it doesn't work that way.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, choosing to do
    something you enjoy, like smoking, and stopping it
    when you're motivated and ready to quit is not a
    sign of clinically significant impairment or 2894
    distress.  Spending time in your basement watching
    football, drinking beer, and smoking is not a
    disorder.  It's a decision.  And David Clayton had
    the choice and the control to make a different
    decision if he wanted to.  All he needed was
    motivation.  The key to quitting is motivation.
         And you heard about Mr. Clayton's alleged quit
    attempts.  I'm not going to go through them
    one-by-one.  You heard about the gum.  It couldn't
    have been nicotine gum because it wasn't available
    over-the-counter until after he stopped smoking.
         You heard about him taking some cigarettes to
    work and leaving some at home.  You heard about
    that.
         In each of those cases he continued smoking.
    His method to quit smoking was to continue smoking.
    He didn't take other steps.  He didn't make other
    plans.  He didn't have a plan at all.  He didn't
    have the motivation.
         Now, when he used the patch in 1993 -- and
    we'll talk about when he stopped -- I think that's a
    sign he was motivated.  I don't know if he stopped
    in '93 or '94, the evidence is a little bit
    inconsistent there, but that's the first time in his
    60 years that he showed any motivation that he 2895
    wanted to quit.
         Now, Dr. Werner admitted what I just said, that
    there's some inconsistencies about when he quit.
    And you saw some of these records.  Let's look at
    these.
         This is from '94, and Mr. Clayton told his
    doctors he had stopped smoking back in '93.  There
    is one more record from this time, and again I think
    this is important.
         Can we see the next one, please?
         This is May 9, 1994, to be completed by the
    patient:  Do you smoke?  It says yes, then it's
    checked off and says, no, quit one year ago.  How
    many packs a day?  Zero.  Signed by David Clayton.
    In May of 1994 he signed his name to a document that
    says I quit in 1993.
         Now, Mrs. Clayton disagrees.  Disagrees with
    all -- you'll see almost every entry on his medical
    records she admits that's his signature, but
    disagrees he had stopped smoking.  And as I said,
    you'll see the medical records on that second half
    of the cheat sheet in 2005 that said he kept smoking
    until 1994.  Those are over ten years after he quit.
    Those are at a time when Mrs. Clayton was going to
    the doctor with him.  There's no record from '93, 2896
    '94, '96, '98 that supports Mrs. Clayton's version.
         That's the evidence of when Mr. Clayton quit
    smoking.  On one side the real David Clayton, the
    contemporaneous medical records, his statements to
    his doctor, documents he signed that says he quit in
    '93.  On the other side for lawsuit David Clayton is
    the testimony of witnesses 20 years after the fact
    that said, no, he kept smoking.
         I submit that Mr. Clayton's consistent
    contemporaneous statements about his smoking
    history, when he quit in the 90's are what you
    should rely on.  I suggest they're more reliable
    than hazy memories two decades later.
         And when you look at this time component, I
    think Dr. Wright said something that's important.
    Let's look at what he said.  He was asked:  And
    having read that do you now recall that the medical
    records you received had some highlighting on them?
    And he said:  That's what I said then, and it was
    closer in time.  So I suspect it was accurate.
         David Clayton's records in 1993 and 1994 were
    closer in time, and I suspect they were accurate.
         But no matter when he quit, we know this we
    now.  We know that he had the ability to quit
    smoking.  And whether it was '93 or '94, he stopped 2897
    for the next 12 years.  There is no dispute over
    that.  And Dr. Werner admitted he had that ability
    to quit at any point.
         Let's look at what she said.  I asked her:  And
    Mr. Clayton had the ability to voluntarily decide to
    quit; correct?  And she said yes.
         The real David Clayton never experienced a loss
    of control, he never lost the ability to quit, he
    never was significantly impaired, he was never
    significantly distressed, and he was never addicted.
         Because the plaintiff didn't meet her burden to
    prove that, she doesn't clear the second hurdle, she
    doesn't meet that second burden.  And for that
    additional reason the answer to the first question
    on the verdict form should be no.
         Your Honor, I think I can get through one more
    area, if that's okay.
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         MR. GEISE:  Okay.  Thank you.
         If you find that Mr. Clayton was addicted the
    third hurdle is this one, addiction causation.  The
    plaintiff must prove addiction was a legal cause of
    Mr. Clayton's injury, and to be the legal cause the
    addiction must directly and in a natural and
    continuous sequence substantially contribute to 2898
    producing his death.  In other words, but for his
    addiction his death wouldn't have occurred.
         And we know that addiction wasn't the legal
    cause for why he smoked up until the 1970's, because
    that's when Dr. Werner says is the first time she
    can say he was addicted.  So for those first 30
    years or so of his smoking their expert didn't say
    he was addicted.
         And even if he was addicted at that point, if
    it was not a substantial cause, and instead his
    choices and his wants were more important to what he
    did, more directly the cause, then addiction is not
    a legal cause.  And that's exactly what the evidence
    shows you in this case.  The but for cause of his
    death was his choice, his decision to smoke for as
    long as he did because that's what he wanted to do.
         So I think you should ask this question.  If
    Mr. Clayton was not addicted, would he have
    continued to smoke?  The answer is, of course he
    would have.  For this reason alone addiction cannot
    be the legal cause of his death, because it was far
    from the substantial cause of his smoking.
         You heard and saw the evidence about Mr.
    Clayton's decision making when it came to his death
    and what he put in his body.  He routinely made 2899
    choices that were not in the best interest of his
    health and contrary to his doctors' advice.
         And these ulcers, they're a big part of who the
    real David Clayton is.  The real David Clayton
    suffered from them going back into the 70's.  And
    this wasn't just heartburn here or there.  You saw
    the records.  You heard that in 1979 they took a
    biopsy from his stomach, diagnosed him with
    gastritis.
         Mrs. Clayton told you his doctors were
    constantly telling him that he needed to keep off
    cigarette smoke so it didn't get on his ulcers so
    they could heal.
         And that wasn't the only advice they gave him
    about this.  You saw this record in 1986.  I'm not
    going to read it to you again.  You saw what they
    told him to stay away from.
         And did David Clayton act on this advice for
    the sake of his health and his stomach?  No.  But we
    saw these records.
         And again, 1986 and 1988, you saw what he
    reported, you saw what he told his doctors about
    what he was drinking, what he was smoking.  You saw
    that.  And these are 1986 and 1988.
         1999, you remember Mr. Clayton stopped working 2900
    at Design Containers because his stomach ulcers were
    so painful.  So even though he stopped working he
    didn't stop the behaviors that the doctors told him
    were making his condition worse.
         And it continued after he stopped working.  You
    saw these records in 1992 and 1993.  Drinking
    continued.  Coffee, tea, cola, it continued.  Still
    he's choosing to consume things that are tearing his
    stomach apart.
         And this is a chart.  I had part of this chart
    for you in opening.  Let's take a lock at it.  You
    can see after 1986 when his doctors tell him what to
    avoid, you can see his consumption of tea goes up,
    coffee stays the same, soda goes up, beer stays the
    same, and cigarettes was consistently a half pack
    per day.
         In addition, you heard about the doctors'
    advice that he needed to change from whole to skim
    milk.  You know, you might say, it's just milk, why
    does it matter?  It matters because it tells you
    what he did when he was given information from his
    doctors.  He was told to switch.  He didn't.  Why?
    He didn't like it, and he wasn't going to do
    something he didn't like no matter what his doctors
    said. 2901
         So even though his doctors told him to avoid
    these things, and the stomach pain from his ulcers
    forced him to quit work, he kept doing it for years,
    not because of an from addiction, but because he
    wanted to.
         You heard from Mrs. Clayton that Mr. Clayton
    was a grown man.  She wouldn't force anything on
    him.  That's what she said when it came to milk.
         Interestingly he reports that the amount he
    smoked stayed the same, but these other substances
    went up.
         Now, the plaintiff's witnesses will try to
    sweep aside these descriptions of how much Mr.
    Clayton smoked in his medical records and say people
    underestimate how much they smoke to their doctors
    because they know they shouldn't be smoking.  And
    that's what Mrs. Clayton said he did.  But she also
    said he drank more than he was telling his doctors
    too.
         Now, first of all, from what we heard about
    David Clayton, he's not the kind of guy who would
    lie to his doctors, or sign his name on documents
    that weren't true.  And even if we adopt the
    plaintiff's logic it needs to be true across the
    board, doesn't it?  It needs to be true for all the 2902
    other behaviors on there that his doctors are
    warning him against.
         So is his tea, his coffee, his cola consumption
    much greater than he admitted?  Is he underreporting
    that too?  Mrs. Clayton said all those records are
    wrong.  She said he grossly overreported his coffee,
    tea, and his cola use.
         Does it make any sense that David Clayton would
    make up a history of things he was warned to avoid
    for a decade?  Of course not.  Mr. Clayton made all
    these choices, unhealthy and especially harmful to
    him with ulcers as they may be, not because of
    addiction, but because he wanted to.
         No one claims he was addicted to tea, or
    coffee, or Pepsi, or beer.  Just like smoking, these
    were his choices.
         And the plaintiff seems to think that, you
    know, we're trying to slander Mr. Clayton by talking
    about the fact that he drank beer.  I'm going to be
    the last person to criticize somebody for drinking
    beer.
         It's just the opposite.  He drank alcohol, but
    he wasn't an alcoholic.  He smoked cigarettes, but
    he wasn't a nicotine addict.  He made those choices.
         Your Honor, we're close to 5.  This would be a 2903
    good point to stop.
[#DELETE RECESS#]
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir. MR. GEISE:  Ms. Shamp, Ms. Bryan, Mrs. Clayton.
         Good morning again, ladies and gentlemen.
         When we stopped yesterday, I was discussing the
    concept of the plaintiff's burden of addiction
    causation.  And just to restart this morning, let me
    kind of set where we are.  We're still on this first
    question of the verdict form, and we'll look at that
    in a moment.
         And that first question has a lot in it.
    There's three different hurdles of burdens of
    plaintiff.  They're called plaintiff has to prove
    cause of death and that it's related to smoking.
    The plaintiff has to prove that Mr. Clayton was
    addicted.  And then the plaintiff, even if they meet
    those two burdens, still needs to prove but for that
    addiction, Mr. Clayton would have avoided smoking
    and avoided his death.
         And the judge has read you your instruction.
    You'll get a copy of them.  Let me reset what legal
    cause means in terms of addiction.  Addiction to
    smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal
    cause of David Clayton's lung cancer and death if it
    directly and in a natural and continuous sequence
    produced or contributed substantially to producing
    David Clayton's death so that it can reasonably be said but for that addiction, his death would not
    have occurred when it did.
         And the evidence in this case proves that
    addiction is not the but for reason for any of
    Mr. Clayton's behaviors, including smoking.  We saw
    this chart briefly yesterday.  Mr. Clayton drank
    tea, coffee, Pepsi and beer, despite the toll they
    were taking, because he wanted to, not because of
    addiction.  But for wanting to drink those things,
    he would not have.  Same with smoking.  He smoked
    for as long as he did because he wanted to, not
    because of an addiction.  But for his choice to
    continue, he would have stopped, and he would have
    avoided his death.
         And here's another way to look at what's
    required for legal cause that comes out of your
    instructions.  Is it the direct cause, the natural
    cause, the continuous cause, the substantial cause.
    And you saw in this case that it was not.  You saw
    that Mr. Clayton's choices were the direct and
    natural, the continuous and the substantial cause.
         Let's look at the next slide.
         And what were those choices?  They were the
    choice to begin smoking, the choice to continue
    smoking, despite the health warnings.  And we'll talk about some of those, the choice to control his
    smoking, how much he smoked and the choice not to
    quit until he was ready to, until he was motivated
    to.  And because David Clayton had control over his
    decisions and his choices, it cannot be said that
    nicotine addiction caused his injury.
         You heard that personal choice is a factor in
    this case from Ms. Shamp.  And I agree.  It is.  And
    Mr. Clayton's choice is a substantial cause for all
    of his behaviors, including smoking.  And the
    plaintiff's witnesses agree that the choice lies
    with the individual.
         Let's look at what Dr. Burns said.  He was
    asked about something Surgeon General Koop had
    written, that smoking is an addictive behavior, and
    the individual smoker must decide whether or not to
    continue that behavior.  And Dr. Burns, when asked
    if he agreed with it, he said, absolutely, sure.
         And so does Dr. Werner.  She was asked the same
    question.  And she said that's the first step in
    quitting is deciding that you're going to attempt to
    quit, yes.
         Mr. Clayton had to make the decision that he
    decided to continue that behavior.
         Now, some people in this case respected Mr. Clayton's decision.  Let's look at Willie
    McCullough, Jr., his stepson.
         He was asked:  "The reason you never asked or
    encouraged Mr. Clayton to quit smoking is because
    you respected his decision."
         And he said, "Yes."
         "Okay.  You let him do what he wanted to do,
    correct?"
         "Yes."
         Now, Mrs. Clayton doesn't want to respect
    Mr. Clayton's decisions.  In this lawsuit, to get
    money for her husband's choices, they're telling you
    that he didn't have a choice that he was addicted
    and that addiction overrun his choice and he
    couldn't make a decision.
         But you heard it from Dr. Proctor that Dr. Koop
    tells you who's in control.  And let's look at what
    Dr. Koop said.  Ultimately, you are the one that has
    control over your behavior.  The cigarette is not
    going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor
    are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic
    trance and light the cigarette.  No matter how you
    smoked or how much you smoke, the choice to light up
    is always yours.
         The cigarette didn't jump into Mr. Clayton's mouth, the coffee didn't brew itself, the beer
    didn't hop in his hand.  He made each and every
    choice, despite knowledge of the harm that it could
    be doing to him.
         And when Mr. Clayton made the choice to smoke,
    his choice was the legal cause.  How do we know?
    Because he kept doing things for years and years
    that he knew were bad for him.  But for his choice
    to continue, he would have stopped smoking.
         As a result, any disease or death brought on by
    Mr. Clayton's smoking was not legally caused by
    addiction.  The substantial cause of his smoking and
    his disease was his choice to smoke.
         I want to go back to the verdict form.  And
    look at the first question:  Was David Clayton
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if
    so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung
    cancer and death?
         And all three hurdles are in these questions.
    The first one:  What's the cause of his lung cancer
    and death?  Is it related to smoking?  We know from
    his treating physician that filled out the death
    certificate, he didn't say lung cancer caused it and
    he said it was unknown whether it was related to
    smoking. The second one:  Was David Clayton addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine?  You heard that
    David Clayton was -- did not lose control, he did
    not have a significant impairment or distress so he
    was not addicted.
         And then third, what we've just been talking
    about:  If so, was such addiction a legal cause of
    his lung cancer and death?  And you know that
    addiction was not the but for reason that he smoked,
    it was not the but for reason of his death.
         So on all three of those issues, the plaintiff
    failed to meet their burden.  They have to meet it
    on all three.  One out of three or two out of three
    doesn't cut it, they need all three and they failed
    on all three.  For that reason, your answer to
    question number 1 should be no.
         And if you notice -- if your answer to
    Question Number 1 was no, you are proceed no
    further.  The case is over.  That answer decides
    this case.
         Now, if you continue past that first question
    and found that the plaintiff meets all three of
    those hurdles, you'll need to consider Questions 2
    and 3.  And these are the conspiracy to conceal
    claims and concealment claims.  And because they're on separate pages of the verdict form, I put them on
    one slide to make it easier.  And you'll see with
    these questions, they really break down.  There's
    two prongs to them, two prongs.
         First, you need to determine if the information
    about the health risks and the health effects and
    the addictive nature of cigarette smoking was a
    secret to Mr. Clayton.  And, if so, you need to
    determine if he relied on any statement to his
    detriment.  That's the legal cause point that we
    talked about.  Here, the information wasn't a secret
    to Mr. Clayton, and he did not rely on anything any
    tobacco company said, let alone R. J. Reynolds.
         So the first question:  Were the dangers of
    smoking a secret?  You'll remember in opening
    statement that Ms. Shamp would say people didn't
    know; people didn't know about the risks.  But the
    other side of the story that we showed you showed
    just the opposite.  It showed the public did know
    about the risks of smoking and the addictive nature.
    And more importantly, so did the real David Clayton.
    And we need to start this story before Mr. Clayton
    was born and, as Dr. Proctor said, before Reynolds
    even existed.
         Let's look at the next slide. Dr. Proctor said before Reynolds existed, it
    was known tobacco contained nicotine, known for
    hundreds of years that it could be addictive, known
    for hundreds of years it could be hard to quit,
    known for such a long time that smoking can be bad.
    And since the beginning of the 20th century, it was
    common to refer to cigarettes as "coffin nails" or
    "cancer sticks."  You saw the evidence.
         Can we see the next one?
         The Florida Health Notes in 1906.
         The next one, please.
         The Surgeon General in 1915, all referring to
    smoking as addictive.
         And Dr. Proctor told you about the prohibition
    movement where smoking and cigarettes were illegal
    in states and he talked about alcohol prohibition.
    When they were done with that, they chanted
    "nicotine next, nicotine next."  And he said that's
    because nicotine was synonymous with tobacco.
    Everybody knew that was the drug in tobacco that
    made it hard to quit.
         You saw a Three Stooges clip from the 1930s,
    and you remember the scene where -- I think it was
    Curly won the prize from the Coffin Nails Cigarette
    Company?  Dr. Proctor can say, oh, that's only a joke.  Well, it's only a joke if people get it.  And
    people got it.  The Three Stooges and their fans got
    the material information that smoking could kill
    you.  It could seal your coffin.  And that is not a
    joke.
         You saw the coverage in Reader's Digest.  And
    Ms. Shamp can say Mr. Clayton didn't read it.  I
    didn't hear the evidence that he read it or not, but
    I know it was out there in the public.  And it was
    the most widely circulated magazine in the 1950s,
    much more widely circulated than True magazine that
    Ms. Shamp talked about.
         And let's leave Reader's Digest out of it.
    Let's look at Moultrie, Georgia.  The Moultrie
    Observer covered the risks of smoking year after
    year.
         Now, not surprisingly with all this coverage in
    the '50s, the public health officials said, yes,
    there's widespread dissemination about the risks of
    smoking.
         You heard from Dr. Heller -- you heard from
    Dr. Burney and Dr. Heller.  Dr. Burney was the
    Surgeon General.  Dr. Heller was a director of the
    National Cancer Institute.  And you saw their
    statements that the public would have been -- had been informed about the risks of smoking.  They came
    to that conclusion.
         Now, Dr. Proctor says that these giants and
    pioneers in the field of public health -- remember
    what he said about them?  He said they were beating
    their chest when they made these comments.
         Ladies and gentlemen, these guys were making
    history in the 1950s, not studying history 50 years
    later.  These were officials who had their boots on
    the ground at that time.  They were eyewitnesses to
    what was going on.  And this was their account of
    what was happening, that the public was aware, that
    the public knew.
         Now, instead of praising them for their work,
    you remember Dr. Proctor called some of these guys
    "aloof figureheads."  I don't think these guys were
    aloof figureheads.  They were eyewitnesses.
         In 1964, 50 years ago, the Surgeon General's
    Report linked smoking to lung cancer.  They
    published it.  It was front page news everywhere, in
    Jacksonville, in Moultrie, everywhere.  It was front
    page news.
         Now, in the 1960s, Ms. Shamp yesterday
    mentioned Smith Gavin.  But she didn't mention this
    story that Smith Gavin told you on the witness stand.  Remember, he said in the late 1960s that he
    saw David Clayton have what he called a "strangling
    cough"?  I don't know if you remember that
    testimony.  And he was gasping for breath.  And
    Mr. Gavin thought that that strangling cough was
    caused by smoking, and he told Mr. Clayton to
    stop.
         When Mr. Clayton was playing cards with his
    buddies and he would need a cigarette, they referred
    to him as having a "nicotine fit."  This is
    information about the health risks of smoking and
    the effect nicotine could have.  It was material
    information that Mr. Clayton had and Mr. Gavin told
    you he had it.
         1966, warning label goes on the packages.  From
    that point on, every pack of cigarettes that
    Mr. Clayton had put in his pocket had that warning.
    The warning was there every single day.  You heard
    that 13 million people quit in the four years after
    this warning label came out.  14 million people --
    or 13 million people had that warning in their
    hands, and they took matters in their own hands and
    quit.  Mr. Clayton didn't even try.  And the message
    was being communicated throughout America in towns
    large and small. Ms. Shamp said I'd show you Daniel Horn, so I
    figured I'll show you Daniel Horn.  This is what
    Daniel Horn said.  "You could stand on a rooftop and
    shout, 'smoking is dangerous,' at the top of your
    lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything
    they did not already know."
         Ms. Shamp said that's anecdotal.  Well, let's
    look at what their own expert said.  Let's look at
    what Dr. Burns said.
         "Now, in 1981, you gave a speech to a lung
    association group about the percentage of smokers
    who were aware of the risks, correct?
         "Yes, I'm well familiar with that group.
         "All right.  And you told that group in 1981
    that 95 percent of smokers were thoroughly aware of
    the health risks, and 90 percent thought that it
    might affect their own health, correct?
         "That's correct."  And he added.  "And I
    believe I said that more smokers know that cigarette
    smoking causes disease or cancer than know the name
    of the president of the United States."
         Ms. Shamp calls it anecdotal.  I call that
    evidence in this case.
         And the warnings kept coming, 1970, 1985, on
    every pack that Mr. Clayton picked up.  And you've heard he watched the news every night.  Maybe he
    didn't watch the whole news each night, but he
    watched some of the news every night when he got
    back from work.  And you know that he received
    warnings from his doctors.  You know he received
    warnings that told him smoking is not good for your
    ulcers, stop it.
         And if you want to believe Willie McCullough,
    Jr., on one thing in this case, believe him on this
    story.  He told you he wasn't a cigarette smoker,
    and they'd be in the basement watching football.
    Mr. Clayton would ask him, Are you a smoker?  He
    said, No.  And Mr. Clayton told him, Don't smoke.
    It's bad for you and it can be hard to quit.
         Now, Mr. Clayton may not have used the
    terminology that the Surgeon General uses, but he
    knew the health effects and the addictive nature of
    smoking, and he told that to Willie McCullough.  It
    was not a secret.
         So on the first prong of these two claims,
    Number 2 and 3, the plaintiff cannot prove that
    material information about the health effects or
    addictive nature were secrets from Mr. Clayton.
    They assuredly were not.  So for that reason, and
    that reason alone on that prong, those two claims fail and the answer should be no.
         But there's another reason they should be no
    and that's the legal cause reason.  That's the
    reliance reason.
         I don't know if you've noticed, but on some of
    the trips up to sidebar, I can see they're building
    a walkway between the building on the other side of
    the street and the courthouse.  And the plaintiff
    needs to build a walkway in this courtroom between
    something Reynolds said or did and Mr. Clayton's
    decisions.
         For purposes of the verdict form, you saw when
    I put it up, it had legal cause.  Legal cause for
    Questions 2 and 3 requires reliance.  It requires
    reliance by Mr. Clayton.  The plaintiff has to prove
    that Reynolds' conduct caused Mr. Clayton, not some
    other smoker, but Mr. Clayton to take some action,
    to rely on something that they said or didn't say
    and that he got a disease caused by smoking that he
    otherwise wouldn't have gotten.  And if the
    plaintiff can't build that walkway, they lose on
    those two questions.  And the evidence you heard
    show the plaintiff never set the first stone in
    building that walkway.
         In opening statements, I told you to keep this question in mind:  What does this have to do with
    David Clayton?  And Dr. Proctor showed you document
    after document or statement by statement, and -- and
    I'll agree that some of those statements are stupid.
    And some of those positions, even if they were based
    on science or not at the time, were clung to for far
    too long.  And in some other smoker's case, they may
    be relevant to their decisions but they weren't to
    Mr. Clayton.
         For both the second and the third question on
    the verdict form, the plaintiff has to build that
    walkway.  And she didn't.  And fact witness after
    fact witness told us why.  Let's look at this chart.
         There wasn't a single fact witness who told you
    that Mr. Clayton relied on any one of these things,
    not one, not one.  Now, Ms. Shamp may talk about
    Mr. Clayton made a comment once; oh, I don't think
    they're harmful.  I don't know if he made that
    statement or not, but nobody ever said he made that
    statement because I heard R. J. Reynolds say this
    and I'm doing that.  We don't know if he said it,
    and we don't know why he said it.  And that's not
    proof that he relied on anything that any of these
    people said or any of these statements.
         Now, Ms. Shamp touched on it yesterday, and she may come back to it later today.  And they argue
    that even if there's no evidence specifically about
    Mr. Clayton hearing or seeing or reading these
    things and then relying on it that you can assume or
    infer that it happened.
         Well, she also told you yesterday, don't
    speculate.  And I agree with that.  Don't speculate.
    Look for proof.  Look for proof.  You know from the
    evidence that he didn't hear it; he didn't see it
    and he didn't rely on it.  And those are the facts
    about the real David Clayton from the people who
    knew him.  Don't assume something else.
         Now, all of the fact witnesses who knew David
    Clayton agreed, and I could put up all of their
    testimony for what they said.  But I'm just going to
    use the testimony from Mrs. Clayton.  And I
    apologize but this is a little bit long, but I'm
    going to walk through the questions she was asked
    and the answers she gave.
         "You've never heard of something called the
    'Frank Statement'?
         "No.
         "Never discussed it with Mr. Clayton?
         "No.
         "Never heard of the Council For Tobacco Research?
         "No.
         "Or the Tobacco Institute Research Committee?
         "No.
         "Or The Tobacco Institute?
         "No.
         "And you never discussed any of those things
    with Mr. Clayton?
         "No."
         Next slide.
         "You never talked with Mr. Clayton about
    anything that a tobacco company may have said about
    smoking, correct?
         "No.
         "You never talked to Mr. Clayton about anything
    R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company may have said about
    smoking, correct?
         "No.
         "No, you didn't?
         "I mean we did not talk about it.
         "Or anything the American Tobacco said?
         "No.
         "Anything Brown & Williamson said?
         "No.
         "And you didn't discuss any cigarette advertisements with him, did you?
         "No."
         Ladies and gentlemen, use your common sense and
    focus on the facts about David Clayton.  When the
    plaintiff can't produce a witness to say he heard,
    read, saw and relied on something, don't infer
    otherwise.
         So the question comes down to this:  Did
    concealment of information cause Mr. Clayton's
    death?  And I think you saw from the evidence that
    the answer was no.  And this case is only about
    Mr. Clayton.  No matter what some other smoker may
    have done, the plaintiff has to prove what
    Mr. Clayton did and she didn't.  There's no bridge.
    There's no walkway.  There's no proof of reliance.
         So if we go to the verdict form then, on
    Questions --
         Can I have the ELMO, please?  Thank you.
         If we go to the verdict form on Question 2:
    Whether concealment or omission of a material fact
    about the health effects or addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of
    David Clayton's death, the answer is no because he
    knew the material facts, and he did not rely on
    anything.  So the answer is no. Question 3:  State whether R. J. Reynolds's
    agreement to conceal or omit a material fact
    regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or
    the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a
    legal cause of David Clayton's death.  Again,
    because he knew the material facts and there's no
    reliance, the answer is no.
         I want to touch for one second on
    advertisements.  You saw what I went through with
    the testimony with Mrs. Clayton.  We asked every --
    every witness about advertisements, whether they had
    a discussion and whether Mr. Clayton relied on them
    and nobody could say he did.  They showed you ads
    through two fact witnesses, Mrs. Clayton and Smith
    Gavin.
         Now, interestingly, after saying how important
    ads were and how ads convinced people to smoke, the
    two fact witnesses that they showed you that knew
    about ads never smoked.  So it didn't have that
    impact on either one of them.
         And you saw when I asked Mrs. Clayton about
    advertisements, every ad that she showed you had a
    warning label on it, every ad.  And with Mr. Gavin,
    he said if they were playing cards and an ad came on
    for a brand of cigarettes that one of the guys smoked, they'd make fun of the guy for smoking that
    brand.  They'd joke around about it.
         And he admitted this as well.  He was asked:
    "Mr. Clayton never told you why he smoked Winston
    cigarettes, did he?"
         And he said, "Well, no, he didn't tell me why
    he smoked none of them."
         There's no reliance.  So the important -- the
    important facts in this case, no witness who knew
    Mr. Clayton testified that he ever smoked a brand of
    cigarette because of an ad or a slogan, "Winston
    tastes good like a cigarette should" or nothing.
         And with regard to advertising, you heard in
    your instructions yesterday that there's no
    liability for advertising.  Plaintiff knew that
    would be the instruction and knew that advertising
    had nothing to do with Mr. Clayton's choices.  But
    they still showed you those ads, again, to try to
    get you upset, to try to make you angry.
         So if you get to -- I don't think you should
    get past Question 1, but if you get through 1, 2 and
    3 and then you get to Question 4, you see state the
    percentage of fault, if any, that was a legal cause
    of David Clayton's death.  And if you get that far,
    you'll have to allocate responsibility between Reynolds and Mr. Clayton.
         And let's look at the next slide, please.
         This is the question:  The allocation of fault
    for Mr. Clayton's death.  And there are two points I
    want you to keep in mind.  The assignment of fault
    relegates only to actions that were a legal cause of
    Mr. Clayton's death, and Reynolds can't be assigned
    fault for actions that were not a legal cause of his
    death.  These points are important.
         Comparative fault is not a global comparison of
    conduct.  You don't take anything that David Clayton
    ever did and anything the tobacco industry ever did
    and compare them.  It's a comparison of actions of
    David Clayton and R. J. Reynolds that were the legal
    cause of his death.  It's a very narrow inquiry.  So
    if Ms. Shamp wants to talk about things that
    affected hundreds of thousands of other smokers,
    that's not the inquiry on this question.
         And you may have seen things a tobacco company
    said or wrote that you don't like, but if they
    didn't affect David Clayton, it's not something you
    consider for this evaluation.
         And when Ms. Shamp was talking about this
    yesterday, she was talking about taking
    responsibility.  I don't think she ever said Mr. Clayton has any responsibility for doing what he
    wanted to do for as long as he did, not any.
         And I come back to the words of the plaintiff's
    own experts.  Dr. Werner said that the decision
    whether or not to quit is 100 percent within the
    smoker's control.  And Dr. Burns said this.
         "And you said many times that smokers are
    responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct?
         "That's correct.
         "And even if they're addicted, the smokers are
    still responsible for their own smoking behavior,
    correct?
         "That's correct.  The fact that someone is
    addicted is a barrier to behavioral change, but it
    doesn't free them from responsibility for their own
    behavior."
         Mr. Clayton isn't free from responsibility for
    his own behavior.  He was responsible for all of his
    choices, responsible for the damage to his ulcers,
    for drinking and eating and smoking and things that
    were hurting him, responsible for his decision to
    choose to smoke and keep smoking, despite the
    knowledge of the risks and what his doctors said and
    responsible for the injuries he suffered because of
    those choices.  Because, ultimately, you're the one who has control of your behavior and it's not 10
    percent control or 50 percent control.  It's 100
    percent control.
         And nobody made Mr. Clayton's decisions for
    him.  Nobody could choose for him to stop smoking
    coffee or tea or Pepsi or beer.  Nobody could decide
    for him to choose to smoke or choose for him to stop
    smoking, not Lee Bonner, not Smith Gavin, not
    Mrs. Clayton.  In fact, she told you you couldn't
    force anything on him.  Only Mr. Clayton could make
    those choices.  He had the control.  He had the
    power.  He had the responsibility.
         So if you get to this point on the verdict
    form, I ask you to give him 100 percent
    responsibility for his conduct and his decisions.
         Now, if you find everything that I've said
    yesterday and today unpersuasive based on the
    evidence and you decide to return a verdict for
    Mrs. Clayton, you'll have to decide the amount of
    damages.  And -- and this is hard for me.  We all
    feel compassion and we all wish Mrs. Clayton the
    best.  But compassion and good wishes are not
    reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment.
    Your instructions that the judge read to you tell
    you that any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence.
         It can't it be a number that comes out of thin
    air, pulled out of a hat.  There needs to be an
    evidentiary basis for it.  And yesterday Ms. Shamp
    asked you to award Mrs. Clayton over $2 million.
    She asked you to make her a multimillionaire.  And
    it isn't a question of whether Reynolds is a big
    company.  If you find Reynolds liable, it's a
    question about what were the damages to Mrs. Clayton
    as a result of her husband's death.
         So if you choose to make an award and decide to
    compensate her, please compensate her based on the
    evidence you heard, using your good judgment and
    common sense.
         If you get all the way through the verdict
    form, you have to decide whether punitive damages
    are warranted.
         And can we grab the slide on just the
    background on punitive damages?
         Punitive damages are damages in addition to
    damages that fully compensate the plaintiff.
    Punitive damages can only -- can be awarded only for
    conduct that is a legal cause of the harms suffered
    by the plaintiff, and punitive damages cannot be
    based on these findings.  And because Ms. Shamp talked about them yesterday -- they're in your
    instructions -- I want to bring out, this is
    directly in your instructions.  It says this:  The
    Engle findings may not be considered in any way when
    determining whether punitive damages may be
    warranted, not at all.
         And punitive damages are designed to punish and
    deter, punish for conduct that's tantamount to a
    reckless disregard for human life.  And because this
    is a big issue, the plaintiff has to meet an even
    higher level and burden of proof that's called
    "clear and convincing evidence."
         And let's look at the jury instruction you
    received on this.  Clear and convincing evidence,
    you can see, is more compelling and persuasive.  It
    needs to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion
    and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or
    conviction about the matter in issue.  It's a
    really, really high burden.
         And when considering whether to punish
    Reynolds, I ask you to consider what you heard on
    the videotape from Dr. Figlar, testimony about what
    he and others at R. J. Reynolds have done for
    decades to try and develop tobacco products that
    have less risk.  Dr. Figlar told you that beginning in the 1950s, Reynolds went to work identifying
    smoke constituents, trying to remove them, trying to
    reduce them.
         And Dr. Proctor even told you that Reynolds has
    identified almost half of all of the constituents in
    cigarette smoke.
         In the 1960s, you remember Reynolds started
    working with the National Cancer Institute's Tobacco
    Working Group.
         And let's look at this next slide.
         This is what Dr. Proctor said about what
    Reynolds was doing.  They participated with the
    Tobacco Working Group for ten years, and then
    Dr. Proctor said from 1967 to 1995, Reynolds spent a
    fortune to make cigarettes less hazardous.  And he
    said they spent a fortune to develop the Premier
    cigarette.  You remember that cigarette that would
    try to heat tobacco instead of burning it, to try to
    reduce the tar?  And Dr. Proctor said the Surgeon
    General's Report even cited Reynolds' book, and I
    held it up for him, that huge book on Premier.
         And the whole time that Mr. Clayton was alive,
    the public health community, including Dr. Burns,
    encouraged Reynolds to try to lower tar and nicotine
    in cigarettes.  And you saw from Dr. Figlar's testimony that Reynolds worked to do that.
         Let's talk about CTR.  You heard about CTR and
    Dr. Proctor said they funded research that produced
    over 7,000 peer-reviewed articles.  It was research
    that had a substantial influence on the public
    health community, and he told you how many times
    over the years that the CTR grantees were cited by
    the Surgeon General.
         Let's look at the next slide, please.
         Dr. Figlar showed you this.  These were all the
    different Surgeon General's reports that
    R. J. Reynolds' scientists were cited in.
    Dr. Figlar also talked about the patents, and I
    think the -- Ms. Shamp talked about patents
    yesterday.
         Well, the interesting thing about patents is
    they're public.  You submit a patent application to
    the patent trademark office and you get it patented.
    Everybody can look at it.  Reynolds was working on
    those ideas and sharing it with the public.
         Can we see the next slide, please?
         Dr. Rodgman.  Dr. Proctor had pretty
    praiseworthy things to say about Dr. Rodgman.  He
    said he used the best available science to identify
    the constituents.  He said his research was excellent.  He didn't keep it secret.  And you
    remember Dr. Proctor admitted that Dr. Rodgman gave
    a speech to the American Chemical Society in the
    1960s, talking about the compounds that Reynolds was
    finding.  He even drew them for the chemists and
    included nicotine and other carcinogens.
         Can we see the next slide?
         Larson, Haag and Silvette, otherwise known as
    the Green Monster.  Remember, we talked about this
    with Dr. Proctor?  It was this comprehensive account
    of literature.  They collected everything they could
    find, every research article about smoking and
    health and addiction and put it in a book.  And I
    held it up for Dr. Proctor.
         "Remember the Green Monster?"
         And he's like:  "Oh, yes.  I have it.  I still
    rely on it."
         And he relies on the green one and the red one
    and the yellow one and the blue one, all of them.
         Ladies and gentlemen, this is not a record of
    wanton conduct or disregard of human life.  This is
    a record of Reynolds trying to lower the risks of an
    inherently risky but legal product.  It's a record
    of contribution to science that was recognized by
    the public health committee.  There were some successes.  There were some failures.  But Reynolds
    tried.  And trying to lower the risks of an
    inherently risky product should not be punished or
    deterred.
         But you also heard about how the tobacco
    industry and Reynolds in particular has changed over
    the last years.
         Can we see the next slide, please?
         You heard that there was an agreement, and the
    organizations you've heard about in this trial --
    CTR, TI, TIRC -- they've all been disbanded.  You
    heard a lot about Dr. Teague, Rodgman, Horrigan.
    All of those employees, they're long gone.
         The documents.  Dr. Proctor told you all these
    internal documents used to be secret, and I think
    many companies probably keep their internal
    documents internal.  But Dr. Proctor told you these
    documents are all publicly available now.  Millions
    and millions and millions of pages of documents are
    available on a public website.  When you're done
    with your jury service, if you want to see what
    Dr. Teague wrote, if you want to see what
    Dr. Rodgman wrote, you can log on when you get home,
    and you can look at every one of those documents.
         Now, the other thing you heard about was Reynolds' position.  And if the company's position
    on smoking and health and nicotine throughout the
    years angers you, Dr. Figlar told you that for over
    a decade now, Reynolds' position is that smoking
    causes cancer and is addictive.
         In the past, you saw where industry
    representatives would challenge the Surgeon
    General's reports.  You saw a press conference about
    it, but Dr. Proctor told you that doesn't happen
    anymore.  When the new Surgeon General's Report came
    out, it immediately went on R. J. Reynolds' website
    with a link to it.
         And you also heard about some of the
    restrictions that Reynolds works under now.  Between
    Dr. Proctor and Dr. Cook and Dr. Figlar, you heard
    about TPSAC.  It's the Tobacco Product Safety
    Assessment Committee for the FDA, and it does what
    its name implies.  You heard from Dr. Figlar that
    Reynolds meets with the FDA, gives presentations
    with the FDA and works with the FDA scientists to
    tell them what they're doing about product
    development.
         Ladies and gentlemen, looking at all of this,
    there's no need to punish or deter R. J. Reynolds
    for these changes that took place over a decade ago. So if you get to the sixth question on the verdict
    form, if you get to the sixth question, you will
    have already fully compensated Mrs. Clayton for her
    losses, already done that.  This is just a request
    for more money.  But that request comes with a
    higher burden, a burden of clear and convincing, and
    the plaintiff has not met that burden of proof.
         So if you were to check yes on this, we would
    come back for another phase of trial with more
    witnesses and more evidence and more arguments, but
    I think based on the evidence and the plaintiff's
    failure to meet that higher burden, your answer to
    Question 6 has to be no.
         In jury selection, each of you committed to
    holding the plaintiff to her burden of proof.  And
    if the evidence warranted, you committed to your
    ability to enter a verdict on behalf of my client.
    At the end of this trial, the evidence compels a
    verdict in Reynolds' favor on every question, on the
    question of the cause of death, on the question of
    whether Mr. Clayton was addicted, on the question
    whether addiction was the legal cause of his death
    and the question on whether Reynolds' conduct was a
    legal cause of Mr. Clayton's death.  The evidence
    about the real David Clayton compels a verdict against the lawsuit David Clayton and a verdict in
    Reynolds' favor.
         Mr. Clayton lived his life the way he wanted
    to, despite painful ulcers, despite warnings from
    his doctors.  Don't reward the plaintiff by making
    Mr. Clayton a victim because of his own choices.
         Now, this is the last chance I get to speak to
    you.  As the plaintiff has the burden of proof, when
    I sit down, Ms. Shamp gets to stand up.  And I can
    tell by her body language that she's ready to do
    that.  Because I can't respond to her, I would ask
    one of you to be my advocate in the jury room when
    you deliberate.
         You've seen how we've responded throughout this
    trial by showing you the other side of the story.
    And as you deliberate, I ask you to keep the full
    story in mind and answer Ms. Shamp as you think I
    would answer her based on what we've done in this
    trial.
         Ladies and gentlemen, it has been my pleasure
    and Mr. Carter's pleasure to try this case in front
    of you.  We truly appreciate your jury service.  We
    can't do this without you people doing what you're
    doing.  I want to thank you again for your jury
    service and your patience and your dedication to the process.
         Thank you.
