CLOSING ARGUMENT
MR. REILLY: It's still morning.
Good morning. You guys, I have to start this off by saying you've been incredibly patient. We've asked you to come from your homes, your jobs, your families and spend three weeks with us and -- three and a half weeks now. During that time, we've presented in Phase 1 some technical information. And now, in Phase 2, we've presented some very long witnesses. Yesterday, all day. Thursday, all day. You guys have paid great attention.
You've asked great questions. You have done exactly what we as lawyers hope that a jury will do. And I know that -- I have great respect for all the lawyers in this room and I know that we all thank you for the service that you have performed. So let me just start there.
Second, let me say that you can see I'm third, as usual. And you know that I'm not -Ms. Parker has given you this global review of the defense of this case. And I'm not going to
do that. What I'm going to do is what I did in my opening statement, and this is -- you are going to see a lot of boards that you saw once before at the very beginning of this. And now that they've moved around the room, they are upside down.
But what I said to you at the beginning of this case was you can distill all the issues in this case down to these two questions. What are they?
Pertaining to Philip Morris, what was Philip Morris' role in Mr. Cohen's smoking decisions: His decision to begin smoking; to continue smoking; and if he quit, he quit, if he didn't quit, he didn't quit, but his decisions relating to quitting? What role, if
any, did Philip Morris have in those decisions? That's number one.
Number two, the extent to which Philip Morris' cigarettes contributed to Mr. Cohen's lung cancer. That's what -Now, I'm going to show you the verdict form. You've seen it once or twice. Twice, I guess. And you won't see that exact language in any of these questions that address -- maybe
that print is too small. Can you guys see that? Is it okay? Well, of course these are filled with legalese, right?
But if you took all this language and pressed it down into two sentences, two concepts, there it is right there for Philip Morris. But let's go through this a little bit.
Do you guys have a marker?
MR. ALVAREZ: Highlight or marker?
MS. PARKER: Here's one.
MR. ALVAREZ: Here's a marker.
MR. REILLY: This is the exploding one.
THE COURT: Like from the Richard III, "a horse is a horse." Go ahead, please.
MR. REILLY: So what are the operative words here?
The first one here is: "Please state as to each Defendant whether negligence on the part of the Defendant" -- and here I'm going to put in "Philip Morris" -- "was a legal cause of Nate Cohen's death." And there's going to be a written instruction that the Court is going to give you on what is negligence. There's going to be an instruction from the Judge on what is
legal cause. Let's see if I can't show you that.
Here's legal cause. Can everybody see that? Legal cause, something is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for it, the injury, wouldn't have occurred.
So that's about as clear as mud to most people. People go to law school for three years and say what the heck does that say. But that's our definition of "legal cause." And what it really boils down to is it's something that's so important that, if it weren't there, it wouldn't have happened. If it weren't there, it wouldn't have happened.
So what the Plaintiffs are obliged -- and Ms. Parker was exactly right when she said this is not a technicality. This is the burden of proof. The Judge is going to tell you the Plaintiffs have the burden of proof. The burden of proof in this case is to show some negligent act on the part of Philip Morris was a legal cause of Mr. Cohen's death. Legal
cause of Mr. Cohen's death. That it so
impacted Mr. Cohen s decisions about smoking, beginning to smoke, continuing to smoke, and quitting smoking or not quitting, that it actually was so important that if you took it out of the picture, he wouldn't have died. Wouldn't have died. That's what means.
There's the same question, but this is regarding a defect. "Please state as to each Defendant" -- I'll just put "Philip Morris" there -- "whether the defect in the Defendant's cigarettes was a legal cause of Nathan Cohen's death."
Now, Mr. Paige said something about inhalability. Every cigarette from the time of man has been inhalable. So we'll talk about the filters in a little bit. Has to be a legal cause, something about a Philip Morris cigarette. Well, what cigarettes did Mr. Cohen smoke that Philip Morris ever made? You're going to see the time line. I'm going to show you the time line again. We're going to move through it pretty quickly because I only have 25 minutes. But you can imagine my time line for use of Philip Morris manufactured
cigarettes doesn't come along until 1980.
1980. That's 40 years after Mr. Cohen's been smoking cigarettes. If he started at age 14, in 1940, it's 40 years after he began smoking.
Was there some defect in Philip Morris' -Benson & Hedges cigarettes that was so necessary that without those cigarettes he wouldn't have gotten his lung cancer?
And then this one, this is: "Please state as to each Defendant whether Nathan Cohen reasonably relied, to his detriment, on any statement by that Defendant." In other words, was there a statement by Philip Morris which concealed or omitted material information -concealed or omitted material information -and if so, whether such reliance was, again, a legal cause of this death. Was there something that Philip Morris failed to say about the health risks of smoking that, if Philip Morris had only said it, Mr. Cohen would not have gotten lung cancer and died? That's what all that means.
It hasn't been explained to you until right now, but that's what all that means. That's the burden. And this is exactly what
the Judge is going to instruct you as soon as these closing arguments are done.
Finally, here's the last one: "Please state as to each Defendant whether Nathan Cohen reasonably relied, to his detriment, on a statement made in furtherance of a conspiracy to conceal or omit material information."
Now, you don't know what material information is yet, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death. We know what legal cause is now, so important that he wouldn't have gotten lung cancer.
What s a material fact? Material fact. Material information. A material fact is one that is of such importance that Mr. Cohen would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact.
Has there been evidence in this case that's convinced you that if Mr. Cohen had just been told something by Philip Morris at some point in time that he wouldn't have smoked, wouldn't have begun smoking, wouldn't have continued smoking, wouldn't have gotten lung cancer? After all the information you've seen that Mr. Cohen had over the decades of time
that he smoked, have the Plaintiffs -- not a technicality -- have the Plaintiffs carried to you their burden of proving that Philip Morris failed to provide, concealed some material fact that would have prevented him from beginning smoking, continuing to smoke, and developing his lung cancer?
Well, you know, I told you that -- let me show you one more, because you're going to get this instruction from the Court as well.
Mr. Paige talked about the warnings on the packages of cigarettes. Right? What he didn't say to you in his closing argument is that the Court is going to instruct you about those warnings. Ana I don't mean starting in 1970.
I mean starting in 1966. That's 14 years before Mr. Cohen ever picks up his first Benson & Hedges cigarette. Fourteen years.
And this is what the Court is going to tell you, as a matter of law. This is no debate. This is not Ken Reilly. This is not Philip Morris. This is, as a matter of law, the warning labels placed on the cigarette packs by the Defendants complied with federal law. And "they," meaning Philip Morris and
R.J. Reynolds, have no obligation to place any additional warning on their cigarette packages other than those required by Congress.
That's an adequate warning. That's an adequate warning. You haven't heard anything about this until this moment. But I couldn't let this go any farther without telling you that, because you are going to hear it in just a minute from the Court.
That's 14 years before Mr. Cohen ever has his first Philip Morris cigarette.
Let me take this down. Put that back up in a little bit, though. I'm to hurry through this time line because I agree with Mr. Paige that Philip Morris did nothing wrong in the '40s. You heard Mr. Paige say that in his closing argument. Philip Morris did nothing wrong in the '40s. I agree a hundred percent. 110 percent. Mr. Cohen begins smoking in 1940. He smokes all the way through the '40s. He attend the University of Miami. We know he's a bright guy. College. In the '40s, that's not that normal. Not that usual.
Ever smoked a Philip Morris manufactured cigarette? No.
You know, there are a bunch of ads that are in evidence. Is there an ad in evidence for Benson & Hedges Menthol 100s? I don't think so. I don t think there's even one.
There are a bunch of Old Gold ads made by a company called "Lorillard." There are a bunch of ads for cigarettes. Nothing to do with this case. Why are they in evidence? I don't know.
But I do know one thing. There are some old ads for a brand of cigarettes called "Philip Morris cigarettes." Did Mr. Cohen -is there even a scintilla -- and a scintilla is smaller than an eyelash. I just made that up. Is there a scintilla of evidence in this case that Mr. Cohen ever smoked a Philip Morris brand cigarette? Not one. Is there any evidence in this case Mr. Cohen responded in any way to an ad for any cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris in the '40s, the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, or even the '80s or the '90s? There's none. None.
So there's the '40s.
I look at the number of boards I have and the amount time I have.
THE CLERK: Eleven minutes.
MR. REILLY: Man, that's a challenge.
Here's the '50s. Any ads, any cigarettes by Philip Morris in the '50s? Any statement by Philip Morris in the '50s? None.
Let's go to the '60s.
Hurrying through, you've already been told about the very personal experience -- this is Mr. Cohen -- had that would have informed anybody that smoking came with a health risk. Anybody. His brother-in-law has a heart attack. And he quit smoking. Everybody knows that that heart attack -- or thinks that that heart attack was smoking-related.
1964, he sees the Surgeon General's report. You saw the news coverage of it. You know Mr. Cohen was a guy who read the paper every day cover to cover. He was a guy that liked to watch the news. He loved Walter Cronkite. So there you go. What does he do?
He and his friend Janet Schwartz agree they ought to quit smoking. But they don't.
Mr. Paige said we accept responsibility.
He could have started quitting smoking in the '70s. Well, in fact, he could have started quitting smoking in the '50s or '60s. He could
have started quitting smoking any time he decided he was ready to quit smoking. Okay?
'66, that federal warning goes on the packs. You remember about the grade school project for his daughter Beth.
In the '70s, you know about his daughter Stacey and the -- you know he's already smoking filters in the '70s, because he shows one to
his daughter and says this is where the filter traps some of the bad stuff.
By the way, filters. Filters, they keep acting like filters don't work. They don't reduce the harm. But you remember they had Dr. Proctor on the stand. And I said,
"Dr. Proctor, filters work, don't they? They reduce the health risks of smoking?"
And he said, "I don't think so."
And I said, "Well, the World Health Organization and the agency that's specifically tasked at determining whether that's true or not has looked at it, investigated it, and says you are wrong, right?"
And he said, "Yeah, they say I'm wrong." And then he had a reason why he thought he was right.
And I said, "Well, they've already considered that, haven't they? And they rejected your theory; haven't they?"
And he said, "Yes, that's right."
Do filters work and make cigarettes completely safe? No way. Has anybody ever said that? No way.
But he still doesn't smoke Philip Morris manufactured cigarettes until -- and I said that the information was going to come from Stacey and it did. She said 79, '80, '81, somewhere around there. So I put it on in 1980.
And they also agreed that in '80s Mr. Cohen knew about the health risks of smoking. So the entire time he's smoking Philip Morris-manufactured cigarettes, Benson & Hedges, he knows about the health risks of smoking.
Did Philip Morris play any role in Mr. Cohen beginning smoking? Absolutely not. Did Philip Morris play any role in Mr. Cohen continuing to smoke through the '50s, the '60s, '70s, until the '80s? Do we know why he switched from -- if it was Salems he was
smoking -- from Salems to Benson & Hedges? We have no idea. Was it because of an ad? We have no ideas. All we know is that he did.
THE CLERK: Seven minutes, Counselor.
MR. REILLY: Thank you.
I'll skip the '90s because you know all about it. Because I'm running out of time.
I want to put up two folks really quickly.
This is Dr. Benowitz. He was asked: "Isn't it true, sir, in your career you've never had a patient tell you that they thought cigarette smoking was safe?"
"That's correct."
"And isn't it also true, sir, that in your career you've never had a patient tell you that they were confused about whether cigarette smoking was dangerous because of something that a tobacco company said?"
"That's true."
Out of the thousands of patients that he's had over the decades that he's been dealing with smokers, he's never had one say what they're alleging occurred here. Not one.
Then I asked Dr. Proctor -- narrow shirt.
I didn't think narrow shirts were still in
fashion, but apparently they are -- "In fact, there have been smokers in the '50, '60s, '70s, and the '80s and the '90s who have smoked willingly and enjoyed it knowing full well that what they did was a take chance, correct?"
"I'm sure that's true of some people."
"In fact, the surveys that you showed this jury reflect that there have been millions and millions of smokers here in the United States that fit right into that category?"
"That's true."
"Millions, correct?"
"Yes. Yes."
"And you don't know which bucket Mr. Cohen fell in?"
I can tell that my time is running out.
So let me go back to this.
The answers to all those questions, in light of Philip Morris' role in Mr. Cohen's decisions to begin smoking, continue smoking, quit or not quit, those answers should be no.
They have a claim for punitive damages that have an apportionment of fault question.
If somehow, involving PM, you get past the nos on this page and then they ask you to apportion
a percentage of responsibility, they've acknowledged that Mr. Cohen is a legal cause of his own death. You've seen legal cause. What does that mean? That but for his decisions, but for the decisions he made, he would not have gotten his lung cancer and died.
Now, if you have that kind of control, is it really 14 percent of the responsibility in this case? Really? If you have acknowledged that you had that kind of control, I leave that in your sound discretion, if you get that far. That's what that board is about.
Spare you that one.
Mr. Cohen has admitted that Nathan Cohen shares some measure of fault in combination with the fact or acts or omissions of the Defendant. That's legal cause.
And finally -- I never knew 25 minutes went that fast. Probably doesn't seem that short to you guys.
"Under the circumstances of this case, please state whether, by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages are awarded against R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris." These questions are not in a vacuum. This is not a
class action. This is not a referendum on whether smoking is good idea. And you remember, at the beginning of this phase of the case when I appeared before you and gave my
opening statement, I said, look, during the course of this phase of the trial, you are going to see old documents from Philip Morris going back 50 years. And out of millions of pages of documents that you are going to see, you are going to see people that had ideas, statements, recommendations, even from management that today you wouldn't do and I wouldn't do. No question about it. But that's no where on this verdict form. What's on this verdict form -- and that's an acknowledgement on my part. They say we won't make any acknowledgement. That's an acknowledgement on my part. You wouldn't do it and I wouldn't do it. No debate about it. But that's not on this verdict form. What's on this verdict form is all about Mr. Cohen. Mr. Cohen.
Now, they've asked you to -- I should tell you that the damages in this case do not include any lost wages or medical bills or anything of that nature. This is all about the
emotional impact of Mrs. Cohen losing here husband.
But it was by their own acknowledgement, in his hands, as a legal cause whether or not he smoked, continued to smoke until he contracted lung cancer. And based on those decisions, they would like you to give them $10 million. That's what they've asked for in this case. They've also asked for 30 or $40 million in punitive damages. And that would come about only after you had fully compensated Mrs. Cohen for her loss.
I'm going to get -- I sit down now and they get to get back up. And I don't know -- I don't know who is going to pick back up, whether it's going to be Mr. Paige or Mr. Trop. I guess I should know. He's the energized one. I'm sure you're going to get an energetic second presentation from Mr. Paige. He's got 15 minutes to talk to you. I'm not sure talk will be at level that we're talking about. But he's going to talk to you for another 15 minutes. He may bring up old documents or old ads. I don't know what he's going to do. But all I would ask you to do is, as he's speaking,
just ask yourself have I really seen evidence in this case of whatever he's talking about really impacted Nathan Cohen.
Thank you very much for your time.



CLOSING ARGUMENT
MS. PARKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court and counsel and Mrs. Cohen.
Good morning everybody. I appreciate this opportunity to get to talk to you all again.
And, you know, I was thinking all yesterday and last night and this morning what I would say to you, ana I really wish that this were a situation like it is when we had witnesses.
You know, you were able to go back in the room and write down your questions and the witness could answer the questions. I wish you could do that. I wish you could tell me -- I wish you could write down and tell me what questions you have so I could be sure to answer anything that you have still hanging out there.
But we can't do this. This is a one-way conversation and it's an opportunity for me to tell you what we believe is important about the evidence. But I hope, when I'm doing it, that I am able to answer any questions that you all have. I'm going to try really hard to be sure
to address some of the questions that you all sent back to the witness.
But thank you very much for your attention through the whole trial and not just on behalf of me, but my client, R.J. Reynolds, and all the men and women who work there. And also Mr. Walker and Mr. Yarber and Mr. Reilly is going to follow me and he's going to talk to
you about another issue as well.
You know, nobody really understands about this case, besides us. Those of us who have been in the courtroom day in and day out who have seen the witnesses on the stand, who have seen the documents, nobody else really understands what this case is about.
And, you know, when you think about everything that you've heard from my perspective, it really boils down to one thing, and that is just the heart of this case, and that is whether you believe that individual people like Mr. Cohen have a right to decide for themselves how they want to live their lives. Nobody forced him to smoke. That's why that night club evidence that we talked about is so important in this case.
You know, Mr. Cohen had the night club for 12 years. He sold liquor there. He sold cigarettes there. He profited from the sale of cigarettes. And that's information about him. That's information that he himself believed that adults had the right to choose. He didn't force anybody to come to his night club. He didn't force anybody to drink alcoholic
beverages there. He didn't force anybody to smoke cigarettes there. But he made those available for adults who chose to do that. And that's the same as in this case, what we're dealing with here.
Now, I know we all know from jury selection that many of you have never smoked and, you know, you may be thinking to yourself why in the world would anybody smoke. It causes lung cancer. It's addictive. It's expensive. Why would people do it? That's not what this case is about. What this case is about is everybody has the right to make that decision for him or herself.
You may make a decision for yourself based on your own experience and that's important to you. Somebody else may make a different decision because of their life. That's their right. They have the right to do that. That's a freedom that we enjoy here in the United States. It's not just cigarettes but other risky products as well. We have a right to do that. That's very important to keep in mind as you're listening to all of this.
A lot of what we heard this morning was
really just an attack on a decision that our society has already made. Mr. Paige said over
and over, and Mr. Trop said over and over cigarettes cause lung cancer. Cigarettes cause death. That's true. That's true. Our government knows that. The Surgeon General knows that. But our society has decided that, nevertheless, cigarettes should be legal. That they're a legal product. And people like Mr. Cohen who -- and I'm going to go over this evidence in just a moment. People like Mr. Cohen who were fully aware, fully aware from their own lives -- he's not just a number on a chart. From his own life, we know he knew about the health risks of smoking. But he decided to smoke anyhow and he decided to sell cigarettes anyhow in his night club.
There have been over 50 million -50 million smokers who have quit smoking in the United States. And let me show you this one chart. Mr. Yarber is going to help me with the chart this morning. Do you remember the very first witness that the Plaintiffs called was Dr. Benowitz and they played him by deposition, the video deposition that first day. This is
what he said: 3,000 people quit every single day in the country.
Let me show you this time line. This is for Mr. Cohen. And this is for the Reynolds smoking. Mr. Reilly is going to talk to you about the Philip Morris smoking. But this Reynolds smoking, he made no efforts to quit. That's uncontroverted. Nobody said anything to the contrary. That is absolutely established evidence. Here he made no efforts to quit this whole period of time shown there.
Now, addiction can never explain why somebody doesn't even try. Okay? You can try and you can fail. That's a different thing.
You can make a serious effort. Sometimes smokers make a serious effort and they have trouble quitting. But being addicted doesn't mean -- it's not an excuse for even trying. He didn't even try during that whole period of time there.
We brought you a lot of evidence about Mr. Cohen being personally aware, personally aware about the health risks of smoking. I want to go over that chart.
You all will remember this one. This is
one that we showed previously. This is Mr. Cohen. Remember? Mrs. Cohen said he kept up with current news events. That went all the way back to the 1950s when all those reports started coming out. Remember? She said they had a subscription to the Miami Herald and that he read it every day and that he watched the news?
And then his sister was Nanette, actually his older sister Nanette. Her husband as Alvin, Alvin Savage. Remember? He had a heart attack and he quit smoking as soon as he had that. And that happened in 1963.
We all know about the Surgeon General s Report. He discussed it with Janet Schwartz. There's proof that he knew about it. He discussed it with her.
And at the same time, he knew that two other people that they knew also quit.
And the warning labels, we know about those.
We know about Beth's school project. Remember? That's when she went to him and she said, daddy, can I borrow one of your cigarettes to use for my project about the
health risks of smoking. Okay. There's proof that he knew back then.
Then his mother passed away. His mother was a heavy smoker and she died from lung cancer. How much more personal warning can you get? Your mother dies from lung cancer and she's a heavy smoker. What else possibly can you be told? There's nothing better. There's no evidence that's any stronger than that, when your mother, who is a smoker, dies from lung cancer. He knew. He knew.
And then Mrs. Cohen -- and remember we showed you the video deposition of the daughter Beth? And she said that her mother told Mr. Cohen to quit almost every day. Remember? And she said that my mom told him it would kill him. That's the words that Beth said. All of that is according to Beth. All of that started from 1972 forward.
We know he was told by his doctors to quit. Remember Dr. Centurion? We showed that video. He's the one who was his friend who was a cardiologist. Dr. Centurion said I told him it was going to kill him. "Every time I saw him, I told him he should quit. He didn't
express any interest. He didn't ask me how to quit. He didn't ask me to recommend anything to him on how to quit."
Same thing with Dr. Gonzalez who came and testified. Remember Dr. Gonzalez? We read this to you. Mr. Walker played the role up in the chair. Remember? Dr. Gonzalez said, "In my medical records and what my habit would have been is to tell every one of my patients back then that they should quit because of the health risk."
And then Mr. Cohen's own health, remember he had all those heart problems? That shows he was aware.
And then finally the fact that he made some efforts toward the end of his life to try to quit smoking is further evidence.
This is a gentleman who knew the risks. This is not a situation that you keep hearing about it this morning where somebody is -doesn't understand or somebody is not exposed to all of that. We have proof here. We have brought proof to you to show you that this gentleman actually, in fact, knew about the
th risks of smoking. But he chose to smoke
anyhow.
That's what a lot of people do. That's their right. That's their choice. A lot of people say I enjoy it. For me, it gives me pleasure, makes me relax. I like to have it with a cup of coffee. Whatever their reason is, that's for them to decide for themselves.
And I'm going to go over this really briefly, because you all just saw it yesterday. But you've got to remember some of the evidence from early -- from the early times. I'll just go over these really quickly. Even in 1955, American Cancer Society said, "In my opinion, people should be warned of the danger and they are being warned." That was back in '55.
And then '57, the Surgeon General, "Our position is that we would inform the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and T.V." Again, this is all that period of time when Mrs. Cohen said he was reading the paper every day and watching the news.
American Medical Association in '64 said, "The health hazards have been well publicized more than ten years" -- that's going back to
1954 -- "and are common knowledge."
And then finally, Horn, in 1968 -- I know you all have seen this. Remember this one?
"You can stand on the rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they didn't already know."
That's Mr. Cohen. He already knew. He knew from his personal experiences, from his family, from his friends.
Now, the smoking rates started to drop around 1950s when these studies came out. Remember Dr. Ford showed you the picture about the mice? Remember with the skin painting and all that? Well, that study started come out in 1950. Smoking rates took a little dip there, started to drop. But there are people who continued smoking. So people continued smoking because, even though they knew about the health risks, they said, you know what, that's what I want to do. I enjoy smoking and I'm going to smoke.
After all of that, after all of that information, here's what the Plaintiffs are asking you to believe. They're asking you to
believe that Mr. Cohen ignored all these warnings. Every day. Remember Beth said every day she said it was going to kill him? She told him it's going to kill you. They want you to believe that Mr. Cohen ignored that, that he ignored the warnings from his daughters. Both of the daughters said we told him. Ignored the warnings from his doctors. Ignored the warnings from the Surgeon General. Ignored the
warnings that were in the newspapers and T.V. Ignored the warnings on the packages and that he didn't know the health risks of smoking.
That was the Plaintiff's case. That is what they are asking you to accept.
That is not the fact. Those are not the facts that you have heard from the witness stand and the documents.
Mr. Cohen had all of the information to make a fully-informed decision about whether to smoke. Mr. Cohen was in charge of Mr. Cohen.
He was a hundred percent in charge of Mr. Cohen. It was his decision and he's the one who made it. And this, we would respectfully submit to you, doesn't make sense. It doesn't make sense, that he had all of that
personal awareness and personal warnings but he ignored every bit of it and didn't know.
That's not right.
We tried to present evidence to you during the trial so that you could get to know Mr. Cohen, what kind of person was he, so that way you could understand for yourselves, see the kind of person who would say, you know what, I'm going to smoke despite knowing all this information.
So what do we know about Mr. Cohen?
Here's the evidence. A lot of this, remember, is from Mrs. Cohen and from the two daughters.
We know he was independent minded, he was a night club owner, he was a printing business owner. Do you remember that? Both of those are risky businesses to start. Any time you start your own business, you have to have the right kind of personality to be able to go out there and take those risks and do that. He was successful at his work.
He was an intelligent man. Everybody says he was smart. That's the word they use to describe him. He and everybody in his family went to college. Remember Stacey said he was a
well-informed guy. She came in and took the stand. She said he was a well-informed guy.
He actively kept up with current events, again, newspaper, T.V.
He traveled extensively. Remember Mrs. Cohen talked about that trip to China and she said that she had traveled together extensively?
Beth said he enjoyed talking to people, which fits in with him being so successful in his night club. Beth said he had good common sense. He was fun loving. All of his family, every one of them described him as having a sense of humor.
And then Mrs. Cohen says he enjoyed smoking. Remember she said he enjoyed smoking with his coffee in the mornings? He enjoyed smoking after his meals.
So we tried to present this evidence to you so you could understand Mr. Cohen and the
kind of person he was.
So let's review the evidence that you have heard also about what Mr. Cohen believed about the right to choose, what Mr. Cohen believed about whether he would take health risks and
make decisions about health. Here's what the evidence has been.
Remember Mr. Cohen decided to stop chemotherapy? He said that was his choice.
That was up to him. Again, that's his choice. He got to decide that. Now, maybe some of you would have disagreed with it or maybe somebody else might disagree with it. Maybe somebody else would say maybe you ought to have that chemotherapy. Maybe you'll live longer. Maybe you'll be the 1 in 10 who survives or whatever. That was his decision to make and that was -and his decision was to stop the chemotherapy.
Same thing about his heart medicine. He knew he was supposed to take it. His doctors told him to take his medicine. He just didn't do it. This was a health risk that he took.
He didn't follow his doctors' diet or his doctors' recommendation to lose weight.
Remember when we showed you the video of Dr. Centurion and he went over all those medical records where Mr. Cohen had met with the dietitian and the dietitian had given him the special diet so he could lose weight.
Mr. Cohen didn't do it.
Again, this is all evidence showing how he himself made decisions that he was going to do things despite the health risks.
Remember he owned and ran a night club? Showed he believed in the right to choose. He sold liquor there, sold cigarettes, and profited. Again, showing ne had the right to choose.
And the same thing with the cigarettes.
The fact that he smoked cigarettes even though he knew from all those sources about the health risks, that is entirely consistent with the rest of his life. That's the kind of person he was. The decision he made about cigarettes is not some decision made because he was addicted and couldn't make any decision, a puppet, a robot. That's not what it was. He knew about the health risks. But just like all these other instances in his life, he said, hey, I'm an adult, I get to choose, it's my right to choose.
And I would like to respectfully submit that we shouldn't second guess that. That was his choice. We shouldn't second-guess it. We might not agree with it, but it was his choice
to make. He ignored his doctors' advice here, because it was at odds with what he wanted to do. We're not blaming him. We're not criticizing. What we're saying is it was his right it make that decision.
Remember what Stacey said their daughter? Stacey she came in and she said -- this is a quote -- "He was very open minded. He was a 'live and let live' kind of guy. And he's not the kind of person who would blame others."
And remember Stacey testified -- Mr. Trop asked her a question and Stacey testified that it was her mother's idea to file this lawsuit.
Now, they're asking you to award damages for one of these choices that Mr. Cohen made. And that's the decision to smoke cigarettes.
But remember what Beth said on her video. Beth said it was just part of him. Smoking was part of him. It was part of his life. It was part of his character. It was who he was.
And the Plaintiff, Mrs. Cohen, and her lawyers, since day one, have said -- and Judge Streitfeld even read to you an instruction when they began this part of case -- that the Plaintiff has admitted that
her husband bears some responsibility, the very beginning when Judge Streitfeld read some instructions to you after we finished the verdict for Phase 1 and we came in, one of the things that he read to you.
But yet, here's what she said at trial.
At trial, when I asked further questions, she said the exact opposite. Here's what she said:
"Do you agree with Mr. Trop's statement that Mr. Cohen accepts as your responsibility for his smoking, his cancer, and his death?"
"I don't believe that."
"Do you believe he had any responsibility for his smoking?"
M.._ II
"No."
We've talked about all those warnings he got in his life from Mrs. Cohen, from the doctors, all those different things, and yet Mrs. Cohen testified, on the witness stand, that he accepted no responsibility.
Now, you may be thinking, okay, well, we decided Phase 1, and Phase 1, we decided that he had lung cancer and that he died from lung cancer so that means she gets money. I want to address that. That's not at all where we are,
otherwise we wouldn't even be here. We could have gone home a long time ago.
There is more that you have to decide in this case in this phase of the case. The Judge is going to read the instructions and I'm going to go over the verdict form about that. But it's not just, well, okay, he smoked cigarettes, he had lung cancer, he died from them, and you go straight from there to money damages. That s not how it works.
We know from jury selection that some of you have experience with other types of claims or other types of lawsuits. And just remember this is not a settlement case. This is not a disability-type case. This is a particular case and you've all agreed to follow the law
that Judge Streitfeld will read to you. That s not a technicality. That's the law. And there are important reasons why there are additional requirements in this case. And the requirements are for something called "legal cause." There has to be a connection with Mr. Cohen. That's the law in Florida. That's the law that Judge Streitfeld is going to tell you about. So it's not just, okay, he had lung
cancer caused by smoking.
MR. PAIGE: Your Honor, I would object.
THE COURT: Overruled. Continue.
MS. PARKER: You have the next part of it in the jury instructions and on the verdict form, which is legal cause. I'm going to talk about that.
Let me show you the verdict form now. The verdict form -- you're going to get, obviously, this back when you go to the room. Every one of these first questions asks about legal cause, legal cause, legal cause, legal cause. And, again, that's not a technicality. That's an important element that the Plaintiff has the burden of proving, just like in Phase 1. We don't have any burden. Reynolds, Philip Morris, we have no burden. The burden is on the Plaintiffs to prove legal cause to you.
What does that mean? What it means is that the Plaintiffs have to prove that Reynolds' conduct is a legal cause of the death. She has to prove that Reynolds did something wrong and that what Reynolds did that was wrong is what caused this. It's more than just smoking cigarettes that are made by
Reynolds or made by Philip Morris.
Every claim requires legal cause. Every one of them. And we submit to you that it would be unfair in this case to award damages without this proof from the Plaintiffs on legal cause.
Now, let's go over what some of the evidence is on legal cause.
You know about the findings the Judge read to you. Those were from another court. Those are not what you are deciding here. Those have already been decided. We can put that behind us. That's not what we're here about. It's not what we're here about. Because we wouldn't have anything else to do, right? But you have this separate work, these separate questions. The findings do not resolve the issues as to Mr. Cohen. There's more to it.
So we do take responsibility. We take responsibility for any statement of Reynolds or anything we failed to say that, in fact, was seen or heard by Mr. Cohen. Where they have evidence that Mr. Cohen actually saw or actually heard any statement that was really made, we take responsibility for that. But
there's no evidence like that in this case.
And I want to go over that with you.
The earliest document, the earliest document that we put into evidence that came from Reynolds was 1953. Nothing at all before then. Earliest one was 1953. Remember that's before Mr. and Mrs. Cohen ever met. They didn't meet until 1955. Remember he was already 30 years old when they met.
So what did the Plaintiffs do? The Plaintiffs, in their case, did not tie up anything that was actually done -- I'm going to talk about that in a minute -- anything that was actually done to Mr. Cohen.
What did they do? Well, they brought you Dr. Proctor. Remember him? Would you have ever thought -- when you were selected for this case and you were told this is a case that's going to last for four weeks, would you have ever thought that the Plaintiffs would have spent an entire day from 9:30 in the morning until after 5:00 in the afternoon bringing a witness who says he has no opinions about Mr. Cohen? He said he was not a biographer of Mr. Cohen. He has no information about
Mr. Cohen's smoking or knowledge. That's not Mr. Cohen.
And then would you have ever thought that they would have started their case -- their very first witness was a video of this gentleman, Dr. Benowitz. Remember what Dr. Benowitz said? He said he didn't know the name of the smoker. Said didn't know anything about the smoker. He's not here to offer any opinion about the smoker.
And then remember the newspaper articles that they put into evidence were the New York Times and New York Daily News. And Mr. Cohen didn't have a subscription to the New York Times. He never lived in New York. He read the Miami Herald. We brought you the Miami Herald.
So let me ask you a question. Assuming -just assume that Reynolds didn't exist. Assume that none of those documents existed. Do you think Mr. Cohen wouldn't have smoked? He would have smoked. He enjoyed smoking. He wanted to smoke. He ran a night club.
Why is it that Mr. Paige and Mr. Trop have shown you all these documents, brought you all
these people, talked this morning about how cigarettes cause death in general, but they aren't tying it to Mr. Cohen? They're doing it because they're trying to make you mad.
They're trying to rile you up. They're trying to get you mad at us so that you will award a large verdict for them. That's what it's for.
So I'm going to ask you, when you go back and you are in the room and you are reviewing all of this, please go through everything very carefully and say: Does this have any tie to Mr. Cohen? Is this something that there is
itually	-------
evidence that he actually saw, he actually heard it? Is there evidence that it was actually implemented in any cigarette that he smoked?
That's something else. You know, you haven't heard anything about Camel cigarettes or about Salem cigarettes. There's been no evidence that there's anything wrong with Camels or anything wrong with Salems. All the evidence has been just cigarettes in general. Cigarettes in general cause lung cancer.
That's true. That's something we don't dispute.
I'm going to go back to the verdict form and I'm going to talk a little bit more about this legal cause issue and these last couple of questions here, 3 and 4.
The law that Judge Streitfeld is going to read to you says that there is really several things that the Plaintiff has to prove.
The Plaintiff has to prove that Mr. Cohen reasonably, reasonably relied, to his detriment, on some statement made by Reynolds that omitted information. That he reasonably -- reasonably relied. He has to have relied on it. And if there was reliance, it has to be reasonable.
Then, also, we talked about the legal cause requirement there. There's no evidence of any reliance here by Mr. Cohen. And there sure isn't evidence that anything was reasonable given all that information he knew from all those different sources, including his wife, including his mother passing away from lung cancer, including from his doctors.
Mrs. Cohen did not like him smoking. She said that. The daughters said that. She tried to get him to quit. She didn't want him to
smoke. She got angry with him, but she could not control him. He didn't listen to her. He didn't listen to his doctors either. Why do you think -- if he didn't listen to any of those people, he didn't listen to his wife, he didn't listen to his children, he didn't listen to those family members he loved the most, he didn't listen to his doctor, why do you think he would have listened to anything from Reynolds? He is somebody, again, who knew the health risks of smoking and wanted to smoke.
Let me show you the evidence at the trial about reliance. This is what Mrs. Cohen testified about:
"Now, Mr. Cohen never tried a particular cigarette because of advertisement, correct?"
"I don't recall."
There's no evidence of reliance. They have the burden of proof. There's no evidence of reliance.
"Well, do you recall having any discussions with Mr. Cohen about Reynolds or Philip Morris?"
No, not really.
That is the evidence in this case.
Now, why is it that this is -- this evidence about reliance and legal cause, why is that so important? Why is it it's not a technicality?
Well, first of all, the Plaintiff has the burden of proof. So the Plaintiff has to produce this evidence.
But there's a fairness issue as well.
I -- Reynolds, we cannot defend against something that's phantom that we don't know about. We have a right to defend ourselves.
But I got it know what it is. Okay? If somebody relied on something, they got to come to court and say he relied on this document, he relied on that document, he relied on this advertisement so that I can deal with that, so we can address it. Here, we don't have any of that evidence. That is not a legal technicality. That is fairness. That is fairness that is built into our system of laws and Judge Streitfeld is going to tell you about that.
Let me talk really briefly about advertising.
We saw ads again this morning and they put
up all those ads during the trial. Of course we have a legal right to advertise. And celebrities and sports figures were used to advertise, not just cigarettes but other products as well, including alcoholic beverages.
Mrs. Cohen has admitted she has no idea when Mr. Cohen started smoking. She has no information about that. Remember, they only met when he was 30 years old. There is zero -zero evidence that Mr. Cohen started smoking because of some ad. You know his sister smoked. Maybe he smoked with his sister. His mother smoked. Maybe he stole a cigarette from his mother and started smoking that way. We don't know. And we don't know. There's no evidence that he started smoking back that whole period of time before they met because of some ad. There's no evidence of that. And you have to base your verdict here on what the evidence is. Not just speculation.
We could speculate that the sister is the one who said, hey, I'm smoking, why don't you have a cigarette with me. But that's not evidence either. And an ad does not -- an ad
saying this tastes as good or try this cigarette, that doesn't mean ignore everything else that's out there. That doesn't mean ignore what your family is telling you, ignore what your doctors are telling you.
Here's what they're asking you to accept. They're asking you to accept that Mr. Cohen didn't believe all of those articles that came
out in the 50s in the Miami Herald that we showed you about the health risks of smoking. They're asking you to accept that Mr. Cohen didn't believe Mrs. Cohen. That he didn't believe his wife when she told him all these times it's going to kill you and you need to quit. They re asking you to accept that he didn't believe his daughter Beth when Beth came to him. That he didn't believe his doctors, including Dr. Centurion. That he didn't believe the warnings on the packages. That he didn't believe the Surgeon General. They're asking you to -- they are asking you to accept that Mr. Cohen didn't believe any of that and was instead relying on some document that we have not had any tie between -- to Mr. Cohen.
If Mr. Cohen were truly concerned about
the health risks of smoking, if he truly wanted to quit smoking, why didn't he ask his doctor to help him quit? If he truly -- the way they argue, if he truly didn't want to smoke, if he actually wanted to quit, all those times that Dr. Centurion said to him -- remember? They're friends. He had gone over to his house. All those times Dr. Centurion said Mr. Cohen you need to quit smoking, it is going to kill you, why didn't Mr. Cohen say will you help me, will you tell me what I need to do to quit, will you send me some pamphlets, will you send me to stop smoking clinic? Remember Dr. Centurion said not once did he ever indicate back to him that he wanted -- he had any interest in quitting. And when those medical records -those same two notebooks are going to go back with you in the jury room. There's not one thing in the medical records that indicate he ever made any effort with any of those doctors to try to quit smoking.
I'm going to address the issue about filters just really briefly. Here's what their daughter Stacey said.
Stacey's testimony was:
"Did you ever have any discussions with your father about the filters?"
"He told me that filters filtered out some of" -- "some of the harmful things in cigarettes."
And that's true. That's true. There's been no evidence that Reynolds ever said filtered cigarettes are completely safe. What they said is, it's safer, but -- because some of the harmful things are filtered out.
That's what his daughter said. That's further evidence that he knew that smoking was not healthy for him, because he was talking about harmful things in cigarettes. This means he knew there were harmful things in cigarettes.
Now, let me go back to that time line that I showed you a few minutes ago.
This period of time here, 1955, that's
when they met. So this whole period of time here, we have no information firsthand. Remember? Mrs. Cohen said his parents and his sister had all passed away and there was nobody back from that period of time.
And then this is when the Reynolds smoking
stopped. And I have arrows here. Mr. Reilly will address the rest of that.
Again, that's 48 years. Forty-eight years -- 48, 49 years without making an effort to quit. And being addicted does not mean that he couldn't try.
Now, there's been some evidence in this case about whether Mr. Cohen quit smoking. I want to go over that because I think it's important.
Here are those medical records, to show you this again really briefly. Remember this chart, all these medical records? Twelve medical records say he quit smoking. Twelve records.
But what else? What other information do we have? We also know where those records came from. Here is a list. Here are all the doctors and the nurses who put in their notes that he had quit smoking, that he told them he had quit smoking. All those people. And, again, remember in Phase 1? These are the folks that you relied on to determine that he had lung cancer. All these people said -these are the people who created those time
lines.
What did Dr. Gonzalez say when he came here? Remember Dr. Gonzalez?
"From your medical records, you understand that Mr. Cohen, in fact, had quit smoking, correct?"
"According to the record, he quit smoking,
yes."
This is the doctor that you guys relied on in Phase 1.
Now, there's another bit of information I want to show you. And it goes back to one of the documents on that chart of medical records. And that is this one. This is in evidence.
Mrs. Cohen was present. This record shows Mrs. Cohen was present. It says he smoked until two weeks ago. It's another record that said he quit. But it says his wife says he's using oxygen and his wife does not -Mrs. Cohen was there. She was telling -- on Mercy Hospital notes, she was telling the nurse who did that about her husband's condition. So she was present. So why didn't she say, you know -- you would assume everybody tells their doctor the truth. She would want his doctor to
know the truth about him, because he's	treating him and giving him medicine. So if he said I quit smoking two weeks ago, why didn't she say that's not true.
And remember -- I said a few minutes ago: Remember he was friends with Dr. Centurion?
They were friends. Why would he be embarrassed to tell his friends that he was still smoking. This whole argument, well, he didn't tell anybody because he was embarrassed just -- does that make sense? Does that make sense to you?
But whether he quit, whether he didn't quit doesn't change anything. Because, as you heard from the Plaintiff's case, if you have a proper motivation and you take proper steps, anybody can quit.
Here's what their expert said,
Dr. Benowitz, their witness, their guy:
"There's no cigarette smoker who, without the right support or assistance, cannot quit smoking?"
"Yes."
"Even people who are heavily-addicted smokers can quit, right?"
"Yes."
"Motivation and commitment are essential elements of the ability to quit smoking, correct?"
"Yes."
Both sides agree on that. That's what the Plaintiff's expert said here. Mr. Cohen was not the person that is being described to you this morning. He didn't hate smoking. He wasn't tormented or tortured or doing everything he could to try to quit.
Let me show you those photos again. I have mine on the board. Let me ask you to look at the photos, particularly the witness of him smoking. Does he look embarrassed? No. He's a happy guy. He's posing with a cigarette. Is he embarrassed about that? Is he trying to cover that up? Does he look like he's a robot smoking? He's having a good time. Look at him.
When you are evaluating the case and you go back to the jury room, we would ask that you use your common sense about some of these issues. People smoke because they enjoy it. They decide for themselves that that's something they want to do. That's what
Mr. Cohen did. And addiction is not an excuse for failing to even try to quit.
And if you're going to file a lawsuit and come to court and ask for money, out of fairness, he should have gone and gotten help, he should have gone it a doctor. He had an obligation to try more than just this day or two. Remember Mrs. Cohen said he never tried to quit more than a couple of days at a time. That was it. That was it.
THE CLERK: Ten minutes, Counsel.
MS. PARKER: Thank you.
His withdrawal symptoms were so mild. They're nothing like what you think of with heroine and cocaine.
Let me go over that quickly.
Remember these? He was able to function normally, went about his daily routine. Didn't interfere with his work. He was not tormented, not tortured, not impaired. Just a little irritable or cranky. Is that like cocaine or heroin? His addiction meant nothing more than he was a little irritable and cranky on those couple days he tried to quit on those occasions. Heroin and cocaine users who are
addicted, remember all the testimony? That's when go out and rob a bank and you can't go to work and everything. That's not an accurate description for Mr. Cohen.
I want to talk about punitive damages for just a moment. Judge Streitfeld is going to tell you what the law is on punitive damages. Punitive damages are a higher standard. A higher standard. And the jury charge says you are going to have to find that Reynolds did something that was -- let me tell you exactly what the language is. "Gross and flagrant, recklessly disregarded his safety, consciously indifferent, intentional violation of his rights."
That's not correct. These documents are not tied to Mr. Cohen. There's nothing that we did and you cannot find us liable merely for selling cigarettes. Merely for selling cigarettes. It's a legal product. So if you go back and somebody says in the jury room, well, wait a minute, they made the cigarettes, Reynolds made the cigarettes, you need to raise your hand and say, you know what, that's not enough.
It is legal for us to sell cigarettes.
You cannot find us liable merely because we made the cigarettes that he smoked. That's not enough. That's not enough on the verdict form. That's not enough in the jury charges that Judge Streitfeld is going to give you.
We are in a new phase of this case. The issues you decided in Phase 1 were completely different. You decided those against us and I told you, when we started this phase, we accepted that. Those are different issues. We're starting here on a blank slate with brand-new issues on legal cause under the instructions that you're going to get.
Now, one thing Mr. Paige said is that he thought -- remember he showed that you board and I think it said 14 percent responsibility for Mr. Cohen. That's not right. Let me show you that time line again.
This whole period of time, he didn't even try to quit. Later on he said, you know, several different things he tried to quit:
Tried the patch, tried this and that and the other. Remember? But nothing more than a couple of days. Look at what percentage that
is. The whole time he smoked cigarettes, the times that he tried to quit is really about 1 percent of his entire smoking history, when he was even doing anything to try to quit.
And, again, addiction doesn't mean you can't try. He wasn't even trying during all those times.
We know that all of you answered questions during jury selection and you said were you going to be fair. That's why you were selected. You were the people who said we can be fair to both sides, we believe in the jury system. And I want to throw out some questions for you to consider.
Why is it Reynolds believes -- and Mr. Reilly will discuss Philip Morris -- why Reynolds believes that your answers on the verdict form should be no on legal cause? No, no, no, no, no in our favor. Here's why.
First of all, this period of time in the 1940s and the 1950s and 1960s, why should we be responsible for a period of time when he didn't even try to quit smoking? Why should we be responsible for that? Is that fair? He didn't even try to quit then. Why would we be
responsible for that?
And then this period from 1940 to mid 1950s, remember even Dr. Proctor said that was honest doubt. Honest doubt. And this period of time, again from 1940 to 1955, they hadn't even met. We have no firsthand knowledge of anything about him. This whole period of time ought to come off the table to begin with. Because, A, they hadn't even met then. We don't have information about anything. Is it fair to say we should be punished for things that had nothing to do with Mr. Cohen?
If I could show the company documents just real quickly, remember the questions that I asked here, just a few of them. Remember the company documents? These are ones that are in evidence that Mr. Paige has been talking about. This is a draft. This is a proposal. He said there's a cold trail after it. This is a proposal. Is it fair to say that we should be held responsible for things that weren't even implemented?
Is it fair for us to be liable for ads that he didn't even rely on when Mrs. Cohen said he didn't rely on ads? Is it fair to say
we should be punished for statements that he didn't hear, see, there's no evidence at all that connects the two of them?
Is it fair to say we should be responsible for making a product available for smokers who chose to smoke when Mr. Cohen also had a night club and he made liquor and cigarettes available to people? He didn't force it upon on them. He didn't force people to smoke. He made it available for adults who chose to smoke.
So when you go back in the jury room, I want to ask one thing and that is to keep your focus on Mr. Cohen. This isn't about cigarettes in general. This isn't about whether cigarettes cause cancer. We agree with that. The government agrees with that. This isn't an opportunity to say how you feel about cigarettes. You may not like cigarettes. You may not want to smoke. This isn t about that. This is about Mr. Cohen. It's about his decisions.
I want to end by playing two short clips for you that I think are really important because it shows Mr. Cohen was not the person
that the -- Mr. Paige and Mr. Trop want you to believe. He's somebody who smoked because he wanted to smoke, knowing full well that there are health risks. I'm going to play these two clips and I will leave it in your hands.
I want to thank you again on behalf of Reynolds. Thank you to very much for your attention this morning. I very much appreciate this opportunity to talk to you.
And so we're going to play those now.
This is the daughter Beth.
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
A. It's not one specific conversation. It was -- she would express the way she felt about it quite often.
Q. And what specifically can you remember her saying to your father about the smoking?
A. That it was going to kill him. And that's pretty much --
Q. Was it something that he became combative about? I mean, was he -- did he not appreciate the times when your mother would make these comments about her concerns?
A. I think he just ignored her and smoked.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
MS. PARKER: And then this is Dr. Centurion.
(Whereupon, a video clip was played to the jury as follows:)
Q. And, again, I've gone through really carefully and I just want you to confirm that there is zero reference in any of your medical records that Mr. Cohen ever said to you or ever indicated to you that he wanted to quit smoking.
Can you confirm that?
A. You are correct.
Q. Okay. And there is no reference in any of your medical records that Mr. Cohen ever asked you for assistance in quitting smoking?
A. You are correct.
Q. Okay. But the contrary of that, you as a doctor have had -- I'm sure are counseling your patients that they should quit smoking?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And what do you tell them?
A. Well, back in 92, the easiest way to try to get somebody to stop is there's -- there's -- it was a whole different regimen back then. You needed
to
tell
Q.
A.
Q.
A.
Q.
smoking?
A.
Q.
that you A.
Q.
refer him
them it's Did you Yes.
-- Mr. Cohen Yes.
You told him
going to tell --
kill you.
it's going to kill him? that he ought to quit
Yes.
Do you have any question in your mind but told Mr. Cohen that he should quit smoking? None.
Doctor, did Mr. Cohen ever ask you to to any, you know, group or organization or
anything in order to quit smoking?
A. Not to my memory, no.
Q. Okay. And did he ever ask you for any information like pamphlets or information like that on how to quit smoking?
A. No, ma'am.
(Whereupon, the video clip which was played to the jury concluded.)
MS. PARKER: Thank you.
Thank you, Your Honor.
