MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court? Counsel.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. How are you all? I have quite a bit of material here.
See if we can keep it simple.
You heard a lot of evidence. It came in in bits and pieces. It came in, you know, not necessarily in great continuity. So I'm going to thank you for your service so far and the fact that you've paid attention. And now I'm going to launch into what I think is our best attempt to stitch together some of the materials that you saw so we can present it our way. And I'm looking to get you all to see it our way.
And that's what this phase of the proceeding is.
It's a closing statement designed to give the lawyers an opportunity to say, what does this all mean? All right.
Now, I think there are two basic elements to the parts of this discussion I'm going to have with you. And Mr. Hammer, my partner, is going to help with some of those when I'm done. So I'm going to go for a little while, Mr. Hammer is going to go for a little while, we're going to tackle that verdict form which, as you can see, has got a lot of parts to it, it's long, there's a lot of questions, 14 questions, 42 subparts, lots of questions.
But what is this case about? All right.
The case is about, to me, the parts I want to address with you are the concept of addiction and the concept of industry fraud. These are the main overarching themes I want to discuss with you as we go through this.
Now, slide 1, please.
So, why are we here? Well, Thomas Jefferson, I think Your Honor quoted at the beginning and just to get you guys inspired a little something introductory about the American way and why we're here, flag, Thomas Jefferson. "Trial by jury, the best of all safeguards for the person and property of every individual."
So the point there is, this is going to be
up to you. You all have the power. We are going to hand the power of this case over to you. The Court in her wisdom has made the rulings that she feels is appropriate based on the lawyers' positions to come to you and say, this is what you should hear. And you have heard a lot. And it's the things you've heard, the evidence she's let in that you are going to be allowed to use to make the determination.
Now, addiction and fraud, are cigarettes addictive? They have been stipulated in this case to be addictive. You heard someone say cigarettes can be addictive, the nicotine in cigarettes can be addictive, but the fact is is cigarettes are addictive, the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
And what is the twin pillars of this long wrongful episode in our country's history that hides in plain sight to this day, I think the twin pillars are the manipulation of the drugs in the cigarette to make them more addictive. That is all a cigarette is. That is all a cigarette ever was. Nobody, and you'll see the evidence is in the case, you're going to have these documents, these internal documents,
nobody has ever become a smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. Nicotine sustains the addiction to smoking, nothing else.
These documents that we're going to talk about I think help us understand that we're talking about an epidemic in this country. A tobacco illness epidemic in this country that affected Helen Cohen and millions like her.
You're going to hear about Helen Cohen, but Helen Cohen is a generic smoker. She is one of many, one of what was a class of 700,000 people decades ago litigated in the Engle case with findings that have been approved more than once to the Florida Supreme Court and then spread out so that all of the folks who wanted to bring an individual lawsuit could get the benefits of the conclusions that a prior jury made that you all are so bound to accept and apply that you believe them, they are yours, they are your findings.
Can you put them up, please?
These are conclusions made after decades of work. What did Martin Luther King say? He said "The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice."
David Cohen is 91 years old. And he whispered to me a couple of times, I think, we're still fighting. 91 years old. That's what it takes and that's what it's taken to get into this courtroom to get -MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- his story -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Disregard the last statement.
Continue, Mr. Schlesinger, please.
MR. SCHLESINGER: To be able to get -- he's in a courtroom now getting ready to tell you his story based in part upon his entitlement -- if you find that Helen is a member of the class, and I think you will once I explain why you should -- that smoking cigarettes causes chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung cancer. That's a medical scientific truth. An absolute.
"Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive."
Not nicotine in cigarettes can be addictive.
"Defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous."
Now, where is the incongruity in our country with that concept? There is no other consumer
product on this planet that is legal to sell that kills over half of its users when used according to the way it's supposed to be used.
I see it as some form of institutionalized madness that this product, which serves no purpose, no benefit for society, but just kills, exists and continues to exist in this country.
And it hides in plain sight. We have become inured to it.
Everybody coming into this courtroom knew and talked about it in their voir dire that we know cigarettes are bad and it's been a long time since the evidence was out that cigarettes were bad, but 450,000 people a year are still dying from the administration of this product.
The death rates haven't dropped off. The documents that are in evidence that you'll have to read the most recent pronouncements by the Surgeon General in 2012 and in 2010, and these books will actually be in evidence as books. They're not hard to get to. You'll find them.
You can look through them. There's anything yoi want to know about what's being said in this courtroom is referenced in here in absolute terms in ways that were done with millions of
government dollars, our tax dollars, to analyze with the finest scientists using rigorous evidentiary criteria.
When Dr. DiFranza wrote multiple, multiple articles that are referenced as the basis for conclusions in these documents they were subject to rigorous scientific analysis. The most commonly used test for the determination of addiction and dependence to nicotine is the Fagerstrom test. It says that in this book, in the 2012 book, which, by the way, is still in this year dealing with preventing tobacco use among youth and young adults.
What does that mean? The twin pillars of the wrongfulness that hides in plain sight in this country. In plain sight. Addicting children. Addicting youths. Addicting adolescents. The replacement smoker is the person that must replace those who are dying and leaving the market. I think -- I hear leaving the market and I think of that movie Leaving Las Vegas, Nicholas Cage, how he left Las Vegas. He left Las Vegas dead from alcohol abuse. But alcohol abuse doesn't compare to nicotine abuse.
It doesn't compare in any way, shape or form.
Alcohol abuse and the harm it causes in this country is a fraction of the deaths caused by tobacco. There is no other cause of more deaths, all the other major causes of death combined don't reach the levels of tobacco. They don't even come close. Homicides, gun damage, heroin addiction, alcohol, car wrecks from alcohol, altogether, all in, they do not add up to almost 450,000 people a year.
Now, 100 million people died in the twentieth century from tobacco, from a product that is now just makes -- there's no rational basis for it in the country.
On par there has been the determination,
Dr. Proctor testified to and Mr. Gdanski asked him, in the twenty-first century we're slated to lose 1 billion souls from the scourge of the tobacco epidemic.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And that's what it is.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Disregard the last statement.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's in evidence, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Continue forward,
Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So the documents we'll through help us understand that the tobacco epidemic is so intractable not simply because nicotine is powerfully addictive, which it is, or because teenagers are the targets of smoking initiation by tobacco companies with absolute certainty, but because a powerful industry depends on its perpetuation. It is the use of the disclosures in these documents and the attention we paid to them that show the root cause of this crisis, the tobacco epidemic in this country. And that's the first step towards accountability.
I challenge the defense attorneys in any way, shape or form during -MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Ask for a curative instruction.
THE COURT: Please disregard the last statement.
Please proceed forward, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: We will see if for any reason under any set of circumstances any acknowledgement of responsibility -MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. PERSONS: Objection. May we approach?
THE COURT: Sidebar, Counsel, please.
Mr. Schlesinger, I need you sidebar, sir.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. S. DAVIS: Could we get a curative, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Please disregard the last statement.
Thank you, Mr. Davis.
You may continue, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes, thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Let me present it this way. The first area of consideration is, was Helen addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes?
The concept there is was she dependent on any degree in the nicotine in cigarettes? Did that dependence cause or contribute to her to cause to smoke enough cigarettes to end up getting sick? And I submit to you that the evidence is overwhelmingly true and yes in that regard because, as a practical matter, one of the internal documents said, no one became a smokei without nicotine in cigarettes, and as a practical matter, Helen smoked so many cigarettes, two to three packs a day for 50 years, it does not happen, nobody does that unless they have an addiction, a dependance on the nicotine in cigarettes, which constrains
free choice. It does not allow you just to
freely make whatever decision you want whenever
you want to make it.
And you will not hear an instruction from the Court as to what constitutes addiction. You will not hear a legal definition of addiction.
You will not be told that the determination of whether Helen is addicted or not is characterized solely by medical considerations, which is why laypeople, nonmedical people, family members and friends who were there to observe and see how much smoking Helen did first thing in the morning when her nicotine levels were depleted before she could even function and then all throughout the day, you will hear from those people and their conclusions were she was addicted.
Can you put up the board of the folks that found her to be addicted, please? It's number -- it doesn't have a number.
THE COURT: Bottom right-hand corner it does.
VIDEO TECH: Let me see. 9.
MR. SCHLESINGER: 9.
THE COURT: Can we take that down, please?
VIDEO TECH: I'm trying to. Give me one second.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay. So this is evidence in the case. It allows you, and there's a jury instruction that also explains to you, you may use your common sense. Common sense comes int play.
Helen Cohen believed she was addicted. You heard testimony to the effect that she said that.
All of the folks, now I'm not talking about just the family members, but David Cohen; Edward Cohen, her son; Linda Rose; Rachel Cohen.
Rachel Cohen, who is a doctor, but she said as a daughter she believed her grandma was addicted. Eva Dahan, the granddaughter, said she was addicted. And Dr. Wasserman, Santini, Baum, Jacobson, Dudley, and the one expert that we asked to come in, Dr. DiFranza, all agreed she was addicted. That's great uniformity in that regard. And you all are allowed to take that into consideration.
In opening statement Mr. Parsons made some -- Mr. Persons made some explanations about you have to use a medical clinical diagnosis,
you can't just use a crude method of how many cigarettes folks smoke or when they smoke them to make that determination, it's got to be a medical diagnosis. But the fact is the law in this case is anybody can make that determination, you all too, just using your common sense, having heard about nicotine, what you've learned about it in this case, and having heard what kind of smoking Helen did and therefore you can come to those conclusions.
You don't have to ask around to just a medical conclusion.
What's interesting is Dr. Dosovitz admitted that under the Fagerstrom test, which principally asks, when do you smoke that first cigarette in the morning? How severe is your nicotine depletion? Under the Fagerstrom test you also ask how many cigarettes do you smoke during the day? And even Dr. Dosovitz conceded and admitted, and we have that testimony, I'll show it to you, under the Fagerstrom test she would be addicted. So that's a full plate of folks, depending on how you define the criteria.
Now, why are we here in a situation where so many folks have got so much cigarette sales
going on for so long -- can you put that up?
Go ahead, Rob, put it up.
That's testimony in this case at page 6583. "So you agree that the Fagerstrom test for nicotine dependence is widely used in treatment studies?
"Answer: Yes, I do.
"Helen Cohen meets sufficient criteria under the Fagerstrom to be highly addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, doesn't she?
"In the Fagerstrom test, yes, she does."
You can go back to the findings now, please.
Why, why is it that since the '50s and the '40s when the tobacco companies knew full well that their cigarettes were causing cancer and they decided to approach it not for the benefit of the public health, but for the benefit of their own company the perpetuation of their company, why is it that they did what they did?
Do you have Jet's, PT 02009?
"Who ain't for more money?" This is tobacco industry document, Mr. Wakeham to Dunn, Jet's money offer, February 19, 1969, "Who ain't for more money?"
An industry that has spent 250 billion
dollars, that's a quarter of a trillion dollars up through 2005 in the 40 years before 2005 hawking and marketing its products to addict children, to initiate youth, because, as they said, The first time a person smokes a cigarette he isn't smoking it for nicotine. We have to convince him with a wholly irrational reason to try that first nicotine cigarette and thereafter he'll be able to discover the real satisfactions to be obtained. That was Claude Teague's document.
So in a callous way, in a way that was for only one purpose and one purpose only, a produ often regarded and referred to as a legal product. We sell a legal product. It is not legal to sell it to children. It is not legal to market it to kids that are 12, 13, 14, 15 years old. That growth spurt in the brain where the exposure of this incredibly powerful drug, a drug every bit as addictive as cocaine and heroin. A difficult concept to wrap your mind around. It took me a while to get it. How is it that that could be? A heroin addict, if he goes through withdrawal he's throwing up and he's a cocaine addict, he's having seizures, how
can that be? But the nicotine doesn't let you go. When you are hooked, and every fisherman who uses a hook puts it in the bait to catch a fish. We've heard the term "hooked." Why do you think fishermen use hooks in bait? To catch the fish. The fish doesn't know the hook is in there. Nobody chooses addiction. Nobody chooses to be addicted.
But when you're a teenager, when you're Helen Cohen and you live in an environment, remember what Dr. Proctor said about presentism, when you live in a world that is so different than our world today, you have to try to imagine what things were like back then. And we identified for you movie stars and Sonja Henie and the folks that kids looked up to. And when a 16-year-old in 1940, 25 years before there was even the beginnings of the most minuscule warning label on a pack of cigarettes ever came into being this poor gal had begun smoking cigarettes. She smoked cigarettes a pack, two packs a day for 25 years before there was a warning. She was addicted, deeply addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes because of the dependence that was produced even in those early
years as a teenager when the growing brain is susceptible, as Dr. DiFranza said, permanent -irrevocably permanent changes in the brain that build the kind of cravings, the kind of withdrawal symptoms that you seek the relief to avoid, to feel normal, to replace that drug in your brain because your brain is different.
It's grown different receptors. They're permanent effects. The permanent effects are so amazing that folks will say the cravings are powerful for months or even up to a year and almost everybody fails. Nobody that tries to quit makes the ability to quit in the beginning. They have to try over and over and over again, if they do.
And then the challenge and the assignment from Mr. Parsons [sic] to Mrs. Cohen is, you have to want to do it. You have to want to do it really, really bad. You have to make a really, really, really serious effort and you've got to be motivated to choose.
MR. S. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative on all of that.
THE COURT: Disregard, please.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Why is it that Helen has to be making such serious efforts and be so motivated to choose? She was addicted. It's a tautology to say you are not addicted but if you are you could have chosen to quit. How does that work? How is it that if you're addicted you could choose to quit when the Surgeon General in 1999 says addiction destroys the concept that the use of cigarettes is dependent upon free choice. It is not. The choice has been constrained. The drug use, the administration of the drug is because of the powerful addictive effects of the drug. So it is a tautology; meaning that you say one thing one way and you say the exact opposite using just slightly different words. You cannot come in and say, yes, nicotine is addictive and then say but anybody can choose to quit because that's just a denial of the fact of addiction.
So Jet's money offer, go to the next highlight on there, real quick, please.
"I would be more cautious in using the pharmic-medical model. Do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? It is, of
course, but there are dangerous FDA implications to having such conceptualization go beyond these four [sic] walls."
Now, let's go to slide 7, please.
Here are some of the documents in evidence. You can read them. Now, one of the challenges, and I've been a juror so one of the challenges -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Please disregard the last statement.
MR. SCHLESINGER: One of the challenges for jurors is, you go back to the room, you are going to be a deliberative body, you are going to get to discuss and describe in your open-minded way and collaborate, interact and decide what is the right thing to do, how do we arrive at justice in this case? And working through each of you has the entitlement and right to make the opinion, to share the opinion, consider and weigh the evidence.
Some of the evidence that's in this case will be stacked up in large piles of documents
back there. You have notes, that may be sufficient. You may wish to refer to some of the documents. We only excerpted snippets and highlights of some of the main points, because, as you know, there's millions and millions of documents. Dr. Proctor came in here, he's a scholar in this subject, he wrote an 800-page novel. We couldn't read that 800-page book.
It's a nonfiction work. We couldn't read that to you guys.
Dr. DiFranza has hundreds of articles on nicotine research. He's a leading, cutting-edge nicotine researcher. Those guys came in, the true experts in this case with legitimate credentials, and they told you what the realities of nicotine are. And it's that twin pillars, children are the only ones that start smoking. If you don't start smoking before 21,
95 percent of people never smoke. If you raise the minimum age of smoking to 21, the business would go down to 5 percent. Instead of 45 to 50 million people in this country smoking you would be down to 4 million or 5 million people in this country smoking.
They'd still have a business, it would still
be a profitable business, but it would be a much diminished business, because what is the benefit of the scourge of this sort of epidemic of tobacco-related illnesses? What does that do to benefit our country, to sell nicotine, which years and years and years they deliberately downplayed the role of nicotine.
Internally they worked on it. They designed it. They added ammonia to it. They came up with ways to get freebase kicks, freebase ammonia. Helen smoked three-quarters of a million cigarettes in her lifetime, 7,500,000 drug hits to her brain rapidly absorbing through the tissues in her lungs, the alveolar tissue, the capillary beds, directly into her brain, because of ammoniation diammonium phosphate chocolate and flavoring and menthols to create an inhalable cigarette to get an impact and a kick and a dose of a drug to the brain that changes the brain to the particularly vulnerable segment of our society that are kids. It's a legal product. It isn't legal to sell it to kids and yet without youth sales there is no new cigarette-smoking generation.
Bennett LeBow admitted it. He's the only
one that did admit it. There's a dozen things tobacco has never admitted to this day in this courtroom.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The evidence in this cas from Dr. Proctor is that big tobacco has never admitted that cigarettes are the leading cause of death in the U.S. and worldwide. And they are -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- the Surgeon General said so.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Big tobacco has never admitted it -MR. PERSONS: Objection.
THE COURT: Counsel, come sidebar, please.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. SCHLESINGER: So the tobacco industry, and this is testimony from Dr. Proctor, has never admitted that cigarettes are the leading cause of death in the U.S. and worldwide. They
have never admitted that millions of people have died from smoking. They have never admitted that cigarettes are a defective product, meaning designed in a way that far more people die from smoking than need be, that cigarettes are deadly by design. They've never admitted that.
They're never admitted that nicotine addiction causes death. They've never admitted that cigarettes are as addictive as heroin and cocaine. They've never admitted that they lied to the public. They never admitted that they lied to Congress. They never admitted having manipulated government and medical groups to further their agenda. They've never admitted to having to conspire to hide the hazards of smoking. They've never admitted that they destroyed documents to conceal their activities. They never admitted that they marketed cigarettes to youth except on a single occasion a single series of events in 1997 and 1998 where Liggett, as Liggett counsel mentioned, we've broken ranks and we have gone our own way in certain ways. They were a member of the conspiracy for many, many years, but in '97, '98 Bennett LeBow, who was then the chief executive
officer of Liggett here in Florida as a matter of fact, admitted, yes, the tobacco industry markets to children. We can't exist without selling to underage kids.
MS. KASCHEL: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I'll find that exact testimony and read it to you, but Dr. Proctor explained and testified to that.
MR. PERSONS: Curative.
THE COURT: Disregard the last statement.
Let's continue forward, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, sure.
Company executives themselves have acknowledged that marketing reaches and influences underage adults. For example, in 1997 Bennett S. LeBow, CEO of the holding company that owns Liggett, stated: Liggett acknowledges that the tobacco industry markets to youth, which means those under 18 years of age. Later that year in litigation in Minnesota Bennett LeBow below further testified that the cigarette companies targeted young people to try to keep people smoking to keep their business going.
These are the things that hide in plain sight. These are the things that folks can come in and say, yeah, we know cigarettes are bad, people should know, everybody should know. At by the time we get to 2013 shouldn't everybody know. What is the point? Serves Helen Cohen right, would that be the argument?
MR. S. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: She knew. She -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Please disregard the last statement.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The industry has never admitted to having conspired to hiding the hazards of smoking, never admitted that they destroyed documents, never admitted they marketed to youth, never admitted that they manipulate the chemistry of tobacco to create and sustain addiction. They made cigarettes, the drug delivery device of cigarettes more addictive. They've never admitted that filters are fraudulent.
This is from this book, which is in evidence, page 16, you'll have it. And
Mr. Gdanski did some of this with Dr. Proctor regarding the tobacco industry's internal memoranda and other documents make it clear thal the core concept of the cigarette has changed very little since its invention. It is a tobacco-derived product for delivering nicotine to the user.
When it came to reduced tar and nicotine yields, they used filters. And remember, 99 percent of all cigarettes today are using filters, all of them. So it used to be there weren't filters. '50s and '60s as part of the health reassurance campaign the cigarette companies, to give the smokers a psychological crutch to continue to smoke, put these filters on. And the Kent documents for Lorillard that are in evidence talk about the new triple filter we market it as a safer cigarette.
And Mr. Parsons [sic] said in opening statement, the FTC and the government suggested that if you're not going to quit smoking use these filters, they're safer, they're better.
And he mentioned the 1966 admonition from the government that the filters could be better.
And he mentioned the 1976 follow-up from the
government that the filters could be better, and I don't think he put those in evidence and I don't think you'll see them. But if you bring it full circle, it turned out that in sum it took decades to recognize the changes to reduce machine-measured tar and nicotine yields in cigarettes, did not have a measurable beneficial impact on public health. That was the National Cancer Institute in 2001.
And in 2008 the Federal Trade Commission rescinded its 1966 guidance that generally permitted statements concerning tar and nicotine yield if they were met by the FTC method.
"Unfortunately," this is page 20, "it took public health researchers and federal authorities many years to discover what the tobacco industry knew much earlier, the health benefits of reductions of tar and nicotine intakes were negligible at best for persons using these products."
NCI report in 2001 concluded, There is no convincing evidence that changes in cigarette designs between 1950 and the mid '80s have resulted in an important decrease in the disease burden caused by cigarettes used either for
smokers as a group or the entire population.
Thus by the twenty-first century it was apparent that five decades of evolving cigarette design had not reduced overall disease risk among smokers. And new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts.
And that was what Mr. Gdanski started by telling you that in contrast to industry awareness the various ways that cigarettes were physically modified and the nature and level of compensation response to design changes were r well understood by parties outside of the tobacco industry itself.
Public health officials have little basis -this is the Surgeon General. Public health officials have little basis to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow smokers to draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes and was represented by the machine-measured yields of tar and nicotine.
And then it was not until the turn of the twenty-first century that it became increasingly clear that no relationship existed between
machine-measured tar and nicotine levels and risks for most categories of cigarette-related diseases.
Here's what's really distressing. Smokers changed the way they smoke to get the cigarette nicotine they needed. They drew harder on the cigarettes. They covered up the ventilation holes in the cigarettes and they breathed in deeper to get deeper draws. What happened? The rise in lung cancer -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor, misstates the evidence.
THE COURT: Counsel, can I have counsel sidebar?
[#DELETED SIDEBARS#]
THE COURT: Welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you so much for your patience with us. You're welcome to make yourselves comfortable.
And Mr. Schlesinger is going to continue with closing arguments at this time.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Please the Court.
Okay. So this document -- these are all documents in evidence, give you a sense of the meaningfulness of nicotine and the dependence on nicotine as a real disease process.
So back in 1980, this is an internal document here that indicates that "cigarette smoking is more addictive than heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke."
This is an industry document, internal secret documents revealed in the late '90s that helped us understand what was really going on behind the scenes for decades, going back to the '50s.
"We can't defend continued smoking as free
choice if the person was addicted."
And yet that is still continuing. The fact is is that an acknowledgment was made way back when, before folks knew, before the public health authorities knew, because the first time the public health authorities figured out and finally said, wow, these things, these cigarettes, this is nothing but drugs, that's all this is. These guys here, this is just drugs. It's hard to wrap your mind around it.
MR. S. DAVIS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: But cigarettes are drugs.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I can't show cigarettes.
THE COURT: You can show the cigarettes. Sustain the objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So because they're in oui social structure, our social context, and they're sold in the drugstores and everything and you see them on what they call the power wall, Dr. Proctor testified about, which is when they're spread out they end up looking like a billboard and they come in these colors, they are attractive to youth and marketing and
advertising is attractive to youth.
But the part that is hard to wrap your mind around, but it's nothing but the truth is, this is a nicotine delivery device, it serves no other purpose but to give drugs to an addicted brain. And the tobacco companies admitted that in many documents that we're going to get through, if I can rip through them, that we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. Without nicotine our business would collapse, we'd all go out of business, we'd have to business without nicotine. So this is an internal document admitting it internally years before it was ever acknowledged publicly.
Finally by '88 and '89 the Surgeon General explained that in a report on 25 years of progress with the health consequences of smoking. "These two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. Most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted."
That's in '89. Remember, subsequent to that and even after 1989 the doubt campaign, doubt is our product. The tobacco companies would come out and refute it and they would refute it
forcefully in newspaper ads, in public relations messages they would downplay it and deny it. So they had a choice.
We talk about choices. You're not going to see choice in those verdict forms. You're not going to see choice words in the language of the jury instructions. You're going to say, was Helen Cohen addicted? Was she dependent upon the nicotine in cigarettes? The answer to that question is yes. Was Helen Cohen dependent upon the nicotine in cigarettes such that she smoked so many of them she got sick with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or emphysema? She did. Is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease a term that anybody even knows what it means?
Back in '89 and '90 they talked about warnings on packs of cigarettes that said emphysema, but even to this day chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is not something that's well known or well understood as to what it means. We'll talk about that. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was never on the side of the warning of the package saying -MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- you're going to get
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Disregard the last statement of Mr. Schlesinger's.
MR. SCHLESINGER: May I reflect on the rotating warnings that were discussed in opening statement by Mr. Persons, where he mentioned emphysema and discussed that?
THE COURT: Be careful -- I would caution you to Court's pretrial rulings.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And I'm not even going ■ go there. We'll keep moving.
Now, the two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. "Most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted."
And what is our current and important Surgeon General's Report say in 2010? It says that "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report," including emphysema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and ultimately
lung cancer, which is what befell Helen. She suffered from those diseases.
And there is now even a stipulation in this case that smoking cigarettes caused Helen to get emphysema/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. That determination has been made by the Court for you as a stipulation that you can accept as truth in this case.
The -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Go ahead.
MR. PERSONS: Misrepresentation.
THE COURT: Sustained. Let's limit our language to the stipulations.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's a stipulation that the parties all agree to, admission, stipulation?
"The tobacco addiction remains a substantial problem in the United States and worldwide. Of those individuals who have ever tried smoking, about one-third become daily smokers. Of those smokers who try to quit, less than 5 percent are successful at any one time. Although not all smokers become nicotine dependent, the prevalence of individuals diagnosed as nicotine
dependent is higher than for any other substance abuse order." [sic]
In our country tens of millions of folks are dependent upon cigarettes and are unfortunately smoking them continuously and chronically over a long period of time to the point where they get disease.
This, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual,
"It is estimated that between 80 and 90 percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence, meaning that up to 25 percent of the United States population may have nicotine dependence."
So I want to show you something. Now, that's the DSM.
Here in the Surgeon General's Report it talks about hooked on nicotine, Fagerstrom test of nicotine dependence. That's one of DiFranza's list, is the hooked on nicotine test list. There's many different types of ways of determining nicotine addiction. The one single criteria is basically smoking a lot of cigarettes, even Dr. Dosovitz admitted a lay definition of nicotine dependence is smoking a lot of cigarettes. And Helen Cohen was a heavy smoker. She was a heavy regular chronic smoker
of cigarettes. She qualifies under that single criteria. She qualifies under the Fagerstrom.
If 80 to 90 percent of cigarette smokers are addicted -- can you put up the board for Dr. Dosovitz?
THE CLERK: Counsel, 45 minutes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: If 80 to 90 percent of the cigarette smokers are addicted, I want to show you something, I'm trying to think in terms of math the -- it says 80 to 90 percent. I want to work with 80 percent, the low number. But I want you to be thinking about the fact that shouldn't it be more like 90 percent because the Engle class smokers that are here, you can consider them to be a concentrated group of the most addicted smokers.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They're in a courtroom. So they've brought a lawsuit.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative. It's outside the evidence.
THE COURT: Please, again, Mr. Schlesinger, sustain the objection for the record. Please.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The evidence is these are
all folks that are in an Engle progeny lawsuit, years after the 700,000 strong class of Engle who are working their way through the Court systems with their individual cases.
MR. WOODS: Object to that.
THE COURT: Sidebar.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, please disregard the last statement made by Mr. Schlesinger. I've sustained defense counsel's objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The class was originally 700,000. Right now there are -MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- cases working their way through the -- there are a number of cases working their way through the legal system.
Some of those cases working their way through the legal system were discussed with Dr. Dosovitz, who doesn't have any credentials, who doesn't have any studies on nicotine, who is not a true expert, who was only hired exclusively -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Is not a true expert, objection sustained. We don't disparage witnesses in my courtroom. Objection sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The evidence does not sht that Dr. Dosovitz has committed himself on paper
in any literature in any study in any scientific research that exists before a piece of litigation; meaning, what is your position on the record in publications? Then I can take them out and see what you've committed to say. There is nothing from Dr. Dosovitz. You will not find his name in the Surgeon General's Reports. You'll find Dr. DiFranza's name. He is an expert with great scholarly credentials, great contributions to public health in the form of rigorous scientific research. Dr. Dosovitz has not made any such contribution.
And when a witness has made no literature scientific contributions, there is nothing in writing that you can take that he's written and discuss or challenge him with it. You can do that with Dr. DiFranza, and what you will notice is despite hundreds of articles on research pertaining to nicotine, not a single article was confronted to Dr. DiFranza by the defense in the case saying, oh, here there's something you said in one of these articles that isn't accurate.
Same thing with Dr. Proctor. They had an 800-page book of the history of the wrongs and internal documents of the tobacco industry, they
did not challenge him with a single document to discredit him. And we submit that the evidence shows these were true scholars with meaningful expertise.
Dr. Dosovitz said -- Dr. Dosovitz said that he has a cure for nicotine, that he has never had a patient that he wasn't able to get off nicotine in a year. And I asked him, have you published these studies? Have you made this known to the public health community? Because if you're on to something that could get millions and millions of smokers struggling with nicotine dependence resulting in diseases where they're being buried by their families and there's human pain and suffering -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Please disregard the last statement by Mr. Schlesinger.
Continue.
MR. SCHLESINGER: If as many folks as
450,000	people a year are dying and a physician has discovered a way to cure them, it sure would be helpful to public health to publish those
findings. There have been no such publications and that begs the question how reliable is that statement that the doctor is able to cure this condition. That's my point.
Dr. Dosovitz has been asked in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, that we know of that we have here for you, Engle class progeny cases, some of which are trials, some of which are lawsuits, some of which he actually examined the patient, and he said not addicted on every one of them and don't know, but I could have said she wasn't addicted; certainly there was no real evidence that she was addicted. And Helen Cohen, not addicted.
0	and 10.
If you take the DSM of 80 to 90 percent, meaning if the document he used -- doesn't use the Fagerstrom. She's addicted under the Fagerstrom, but he doesn't use it. The document he uses that says using this diagnostic tool, 80 to 90 percent of regular smokers, of which all these folks are, are addicted then one out of every five, let's do the math, one out of every 5 would not be addicted. One out of every 5.
How do you know in a situation where 1 out
of every 5 is not addicted, what does that mean for 10 people? Well, you can do it 1 in 5 times 1 in 5 times 1 in 5 or 1 in 5 to the power of 10. I said that could be confusing. And in the intensity of a courtroom trying to explain math to jurors and I'm not that good at math, could be confusing, but I thought of a way to do it.
There's 800 blue jelly beans in this jar. They're all mixed up. 800 blue jelly beans. There's 200 red jelly beans, they're mixed.
Okay. In order for Dr. Dosovitz's conclusions here to be right and square with the DSM, then if you don't look and you pick out jelly beans without looking at them, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten. You can't get 10 red jelly beans, if the 200 red jelly beans represents the folks that are not addicted to smoking. You know why? The odds are 1 in
10.000.000.	1 over 5 to the power of 10 is 1 in
10.000.000.
And you can do this experiment. You can have these, and you can do this experiment all day long, when you eat your lunch, when you're bored, whenever you want. Don't look. You cannot get 10 jelly beans. The chances, you
could do it 10 million times, 10 million times, the odds against having 10 folks that are not addicted using this criteria, which calls for 80 percent to be addicted, is 1 in 10,000,000.
It begs the question, is that opinion reliable and valid? And the argument is, do you want to rely on that, or can you reject that? I think you can.
Let's go to the next one, Rob. 8.
This is one of the internal documents in evidence. "Without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. Some strong evidence can be marshalled to support this argument. No one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. The cigarette should be conceived not as a product, but as a package. The product is nicotine.
Think of the cigarette pack as a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine. Think of the cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine. Think of a puff of smoke as a vehicle of nicotine. Smoke is beyond question the most optimized vehicle of nicotine in a cigarette and the cigarette is the most optimized vehicle or dispenser of smoke."
Let's go to 49, please.
We're going to talk about this. You're going to here an instruction -- you heard it already -- that there are the believability of witnesses and in addition to who you believe, which is completely up to you, you take in the demeanor of witnesses. We had treating physicians on the stand.
We had Dr. Rosenkrantz on the stand. He told you he read a CT scan, high degree of probability that that showed lung cancer. Helen Cohen was on death's door. They withheld thei hand from doing such tests as a liver biopsy, a painful thing to do in a woman in hospice or about to go to hospice, who is going to die, but Dr. Rosenkrantz, who is a neutral, unbiased witness, he's not a specially retained expert that was hired after the fact, he was there at the time treating this patient telling you all what he thought in his role as an independent eyewitness back in that hospital setting.
He said, I saw an X-ray in the '90s when she was hospitalized, I didn't see any COPD.
THE CLERK: Counsel, 55 minutes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I may go over a bit.
I saw a 2006 CT scan when she was hospitalized in Delray when she was in there and she was extremely -- she was on death's door and we found, sadly, a terrible lung cancer that had eaten up the center of her chest and had spread to her liver, which is where metastatic lung cancer from cigarette smoking goes to the liver. And the unimpeached, uncontradicted testimony is she died from lung cancer. That should be a pretty straightforward question to answer, that it's probable, it's most likely a reliable test.
A high degree of likelihood reliable test of a CT scan proves she had lung cancer.
Dr. Dudley came in here and testified to you. I took the responsibility to do a death certificate, and I had to know what did she die from and I determined what she died from after review. And I committed myself on a legal document, the death certificate, to the fact that she died of lung cancer and I attribute it to cigarette smoking. That is unrebutted.
There was a promise -- there was a representation made in opening statement by Mr. Parsons [sic] that she had cancer which originated outside of the lung's thoracic
cavity. It's in his opening statement. I'll show you the exact language if I have to on rebuttal. But the fact is it's in there. And he put in no evidence, there is no evidence in this case from any witness from any expert from any doctor that said, I analyzed this case and I disagree with the medical record that existed at the time back in 2006 where the doctors who are only trying to do the best for the patient; can we save her? Can we give her some remaining quality of life, or is it over for her? Is she on her way out, and is hospice, a dignified way to meet your end that we think in this country is appropriate, is hospice the way to go for her? And that's how she went. She went througl hospice.
And what did the concluding doctor who held her hand as she passed say, she died from cancer, lung cancer, metastatic, it had spread through her body, it was eating her up. And what was the cause of it? Did cigarettes cause, right on the death certificate, yes, cigarettes contributed to causing it. And a representation was made, we will show you evidence, the evidence in the case will be that cancer started
somewhere else and went to the lungs. And there is none, not a single shred of such evidence.
You will not see it in this case.
Now, let's go to -- by the way, there is nobody that came in and testified that her addiction didn't cause her lung cancer, her addiction didn't cause her entitled to be a member of the class, that the dependence on cigarettes caused such heavy smoking that it led to the COPD. There's no evidence to the contrary.
Of course it did, in the natural continuous sequence of events, addiction or dependence, the medical term "dependence," was she -- this is a threshold question for class membership, and we submit, do not exclude her from the class.
She's entitled to be in the class.
MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The first question -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The first question doesn't address the topic of fault or relative degrees of fault or percentages of fault, that comes later. If you find she's in the class you will then compare what she did, what she knew, what
her obligations and her personal responsibilities were with what the personal responsibilities of the tobacco companies should or ought to have been. They made choices. They had awareness. They knew in 1964 that cigarettes caused lung cancer.
Can we show that one, the side-by-side, the letter to the Surgeon General and the preceding findings.
MR. HAMMER: It's up.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So this is part of what we were talking about some of the Engle findings.
And the Engle findings say they concealed, they misrepresented. They got together, they hid the health effects, they knew what they were, they did it for decades. And it's true, they did.
They didn't let the public health authorities know what they really knew.
They knew the filters didn't work. They didn't let the public authorities know. They duped them. And the public health authorities fell for it.
And here in 1961 Philip Morris incorporated tobacco and health approach, some presentation, and number one, "Carcinogens are found in
practically every class of compounds in smoke."
Number 2, "Present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke."
So what are we saying? These guys knew in 1961 there's cancer in every compound of smoke, and guess what, we can't filter them out. We can't put a filter on the back of it that's going to take out the poisons and let the people smoke. But what did they write in their contribution to what was going to be the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, to James Hundley, the Assistant Surgeon General for operations? "We have prepared and submit chemical constituents in tobacco and smoke. None of the chemical substances listed herein to our knowledge has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in the amounts reported in smoke."
That's not what that says. What do they tell them? "It is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters."
"Present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke."
That is part of Engle finding of misrepresentation, concealment of health effects for the purposes of getting the American public to rely on these things so that they would continue smoking.
Back to the legal cause real quick, Rob.
So when you answer that first question, addiction is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss injury or damage so that it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction the loss, injury or damage would not have occurred.
We submit that contributes substantially means that, did the addiction play an important role? Did her addiction to cigarettes as obviously and clear as the evidence suggests it is, did that play some important role in her continuing to smoke? Was she one of millions of folks that were smoking because they were dependent on that nicotine because they needed that nicotine from the time she was a teenager?
And the fact of quitting does not mean that
you could not have -- that you were not addicted. Because if someone came in here and they had not quit, couldn't you make the argument, well, they didn't try hard enough so they're not addicted. How does one outcome change another?
So we believe that but for addiction if she was not addicted to nicotine would she have smoked two packs a day for over 50 years and developed COPD? I believe the answer to that question is no.
And there's a concurring cause instruction I'll skip over, but Her Honor read it to you that the addiction doesn't have to be the only cause. It can act with other causes. It can be the marketing. It can be the health assurances that the tobacco companies gave you that filters were better. She smoked filters. The surveys show that as of February 6, 1990 she was smokin filtered cigarettes, and she was smoking Now and Carlton, among the lighter of the filtered cigarettes. And even though she didn't work, those health reassurances would get -MR. S. DAVIS: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: And ask to disregard the brands.
THE COURT: Sustained. Please disregard.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There was a survey you saw, as of February 6, 2009 she was smoking cigarettes.
The 51 board.
So you'll see as the judge instructs you what the jury form says, it's not whether or not Helen Cohen had free choice, that's not going to be determined in the jury instructions, it's not whether addiction prevented Helen Cohen from quitting, because lots and lots of addicts can quit, it just took her 50 years to do it. The issue is not whether Helen Cohen is unable to control herself. She demonstrated weight control. There were a lot of things she demonstrated the ability to do, but one of the things she couldn't do for a really long time was get off cigarettes because see was addicted to them.
The issue is whether addiction was a substantial contributing factor, one of among many other causes.
It's not -- the question is not was
addiction the cause. There's lots of other things going on in a person's life, lots of influences, and maybe even her own efforts or inadequate efforts could be a cause, a hurdle to quitting.
What are some of the hurdles to quitting? Addiction. How about not trying hard enough?
Is that a hurdle to quit? Sure. But those are contributing causes.
So we submit that Helen Cohen's addiction to cigarettes was a -- to nicotine was a cause of her COPD.
We talked about the Fagerstrom. I'll go past that.
Let's go to 9, please.
Here are some of the things, because I talked about addiction and fraud, addiction and fraud. Fraud is, what did the tobacco company do to keep their business going after they promised that they would take out the dangerous elements but they didn't and they knew they couldn't? They promised that they would do something to make it safer, but they didn't.
They promised if we find something is harmful we'll go out of business, but they didn't. Why?
Who ain't for more money?
Billions and billions, huge amounts of profits that were the more important consideration than the public health of the customers.
Here it says they used code names, "Nicotine should be referred to as Compound W," playing down the role in nicotine.
"In the future when describing the low end of the cigarette business, please use the term 'young adult smoker' or 'young adult smoking market.'"
So they changed the term "youth smoker" to deflect that they were looking at 14 to 17-year-old teenagers, underaged smokers, and they started calling them young adults.
Next one, please. 10.
One of the other ones was zephyr. What is zephyr? A warm cool breeze, a refreshing breeze. That was the industry code name for lung cancer. Does that seem a little callous? Does that seem a little uncaring?
Corporations have an instruction, you'll hear, that they're entitled to be treated like people in this courtroom. And I submit to you
if you want to be treated like a person, act like a person.
Robert Fulghum wrote a book, Everything I Ever Needed to Learn I Learned in Kindergarten. What were some of the fundamental things that w learn in that book? If you read the book its:
Be decent, be humane, no more hurting people. Do things right, play fair. But to take and create an industry that is as dangerous as this one is and to promise the American public, we'll take out what's dangerous or we'll stop making it and use that to reassure folks to give them a psychological crutch to continue smoking, to give that message. Doubt is our product. What we sell is doubt, controversy. Conclusion, lung cancer is unproven and that will allow for the continuation of these great tobacco sales. And Proctor explained, zephyr was a code name for cancer.
Next, 11.
Here are some of the documents you saw. Some are in evidence. Some, and I haven't read all of them, but look at all the things. They want to destroy and bury evidence of the negative health effects. "All data relating to
human smoking habits should be deleted or rem unidentifiable with respect to human smoking. I do not want Lorillard to report identifiable data on human smoking behavior."
How about this, "This is to inform you that I have either returned to the library or destroyed all formal reports and the like checked out to me."
That's another Claude Teague document.
Dr. Proctor said thousands of documents were destroyed. The secret documents that were revealed that were represented to be -- you know, there were some people that said some stupid things, and I'm not here to defend that.
I don't know that I heard I am here to accept it, stand up for it, own up for it.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Counsel, sidebar.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. S. DAVIS: We all objected, but it's the same objection that we raised. You can't predicate an argument reliability or imposition is of damages on the right of defending the
case. And it's a denigration of the defense theories, denigration -- you can't predicate the claim on the way you defend the lawsuit. That's the point. That's not evidence. It's the same thing we raised.
THE COURT: Anybody else for defense?
MR. PERSONS: Yes, Your Honor, I would add on behalf of Reynolds, Ray Persons. Based on what Mr. Davis just said, that objection, we move for a mistrial.
THE COURT: Mr. Woods.
MR. WOODS: I have nothing to add.
THE COURT: Ms. Kaschel.
MS. KASCHEL: I would only add to the extent that the evidence is not that these tobacco companies did these -- he keeps referring to them generally. And I understand we can argue that, but it is a misstatement of the evidence.
THE COURT: I'm going to reserve on the motion for mistrial.
Let me hear the response.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, Mr. Persons in his opening statements said: You're going to hear statements that were made by people in the tobacco industry and they were just stupid
comments.
We're certainly free to comment on that.
And if the defense or if we say something in opening we can comment on what they say in opening.
THE COURT: I didn't have a problem with the initial. I had a problem with the follow-up comment.
MR. S. DAVIS: It's the failure to take responsibility, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Let me find it. Hold on.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I have a very simple line if you let me proceed.
THE COURT: How do you propose to clarify
it?
MR. SCHLESINGER: To ask what exactly is a stupid comment? What is meant by that term "stupid comment"? Which comment was stupid?
THE COURT: I'm still reserving on the motion for mistrial.
MR. S. DAVIS: Your Honor, that's not going to help when he's asking Mr. Persons to explain what he meant, that's not evidence either.
THE COURT: Let me see what he comes up with. We may be back up here in two minutes,
Mr. Davis.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
MR. SCHLESINGER: I think we're on 11.
So the data related to human smoking habits should be deleted. 1975, this is informing you I've destroyed documents, Dr. Teague.
Down here, "If, however, results with nicotine are similar to those gotten with morphine and caffeine," I think that's supposed to be cocaine, "we will want to bury it.
Accordingly, there are only two copies of this memo."
"Here we do not foresee any difficulties to remove certain reports from research files. If necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all reports." This is from the scientific reports. "As an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the reports which appear objectionable."
This is supposed to be science. It's supposed to be the Center for Tobacco Research, which is the independent body that the Frank
Statement in the '50s promised taking health as a fundamental obligation to the citizens, that they were going to put out a full-on, honest scientific analysis to get to the bottom of the truth, but really it was a front and a shield.
It was a defensive organization. It was a marketing gig to try to convince people to keep smoking to give them a reassurance to keep them smoking.
Go to 12, please.
On 12, again, evidence of burying and destroying records. At this meeting, and there's a bunch of people at the meeting, and see who they all are, because there's the reference to stupid people, and let me tell you something, this is not stupid people. There are lots and lots of people higher up, senior research scientists, the CEOs, vice-presidents of the company. The last thing in the world, anything that this was was stupid. This was ingenious. This was brilliant. This was men of great intellect doing something that was nefarious and what we'd say was reprehensible, committing atrocities that cost the lives of millions of people.
MR. WOODS: Objection. Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Sustained. Disregard the last statement.
Let's move on, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It was with a forethought, knowing full-well that selling the product, addicting the folks and selling the nicotine, which drives the sales, would result in death.
MR. S. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There should be no writte record of what transpired.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: We might do some things which we are reluctant to do in this country.
That was INBIFO. They bought a company in Cologne, Germany so they could ship stuff off there so they could do things which they were reluctant to do in this country, and you'll see in the papers, because they could be revealed in legal matters.
"Here we have gone to great pains to eliminate any written contact with INBIFO. If this procedure is unacceptable to you," and these are letters to Germany, "perhaps we should consider a dummy mailing address." It amounts
in certain ways to spycraft, to the way in which you conceal and the art of concealing the truth of what you're doing.
Go to the next one, please.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor, move t strike.
MR. SCHLESINGER: 13.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection.
Disregard the reference to "spycraft."
MR. SCHLESINGER: 13.
This was one in 1977 where they were discussing research to see if we could get a clinically acceptable antagonist to nicotine.
How about a drug that would block nicotine so folks wouldn't get addicted, a drug to keep folks from getting addicted so they could get off the nicotine? Tobacco had choices. They had awareness. They knew they were selling nicotine. They could have at any time come out when the Surgeon General's Report came out and made the choice to come clean and tell the truth. We know our product is hurting and killing people. We don't want it to happen anymore. We want to help. We want folks that want to get off cigarettes; we're going to open
cessation clinics. We're not going sell it to anybody over [sic] 21 years old. If you come to me and you're an 18-year-old or a 15-year-old that's been smoking for 12 years and now your 3C and you go, I want to raise a family. Can you help me? They had a choice. They could have said, yes, you've been our customer. We know the cigarette is addictive. We know it causes cancer, before you get to that point we'll help you get off the drug. You were our good customer. We'll do the right thing. They had that choice. They didn't make the choice to do that. They had that choice.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor, to this do the right thing.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection.
MR. PERSONS: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Please disregard the last comment.
Let's continue, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Here it says, "The clinically acceptable antagonist to nicotine, this goal would have the potential of putting the tobacco manufacturers out of business." So don't make a drug that blocks the nicotine that
let's folks not be addicted.
How about down here. He said he has a high degree of competence, this Leo Abood, and he had a specific antagonist and he could do chemical manipulation. And down here, "It is my strong feeling that with the progress that has been made, we are in the process of digging our own grave." Great potential to do great damage to the industry.
A company, right, treat it as a person, I said you want to be treated as a person, act like a person. This company has certain person attributes. It has certain personal responsibilities. It works for the people that work for it. One of its personal attributes and responsibilities is -- well, I'll tell you one of its traits, survival, like every human organism wants to survive, so too does this industry. It has a survival instinct. And when they say we are digging our own grave, I say that's a callous calculation, because if they are not digging their own grave, whose graves are being dug?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
MR. PERSONS: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Counsel, sidebar, please.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, I sustained defense counsel's objection. Please disregard the last comments by Mr. Schlesinger. Please continue forward, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So let's go to -- let's go
to 14.
"The most important type of story is that which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking."
"And these should be very carefully written on the premises that doctors and scientists, like other readers, often grab information from the headlines and nothing more. Thus, headlines
should strongly call out the point, controversy, exclamation point, contradiction, exclamation point, other factors, unknowns."
Go to the next one, please. 15.
Here you see articles that get in the paper, that get in the public awareness that cast doubt.
"Lung specialist cites 20 reasons for doubt -- doubting cigarette cancer link."
"March births and lung cancer linked."
"Find occupational tie for lung cancer."
Nearly half of 1,000 lung cancer cases found to be nonsmokers."
Let's go to 3.
These articles are from as early as the '20s where even in the day of Helen, she's born in '24, she's smoking in 1940. "School days are here. Big business for tobacco. Line up the most popular students, line up the students as consumers. Induce a pre-smoker or nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker."
The next one, number 4.
"Children are replacement smokers for folks leaving the market. To increase our young adult franchise," remember they changed the word from
youth to young adult, "Camel filter, the brand, must increase its share penetration among 14 to 24 age group, which represents tomorrow's cigarette business."
Is a 14-year-old a young adult? Is that accurate?
Then if you look here "Younger adult smokers, the only source of replacement smokers, less than one-third of smokers, 31 percent, start up after 18 and only 5 percent start up after the age of 24.
21 and up you don't have smokers, so it stands to reason that the industry must get young smokers.
Here are: Some thoughts about the new youth brands for smokers. Cigarettes induced market provide sufficient motivation during the learning period to keep the learning going despite the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness of the period, which gets into the design of the cigarettes with the chocolate and the ammonium to ease the harshness of the inhalation of smoke so that the addiction can take hold.
Is the tempter blameless? Is he who tempts
blameless?
MR. WOODS: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PERSONS: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Disregard the last statement.
Move forward, please.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Page 5, "We have deliberately played down the role of nicotine; hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfaction," another code word for nicotine addiction, "it may offer him and no desire to try. Instead we must somehow convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking in the hopes that he will for himself discover the real satisfactions obtainable."
Is that hooking? Is that hooking a child? Somebody that doesn't know what's coming and y get them with the hook. That's where the term "hooked" comes from.
Next. Skip 96. We did that. Skip 97. We did that. Let's go to 18.
"We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." That is Battelle Hippo document. You'll see it. What year is it?
1963. The Battelle Hippo experiments from as early as 1963, "We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug."
In '72, "In designing the cigarette product the dominant specification should be for nicotine delivery." The Surgeon General's Report talks about design. Dr. Proctor said billions have been spent on the design of this most perfect nicotine delivery device, a segmen' of the pharmaceutical industry, that that's what we really are.
Here he says that: Nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects, our industry is based upon the design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine.
It's not taking a leaf off of a bush and rolling it up and smoking it. It's a highly ammoniated tobacco sheet. It's chopped up.
It's reconstituted. It's poured through a slurry. It's put with lots of chemicals. It's all in the SG '10 book to increase that nicotine freebase hit to the brain in 10 seconds or less, faster than IV administration, the most efficient way to get a bolus of nicotine to a brain and permanently change that brain.
Next, 88.
And then the Surgeon General comes out and they rebuff the Surgeon General, and those articles are in as well. They had a choice.
They had an opportunity here to say, you know what, it's addictive. We're going to take the addictiveness out. We're not going to sell addictiveness. We're going to have a cigarette that has less nicotine than sustains addiction, that was their choice, their awareness. They want to compare it to Helen's choices and awareness. Who knew more? Helen was an innocent. She was a child addicted as a teenager 25 years before the first warning appeared on a pack of cigarettes, and she becomi addicted to a drug. They knew.
And finally in '88 it was said that:
Cigarettes and other forms of tobacco, addicting nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction and the pharmacological and behavioral processes that determine nicotine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
I'm going to skip the montages right now.
We'll do them later.
VIDEO TECH: That's just Koop.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Just Koop. Let's skip it.
I want to rip through a few of these. Okay.
Show 23.
It's on the verdict form. We ask you, please check that box yes. That is a threshold easy, simple, definitive, straightforward determination. We believe that it absolutely merits that you find yes she was addicted to cigarettes and it caused her to have that chronic obstructive pulmonary/emphysema disease which was ultimately diagnosed by Dr. Greene in 1994. And I'll speak very briefly about that.
The defendants have an obligation to prove to you, their proof, that somehow she is -- she missed the date. Their job is to prove the technicality that she was a few months -MR. PERSONS: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Their job is to prove to you that -THE COURT: Counsel, sidebar.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I want to move on.
THE COURT: No, we will not move on. You'll move up here, Mr. Schlesinger.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, the last objection was sustained and I'm going to ask you disregard the last statements by Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I didn't want to spend to
much time on it because we'll come back to it.
It's the affirmative defense of the defendants, but I wanted to say very briefly, you have records in evidence. Not everybody that testified testified live, Dr. Wasserman,
Dr. Santini did not testify live.
Dr. Rosenkrantz testified live. Dr. Dudley testified live. In Dr. Wasserman's testimony he said, I don't know, I don't remember, he was trying to reflect on what happened 20 years ago and we will -- I'll prove -MR. PERSONS: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They have to prove -- w will -MR. PERSONS: I was waiting for a space for an objection. That contravenes the instruction about giving depositions the same weight as you do -THE COURT: Correct.
Ladies and gentlemen, you remember I instructed you throughout the case that depositions are to have the same weight as you would any live witness in this case.
Mr. Persons is correct.
You may continue, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: One of the instructions talks about the demeanor, lack of demeanor, and you can observe it from a live witness. That's what I was reflecting, but I'll move along.
MR. PERSONS: Objection to the commentary.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection for the record. Disregard the last statement.
You may continue forward, Mr. Schlesinger.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Greene, who's a pulmonologist, lung doctor, that saw the patient in 1994, he diagnosed COPD. He did the diagnosis based on two tests, March 10th of 1994 we'll talk about the Dr. Greene record, wherein he received a patient, Helen Cohen. He asked Helen Cohen a medical history, meaning, tell me about your past medical problems. Helen Cohen didn't report anything about chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, because she had no knowledge, because she had never been told that she had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
The medical record is designed, a doctor takes a medical history. A medical history is to ask the patient, tell me what's wrong with you. Why are you here today?
And she told Dr. Greene, I used to be able
to walk two miles a day up till '94, I've been walking for the last several years two miles a day and now I'm not feeling so good. I'm kind of short of breath. And Dr. Greene, a board-certified lung specialist, whose record is typed and you'll have all three pages of it, said, okay, let me check you out. He did a spirometry study, a medical diagnostic study, which gave him an inclination of the condition of COPD. And he documented that it was abnormal, and then he said, I'm going to send you to get a pulmonary function test, a PFT. A pulmonary function test, quote, to see whether -- to see if you have emphysema or not. No history of emphysema reported to him by the person who should know if the defense of time bar is correct, she had no knowledge of it. And he said "complete pulmonary function testing to see if she has emphysema or not."
And we'll go into some more detail on rebuttal, 'cause it's their defense and we want to hear how they say it, but the fact is is that when she returned in '92 to Dr. Wasserman for a follow-up study she had -- Wasserman had lost her to follow up for two years, hadn't seen her
in two years, he wrote in his note, "comes to see me" and he documents a history of asthma.
He doesn't write COPD. Why? The patient didn't tell him she had COPD? Why? The patient didn't believe she had COPD. Why? The patient was walking two miles a day. Her awareness, her knowledge what she knew in the subsequent years of medical care is what reflects and reveals.
It is revelatory of the fact that this is a woman that did not have within her state of knowledge the condition of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which COPD, by the way, is not the same kind of thing as emphysema in terms of the word and the use of the word and the understanding of the word.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Misstates the evidence. Disregard Mr. Schlesinger's last statement. Throughout the jury instructions it's COPD/emphysema.
Let's continue forward.
MR. SCHLESINGER: In any event, let's go to -- we'll play this tape later.
Remember Anne Browder was one of the spokesmen for the tobacco industry and she
denied having anything to do with product placement in movies.
Surgeon General '12 says, "Smoking in movies makes kids smoke. It initiates teenagers to smoke. And it's a big problem that the tobacco companies pay large amounts of money for produ placement in movies, including the Muppets."
And Anne Browder, and you'll see the videotape, said, We don't do that. We don't make product placements. We didn't pay for Superman to fly through the Marlboro billboard in the Superman film.
Put on 28, please.
And the letter confirms the agreement between the companies whereby we've agreed to include in our feature film, Superman II, the exposure of the Marlboro brand name, the material, on the following terms and conditions.
They paid to have Superman fly through a Marlboro ad after Anne Browder denied it to the public. And this again is this campaign of doubt and denial.
Next. Let's go to The Frank Statement, 33, real quick.
The Frank Statement, right, quarter million
dollars spent to put it in every major newspaper in the country in the '50s after they found out that cancer was being caused by cigarettes and they all got together in the Plaza Hotel and formed the conspiracy of the CTR, the Center -well, the Tobacco Institute Research Council and they said: We accept an interest in the people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. We believe the products we make are not injurious to health, and we will always work and cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health.
They did not do that. They opposed the Surgeon General.
Go on to 34, please.
This is what they knew at the time and in years soon after: Carcinogens are found in practically every class and compound of smoke. Carcinogens are cancer-causing materials. Obviously the amount of evidence accumulated t< indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming. The evidence challenging such indictment is scant.
This is internal what they knew among
themselves in the early '60s.
In '63: Cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. They cause lung cancer. That's Battelle Hippo. This is a company that went on to say after that on page 36, please, "Doubt is our product. Since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact," also known as the truth, "that exist in the mind of the general public. It also is the means of establishing a controversy." This is an intentional embarked upon campaign with knowledge aforethought with motive and intent.
Did Helen Cohen have motive and intent? Did she know in a way that was equivalent to their knowledge?
"Obviously the keyword is "confusion," and anything we can do to confirm such a situation would work to our advantage."
And this one, "We must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking."
Giving a mixed message to an ad is the most dangerous thing you can do to somebody who is trying to get off a powerful drug, because it
gives them something to lean on, maybe it's not so bad, something tickling them in the back of their mind to keep going. So to develop a strategy to give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to quit smoking is just going to perpetuate addiction.
What did Dr. DiFranza say? Because it was in opening statement that they said every expert agrees that everybody can stop smoking. And what did we ask Dr. DiFranza, can every smoker stop smoking? And he said no. Said, well, why do you tell them that they can stop smoking? Because we don't know who's going to be able to stop and we want a clear, concise message. The treatment modality for a smoker who is having trouble stopping because he's addicted is tell him you can do it, you can do it, give them the belief they can do it, but the fact is, and Dr. DiFranza testified, half the people he treats can't. They try again and again, he said sometimes hundreds of times, and they cannot quit. And the smokers that have quit and the smokers that haven't quit are in equilibrium, in balance, the new kids coming into the market and the people that are quitting or dying and
leaving the market is in the balance and the equilibrium of the market, that's in the documents too. And as long as they maintain equilibrium, they stay alive, they keep a business going that's based on an extremely defective and dangerous product, and the Engle findings say so.
So they are giving smokers the rationale.
Dr. DiFranza said not everybody can quit, but we try to tell them they can. That's not the same thing as everybody can quit, in reality. In practical scientific reality not everybody can quit. And those that do were addicted during the periods of time that they could not quit.
So they say: The most important type of story is that which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of diseases and smoking. And then they talk about their Tobacco Institute Research Council. The men they said would be of unimpeachable repute, the scientists who would be above reproach, independent, untied to the tobacco industry in any way, the TRC, has been successful defensive operation.
And what do they admit in their own house in 1968: Our basic position in the cigarette
controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
Skip the montage and go to 38, please.
Doubt, confusion and lies, December 8th of 1970. The Committee for Tobacco Research and the industry have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth.
Let's face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. And for 20 years we've employed a single strategy, to defend ourselves on three major fronts, litigation, politics and public opinion. The strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed and helped us win many important battles, but it was only a holding strategy, creating doubt about the health of the charges without actually dying.
And what was the CTR? That which they told us in The Frank Statement was the unimpeachabl group of scientists of wonderful repute to get to the bottom of the smoking controversy. What was it really? It was set up as an industry
shield in 1954 and the special products are the best way the moneys are spent on these projects; the CTR acted as a front organization, all for duplicity, all for deception, all for dishonesty to create the cigarette controversy, the doubt that existed for decades in this country.
Go on to 45, please.
The tobacco industry misled the public about the safety of filters. This one -- it -They had made an invention to patent it. It was signed off, you'll have the document, it's signed off a whole bunch of places on the document, signed up and down, in and out, a few stupid people, these are brilliant scientists, up and down, in and out, signed, sent all around. "The cigarette smoking public attaches great significance to the visual examination of the filter material because the public attaches significance to this visual inspection. The possibility of incorporating chemicals into the filter tip materials that would darken or otherwise change color on contact with smoke appears attractive. While use of such color-changing materials would have little or no effect, the advertising and sales advantages are
obvious."
So this is an invention to take a dye and put it in the tip of a cigarette so when the smoker smokes it will turn color, preferably dark, so the smoker will think the bad stuff is being pulled out of the cigarette. It has nothing to do with benefits or health, but the sales advantages will be obvious, because the health reassurance, the public will be defrauded. They will be fooled into thinking somehow this is safer.
And how do they describe it? "The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration." The illusion of filtration. What do they say amongst themselves? "The smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette." They knew that full well in 1976, decades before the Surgeon General and public health authorities knew it.
And so how were they going to reassure the health of a smoker? And Lorillard has some documents in here. They call it the safer cigarette.
MR. WOODS: Objection, Your Honor, misstates
the evidence.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection.
MR. WOODS: Kent is from Lorillard that's not a Lorillard document.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I know that. I'm talking about another document. There's a document in evidence I'll pull up for you, a Kent document that marketed the Kent filter as a safer cigarette. I'll show you that document.
Right now I'm showing a July 1963, "We are going to say in the meantime," like for the health controversy, the health scare, for reassurance to the public, "Here is our triple or quadruple or quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspect."
Remember that other document says they can'l selectively filter? But here they're going to say, for marketing, advertising, health reassurance to the public, to keep folks smoking, give them the psychological crutch.
"Our triple, our quadruple, our quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspect, while delivering
full flavor and, incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. And if we're the first to be able to make and sustain that claim, what price Kent?"
How much more can we charge and how much more money can we make selling that cigarette?
"By the 21st century it was apparent that five decades of the following cigarette design had not reduced overall risk among smokers. And new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation habits."
I'm showing you this because you're going to hear descriptions as to whether or not these companies are deserving of punishment. And Mr. Hammer is going to address some of the central issues about fault and percentages of fault and how much would be fair compensation for David's loss of Helen, but for me, addiction and fraud. The evidence of reprehensible conduct that deserves a reckoning, a consideration of past wrongdoings.
An application by you as a jury, an American public jury that Thomas Jefferson said the best system we have to look at something that was done and say, we censure it, we condemn it, we
do not accept it, it is reprehensible, it is deserving of our condemnation.
If this evidence and many, many more gets you there and you see it our way, then it will make sense. Because Helen is one of many peo| who existed in the environment during the years that these types of things were going on.
MR. S. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Need to come sidebar?
Sustain the objection.
MR. S. DAVIS: Just ask for a curative -THE COURT: Please disregard -MR. S. DAVIS: -- focus on Mrs. Cohen.
THE COURT: Pleas disregard -MR. SCHLESINGER: Page 54, please. We talked about the Jets money offer, "Who ain't for more money?" Which I submit to you is the overwhelming force of why this goes on.
And here it says, "Without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, Philip Morris would collapse and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. We cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to say, if the exit gates of our market
would suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight."
It's a company with a survival instinct.
And even though they said something different, go to page 55, this is what they did to reassure the public. Internally they said, no nicotine, no tobacco business. Externally this is what they said over 18 years, and there's more, we have some more in evidence, but here's a couple.
"If any one of us believed that the products we were making and selling was in any way harmful to our customer's health and our own as well, we would voluntarily go out of business."
We wouldn't make a dangerous product and sell it to the American public.
"'If our product is harmful,' says James Bowling, vice-president of Philip Morris, 'we'll stop making it. We don't know if smoking is harmful and we think somebody ought to find out.'"
And I submit that America is this industry's ashtray, they put out -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- 400,000 people -THE COURT: Sustain the objection for the
record.
You may continue.
MR. PERSONS: Can we have a curative instruction?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Play Waxman.
THE COURT: Please disregard the last statement.
MR. SCHLESINGER: 46.
(The video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Do you swear that the testimony you're about to give is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
(Inaudible.)
VOICE: Please consider yourself to be under oath.
VOICE: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive.
I heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive,
yes.
VOICE: Mr. Johnston.
VOICE: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxication -VOICE: We'll take that as a no. Again, time is short, if you can just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, we just would like to have this for the record.
VOICE: I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. SCHLESINGER: What about the clip that talks about the doesn't cause COPD, doesn't cause emphysema, please.
MR. PERSONS: May we approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
MR. S. DAVIS: That's the only clip in evidence.
THE COURT: Which other clip?
MR. GDANSKI: There's another clip in the record. There was another short clip that came in. It's Exhibit number 3862, I believe.
THE COURT: That's fine. We'll take a representation.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: All right, let's keep going, please.
(Video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Do you or do you not agree with the Surgeon General's estimate of over 400,000 smokers dying -VOICE: I do not agree.
VOICE: Do you know how many die each yeai
VOICE: I do not know.
VOICE: They agree that smoking causes lung cancer; do you agree?
VOICE: It may.
VOICE: Do you know whether it does?
VOICE: I do not.
VOICE: The medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema; do you agree?
VOICE: It may.
VOICE: They agree that smoking causes bladder cancer, stroke and low birth weight; do you agree?
VOICE: It may.
VOICE: Mr. Tisch, I want to move to you for a moment. In a deposition last year you were asked whether cigarette smoking causes cancer. Your answer was, quote, I don't believe so.
Do you stand by that answer today?
VOICE: I do, sir.
VOICE: Do you understand how isolated you are in that belief from the entire scientific community?
VOICE: I do, sir.
VOICE: You're the head of a manufacturer of a product that's been accused by the overwhelming scientific community to cause cancer. You don't know? You have an interest in finding out?
VOICE: I do, sir, yes.
VOICE: And what have you done to pursue
that interest?
VOICE: We have looked at the data. And the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death.
VOICE: Mr. Campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. This is a rather passive and puzzling approach especially in light of the consensus not by some, but all of the scientific community. Will you ever be convinced? And what evidence are you waiting for? And let's have the microphone passed over.
VOICE: Yes, I may be convinced. We don't know what causes cancer in general right now so I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. SCHLESINGER: The point being that one of the important questions on here, and to try and help you get through this if you see this our way is that you have to answer a question as to whether or not these concealments, these
statements worked to Helen's detriment, was she relying on them.
And, remember, the advertising effects, the use of filters, the behaviors in accordance with trying to do a better job with your health as promised by the tobacco industries are what induces reliance. It isn't necessarily that any of us say or see advertising and recognize how it influences us, and yet it is such a giant part of everything. Advertising influences us. Health reassurance in the form of filters advertising and filters. And Helen acted in accordance with that, she became a filter smoker, as most filter smokers are today.
MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor. I was waiting for a break. Violation of the golden rule.
THE COURT: Overruled.
You may continue.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Please the Court.
So that the two questions are before and after 1982 -- or after 1982 was there some reliance. Before 1982, after 1982 a reliance on the Engle findings that say hiding information, not telling the whole truth, the things you were
saying in Congress like this were false statements and they were designed, as the Engle finding says, they were designed with an intent to get folks to rely on them. And so does it stand to reason that smokers like Helen were, in fact, relying and holding out some hope that the Carltons, the low cigarettes, the Nows were healthier.
MR. S. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. S. DAVIS: Ask for a curative.
THE COURT: Please disregard the last statement.
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is the death certificate. And it talks about immediate cause of death, final disease condition resulting in death, metastatic lung cancer. Did tobacco use contribute to death? Yes.
This document has not been impeached. It has not been changed, it's not been altered. It is the official record of what happened on the files of the state of Florida to Helen Cohen.
So she was addicted. She did get sick from the long smoking. She did get emphysema. She did ultimately die a difficult, painful, sad
death in 2006. And the tobacco companies have some responsibility to bear for that.
Mr. Hammer will tell you how he thinks you ought to break it up. Helen Cohen is willing to accept, through David, that maybe her human weaknesses were such that she could have tried harder. Helen Cohen is willing to accept, in combination with the actions and the wrongdoing of the tobacco companies, that her human weaknesses, her human frailties went along with taking in these -- this toxic soup, this endless dosage of 750,000 cigarettes, 7,500,000 cancerous inhalations of chemicals along with nicotine hits to the brain over a 50-year period of time. And by the time she finally did quit it was too late and her diseases, which do have a lag time, started to emerge. I'll show you more about 1994 and Dr. Greene, I'll show you a little bit more about 2006.
Thanks for taking the time to listen to me thus far. I get a chance to talk to you a little bit more again. My partner is going to talk to you now. And I appreciate you taking the time.



MR. HAMMER: And I want to go through this. This is the verdict form. This is what you're
going to be filling out in this case.
And Mr. Schlesinger certainly covered a lot of these topics pretty thoroughly. And I want to go through them now with you and walk you through the verdict form, because this is a document that you're going to be filling out and giving to the Judge.
As far as the first question I think that's been covered pretty thoroughly. And as Mr. Schlesinger pointed out, this is a threshold question. Was Helen addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? I think it's pretty clear that she was. And the evidence is uncontroverted with regard to that.
Was her addiction a legal cause of her COPD? Well, there's stipulations, which I don't think you did get, but were read to you. And the Judge told you that the nicotine in tobacco is addictive. Judge told you that Helen Cohen had COPD/emphysema and that it was, in fact, caused by cigarette smoking. These are agreements now that the parties have reached. So that's not for your determination.
So really the determination is: Was her addiction a legal cause of her chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease or emphysema?
And, quite frankly, the legal cause issue is but for her smoking, but for the nicotine, her addiction to the nicotine, would she have continued to smoking those cigarettes?
Of course she wouldn't have. If it wasn't in there, would she have smoked those cigarettes? Of course not. Because all the documents that you've seen that Mr. Schlesinger went through show people smoke for nicotine. And Helen was addicted, no doubt about it.
And even according to Dr. Dosovitz by way of the Fagerstrom she was addicted. She wasn't, according to him, by the DSM. But use your own common sense. It doesn't take an expert. There is no definition of addiction.
So this should be checked off "yes."
Now, the second question is asking about whether or not she knew or should have known before May 5th that she had COPD.
Now, we heard from Dr. Wasserman, the defense played that for you, we heard from Dr. Santini, the two doctors that treated her back then. And what's very important about their testimony is that neither one of them
specifically remembered conversations they had with Helen. But what's most important is Dr. Wasserman did note in his records COPD and emphysema. And the defense pointed that out to you in opening, they showed you a bunch of records. And we acknowledged, I said to you in opening, you're going to see that Dr. Wasserman did, in fact, write in his records COPD.
Because I knew what they were going to do, they were going to show you these records. But what's telling is while she's in that hospital she was examined by a pulmonologist Dr. Berkowitz who has a note and it's in evidence, I don't have to pull it up for you.
But basically the note says, I've examined Helen in the hospital and there's no need for me to be on the case anymore, I'm signing off, thank you for the referral. And he signs off.
Now, folks, don't you think if Helen Cohen had COPD that pulmonologist would have said, Mrs. Cohen, I'm examining you, I'm a pulmonologist. I think you've got COPD. I want to run these tests on you to confirm, like Dr. Green did four years later in 1994, to confirm you've got COPD because that's what you
doctor thinks you have. And once you're out of the hospital, come see me, because you're going to need me because I'm a lung doctor and you've got COPD. That's common sense, folks.
That's why Helen wouldn't have known what Dr. Wasserman put in his charts. There would be no reason. People don't sit in the hospital and get access to their medical records. It just doesn't happen.
Helen didn't know and there's no reason for you to think that she would have known. And so your answer here should be "no."
I want to go to the second page, because what your instructions say, "If your answer to question number 1 is yes, go to question number 2. If your answer to question number 2 is no, go to question number 3."
And question number 3, and again you've got it there in front of you, asks whether the cigarettes which she smoked were the legal cause. Well certainly they were. Each cigarette that she smoked contributed to her disease. So this should be really a no-brainer and you ought to check off "yes" as to each of them.
And question 4, her lung cancer, you saw the death certificate, you heard from Dr. Dudley.
She had lung cancer. There's no question about it. Was there a biopsy done? No. Why? Because to do a biopsy would have just caused pain to Helen. Why do a surgery when you're dying? There's no need for it.
Dr. Rosenkrantz said, you look at that picture, that's a picture of lung cancer. We don't have to go any further. Yeah, if you're going to treat her, do a biopsy to find out what course of treatment, but there was no treating her. She was at the end stage of her life that's why we put her in hospice.
And you should check off "yes" for that.
Going to page 3. Again, talks about were the cigarettes the legal cause of her cancer?
Of course they were. Each cigarette she smoked contributed to her cancer. You should say "yes" to each of these questions.
Going to question number 6, did she reasonable rely on a statement? And Mr. Schlesinger talked about all these various statements, all this knowledge that was withheld. And the question is, she started
smoking nonfiltered cigarettes, when filters came out, she switched to filters. Why?
Because she thought they were safer. That's the testimony from her own husband. They switched because they thought they were safer and they thought they were safer because that's what they were being told. And yet the tobacco documents that are in evidence, stacks of them, all reference the fact that we know filters don't work, but you know what, let's fool the American public. And they did. And they fooled Helen Cohen and David Cohen as well.
So she certainly relied on the messages that these tobacco companies were sending out, both before 1982 and after, because she continued to smoke filtered cigarettes. And they continued to put this information out that our filters will remove the bad stuff. And so you ought to be marking "yes" for all these things.
Now on page number 4 it talks about percentages of fault.
THE CLERK: Two minutes remaining.
THE COURT: Counselor, two minutes left.
MR. HAMMER: Judge, can I have a few more minutes extra?
THE COURT: Need counsel sidebar.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: Basis for additional time?
MR. HAMMER: To go through the verdict form, Judge. It's one thing that wasn't done. I'm not repeating anything Mr. Schlesinger said.
It's essential I go through the verdict form. I think it's only fair. And I need additional time to do that.
THE COURT: Any objection.
MR. PERSONS: Yes, Your Honor. They should stick to the time designated. The Court gave them a certain amount of time with the understanding going in that any additional time used by Mr. Schlesinger was going to be at the expense of whatever Mr. Hammer had -THE COURT: Gina has been giving warnings ahead of time and she gave the warnings that counsel requested.
MR. HAMMER: I understand, Judge. And you know what, if we need to take some time off rebuttal, I'll be happy to do that. But I need additional time to go through -THE COURT: How much additional time are you
requesting?
MR. HAMMER: Hopefully no more than 10 minutes.
THE COURT: No. Tracey needs a break. The jury hasn't eaten. So I'm going to give you five minutes and that comes off rebuttal.
(Sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: Five additional minutes but that's coming off rebuttal time.
MR. HAMMER: Percentages. Who should be held at fault? Well, we certainly accepted some fault, but based on all those documents and based on what they knew you've got to acknowledge these companies should have some fault.
And she smoked mostly RJ Reynolds products, but I would tell you based on what Helen knew and what she did, her failure to quit when she did I would tell you I think 10 percent is fair, fair to attribute to Helen.
She didn't smoke as much Lorillard and Liggett, but you know what, she didn't smoke as much Philip Morris, predominantly RJ Reynolds, however, as far as the conspiracy aspect of it,
Liggett was not involved as long. And so I would say Liggett is probably just as at fault as Helen. Between the other three I would say Reynolds is 40, Lorillard is 20, and Philip Morris is 20.
Now, we talked about the damages and the money to compensate David for his loss. We already -- there's a stipulation that the total amount of money -- I don't know where that was -- is 396 dollars [sic] for the medical expenses -- 396,000 -MR. PERSONS: Objection.
MR. HAMMER: -- 570.
THE COURT: Mr. Hammer. Just fix it.
MR. HAMMER: Oh, I'm sorry.
Regarding the COPD minus the funeral expenses so it comes out to -- the question is -MR. GDANSKI: I think he was right.
MR. HAMMER: 341,523.
MR. S. DAVIS: Your Honor, objection to misstatement of the stipulation.
THE COURT: Let me see the statement.
MR. HAMMER: You know, I was right the first time.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. HAMMER: All right. According to the stipulation it's $55,050.26.
Now the question is, the next question, what's the total amount of damages sustained by David Cohen for the loss of his wife? Loss of wife for 57 years. You heard the impact that she had on him, on the family. He's been without her now since her death for the past 7 years. He's going to be without her -- we don't know how long he's going to live, he's 91 years old. Hopefully he lives even longer, but you can take that into consideration.
But I would submit to you that that first year was hell for him. You heard it. And he was totally lost and he still is. I mean, he still goes to the grave, he still prays to her, still talks to her, still goes to her and asks her for help with the kids tests, still wears the ring, still has pictures of her.
What's fair compensation? That's your determination, but I would submit to you that what would be fair would be 9 million dollars.
I come up with that because I would say that first year 2 million dollars, the following six years that we've been hanging around here waiting for this case -MR. PERSONS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. HAMMER: -- a million dollars.
THE COURT: Sustain the objection, "waiting around for the case."
MR. HAMMER: Since her death it's been seven years, 2 million dollars for that first year that he suffered tremendously. A million dollars each year thereafter and a couple million dollars for the next few years that he's going to be alive. I think that's fair.
On page 5 you're asked about whether they concealed information. Well, I think it's pretty clear they did. Based on all those internal documents, they certainly did. Did she rely on that? Did they conceal it? Did they conspire? Did she rely on that information?
She did just as everybody else. She was just one of many that it was directed at and it hit her. We know it did. Just the advertising hit her, the false lies hit her. Everything hit her. And she believed it. And they should be
held accountable.
As far as the COPD, if you don't believe that she died from lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking, well, then you go on to these questions. So we don't even think you have to go there, because we believe we submitted enough evidence that she certainly died from lung cancer. But if you don't think that, we ask you to go to this. And, again, ask you for the same proportions.
And then on to page 6. The damages for medical expenses there was a stipulation which came to $341,000 -- $341,523.36. And with regard to what her pain and suffering was for those years that she had COPD that she struggled breathing every day. She had to be on oxygen 24 hours a day from 1995 through her death where she couldn't breathe on her own. You heard how tough that was on her and on the family.
Certainly Mrs. Cohen's pain and suffering, yeah, some of it was caused by her own devices because she smoked, but she only smoked becausf of what these companies did and said and withheld from her. And so certainly for those years I think 7 million dollars is certainly
fair for a total of $7,341,523.36.
And, finally, the question about punitive damages, should these companies be held accountable for their actions? Should they be punished for their actions? Should they be?
And I just want to sum up with a couple things about that, but certainly they should. Because companies just like individuals should be held accountable. Should be held responsible. And this is America, if you're going to make a product, you make it safe. If you can't make it safe, then you don't make it. That's what this country has been built on. If you're going to make a product -MR. PERSONS: Judge, object.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. HAMMER: If you're going to make a product and you promise the American public and Helen Cohen that if our product is unsafe, we'll stop making it, then you live by your promise.
And they haven't done that. They haven't done it. Hold them to their promises. They broke their promise that they made to Helen Cohen and to millions of other people -MR. S. DAVIS: Objection,
Williams/State Farm.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. HAMMER: -- and as a result, millions have died.
MR. S. DAVIS: Your Honor.
THE COURT: Disregard that. There was a Williams/State Farm objection.
MR. HAMMER: -- as a result Helen Cohen died because she bought into it. Because she bought into it because that's what these companies wanted her to do. And they need to be punished for that. If you're going to promise something about your product, then have the courage to stand by that promise. And if you're going to not stand by that promise, then accept the punishment.
And that's what we're going to talk about in Phase II. And it's going to be a very short phase, I promise you.
We're going to have a chance to rebut what they have to say in their closing to you. I ask you to listen very carefully and most importantly keep the evidence in mind as you listen to their arguments. Thank you very much.



                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Counsel, ladies and
          gentlemen of the jury, hello.
                So I'm going to try to keep my time here,
          and I'm going to try to rip through some of
          this stuff real quick.  But what comes to mind
          as I think how to rebut or to refute some of
          the statements I've heard is, the overwhelming
          certainty that the public knowledge that
          existed despite protestations to the contrary,
          notwithstanding for decades was known virtually
          completely to everybody, including Mrs. Cohen.
                But nothing that the defendants ever did,
          despite spending, and let me repeat this number
          to you, a quarter of a trillion dollars,
          $250 billion, that's 250 thousand million
          dollars, on advertising that had no effect.  A
          quarter trillion in advertising over decades
          that they would suggest to you had no effect.
                But a Reader's Digest article gathering
          dust on the bottom shelf of a television
          console somewhere was what everybody every
          morning got out of bed before they would do
          anything else, and they would bounce their
          little kids on their knee and say, Let's take
          out that article, one of 12 about smoking, and
          let's read it to our children.  Let's read it
          to everybody.  Everybody knew.
                For 50 years they engage in a conspiracy,
          a fraudulent coverup, lied to the American
          public to sell the drug nicotine, an addictive
          drug, addicting children with knowledgeably
          aforethought to do this, and all the while
          denied the health harms of it, all the while downplayed nicotine, all the while said this
          has got nothing to do with any of those things;
          hid it; knew it inside their labs.  Denied it.
          And now in this courtroom, they say --
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Objection.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                MR. PERSONS:  May we approach?
                THE COURT:  Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
                THE COURT:  Mr. Schlesinger is going to
          continue forward.  Thank you very much, sir.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Would you read back --
                (Mr. Schlesinger read the court
                reporter's realtime screen.)
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Let me hit my little
          clock.
                The pivot is everybody knew, everybody
          knew.  How do we go from 50 years, a conspiracy
          of 50 years where they lied to Congress, they 11
          lied to the American people, they lied to the
          Surgeon General and then try to take credit for
          having conned and duped the Surgeon General
          into thinking filters -- which were every bit
          as deadly as non-filters -- were safer, because
          the filters were the psychological crutch that
          millions of smokers like Helen Cohen relied on
          for a lifetime, until she got sick and
          eventually died.
                The filters don't work.  They don't make
          anybody any better; they never did.  It is not
          evidence in this case.
                The evidence is contrary in this case
          that the FTC method, which was a machine that
          smoked the cigarettes, did not work --
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  -- never worked.
                MR. PERSONS:  And move to strike.
                THE COURT:  The FTC --
                MR. HAMMER:  Judge, that's in evidence.
                THE COURT:  No.  Sustain the objection.
          It didn't go to that issue.  Sustain the
          objection.  Sustain the objection.
                MR. GDANSKI:  May we approach?
                THE COURT:  Good.  Counsel make a motion?
                MR. PERSONS:  Yes, Your Honor.
                (The following discussion was held at
                sidebar:)
                THE COURT:  FTC, we spent so much time.
                MR. GDANSKI:  It's not the FTC reports.
          It's an FTC method that's directly in the 2010
          Surgeon General's report.  It's not the FTC
          report.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  It's a testing method.
                MR. GDANSKI:  I think I read it with
          Dr. Proctor.  It's the FTC testing method.
          They all heard him say FTC testing method.
                I know they're trying to jump on Scott,
          Mr. Schlesinger.  That's fine.
                No, it's not an aspersion.  I know they
          are going to object when they feel it's
          necessary.  I'm not pointing that out.
                I'm saying they all heard FTC testimony.
          No one is going to suggest that they heard FTC
          reports, so -- this is in evidence.
                MR. BASSETT:  Reports -- I don't know
          that there's any discussion of what the FTC
          method was, how it was applied.
                MR. GDANSKI:  It's in the Surgeon
          General's report.       MR. BASSETT:  I don't remember that.  I
          don't remember that.
                MR. PERSONS:  Neither did I.
                THE COURT:  When did Dr. Proctor talk
          about that?
                MR. GDANSKI:  In my direct.  And it's in
          the 2010 Surgeon General's report.
                THE COURT:  I don't remember that.  But I
          will take your representation as an officer of
          the court.  Okay.
                (Sidebar discussion concluded, and the
                following was held in open court:)
                THE COURT:  Let's continue forward.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Rob, put it up.  I'll
          do this quick.  I'm going to have to speed
          read.
                All right.  Tobacco industry documents,
          many of which are available at the Legacy
          Tobacco Documents Library at the University of
          California San Francisco clearly demonstrate
          that at least by the mid-1970s, the tobacco
          industry well understood the importance of
          creating health reassurance messages in order
          to alleviate health concerns, and that one
          important method of doing so was through claims
          of low deliveries of tar.
                For example, a 1977 British American
          Tobacco marketing report concluded:  All work
          in this area should be directed towards
          providing consumer reassurance, emphasis in
          original, about cigarettes and the smoking
          habit.  This can be provided in different ways.
                For instance, by claiming low deliveries,
          by the perception of low deliveries and the
          perception of mildness.
                At the same time, tobacco company
          documents also clearly demonstrate that the
          industry understood that smokers would not
          achieve the claimed deliveries because of
          smoker compensation.
                Folks, a 1975 Philip Morris memo noted:
          In effect, the Marlboro '85 smokers in this
          study did not achieve any reduction in smoke
          intake by smoking a cigarette, Marlboro Lights,
          considered lower in delivery.
                In contrast to industry awareness, the
          various ways that cigarettes were physically
          modified and the nature and level of
          compensation response to design changes was not
          well understood by parties outside of the 12
          tobacco industry itself.
                Public health officials had little basis
          to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers
          could design cigarettes to allow smokers to
          draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes
          than was represented by machine-measured yields
          of tar and nicotine.
                National Cancer Institutes in 2001 and
          Parascandola in 2005.  It was not until the
          turn of the 21st century that it became
          increasingly clear that no relationship existed
          between machine-measured tar and nicotine
          levels and the risks of most categories of
          cigarette-related diseases.  And that was what
          Helen smoked.
                And trying to say that --
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                MR. PERSONS:  And move to strike.
                THE COURT:  Strike, granted.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Curative instruction.
                THE COURT:  Please disregard the last
          statement.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  There's evidence in the
          record you can remember from the folks, the
          family members talking about she smoked
          filters, her husband explained she smoked
          filtered cigarettes.
                But saying a filtered cigarette is safer
          is the same thing as saying -- I mean, in a
          place where now 99 percent of all the
          cigarettes have filters, it's like saying that
          falling off a 50-story building is safer than
          falling off a 60-story building.  They are no
          safer.  There is no science.
                And yet you've heard the suggestion that
          somehow that is safer.
                Let's put up the Engle findings, real
          quick.
                Okay.  So I only got through part of the
          Engle findings the other day when we were
          talking.  I want to remind you of what you will
          realize as you work through this verdict form.
                Question 1:  Was she addicted to
          cigarettes and the nicotine in cigarettes and
          did that cause or contribute to cause her to
          have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or
          emphysema.  And it obviously did.  She
          obviously had to be dependent on the nicotine
          in cigarettes.  Nobody smokes like that.       But more importantly, here are the
          findings.  Once you determine she's a class
          member -- and obviously the fact that nicotine
          in cigarettes is addictive is relevant to that.
          Once you determine she's a class member, first
          question, which has nothing to do with fault --
          Helen Cohen's entitlement to belong in the
          Engle class has nothing to do with fault.  The
          business about choice will not be in the
          instructions.  It will not be in the law.
                To the extent you want to say, what about
          her choices?  That comes at the phase where you
          discuss fault.  As Mr. Hammer showed you, there
          are percentages of fault you can apply.  And
          you're welcome to do that.
                You can decide to parse fault and
          relative degrees of responsibility for the
          personal responsibility of corporate actors, as
          well as the personal responsibility of Helen.
          You can decide Helen has this much
          responsibility.  Whatever percentage you want
          to put on her.  That's the fault phase.
                But it is not -- and -- please don't be
          confused that that fault phase is in
          question 1.
                Question 1 is:  Was she a nicotine
          dependent smoker that got sick from smoking
          three-quarters of a million cigarettes.  And
          she was.  So --
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Objection, state of --
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Move to strike.
                THE COURT:  Please disregard the last
          statement.
                Continue forward.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Defendants concealed or
          omitted -- I'm a lefty.  I will look from this
          side.
                Defendants concealed or omitted material
          information not otherwise known or available,
          knowing that the material was false and
          misleading or failed to disclose a material
          fact concerning the health effects or addictive
          nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
                These are your findings as if you found
          them yourselves.  Her Honor ordered you to say
          these are my findings.
                You are an Engle progeny jury.  We are
          Engle progeny claimants, and you are furthering
          the work done over a decade ago by the Engle 13
          jury that made this finding.  And they hand
          this to you and say, this is such rock-solid
          law that you should take it as yours.  It
          belongs to you.  You believe it.  You think of
          it as your own.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Objection, Your Honor,
          misstates the instruction and the law.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Move to strike.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.  Sustained.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I'm pretty sure Her
          Honor said you take these findings as if you
          found them yourself.
                So I -- I got a little excited about
          that.  I thought that was a good thing.
                MR. PERSONS:  Object to the commentary.
                THE COURT:  No commentary,
          Mr. Schlesinger.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Defendants concealed or
          omitted material information not otherwise
          known or available, knowing that the material
          was false and misleading or failed to disclose
          a material fact concerning the health effects
          or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes
          or both.
                Defendants agreed to conceal or omit
          information regarding the health effects of
          cigarettes or their addictive nature with the
          intention -- on purpose -- intention, with the
          intention that smokers and the public would
          rely on this information to their detriment.
                Smokers.  Helen Cohen.  This is a finding
          as if you found it yourself.  They lied, they
          concealed, they dissembled, they created a
          situation of fraud and doubt to sell an
          addictive drug, nicotine, as if it was
          something that was just a wonderful thing, a
          zephyr, a fresh breeze.
                So defendants, all of them, these are all
          the defendants.  This applies to Liggett,
          Lorillard, Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds.  All
          of them, all of the defendants, all of these
          defendants did all these things in this case.
          With the intent to rely.
                And selecting one person out of the group
          of what was 700,000 and saying, well, you know,
          none of the quarter trillion dollars in
          advertising affected her.
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
                THE COURT:  Sustained as to 700,000.       MR. S. DAVIS:  Move to strike and
          curative.
                THE COURT:  Please disregard.
                Let's continue forward.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Aesop, 6th century BC,
          a story called the bundle of sticks.  An old
          man at the point of death summoned his sons
          around him to giving parting advice.  He
          ordered his servants to bring him a bundle of
          sticks.  He said to his eldest son, break it.
          The son strained and strained.  But with all
          his efforts was unable to break the bundle.
                The other sons also tried, but none of
          them successful.  Untie the bundle of sticks,
          said the father, and each of you take a stick.
          When they had done so, he called unto them.
          Now break, and each stick was easily broken.
                You see my meaning, says the father?
                Do you remember how we had a doctor that
          came in here purporting to be an expert, whose
          name you will never find in anything that is in
          evidence having to do with expertise in
          nicotine, who testified to you that by some
          chance, ten folks that came as Engle class
          members resulted in a 1 in 10 million chance of
          something happening.  Zero in 10 addicted
          smokers that he just so happened to be
          evaluating, that he just so happened to be
          evaluating only on behalf of Philip Morris.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Objection, misstates the
          testimony.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  No government agency --
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Move to strike and ask for
          curative.
                THE COURT:  I sustained the objection.
          Continue on.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  No government agency,
          no scientific authority, nobody ever asked for
          Dr. Dosovitz to be their expert.  But they
          have.  And you are -- and there is a jury
          instruction on the credibility of witnesses,
          and I want to read it to you.  I want to read
          this to you.
                MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor -- excuse me,
          Mr. Schlesinger.  I object, Your Honor.  This
          is not rebuttal.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I can't read the jury
          instruction?
                THE COURT:  I will sustain the objection. 14
                Let's continue forward.  You're welcome
          to read the jury instruction.  That's fine.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  The general
          believability of witnesses talks about you've
          heard at the outset of the case the
          believability of witnesses, regarding witnesses
          evaluating, the believability of any witness
          and the weight you will give the testimony of
          any particular witness, you may properly
          consider the demeanor of the witness while he
          or she testified, the frankness or lack of
          frankness of the witness, the intelligence of
          the witness.
                Any interest the witness may have in the
          outcome of the case, the means and opportunity
          the witness has to know the facts about which
          the witness testified.  The ability of the
          witness to remember the matters about which the
          witness testified and the reasonableness of the
          testimony.  Considered in light of all the
          evidence in the case and the light of your own
          common sense.
                So what does that mean?
                The memory.  Remember there was some poor
          gal with Alzheimer's, her memory was not so
          great.  But she testified to a few things.  One
          of the things she testified to was -- and
          Mr. Person said this, and I counted it four
          times --
                THE COURT:  Persons.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I'm sorry.  I want to
          call you Parsons, I apologize.
                Mr. Persons said this four times, and I
          noticed it, because there's also another
          instruction about prejudice and sympathy.  And
          I heard a lot about Helen was a strong woman,
          being able to lose a lot of weight, but not
          being able to get off cigarettes argues in our
          favor.
                In other words, you were able to set your
          mind to determine yourself to lose weight.  But
          you couldn't get off cigarettes.  That shows
          how powerfully addictive they were.
                But they also said she stole that first
          cigarette.  She stole that first cigarette from
          her father.  Four times.  She stole that first
          cigarette from her father.
                And then they played a poor old lady with
          Alzheimer's who couldn't remember anything, a
          little piece of her testimony that says I remember that Helen was sitting down outside of
          a restaurant smoking a cigarette, I'll never
          forget it, a lady sat down next to her and said
          you're smoking that cigarette.  And she said,
          Well, I was here first and you should get out
          of here.
                Now was that to prejudice you against
          Helen?  The records of Dr. Greene --
                MR. WOODS:  Objection, Your Honor.
                THE COURT:  Sustained, sustained.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Move to strike.
                MR. PERSONS:  Move to strike and ask for
          a curative, Your Honor.
                THE COURT:  Let's sustain the objection
          for the record.
                Keep going, Mr. Schlesinger.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  The records of
          Dr. Greene describe her as a pleasant lady.  I
          want to reflect on that episode.  Let's say
          that episode happened just that way.  Is it
          possible that episode could be looked at in
          another way; that this was a woman who had
          guilt, she had denial and she was defensive?
                Wouldn't a smoker who is an addicted
          smoker sitting, smoking her cigarette, having
          heard people say, don't Smoke, you know you're
          not supposed to be smoking.  You're an addicted
          smoker.  You're looking for someplace to --
          where you can live in that way, where you have
          that addiction.  Does it make sense she might
          be defensive?
                And if somebody comes over and says, Hey,
          you should stop smoking, she goes, I was here
          first.  Maybe that's an act of a defensive
          person who is addicted.  There's a bunch of
          different ways to look at things.  I wanted you
          to think about that.
                These -- the -- back to the witnesses.
          In this case, you've heard opinion testimony
          about certain technical subjects from persons
          referred to as expert witnesses.  Regarding
          experts, this is -- this is your power.  This
          is the law, Her Honor will give you.
                She has no interest in the outcome of the
          case.  She doesn't prefer, Her Honor, what side
          wins or loses.  She is the neutral referee.
                You will decide who is correct.  You will
          decide what the justice is in the case, what is
          right, what is true.  And one of the things you
          will have that you will be armed with, it is 15
          the power that you can use is the power with
          regard to what you think about an expert.
                In this case, you've heard opinion
          testimony about certain technical subjects from
          persons referred to as expert witnesses.
          Regarding experts, you may accept such opinion
          testimony, you may reject it, you may give it
          the weight you think it deserves considering
          the knowledge, skill, experience, training,
          education of the witness.  Reasons given by the
          witness for the opinions expressed, the
          opinions expressed and all other evidence in
          the case.
                Unlike regular people, the expert who
          comes in and says, I have earned the right to
          be called an expert, I am a scholar, here are
          my scholarly accomplishments.  If you don't
          approve, if you choose to, you have the power
          to reject the opinion of an expert.  And I
          suggest to you that the opinion of the only
          expert they brought in here, Dr. Dosovitz, is
          worthy of rejection.
                Now, I want to go, because I said I
          wanted to hear what they had to say about --
          about the time bar.  May 5 of 1990.
                A medical record that is formed in the
          '90s has got certain parts to it:  Subjective,
          objective, assessment, plan.  A medical record
          has got what is called a past medical history.
                Dr. Santini's note did not say the word
          "chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" in
          December.  Remember it.  If you don't -- if
          you're not sure for me, you know -- take one
          thing from me at face value.  I'm not going to
          intentionally mislead you on the evidence.  You
          guys rely on your collective --
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                MR. PERSONS:  Strike and ask for
          curative.
                THE COURT:  Please proceed forward,
          Mr. Schlesinger.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I have a recall of the
          evidence.  If yours differs, please look at the
          evidence.  Look at the record.  Look at the
          December 22, 1989, record.
                Dr. Santini's record does not say chronic
          obstructive pulmonary disease.  Dr. Santini's
          record only talks about telling Mrs. Cohen not
          to smoke.  It does not say past medical history, I have COPD.  It does not diagnose
          COPD.  It just doesn't.  It's not in there.
                In January, and I want to show the -- go
          to the January records, because the defendants
          have put together this assemblage of the
          documents, I want to show you some other ones,
          that will not stand up to scrutiny with regard
          to this May 5, 1990, the greater weight of the
          evidence -- and I'm going to tell you this.
          They have not proven -- their burden of proof,
          the hurdle -- if we have hurdles, they have a
          hurdle.
                Their burden of proof, they have not
          proven with their burden of proof that Helen
          Cohen was aware she had chronic obstructive
          pulmonary disease on -- in January of '90 and
          thereafter, and I'll show you why.
                Okay?
                They need several pieces to this.  They
          have to show that she knew she had the
          smoking-related disease of emphysema, right?
          Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, I told
          you, COPD.  That's a terminology that they
          never establish she understood or anyone knew
          what that meant at that time.  They didn't get
          anyone in there to say, oh, Helen Cohen knows
          that COPD means chronic obstructive pulmonary
          disease.
                Back then in the '90s, that wasn't the
          term.  The term was emphysema.  But even
          setting that aside --
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection, Your Honor, that
          misstates the evidence.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  The evidence that
          nobody told --
                THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar on that one,
          please.
                (The following discussion was held at
                sidebar:)
                THE COURT:  State your objection.
                MR. BASSETT:  Your Honor, he just said no
          one told Helen Cohen she had COPD.  Everybody
          knew about emphysema.  That misstates the law.
          The law for this on the jury verdict form is
          COPD/emphysema, so either one or the other is
          relevant.  But he misstated the --
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  But --
                MR. HAMMER:  It's the same thing.
                THE COURT:  But it's wrong to imply it to
          the jury.  The verdict form and the jury 16
          instructions in this case backslash emphysema.
          We did it -- I'm going to sustain the
          objection --
                MR. WOODS:  And all the medical records.
          They use them interchangeably.
                THE COURT:  That's why we did that in the
          verdict form and jury instructions.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I'll move forward.
          Except one thing.  It has absolutely nothing to
          do with the fact that they're two completely
          separate entities, two different words, with
          two different terminologies.  Different
          perception is --
                THE COURT:  I understand.  Maybe
          medical -- no one brought that up.
                MR. BASSETT:  Not only that, their own
          experts agreed emphysema was the same as COPD.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I didn't --
                THE COURT:  That's not what your expert
          says.
                MR. HAMMER:  Judge, this is argument and
          we're trying to frame what Helen --
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  He put up a board that
          suggested that Dr. Berkowitz wrote down COPD.
          He told them that Dr. Berkowitz read that COPD
          in the record.  There is no evidence of that.
                THE COURT:  I'm going to sustain the
          objection for the record and move forward.
                (Sidebar discussion concluded, and the
                following was held in open court:)
                THE COURT:  Objection sustained.  Let's
          move forward.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Now, COPD, chronic
          obstructive pulmonary disease, at Bates
          210507-014.
                Can you put that up, please?
                This is the January 22, '90, Delray
          Community Hospital sheet -- face sheet.
          Because it was said on many occasions that when
          Dr. Wasserman saw this patient in the hospital.
          He admitted her for COPD.
                That is not true.  He admitted her for
          asthmatic bronchitis.  That was the admission.
          She had an acute infectious disease.  All the
          meds she got are medicines that treat asthmatic
          bronchitis.  She went to the hospital --
                MR. WOODS:  Judge, misstates the
          evidence.
                THE COURT:  Counsel, sidebar, please.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  This is an argument, Your Honor.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
                THE COURT:  Last objection was sustained.
          Let's continue forward.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Can we have the record
          up, please, the admitting diagnosis.
                The reason I want to bring this up is
          because every time the reason for the admission
          to the hospital was referred to, it was
          described as she was being admitted for COPD.
          And she was not being admitted for COPD.
                Her admission was for asthmatic
          bronchitis, an acute illness that she was
          suffering from, an acute illness that she was
          suffering from that needed antibiotics to kill
          germs that she got.
                Now, unlike the board that was put up with a highlight of the word COPD on it and
          then a highlight of Dr. Berkowitz's signature,
          Dr. Berkowitz did not write down COPD in his
          chart.
                And if you have any doubt, look at the
          chart.  Dr. Berkowitz came in, he made a brief
          handwritten note, and Dr. Berkowitz also
          dictated a note.  Dr. Berkowitz's note dictated
          this is a pulmonologist, a lung doctor, brought
          in for purposes of consultation with regard to
          the lung condition.  His dictated note.
                What did he say this woman was there for?
          What did he say she had?  She had bronchitis.
          The word COPD does not appear in the record of
          the man who is the specialist for COPD.
                Now, let's talk about shifting
          justification.  This business about COPD
          diagnosis during this hospitalization would
          have to be a diagnosis in the absence of any
          test to confirm the diagnosis.
                It would be in the absence of any finding
          to confirm the diagnosis.  It would be because
          the word is on the page, she had that
          diagnosis.
                Now, the justification on lung cancer was
          held to a much higher standard.  She didn't get
          a lung biopsy.  She did not get a bronchial
          washing, and therefore, the plaintiffs have not
          met their burden of proof that she probably had
          lung cancer.
                She had a high-tech CT doctor,
          Rosenkrantz came in here and said in no
          uncertain terms, a very high likelihood that
          that was nothing but a big, honkin' deadly
          tumor in the middle of her chest that had
          spread to her liver.  That's what he said.
                However, the argument goes, that's not
          sufficient to diagnose lung cancer, even when
          there's a cutting-edge standard CAT scan, a CT
          tomography, computed tomography, X-ray computer
          of the tumor; but before May of 1990, it's okay
          for their burden of proof with no test, no
          spirometry, no pulmonary function tests.
                Now remember the family doctor,
          Dr. Dudley, independent witness, comes in here
          and he says you have to have a pulmonary
          function test.  You have to have a lung doctor
          do the test to find out about COPD.
                And what did Dr. Rosenkrantz say about
          that X-ray?  There wasn't any evidence of COPD 18
          on it.  I'm not saying that a chest X-ray is
          the only way to diagnose COPD.  But if it's
          severe enough, you can see it on a chest X-ray.
                And so there's objective evidence by an
          independent witness, Dr. Rosenkrantz, on the
          witness stand who said no COPD on the chest
          X-ray.  So what is it, except for the words on
          the page.  And you know what the words on the
          page were when the doctor wrote it in the
          chart, they were a differential diagnosis.  You
          know what a differential diagnosis is?  An
          alternative explanation of possible problems.
          That is why doctors write down --
                MR. WOODS:  Objection, Your Honor.
                THE COURT:  One at a time.  State the
          objection.
                MR. WOODS:  Misstates the evidence.
          Facts not in evidence.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                Do you want to come sidebar?
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I'll move on, Judge.
                THE COURT:  What do you want to do,
          Mr. Schlesinger?
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I'll just move on.
          I'll keep going.
                The record -- so, in his deposition --
                Patients don't know what doctors write in
          their charts.  Patients don't know what doctors
          write in their charts.  That is common
          knowledge.  Maybe nowadays more people get
          their charts --
                MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor, objection,
          there is no evidence of that.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  -- but in 1990, it is a
          perfectly reasonable --
                THE COURT:  Overruled.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  It is a perfectly
          reasonable inference to draw that what is
          written in a hospital chart is not something
          that is shown to a patient.
                And if a doctor wants to document what he
          told the patient, he writes down what he told
          the patient.  Discussed with patient, D/W,
          discussed with patient.  It doesn't exist in
          these records with Dr. Wasserman or Santini.
                There is no medical history documenting
          what Helen told Dr. Wasserman or Santini about
          what she had.  It's not there.
                Now, patients are not commonly known to
          read their own charts.  So they have to rely on what is being told to them.
                The depositions of Dr. Wasserman were 22
          years after the fact.  Dr. Wasserman --
                Do you want to shoot up that testimony by
          Dr. Wasserman real quick, please?
                VIDEO TECHNICIAN:  Yes.
                (Video clip played.)
          Q     Would you have told Helen Cohen on this
   date, January 22, 1990, that she had COPD?
                ATTORNEY:  Object to the form.
          Q     As part of your standard practice of
   treating patients with that disorder?
          A     I might, I might not.
          Q     Do you believe --
                MR. WOODS:  Whoa, whoa, objection, Your
          Honor.  They cut off the answer.  We need to
          approach.
                (Video clip paused.)
                THE COURT:  Sidebar, please.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
                THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, I'm
          going to read the question and answer to you.
                QUESTION:  At line 3:  As part of your standard practice of treating patients with
          that disorder?
                ANSWER:  The witness.  I might, I might
          not.  She was probably aware of the diagnosis
          at that point.  So it wouldn't have warranted
          repetition.
                MR. WOODS:  Thank you.
                THE COURT:  Thank you, Mr. Woods.
                You may continue, Mr. Schlesinger.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  So that answer given at
          that time had to do with the fact that
          Dr. Wasserman, on the first time he ever saw
          her on January 22 of 1990, had in his notes
          nothing about whether or not she was a smoker.
                And he commented in his testimony that he
          would document if she was a smoker.  And he did
          not think she was a smoker at that time.  And
          for that reason, if he did not think she was a
          smoker, he does not give folks that he doesn't
          think is a smoker his "don't smoke" lecture --
                THE COURT:  20-minute warning,
          Mr. Schlesinger.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  -- or his mantra.  He
          doesn't give that lecture.  He did not know she
          was a smoker when confronted with that record
          because he said that if a patient of his is a
          smoker -- and this was a new exam by him -- he
          would document it in the records.  And since
          his record doesn't document it, he didn't think
          she was a smoker.
                Here's where things get confusing.
                In the middle of the deposition, for the
          first time ever, 22 years after Dr. Wasserman
          was involved in this matter and he was being
          questioned at the request of the tobacco
          company attorneys, they took out a discharge --
          no, a history and physical that Dr. Wasserman
          filled out.
                Can you bring up the history and
          physical, please?
                The history and physical had in here that
          she was smoking heavily two packs a day for 50
          years.  You'll look at the chart.  I can't do
          it all right now.  I don't have enough time.
          You look at the chart.
                He had handwritten notes in his office
          chart, January 22nd, '90.  He had some
          handwritten notes in the progress notes of the
          hospital chart during this admission for
          asthmatic bronchitis between January 22 and 21
          January 28.
                This note that's the dictation of the
          history and physical was demonstrated to him to
          be January 22, '90.
                Look, Doctor, on January 22, '90, you
          must have thought she was a smoker.  Therefore,
          would you give her your mantra, smoking can
          cause emphysema, heart disease, lung cancer,
          bladder cancer, those nine things he says he
          tells all smokers generically as a habit.  But
          he doesn't tell them if he thinks they're not
          smokers.
                So ...
                MR. WOODS:  Objection, misstates the
          evidence.
                THE COURT:  Sustained.
                Let's moved forward, Mr. Schlesinger.
                MR. WOODS:  Curative, Your Honor.
                THE COURT:  Please -- keep going.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I want the history and
          physical.
                THE COURT:  Put up the --
                MR. PERSONS:  Can we have a curative,
          Your Honor?
                THE COURT:  We had the wrong slide up.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Curative for the wrong
          slide?
                MR. PERSONS:  Curative for the
          misstatement of the evidence.
                THE COURT:  Disregard that.  Now we're on
          the right slide.
                Is this the right slide, Mr. Schlesinger?
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  This is the right
          slide.
                So, see what it says?  Dictated April
          30th of 1990.  Transcribed May 1st, 1990.
                He wasn't with Helen Cohen then, he
          didn't see Helen Cohen then.  Dr. Wasserman,
          like any doctor that has to complete a chart
          and a month or more has gone by, is advised by
          the records department you've got to come down
          and complete your charts.  He came down three
          months later and completed the chart.
                MR. PERSONS:  Your Honor, no evidence of
          this.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  They made the
          statement --
                THE COURT:  Sustained.  Go forward.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  They made the same
          argument.       MR. PERSONS:  Curative.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  There's three months
          right here, April 30 --
                THE COURT:  Keep going, please.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  The fact of the matter
          is, is that three months went by, and that was
          the record that was shown to Dr. Wasserman in
          his deposition, and Dr. Wasserman looked at the
          date thinking he was talking about January 22,
          1990.
                MR. PERSONS:  Judge --
                THE COURT:  Sustain the objection.
                Counsel, sidebar.  I need everybody
          sidebar.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
                THE COURT:  We're almost at the end.
          Finish line.  How much more?
                THE CLERK:  16 more minutes.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  The point I'm trying to
          make is that on -- the dictation was April 30th
          of '90, Helen was out of the hospital.  Helen
          was out of the hospital.  Dr. Wasserman's
          contemporary notes in the hospital reflect
          nothing about COPD.
                MR. WOODS:  Objection, misstates the
          evidence.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I made a mistake.  I'll
          correct it.
                THE COURT:  Please continue.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Reflect nothing about
          smoking.  The word smoking doesn't appear in
          there.  Dr. Wasserman was under the impression
          in his depo, at the beginning of his depo when
          he said I might not have told her, because I
          don't give the litany if I don't think there's
          smoking.
                At the time, all during January, all
          during February, all during March, the March
          notes, there's no mention of smoking in
          Dr. Wasserman's records at all.
                The first time there's a mention of
          smoking in Dr. Wasserman's records is in
          September of 1990, where in that one note it
          says sees a psychiatrist, and a few lines down
          it says stop smoking.  Which corresponds with
          the dancing in the streets in Texas and the
          summer trip to Texas and the smoking during
          that period of time.
                And remember Dr. Greene's note also says
          it's in her 66th year of life that she stopped
          smoking.  She didn't stop smoking any time
          before she was 66.  She reported that to
          Dr. Greene in 1994, and she was born on May
          19th of 1924.  So May 19th of 1990 was her 66th
          birthday, and she was still smoking.
                Now here is why the defendants' defense
          that they have the burden of proof is --
          speculation is not proof:  It's a supposition,
          an assumption based on doctors looking back in 23
          time without recollecting what really was going
          on, off a note that was months after the fact
          and then saying, well, I think they're smoking,
          I usually tell them this, and I don't remember
          what I told her, but I might have told her that
          if I thought she was smoking.
                MR. T. DAVIS:  Objection.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Spend the time --
                MR. T. DAVIS:  Excuse me,
          Mr. Schlesinger, I don't mean to interrupt you.
                Your Honor, I would renew the objection
          that we made at sidebar for the same reasons.
                THE COURT:  It's reserved.  Let's
          continue forward.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  So look at the records
          closely.
                Now, Mr. Persons said you'd have to
          assume the nurses wouldn't say anything about
          COPD to the patient.  Well, you've got the
          hospital chart.  Look at the nurse's notes, and
          you'll see that every single nurse's note,
          every single nurse's note says the patient is
          there for asthmatic bronchitis, asthmatic
          bronchitis, every single note.
                The medication administration record that
          they made such a big deal of, what the medicine
          was for, every single medication administration
          record says she was being treated for -- the
          medication administration record, that's the
          list of the drugs -- asthmatic bronchitis,
          diagnosis -- nurse's record, diagnosis,
          bronchitis.  Nurse's record, diagnosis,
          bronchitis.  Nurse's record, diagnosis,
          bronchitis.
                Medication administration record.
          Diagnosis, asthmatic bronchitis.  And that's --
          Mr. Persons said we would have to assume that
          those nurses didn't tell Mrs. Cohen she had
          COPD.  You can't assume what someone tells.
          It's either in the record or it's not in the
          record.
                Now, the -- I'm going to give you
          objective evidence.  Objective evidence in the
          chart right here, right now.  And I am going to
          disprove their theory that she knew.
                MR. T. DAVIS:  Your Honor, can we see
          what it is?
                THE COURT:  It's a medical record.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  I'm going to disprove.
          You can put it up there as well.  I'm going to disprove.  They didn't prove it.  But I'm going
          to give you the objective evidence that
          disproves that Mrs. Cohen could possibly have
          known that she had chronic obstructive
          pulmonary disease in the hospital where
          hospitals follow their duties to tell the
          patients what they have, give the patients
          instructions, and teach them so they may learn
          how to care for themselves.
                And on the discharge instructions -- and
          who gets the discharge instructions?  The
          patients.  Instructions on discharge to the
          patient.  Remember, Levine didn't even dictate
          his discharge note until she was out of the
          hospital.
                So Levine didn't show her his discharge
          note.  But there's a discharge instruction, and
          everybody knows the patient gets the discharge
          instruction, here it is.  Diagnosis, asthmatic
          bronchitis, signed off by the physician.
          That's what she was diagnosed with.
                Here are all the medications for the
          condition she was diagnosed with:  Proventil,
          Zantac, Theodore, Proventil inhaler, Ceftin,
          Thyrolar, and the instructions how to take it,
          discharge instructions.
                Now, that is what we call objective
          evidence.  Not assumptions, not speculation,
          not cross-examination where you put words in a
          doctor's mouth 20 years later.
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection.
                MR. S. DAVIS:  Objection.
                THE COURT:  Sustained, sustained, keep
          moving forward.
                MR. T. DAVIS:  Curative.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Or will you refer a
          doctor to a note that is supposedly from
          January 22 that's really from late April, early
          May.
                Now let me show you what -- you may be
          saying -- I know what you're saying --
                MR. PERSONS:  Same objection.
                THE COURT:  Reserve on that motion.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  You may be saying,
          Well, Mr. Schlesinger, that's very clever.
          You're a very clever lawyer.  How do I know --
                MR. PERSONS:  Objection on the
          commentary.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Sorry.
                THE COURT:  Sustained on the commentary. 24
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Sorry about that.
                If you have any concern or doubt as to
          this discharge instruction, you can say, Well,
          okay, it's in the record.  But I'm challenging
          the fact that there's no evidence that anybody
          told Helen about this condition.  So how do I
          know she got it?
                Put up Bates 21057.
                MR. GDANSKI:  1644.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  What is this?  This is
          a nurse's assessment intervention teaching
          plan, 6 a.m.  Getting ready to get out of the
          hospital.  We've handled your bronchitis, the
          antibiotic IVs have taken hold.  You're good
          enough to be discharged.  And what does it say
          here?  I'm left-handed.
                Discharged with instruction via
          wheelchair in satisfactory condition.
                Now, you've heard the word records
          custodian, you've heard the term chain of
          custody.  I have just established for you
          proof, reasonable proof, likely proof, good
          enough to meet a burden of proof that they did
          not meet that this woman got in her hands, in
          her lap, in the wheelchair, wheeled out of the
          hospital the discharge instructions which told
          her what she needed to know about what was
          wrong with her, and she was told she had
          asthmatic bronchitis.
                And she never reported it to another
          subsequent physician, including Dr. Greene, who
          I told you about before.  When she saw
          Dr. Greene four years later, she went in, she
          reported she had asthmatic bronchitis.
                He said what do you have, Mrs. Cohen, who
          is coming to me, Dr. Greene, the pulmonologist,
          the lung doctor, because you aren't able to
          walk the two miles a day you've been walking
          for the last couple of years, past medical
          history, the questions you ask the patient,
          they ask the patient the questions.
                Answer the questions:  Past medical
          history is positive for hypothyroidism, did not
          get an answer from her that she had that
          condition.
                But if you go to -- now remember, this --
          the journey with COPD for poor Helen Cohen, the
          COPD she got from the cigarettes she smoked
          because of the addiction she had to the
          nicotine in cigarettes began in 1994.  That's when she knew about it.
                When she went back to Dr. Wasserman in
          1992, and he said:  Haven't seen you in two
          years, I lost you to follow up.  What are you
          doing here?
                I'm back for a checkup.
                What did she report to Dr. Wasserman?
          She reported to Dr. Wasserman that she had
          asthmatic bronchitis, past medical history,
          asthma.  She didn't say past medical history,
          COPD.
                Now, after 1994, on October 8th of '97.
                Do we have that note?
                MR. GDANSKI:  From Dr. Wasserman?
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Record on that.
                MR. GDANSKI:  This is Wasserman.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  So February 14, '92.
          She comes back, she has a past medical history.
          Right?
                How do you get a past medical history?
          What is Helen's awareness?  What does Helen
          know?  What has Helen -- Helen is telling us in
          this document what she said.  To Dr. Wasserman.
                What have you got, Helen?
                I've got asthmatic bronchitis,
          hypothyroidism.  Gastroesophageal reflux
          secondary to a hiatal hernia.  Fibroid uterus.
          So on and so forth.
                And even if Dr. Wasserman -- did he
          mention COPD in there somewhere?
                MR. GDANSKI:  He did.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  We don't need to get
          there.  I want you to be complete.  I'm not
          trying to hide anything from you.  But I'm
          trying to show you that here, this is what she
          knew she had in '92.
                Once Dr. Greene did the tests, the
          medical tests, the spirometry in his office,
          the pulmonary function test, which is the
          diagnostic test that diagnosed COPD, he gave
          her that diagnosis, then she knew she had the
          diagnosis, and she believed she had the
          diagnosis.
                Put up October 8th of '97, please.  Do
          you have it?  The rheumatologist note.
                October 8th, '97.  The rheumatologist
          note, please.  Do you have it?
                THE CLERK:  Counsel, you have five
          minutes.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Is that the 25
          rheumatologist note?
                VIDEO TECHNICIAN:  Yes.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Look at past medical
          history.  Helen is living her life.  She now
          knows she has COPD.  And in the past medical
          history, when she goes to a rheumatologist for
          aching joints, a completely unrelated matter
          and he says to her, what have you had?  What
          does she say?  She says COPD.  And there are
          subsequent records that repeat that.
                Because question 2, which should be
          answered no, right?
                MR. GDANSKI:  No.  No.
                MR. SCHLESINGER:  Which should be
          answered no, because you will find that it's
          the truth that the evidence bears out, is did
          Helen have awareness?
                And her awareness is documented in an
          objective fashion with a discharge instruction
          back at the time.  And the note that
          corroborates it is put in her hand, a chain of
          custody in her hand.
                And then it wasn't until Dr. Greene, in
          his note, and please read it, March 10, '94,
          lays it all out and says, I've got to test this
          woman.  She's not breathing so well.  She
          hasn't been able to walk her usual two miles.
          Let's see what she's got.
                He does a spirometry.  How high can you
          push that little ball up on the little blowy
          thing in the cylinder.  Wow, it's not going up
          high enough.  Looks like it could be chronic
          obstructive pulmonary disease.  That's a
          medical test.  It gives him a hint, it gives
          him a reason to want to test further.
                So he does.  He sends her for proper
          diagnostic pulmonary function studies, just
          like Dr. Dudley said was required.  That's what
          you get.  The patient is going to have complete
          pulmonary function testing to see if she has
          emphysema or not.
                That's the actual facts and best evidence
          and most believable, legitimate, meritorious
          evidence in the case.  Especially if it's based
          on what did Helen know.
                Helen told you what she knew in her past
          medical histories.  It's the obligation of the
          physician to take that down.  Just because the
          terms appeared in the record of Wasserman does
          not mean that Helen knew.  And she didn't know. And the discharge demonstrates she didn't know.
          Here is her discharge.  Asthmatic bronchitis.
                So the last thing I want to read to you
          is this because I'm out of time, and I can go
          for nine hours and you guys would not like
          that.  So I won't do that.
                George Orwell, 1949 -- 1949 wrote:  You
          must stop imagining that posterity will
          vindicate you, Winston.
                The movie, 1984, of the book, the book is
          a classic.  The movie 1984 was Richard Burton
          and John Hurt.  And Richard Burton, when he
          said this part of the book that I'm going to
          read, was leaning over John Hurt, and these are
          two masterful actors.  And Richard Burton's
          voice rings in my ears as I say these words,
          and I couldn't say them like he did.  But this
          is what he said.
                You must stop imagining that posterity
          will vindicate you, Winston.  Posterity will
          never hear of you.  You will be lifted clean
          out from the stream of history.  We shall turn
          you into a gas and pour you into the
          stratosphere.  Nothing will remain of you, not
          a name in a register, not a memory in a living
          brain.  You will be annihilated in the past, as
          well as in the future.  You will never have
          existed.
                When you take this solemn journey into
          the jury room, at which time nobody can tell
          you what to do except your six collaborative
          selves doing what you think is right, think
          about Helen Cohen and determine if in your
          verdict she deserves for posterity to remember
          her.
                Thank you.
