MR.  ALVAREZ:  May  it  please  Your  Honor  and  the 
Court,  Counsel,  Mr.  Crawford. 
I'll  be  very  brief;  less  than  15  minutes. 
But 
and  I  think  the  reason  for  my  brevity  is 
that  I  think  you've  heard  the  evidence. 
I  think 
you  know  what  this  case  is  about. 
I  think  I  don't 
have  to  convince  you  of  anything. 
You  have  seen I the  compelling  evidence  In  this  case,  and  you've 
spoken  by  your  Phase  I  verdict  that  punitive 
damages  are  warranted  in  this  case.  And  that's  why 
Page 2599 
we're  here. 
Let  me  just  tell  you,  first  of  all,  the  Judge 
read  you  some  instructions.  But  some  of  the  things 
that  are  most  important  that  I  would  like  to  talk 
to  you  about  is  that  in  determining  the  amount  of 
punitive  damages  to  be  awarded  against  Reynolds,  if 
any,  you  may  punish  Reynolds  only  for  the  injury 
caused  to  William  Crawford  by  the  specific  conduct 
of  Reynolds  that  was  the  basis  for  your  finding 
that  Reynolds  is  liable  to  William  Crawford  on  his 
claim  involving  concealment  or  conspiracy  to 
conceal. 
And  that's  important,  because  what  we  want, 
and  the  only  thing  we  want,  lS  you  to  punish  that 
company  for  what  they  did  to  that  man.  And  that's 
what  we  want  you  to  consider.  That  and  only  that. 
And  the  reason  they  need  to  be  punished  lS, 
this  lS  a  deterrent  for  others  so  they  don't  act 
this  way.  We  cannot  allow  other  companies  to  act 
this  way.  Your  verdict  is  a  deterrent  to  other 
companles  acting  this  way. 
If  you  don't  deter 
them,  no  one  will. 
If  its  not  now,  when? 2600 
The  purpose  of  Dr.  Figlar  -- part  of  the 
purpose  of  Dr.  Figlar  was  to  tell  you,  or  try  to 
conVlnce  you,  that  they  are  a  changed  company. 
That  somehow  they're  changed.  That  we're  not  the 
same  people.  We're  not  those  old  men  that  used  to 
say  those  things  anymore.  We  are  different. 
That 
was  the  purpose  of  Dr.  Figlar. 
There's  two  things  with  that:  Number  one,  it 
doesn't  matter. 
It  doesn't  matter,  because  you 
have  the  right  to  punish  them  for  what  they  did  to 
this  man.  Whether  they're  changed  now  or  not,  you 
still  have  the  right  to  punish  them. 
But  I  will  submit  to  you  that  they  are  not 
changed.  That  they  have  never  changed. 
And  what  they  call  youth  smokers  are  nothing 
more  than  the  replacement  smokers  that  they  talk 
about.  When  you  hear  the  words  "replacement 
smokers,"  all  they're  talking  about  are  teenagers. 
And  that  document  that  we  saw  that  said, 
"Well,  that  as  a  mistake.  Oh,  no,  it  was  really  18 
to  24."  Well,  was  this  one  a  mistake  when  it 
showed  that  they  were  talking  about  teenagers?  Was 
this  a  mistake  when  they  were  talking  about  12- to 
17-year-old  kids?  Was  this  a  mistake  in  1990  when 
they  wrote  to  a  middle  school  principal  and  said 2601 
that  smoking  -- they  didn't  know  that  smoking 
caused  cancer?  Was  that  a  mistake  too? 
There's  nothing  changed  about  these  people. 
They  changed  nothing.  They  had  one  thing,  and  one 
thing  in  mind  is  to  peddle  their  product,  addict  as 
many  people  as  possible  so  they  can  make  more 
profits.  That's  it.  That's  all  they  cared  about. 
They  don't  care  about  William  Crawford. 
This  whole  thing  about  the  discounts,  why 
would  they  discount  a  dollar  off  a  pack  of 
cigarettes  if  they're  only  making  40-cents  on  it? 
Why  would  they  do  that?  They  do  that  because  they 
know  they're  selling  a  highly  addictive  product. 
And  if  they  get  our  kids  hooked,  they'll  have  them 
as  lifelong  customers. 
So  they'll  know,  if  we  pay 
now,  they'll  pay  later.  And  that's  the  whole 
purpose  behind  that  scheme,  that  conspiracy,  that 
lasted  until  the  year  2000. 
And  when  we  pressed  Dr.  Figlar  here,  he  still 
could  not  admit  that  addiction  caused  disease. 
This  is  now  2013.  This  isn't  1954.  This  is  2013, 
and  they  still  can't  admit  that  addiction  causes 
disease. 
And  you've  got  to  question,  why  is  it  that  In 
a  case  where  we're  claiming  that  they  committed 2602 
fraud  and  a  consplracy  to  defraud  the  public,  why 
would  they  bring  a  scientist  instead  of  a  market 
guy?  Somebody  from  -- they  bring  a  scientist  who 
will  bring  out  all  of  these  advertisements  and  say, 
"well,  aren't  you  the  marketing  -- I  don't  know. 
I 
don't  see  it. 
I  don't  remember. 
I  don't  know." 
They  made  it  seem  like  they're 
they 
embraced  the  FDA.  They  embraced  it. 
Look,  they  say  know  now  that  they  embraced  the 
Surgeon  General.  They  have  it  on  their  website. 
They  say  now  that  they  embrace  the  warnings  on 
their  labels.  They  say  now  that  they  embrace  the 
Master  Settlement  Agreement.  When  the  reality  lS, 
they  went  kicking  and  screaming  every  --
MR.  BELASIC:  Objection;  no  evidence  for  this, 
Your  Honor. 
THE  COURT:  Sustained. 
MR.  ALVAREZ: 
It  reminds  me  of  a  saylng:  The 
wolf 
was  sick.  He  vowed  a  month  to  be.  But  when 
the  wolf  got  well,  a  wolf  once  agaln  was  he. 
This  verdict  form  has  one  question,  and  one 
question  only:  How  much  to  punish  R.J.  Reynolds? 
And  we  could  probably  ask  for  five  or  ten  times  the 
compensatory  damages  award,  but  we're 
not  gOlng  to 
do  that.  We're  not  going  to  do  that. 
We're  going 2603 
to  do  -- what  we're  gOlng  to  ask  you  for  lS  a  very 
reasonable  amount  in  light  of  the  evidence  and  the 
punishment  to  deter  other  corporations  from  acting 
this  way.  And  we  think  three  times  the 
compensatory,  three  times  the  $9  million  for 
$27  million,  lS  a  fair  and  reasonable  amount. 
On  behalf  of  Bill  Crawford,  we  want  to  thank 
you  for  you  deliberate,  conscientious  deliberation 
and  verdict. 
Six  people  came  together  that  didn't  know  each 
other,  sat  here  for  over  two  weeks  and  decided  a 
very  difficult  case.  And  we  want  to  thank  you  very 
much  for  your  verdict. 


