           CLOSING ARGUMENT BY THE DEFENDANT
          MR. BELASIC:  Good morning, ladies and
     gentlemen.  Thanks for being here so long.  As
     Mr. Rosenblum said, I know two weeks -- it wasn't
     exactly volunteer when you came in.  You were
     drafted.  Thanks for performing your civic duty;
     not just to the system in general, but to
     Mr. Crawford and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          You know, Mr. Alvarez just told you just like
     he told you in opening statement, he said that his
     client, Mr. Crawford, believed the tobacco
     companies and didn't think that smoking was
     dangerous until 1989.  So let's make no mistake
     about it.  What he's telling you is this man, until
     he was 54, didn't think smoking was dangerous.
          You remember you heard that there are two
     sides, sometimes more, to every story.  There is
     two sides to every testimony.  There's the time
     when the lawyer asks you questions.  Mr. Crawford
     gets up there.  Mr. Alvarez asks him, "Were you
     deceived?  Were you defrauded?"  He showed you what
     he said.
          But then there is cross-examination, the great 2029 engine of truth in our system.  Everyone is allowed
     and required to be subjected to cross-examination.
          I think you remember, and I'm going to show
     you, Mr. Crawford said flat out that decades, years
     before he got cancer, years before he quit, that he
     knew and he personally believed that smoking was
     dangerous and that it could cause cancer in him.
          Let's look at what he said.  That is his
     testimony when I asked him:  "You saw the Surgeon
     General's 1970 warning, 'Smoking is dangerous.'  so
     you knew was dangerous to your health?
          And he answered "Yes."
          I saw a lot of you write that down when he
     made that admission in the trial.  That is not what
     Mr. Alvarez said this case was going to be about in
     opening, and that is not what Mr. Crawford
     testified when he answered questions.
          In 1970, he knew.  He wasn't believing some
     statement that we know he never heard.  He wasn't
     believing something that Dr. Proctor came in and
     showed you that Mr. Crawford never heard.  He
     believed and a he knew it was dangerous to his
     health 22 years before he ever got cancer, and he
     chose to smoke after that, just like he chose to
     quit. 2030 But it was a lot more significant.  He said he
     personally, personally believed -- again, we're
     talking two decades before he got his cancer -- he
     personally thought he could get cancer from
     smoking.
          And remember what he did?  He bought cancer
     insurance.  Twenty years.  They're claiming he's
     defrauded.  How could you be defrauded about
     something you said under oath you believed?  How
     could you be defrauded about something that you
     went out and bought insurance for?
          I know his explanation.  He says, "Well, my
     wife had cancer in her family, so I bought that
     policy."
          You know what?  He didn't buy that policy just
     for her.  He said he bought that policy for himself
     as well.  He didn't have cancer in his family.
     That was heart disease was in his family.  He
     bought it because he knew, he believed that smoking
     caused cancer 20 years before he got sick.  He
     believed it.  He went out and bought insurance for
     it.
          Now, any statement from now on that suggests
     that this man was defrauded, that he was defrauded
     in the '70s, that he was defrauded after 1982, that 2031 was his sworn testimony, ladies and gentlemen.
     There is no dispute about that because that's what
     Mr. Crawford said.
          Mr. Rosenblum got up and said, "you know, the
     defendant never brought a doctor to say for sure
     that smoking didn't cause his larynx cancer."
     That's true.  They brought in someone who had never
     treated him and had never met Mr. Crawford and,
     we're going to show, didn't even look at his
     medical records, ladies and gentlemen.
          But let's turn the tables because what
     Mr. Rosenblum says is a fair point.  Let's turn the
     tables on them.
          Where are Mr. Crawford's doctors?  He's
     78 years old.  He was diagnosed 20 years ago.
     Everyone agrees there is a box full of medical
     records that are hundreds or perhaps over a
     thousand pages long.  You can look at every one of
     them, and you will see dozens and dozens of
     doctors.  Not one of his doctors ever diagnosed him
     as addicted.
          I asked Mr. Crawford that.  He said no, none
     of his doctors ever told him he was addicted.  But
     yet, I asked him, every time you see a doctor, they
     ask you about smoking, and they ask you about 2032 drinking, and they ask you about diet.
          Now, who knows him best?  A doctor from
     Baltimore that read the deposition, who never even
     met him and didn't even look at the medical
     records, or his own doctors, dozens of them?
          Where is that doctor?  Don't you think that if
     there was a doctor who had found him addicted, it
     would be in the medical records?
          We just pull out a piece of paper.  There it
     is.  Dr. Smith says he's addicted.  It's not there,
     and they don't call any of them.
          Same thing about the causes of his cancer.
     Think of all of the doctors he's had from the time
     he was diagnosed to the time he was treated to the
     time he had his surgery.  We know the doctors did
     pathology testing.  Did they take a biopsy?  Not
     one of those doctors ever concluded that smoking
     caused his cancer.  And in all of those medical
     records, there is not a sheet of paper that says
     smoking caused his cancer.
          And I'm going submit to you -- you'll decide
     for yourself -- that's why they had to go to
     Baltimore and find a man that had never met him
     because none of his doctors support that.  And you
     heard that from Mr. Crawford.  Not one of his 2033 doctors think he's addicted.  There is no evidence
     that any of his doctors found that his smoking was
     caused by cancer [sic].
          Now, the evidence in this case is that
     Mr. Crawford was a willing smoker.  And by
     "willing," I mean there is no dispute that he
     enjoyed smoking, and he told you that.  You saw all
     of the reasons that are in the medical records,
     there are all of the reasons that are in the
     depositions that he enjoyed smoking.
          But he wasn't just a willing smoker because he
     liked it.  He was a willing smoker because no one,
     and certainly not R.J. Reynolds, forced him to
     smoke.
          What do we know about his starting?
          The first thing he told me is that he didn't
     start because of advertising.  All those old ads
     that they showed to get you mad, Mr. Crawford said
     those didn't cause him to start smoking.  He said
     it was his brother.  He said the only person who
     was responsible for him starting was his brother.
     So he doesn't sue his brother, but he's going to
     sue a company with money.  But he admits that none
     of those advertisements caused him to start.
          Well, now think about the next step.  When he 2034 was 16, he said he started -- he became a regular
     smoker.  And he doesn't even claim that
     R.J. Reynolds caused him to become a regular
     smoker.  He doesn't even claim it was advertising.
     He says the only reason is that his mother began
     buying him cigarettes.
          And if you'll think back, I asked him straight
     out:  "Isn't it true that the simple reason you
     became a regular smoker is that your mother started
     buying you cigarettes?"
          And he said that's not true.  And that was the
     first of many, many times, you'll remember, ladies
     and gentlemen, I had to pull out his sworn
     testimony from last year because he's testified
     before trial under oath like all of the other
     witnesses.  And I had to put that up on the screen,
     and you saw what he said last year before trial.
     And he said "yes, he started becoming a regular
     smoker for the simple reason that his mother bought
     cigarettes."
          Now, they want to talk about lies.  They want
     to use smear words, et cetera.  They want to
     attack.  They want to say every disagreement of
     opinion between a tobacco company and the
     Surgeon General is a blatant lie. 2035 You're going to decide the credibility of
     every witness, including Mr. Crawford.  And you saw
     example after example.  I only asked him questions,
     I think, for about an hour and 20 minutes, yet how
     many times did I have to put up his testimony that
     he had given a year ago to show that he had said
     something that was the exact opposite of what he
     was saying today?
          Like when he said, "Oh, I believed the
     companies.  I didn't think it was dangerous," and
     then he admits now for 20 years, he believed it
     could cause cancer; when he says, "No, it wasn't my
     mom," and it was his mom.
          That's his testimony.  No one is tricking him.
     All we're doing is showing the man his sworn
     testimony.
          Now, plaintiffs say he smoked because he was
     deceived or we concealed something.  You saw that
     for 20 years, he continued to smoke even though he
     believed he could get cancer to the point he was
     going out and buying a cancer insurance policy.
          But consider this:  The most important
     evidence that would tell you whether a person has
     been defrauded, when he quit, when he changed his
     mind and decided he would quit, you heard 2036 Dr. Samuel say that he told him that he had decided
     about a year out that on December 31, '89, he would
     smoke his last cigarette and that he planned to
     spend the year tapering down.  And he did exactly
     that; that he made a plan.  December 31, '89, was
     the target date, and he met it.
          Now, did he suddenly start smoking because he
     learned what Mr. Alvarez says is the truth?  Or
     that he found out some new information and he said,
     "oh, no, I didn't know?"  No.  He admits, there was
     no new information that caused him to smoke.  It
     wasn't a change in cigarettes.  It wasn't a change
     in information.  What he changed was his mind.
          Now, think of a normal case of fraud.  What
     happens is, you find out the truth, and you say,
     "Wait second.  Now that I know, I'm going to change
     my behavior" or "now that I know, I'm going to try
     to give that car back to the dealer.  It's a lemon,
     they didn't tell me."
          That's not what happened to him.  He said it
     wasn't any new information, and of course it wasn't
     because for 20 years he thought he could get lung
     cancer.  And for at least 20 years, he said under
     oath he knew it could be dangerous.  So this idea
     that he heard something that was never identified, 2037 it's not right.  It's not correct.  And it's not
     true because Mr. Crawford said it wasn't true when
     I asked him.
          You've seen this many times, and we all know
     that these are Mr. Crawford's own words.  He quit
     because he just decided that it was time to quit.
     As Mr. Alvarez said, he was getting older, and he
     decided it was time to quit.  Not that he suddenly
     learned the truth.  He had known for decades,
     believed for decades that it was dangerous and
     could cause cancer in him.  He said he really,
     really wanted to quit.
          Why is that important?  Because he said that's
     when he finally made up his mind.  Look at the word
     "finally."  This is his words, not ours.  He
     finally made up his mind, meaning before then, as
     we heard, he wasn't motivated.  He didn't want to
     quit.  He saw the Surgeon General's warning and
     believed it, and he chose not to stop.  He was
     warned by his family.  He knew and believed he
     could get cancer, but he didn't make up his mind to
     quit until 1989.  And nothing that R.J. Reynolds
     did prevented him from making up his mind before
     because he knew and believed it could cause cancer.
          Now, they talked about family.  Okay?  He has 2038 a wife and two children.  Now, of his family, the
     only family member that they called was his
     daughter.  Did his daughter corroborate or back up
     his story?  Look what she says.
          She is not aware that he ever tried to quit
     before January 1990.  You judge her testimony.
     There is no reason for her to try to hurt her
     father's case.  She's telling the truth there.  He
     didn't try to stop before January 1990.  We heard
     he made a plan, he would spend a year tapering down
     and quit on December 31, 1989.  That's what he did.
          I'm going to talk to you about the evidence
     and the warnings, but I've already shown you in his
     own words what he knew and believed for decades
     before he developed cancer, before he quit.  There
     were warnings all around him, on the packs, in the
     TV, in the magazines.  He was warned but a
     coworker.  We know what he believed.
          He told me way back in the day, he had heard
     "coffin nail."  He had heard "cancer stick."  He
     had heard "nicotine fix."  That was before all of
     the technical publications were coming out, and he
     thought "cancer stick" -- he knew it meant that
     that cigarette, that "cancer stick" he was buying
     could cause cancer. 2039 He told us in the '50s, he knew there was bad
     stuff in cigarette smoke.  Now, I heard what he
     said about filters.  We're going to look at exactly
     the evidence on filters and exactly what he said
     about filters.
          He knew the Surgeon General thought that
     smoking was unsafe.  He never told you that he
     didn't believe the Surgeon General.  He knew.  And
     get this:  His daughter said that in '65 or '66, he
     smoked around her so much she was getting
     bronchitis, and there was a family discussion that
     cigarette smoke from his cigarette was causing lung
     injuries or lung problems in his daughter.
          Now, ladies and gentlemen, that is 26 years
     before he developed cancer.  He knew.  He knew then
     it could hurt the lungs.  It was hurting his
     daughter's lungs, and he chose not to make even an
     effort to quit.
          We know he read the 1966 warnings, and we know
     millions of people quit after those warnings.  He
     chose not to.  Look what his own daughter said.
          Again, don't believe me.  Look at what he said
     and what the evidence is.
          His own daughter says that the 1966 warning on
     every pack he bought didn't tell her father 2040 anything he didn't already know.  That's his
     daughter.  I mean, what possible reason is there to
     not believe that?  So the only family member they
     called doesn't back up his story.  And his wife,
     who lived with him from the age of 17, who is still
     living with him and would have had firsthand
     knowledge, she didn't testify.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.  They have the
     same ability to call the witness.
          I withdraw that.  Go ahead.
          MR. BELASIC:  They talk about family.  All
     they call is his daughter.
          Now, you saw the list of depositions of all of
     the people who testified.  None of them were
     called.  It's just the daughter, and she doesn't
     back up her father.  He knew in '66 these things.
     That's 26 years before he got cancer.
          We know he said he was sure he saw the '70s
     warning.  And that's when I asked him:  "You saw
     it, you knew it was dangerous to your health in
     1970?"
          He said simply, "Yes."
          We know that it wasn't just generic.  Oh, it
     could be dangerous.  I don't know what that means.
     No, he was already thinking, 20 years before, that 2041 he could get cancer.  And that's why we know he
     made that dramatic decision.  He bought cancer
     insurance, not just for his wife, but he bought
     cancer insurance 20 years before he got it.  He
     knew.
          You didn't hear this:  He was personally
     warned from the plaintiff, he was personally warned
     by his coworker -- and Dr. Samuel told you about
     that -- he was personally warned, and he didn't
     change his mind.  We know he bought that cancer
     insurance.  And years later, he saw this warning
     that couldn't have been more specific.
          And did he tell you, well, in 1985 he had
     known about cancer for many years; that he changed
     his smoking behavior?
          No.  He didn't.
          And when you talk about concealment, you can't
     conceal something that somebody already knows.  You
     can't hide something that somebody already knows.
     He knew and believed that smoking could be
     dangerous, and it could cause cancer.  That wasn't
     hidden from him.  We'll see later it wasn't hidden
     from the public.  But it wasn't hidden from him.
          And his own daughter says that when that
     warning came on the pack, 25 years before he got 2042 cancer, he already knew.  That's his daughter.
          I talked to you about why this case is about
     choice, control, and responsibility.  And we're
     going to look at his choice.
          But when it comes to control, there isn't any
     evidence in this case that R.J. Reynolds forced him
     to smoke or that R.J. Reynolds could have made him
     quit because in the end, the only time he ever
     stopped, nothing changed at R.J. Reynolds.  No new
     information.  100 percent of the reason that he
     stopped smoking was his decision, and he agreed
     with me:  Reynolds' information didn't change.  The
     cigarettes didn't change.  The only thing that
     changed was his mind.  He had that control.
          And there isn't a dispute that he could have
     quit because you saw that they admit and
     Judge Dresnick has instructed you that they admit
     that because he didn't quit earlier, it was a
     partial cause of his injury.
          You'll see in the instructions that the Judge
     granted summary judgment in favor of R.J. Reynolds
     on that issue.
          You heard a lot about the Engle findings.  And
     what Mr. Alvarez does is say that they are the law
     of the case.  Well, you heard that there was a 2043 class action trial and another jury made findings.
     Here is the Judge's instructions.  But remember,
     you're the jury in this case, and all of the
     questions on the verdict form in this case are
     about Mr. Crawford.  Mr. Crawford has never had his
     trial.  This is it.  You're the ones who decide.
          Look what the Judge tells you:  The findings,
     these findings that Mr. Alvarez plays up, they
     don't establish that Reynolds is liable in this
     case -- that's Judge Dresnick -- nor do they
     establish that Mr. Crawford was injured.  And they
     don't establish the degree of which Reynolds'
     conduct was a legal cause.
          All of those things are for you to decide.
     And those findings from the other jury, they don't
     make Mr. Crawford the winner in this case.  They
     don't hold R.J. Reynolds liable.  He has the burden
     of proof.
          I talked about that burden of proof, and
     you're going to see on the verdict form a series of
     questions.  I'm going to go through each of those
     questions with you.  But in general, the first
     three questions that you're going to see is whether
     or not they proved that smoking was the cause of
     his laryngeal cancer, and the second one is whether 2044 he was addicted, and the third one is whether
     addiction was a legal cause.  I want to concentrate
     on the third one for now.
          Now, it's not enough for them to say smoking
     is the reason he got cancer, and it's not enough
     for them to throw out that little checklist for you
     on addiction and say if you add up the points, they
     claim that means addiction.
          This is what they have to prove:  Whatever
     addiction is -- and we're going to show the
     evidence proves he was not -- that he didn't meet
     the real definition of addiction -- but addiction
     had to have been a legal cause, not just smoking.
          Even if they're right, that smoking was the
     cause, the Judge is instructing you and the verdict
     form tells you that addiction has to be a legal
     cause and not his choice to continue.
          Do you remember when I showed this chart to
     Mr. Crawford and I wrote down these things?  He
     quit the first time he wanted -- he really wanted
     to, decided it was time to quit.  He finally made
     up his mind to quit.  And he didn't change his
     brands.  He didn't change anything in terms of his
     information and nothing that Reynolds said changed.
          And suddenly, on December 31, '89 to 2045 January 1, 1990, he's no longer smoking.  Well,
     ladies and gentlemen, how is addiction causing his
     disease, then?  How is addiction even causing him
     to smoke?  Because suddenly, he doesn't smoke.
          And he admits, well, on that day, addiction
     didn't cause me to smoke because he didn't smoke.
     And then the next day, addiction didn't cause him
     to smoke and the next day.  And for the next 23
     years, the next 8,000 days, addiction didn't cause
     him to smoke.
          Now, let's say for a second that you accept
     this checklist that they give you where you do a
     point score, and you find that he's addicted.  Does
     that mean that that caused his disease; that that
     caused him to smoke?  Because he agreed that once
     he changed his mind, which is the only thing that
     mattered, addiction suddenly no longer caused him
     to smoke.  That's the strongest possible evidence
     from the plaintiff's own mouth that addiction isn't
     the cause of his smoking, even if his cigarettes
     was.  And it's Judge Dresnick and the verdict form
     that tells you they have to prove that.
          Addiction wasn't the cause of his disease
     because as soon as he changed his mind, whatever
     they say the effect of addiction was, it vanished. 2046 And let me give you an analogy, something that
     we all do, and that's drive.  I'm driving in a car,
     and somebody smashes into me.  I don't see them.
     That guy and that car are the direct cause of my
     injury.  There is no way as I'm driving along I can
     change my mind and say "I don't want to get in an
     accident today.  No.  I don't have any power over
     whether this guy smashes into me."
          Or someone is walking on the street, and three
     stories up, they're putting in an old-fashioned
     window air-conditioning unit.  The workers are
     negligent, and it falls out the window, and it
     smashes that person on the head.  That is the
     direct cause of their injury, ladies and gentlemen.
     That person walking down the street can't just say,
     "I'll change my mind.  I won't get injured today.
     I will just prevent the injury."  No, of course
     not.
          The direct cause in those cases is the person
     who injured them.  But here, according to
     Mr. Crawford, once he changed his mind -- or once
     he finally made up his mind is what he said --
     suddenly, addiction had no power, and suddenly
     addiction didn't cause him to smoke.
          It's a very strange argument that they're 2047 saying addiction is some force that caused him to
     get a disease when he could just change his mind
     and stop smoking.  They say, "well, it wasn't
     easy," or "it was hard."  But we're not talking
     about that now.  Was it the cause?  The only thing
     that changed was his mind.  If he was addicted, the
     addiction didn't change.
          So what ended up causing his disease, if
     they're right, was his smoking.  But addiction
     wasn't the legal cause because he stopped when he
     wanted to.
          You're going to see the Judge's instruction,
     and it's going to talk about three factors.  What
     is legal cause:  A direct cause, a continuous
     cause, and a substantial cause?
          You've seen, as Mr. Crawford admitted, once he
     chose to quit, he never relapsed, and addiction
     wasn't a direct cause of his smoking.  There is no
     dispute in this case, and they admit he could have
     quit earlier.  Could have quit earlier.
          They can talk about he meets some definition
     or checklist of addiction all they want, but this
     doesn't change the evidence and the undisputed fact
     that he could have quit earlier.
          And even if he quit in '89, he could have quit 2048 in '79, or he could have quit '70 when he believed
     the warning, and '74 when he bought cancer
     insurance, and '66 when he saw the warning, and
     '65 when he knew it could cause bronchitis, and in
     the '50s when he read about it.
          They don't dispute he could have done that.
     Addiction is not a direct cause.  It's not like
     someone smashing into your car or dropping
     something on your head.  His choice, his mind is
     what prevented what he claims addiction from having
     any effect on him.  For the same reason, there is
     no way it could be a continuous or substantial
     cause.
          In the end, there was a 100 percent change in
     his smoking from a pack a day to zero, and it was
     100 percent because he made up his mind, and he
     took his own actions.  There was no change in
     anything else.  That was 100 percent of the reason
     he quit.
          Now, I've talked about this before, and
     Mr. Rosenblum raised it.  And they had this slide
     where they said, you know, none of -- Reynolds
     won't be calling anyone who says laryngeal cancer
     was not caused by smoking.  I already told you
     turnabout is fair play. 2049 Look at this.  None of their experts testified
     that Mr. Crawford was addicted.  And think who they
     called.  Dr. Proctor is not a medical doctor.  He
     is a professor of history; didn't know much, if
     anything, about Mr. Crawford, and told you flat out
     that after a day of showing all of these ads, that
     he had no opinion, no opinion, whether Mr. Crawford
     ever relied on any of it.
          So the first day or actually about two days of
     testimony in this case was from a man that doesn't
     have an opinion on Mr. Crawford.  He's a history
     professor.  He didn't testify on anything about
     addiction.
          Then they called Jack Henningfield, and
     there's a "Doctor" in front of his name because he
     has a Ph.D.  But he's not a medical doctor.  So
     another guy who is not a medical doctor.  And he
     has never heard of Mr. Crawford.  His testimony on
     videotape was four and a half years old.
     January 2009, Mr. Alvarez introduced it.  He never
     heard of Mr. Crawford.  He never saw Mr. Crawford.
     He doesn't know anything about Mr. Crawford.  He
     didn't read the testimony, and he sure as heck did
     not examine him.  He's not a medical doctor.  He
     doesn't diagnose people for a living. 2050 And then you've got Dr. Califano, who is a
     medical doctor, but he's testifying only about
     whether smoking was the cause.  Dr. Califano didn't
     say anything about whether addiction was the cause.
     And in fact -- and you saw this when they just put
     up their slide, Mr. Alvarez did -- Mr. Alvarez had
     to tell him, "Dr. Califano, I'm going ask you to
     assume that Mr. Crawford was addicted.  I'm going
     to ask you to assume that that addiction caused him
     to smoke."
          And then he said, "well, based on that,"
     ladies and gentlemen, plaintiffs have the burden of
     proof.  They don't get to assume their way to a
     checklist on a form that is entirely about
     Mr. Crawford and not about R.J. Reynolds.
          They didn't bring one single expert to say
     that he's way addicted, and this is an addiction
     case.
          Now, I've talked about his doctors, but this
     is what Mr. Crawford admitted:  None of his doctors
     told him he was addicted.  And we can go through
     every single piece of paper in that box, and none
     of his doctors ever did.  And not one of his
     doctors, not one of his doctors was called.
          So when plaintiffs set a standard, frankly, 2051 Mr. Rosenblum got up on the high horse and he said,
     "look, Reynolds didn't bring a doctor on laryngeal
     cancer."
          Turnabout is fair play.  They didn't prove
     addiction in an addiction case.  They have an old
     videotape of a man who is not a medical doctor, who
     says he's not using the official definition, and
     then they want you to play doctor and do this
     checklist when none of his own doctors ever found
     that he was addicted.
          Mr. Crawford had the opportunity to show you
     the whole instruction.  And I saw it from a
     distance, and you saw it up close, and I saw your
     expressions.  And your expressions were exactly
     like any human being would react to that type of
     injury.
          But you promised and agreed that you would put
     aside your sympathy in this case and that you would
     follow the Court's instructions, which include the
     fact that Mr. Crawford has the burden of proof.  He
     doesn't get to assume, and they don't get to say
     that he was sick or injured and that that's the
     substitute for proof.  No one came in here and said
     he was addicted.  None of his own doctors ever said
     he was ever addicted. 2052 Now, Mr. Crawford hasn't disputed this.  And
     we saw some of his own testimony, and then
     Dr. Samuel, who actually examined him and knew all
     of the information about him.
          He smoked for a whole bunch of reasons that
     had nothing to do with nicotine.  It helped him
     relax and made him less nervous.  Dr. Samuel said
     it could help him concentrate.  He liked to smoke
     after meals with coffee, when he was having a
     drink.  It even helped his stomachaches that he had
     had for the last 50 years.  So there is a whole
     bunch of reasons, and there is no dispute on the
     plaintiff's side that these are true; that he
     smoked for a whole bunch of reasons that have
     nothing to do with nicotine.
          Now, they mentioned that he smoked in bed, but
     there is an even longer list of times where he's
     not allowed to smoke, and he exhibits that control.
     He doesn't smoke in the areas of the hotel that he
     managed.  He wouldn't smoke around the hotel
     guests.  He himself said he's not a chain smoker.
     He wouldn't smoke in church, when he went to other
     people's houses where it wasn't allowed,
     restaurants, movies.  He complied with smoking
     restrictions.  This is before he chose to quit. 2053 But if you told him he couldn't smoke, whether
     it was from basic training to the last job he held,
     he wouldn't smoke.  He could control it.  When it
     came time to quit, we know that he quit for good
     the first time he was motivated, not as Mr. Alvarez
     says, the first time he knew because we know that
     he knew back in the '60s, and we saw him say flat
     out that at least in 1970, he believed the
     Surgeon General.  And he thought that it could
     cause cancer and went out and bought insurance.
          Now, Dr. Samuel is the only doctor that
     actually examined him.  It's not in dispute.
     They're playing an old videotape of a doctor who is
     not a doctor, who never met Mr. Crawford.  He never
     heard of the man.  That's what they played.  That
     was their proof of evidence.  Now they want you to
     be a doctor and do a checklist.
          Dr. Samuel applied the official criteria.
     Even Jack Henningfield, the guy who is not a
     doctor, even he said DSM-IV and now DSM-V were the
     official criteria of the American Psychiatric
     Association for doctors who deal with substance
     dependence and addiction.
          And he went through those criteria.  He
     examined him. 2054 They say, "well, he's a biased man.  He's got
     a conflict of interest."  And Dr. Samuel said he
     didn't think he could testify on both sides in the
     same type of litigation.
          But let's put him to the test.  Do you think
     he's biased?  Do you believe, are they trying to
     say he's a liar?  I asked him, remember, he looked
     at 20 cases or something, and I asked him:  "Do you
     find in every single one of those cases that
     R.J. Reynolds or a tobacco company gives you the
     smoker is not addicted?"
          He said, "no, I found smokers that are
     addicted."
          So what does he do?  Does he bury it?
          He said, "no, I tell the tobacco companies
     they're addicted."  That's a man who said in his
     own words he goes where the facts lead him.
          Now you're going to decide whether this well
     qualified psychiatrist from Boca Raton who has seen
     hundreds and even more than a thousand smokers and
     has been treating substance dependency for
     30 years, you're going to decide whether he's a
     liar.  Make no bones about it.  That's what they're
     implying:  Do you think Dr. Samuel is a liar?  Then
     you'll make your decision accordingly. 2055 But this man who is well trained and has 30
     years of experience is the only man that actually
     saw Dr. -- saw Mr. Crawford and the only man that
     did an examination.
          Dr. Samuel found that Mr. Crawford at all
     times had the ability to control and quit his
     smoking.  And even the plaintiffs never presented
     any evidence that he couldn't have decided, the
     first time he saw a warning, that he could quit.
     They don't even dispute that.
          We know he quit the first time he made a
     serious effort to do so, and he explained it for
     the reasons I said.  And even Mr. Crawford agreeing
     that addiction didn't cause his injuries because
     once he made up his mind, suddenly, addiction was
     like it didn't exist because once he made up his
     mind to quit, he wasn't smoking.
          They said something about, well, only one
     person came to Dr. Samuel and said, "Hey,
     Dr. Samuel, I want you to treat me for one and
     only -- one and only one thing, nicotine
     dependency."
          I don't know if you found that surprising, but
     Dr. Samuel explained.  He's a psychiatrist.  He
     treats substance dependency and mental disorders. 2056 He said he didn't just have one patient who smokes
     who he treated; that he's had hundreds or perhaps
     thousands of smokers.  He's been doing this for
     30 years.  He got his training at Bellevue
     Psychiatric with adolescent addiction, one of the
     most prominent psychiatric hospitals in the
     country.  He hasn't seen just one smoker; he's seen
     over a thousand smokers.  And he's diagnosed and
     treated their addiction.
          And again, you talk about conflict of
     interest?  He said flat out, he's diagnosed a lot
     of smokers as addicted.  He's become -- he's
     determined that a lot of his patients are addicted.
     Just like when he looks at some of these tobacco
     cases, he finds that smoker is addicted.
          He found Mr. Crawford wasn't.  Mr. Crawford is
     one of the 50 percent of smokers, and you saw that
     only 50 percent of smokers meet the definition for
     addiction.  Mr. Crawford is not one of them.
          Now, again, let's talk about
     Jack Henningfield.  He's a doctor because he's a
     professor, but he's not a medical doctor.  What
     Jack Henningfield said is relapse is the hallmark
     of addiction.  And "relapse" meaning that when you
     quit, you go back to it because that's what 2057 addictive drugs are like; that people have a
     compulsive behavior, and they go back to it.
          And he said that the relapse that an addicted
     smoker has, it's not just after a day or two
     because he said after a day or two when a smoker
     quits, he might go back for any number of reasons.
          But their expert said that the key definition
     for addiction -- that addicted smokers relapse
     after a week of cessation.  He said if you can see
     a person who can quit smoking for a week and then
     they go back, that's addictive behavior.  And, of
     course, Mr. Crawford doesn't fit this description
     of an addicted smoker.  He never relapsed.
          Now, we've got a real conflict here because
     you just heard Mr. Alvarez said did relapse, and
     now I'm saying the opposite.
          Who to believe?
          Well, ladies and gentlemen, believe the
     evidence.  Don't -- what the lawyers say isn't
     evidence.  Here's the evidence.  I asked
     Mr. Crawford:  "You heard the testimony about
     addicted smokers who lapse and started smoking
     again.  But that wasn't you.  You never relapsed
     and started smoking."
          And Mr. Crawford said, "I did not." 2058 So I don't -- what was Mr. Alvarez talking
     about?  You saw him on the stand.  I asked that
     question.  He said he never relapsed.
          And Janet Cooke, did she support their
     argument on addiction or that addiction was causing
     him to develop a disease?
          Again, this is the only member of the family
     that they brought in to corroborate his story.
     Look what she said.  "Did you think it was his
     choice, and it wasn't your business?
          "ANSWER:  It was his choice.  I didn't tell my
     dad what to do, ever."
          Even Janet Cooke -- no doubt she loves him and
     wants to help him -- even she has to admit it was
     his choice, just like she said he already knew in
     1966.
          Mr. Crawford own's words, the information
     didn't change.  And remember, that's how you can
     determine if there is a fraud.  If somebody has
     been fooled or tricked because information was
     concealed, then when they learn new information,
     they're going to change their mind.
          No.  He said the information didn't change.
     He changed his mind because, he said, "I was
     getting older.  I was 54."  And then he wanted to 2059 quit.  But 20 years earlier, he believed that he
     was going to get cancer when he's 34.
          Now, you're going to be asked -- Your Honor,
     may we take a break?
          Is pizza here?
          THE COURT:  It's not here.
          MR. BELASIC:  I think this is a good stopping
     point for the pizza.
          THE COURT:  I'd like it -- but it's not here.
     It's close.  If you want to take a break and --
     let's take ten minutes.  If it doesn't show, start
     again.  And if it does, we'll eat the pizza.
          MR. BELASIC:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  So we'll take ten minutes at a
     minimum, or longer if the pizza arrives.
               (Jury exits at 12:06 p.m.)
          THE COURT:  Note the presence of the jury and
     the parties.
          MR. BELASIC:  Welcome back, ladies and
     gentlemen.  I hope everyone enjoyed the pizza.
          This board has the verdict form.  And as I
     told you, I'm talking about the addiction questions
     first.  What you'll be answering, as I showed you,
     the second question:  Was he addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine?" 2060 And you should check "No" there because none
     of his own doctors, all of the doctors that treated
     him for 40 years, seen him smoke, they asked him
     about smoking all the time, not one of them has
     ever found that he was addicted.  There is not one
     medical record.
          They brought in some videotape of someone who
     is not a doctor and who uses, he says, this
     Fagerstrom test.  He admitted that Fagerstrom,
     which is the checklist they want you to fill out
     like you were doctors, is not used to diagnose
     nicotine dependency; but instead, it's used to
     diagnose -- or measure how severely a person is
     dependent after they've already been found, and
     that's one of the things that Dr. Samuel explained
     to you.
          What Dr. Henningfield, their doctor, says:
     This Fagerstrom test, remember how he uses it?  He
     uses in his studies where people come in to go to a
     smoking cessation, a stop-smoking study.  And as he
     described it, by definition, all of the people that
     come into his research are people who couldn't quit
     smoking; people who need to go to a university and
     be examined to see if they can quit.
          That's not Mr. Crawford.  He didn't go to a 2061 university.  We know he never asked a doctor for
     help.  He never asked anyone for help.  That's not
     Mr. Crawford.  Just like Dr. Henningfield said,
     well, the hallmark of addiction is relapse.  And
     Mr. Crawford [sic] said he doesn't fit that,
     Mr. Crawford doesn't even fit Jack Henningfield's
     definition, a definition that he admits is not used
     by doctors to diagnose nicotine dependency.
          So the third question is the question I told
     you about addiction:  Was addiction the legal
     cause; not actually smoking, but was addiction?
          For all the reasons I discussed, you should
     find no.  But the most important one is that we
     know that once he changed his mind, addiction
     didn't cause him to smoke at all, let alone causing
     his cancer.
          And again, as the Judge explained to you in
     his instructions, this is not about whether smoking
     causes a tumor in his larynx.  That's question one.
     It's a completely separate question.  This is about
     whether addiction is the actual legal cause of his
     injury.  And he himself has admitted that once he
     changes his mind, addiction doesn't have any effect
     on him.  Whether he was addicted or not, the only
     difference is smoking; and ultimately his cancer, 2062 if it was related to smoking, it was his decision.
     So you should vote no.
          What I'm going to talk about now are, there
     are -- Mr. Alvarez, I think covered -- there are
     four questions -- there are four questions that
     talk about whether or not Mr. Crawford relied on
     something that tobacco companies said.
          And so Number 5, Number 6, Number 7, and
     Number 8.
          The first thing you'll notice is all of these
     questions are about Mr. Crawford.  They're not
     about something the tobacco companies said.
     They're not about whether the tobacco company was
     good and bad, or, as Mr. Alvarez says, liars.
     They're about Mr. Crawford.
          The Judge is going to instruct you as to what
     "reliance" means.  You'll have a chance to read all
     of these and look at it, but here's his definition.
          When you determine whether Mr. Crawford
     reasonably relied on a statement, you have to
     determine not just whether he relied.  It's not
     good enough for him to just come in and say, "Oh, I
     believed what they said" when Mr. Alvarez asks him
     and "oh, no, I knew you could get 20 years" before
     I did when I asked him.  That's not enough. 2063 Look at what the Judge instructs you.  You
     have to determine once again:  Was the reliance a
     legal cause of his cancer?
          Well, how can reliance on something a company
     said be a cause of cancer when you, yourself, have
     already said 20 years ago that you believed the
     Surgeon General?
          I'm going to show you some of the evidence for
     you to consider on this.  But here's the definition
     of reliance:  In order to be reasonably reliant on
     a statement that omits a fact, it has to directly
     and in a natural continuous sequence produce or
     contribute to such loss -- in this case, it's
     laryngeal cancer -- so that it be said that but
     for, but for the reasonable reliance, the injury
     would not have occurred.
          In other words, if there hadn't been some
     statement, then he wouldn't have gotten cancer.
          And ladies and gentlemen, the evidence in this
     case from Mr. Crawford himself is, as Mr. Alvarez
     would say, "not close."  And here's why:  Because
     when we asked the plaintiff, Mr. Crawford, whether
     or not he actually changed his behavior, whether or
     not he would have quit smoking if there hadn't been
     some statement that he can't identify, the answers 2064 were pretty clear.
          So let's look at did Mr. Crawford rely on a
     statement from a tobacco company?  I put it up on a
     blackboard because, remember, when their historian
     was there, I said:  "If I asked you, Dr. Proctor,
     did Mr. Crawford rely on a statement," you know
     what he said?
          "I don't have any opinion."
          The guy is here for two days.  He shows you
     nothing but advertisements that he can't tie to
     Mr. Crawford and then admits, "I can't say that he
     relied on it."
          So let's look at what Mr. Crawford told us.
          And we asked him question after question about
     whether he chose these brands.  And he said, his
     first three brands, Camels, Lucky Strike, and
     Raleighs.  He did not start smoking because of
     advertisements, and he didn't smoke those brands
     because of ads.  And he told me those were the --
     those were the brands that the other kids got from
     their parents; that they would take from their
     purses, et cetera.
          He wasn't being tricked.  He never identified
     any advertisement for these that he thought was
     false.  He said it was because of the other kids. 2065 And he didn't smoke Kools because of ads, and
     we'll show you that.  We actually showed the
     statement where he said he had no idea why he
     smoked Kools.  His mom picked Kools out.  There's
     been no evidence.  She's not the plaintiff here.
     There has been no evidence about anything that
     affected his mother.
          And he didn't smoke Winstons because of ads.
          Now, Mr. Alvarez did ask him, and he said
     something about ads.  Mr. Alvarez is a good lawyer.
     He showed you that statement.
          But when we asked him, we said, "Look,
     Winstons came out with filters in 1954, and
     Mr. Crawford would have been 19 years old."
          I said, "well, you thought filters were safer.
     You must have jumped on it."
          No, he didn't.  He didn't go to Winston
     filters.  It was years later.  And even when he
     then tried Winstons, there was evidence that he
     smoked other brands that were unfiltered and went
     back and forth.
          Here's what we flat out asked Mr. Crawford.
     This was his chance.  If he really, actually relied
     on a statement that was false on cross-examination,
     this is what he says:  "You don't remember ever 2066 seeing an ad that had some statement that you think
     is false; is that right?"
          "No, I don't."
          He doesn't recall.  He's not claiming a false
     advertisement.
          We asked him:  "Is there any advertisement
     that actually said smoking was okay or that smoking
     was safe?"
          He says, "Not that I can recall."
          And he's going to talk about filters.  But
     when we asked him -- this is his opportunity, just
     like it's my right and every person's right to
     cross-examine their accuser -- he says no, he can't
     recall anything that told him --
          Now, he clearly told you -- we asked him:  Did
     you ever look to the Tobacco Institute as your
     source on smoking and health information?
          And he said no, he never looked to the Council
     for Tobacco Research; he never looked to the
     Tobacco Industry Research Committee; he never saw
     the frank statement.
          You think about how many hours this historian
     from California came on to show statement after
     statement, pictures of old men meeting in those
     rooms, pictures of old hotels, blurry TV shows 2067 where old men sit in front of labs.  None of it has
     anything to do with the smoker in this case.
          This isn't the class action anymore.  It's
     Mr. Crawford's lawsuit, and it's his duty to tie
     these statements that they show you to him.  He
     hasn't met his burden of proof.  He admits he never
     looked to these tobacco organizations as a source
     of information or help.
          And remember what I also asked him, I said:
     Had you even heard of these things before you and
     the lawyers filed this lawsuit?
          He hadn't even heard of these groups.  How can
     you be defrauded by groups you never heard of?
          And the frank statement, we know what that is.
     They say it's the start of the conspiracy.
          "Did you see the frank statement?"
          No, he never saw it.
          How can he be tricked by something he never
     saw?  How can you conceal something that somebody
     already knew when he says he smoked for decades
     after he believed that smoking was dangerous?
          We ran down the whole list.  He doesn't recall
     hearing any statements from these people.  That's
     the whole list.  I asked him every one of those.
          Now, they talk about a conspiracy, and they 2068 say it started at that meeting in the hotel in
     1954, and Dr. Proctor was the person that spent an
     enormous amount of time.
          So if they have a conspiracy claim, simple
     question, "Dr. Proctor:  Did the conspiracy start
     Mr. Crawford smoking?"
          And look what Dr. Proctor said.  As the
     historian in this conspiracy, he agrees the
     conspiracy could not have caused Mr. Crawford to
     start smoking.
          Of course not.  He had already started smoking
     before that.
          I saw some of you write that down.  The
     reasons that's important is you're going to be
     asked:  Did he rely on some statement pursuant to
     this agreement?  It's right here on the verdict
     form.  Their historian, their expert on this
     conspiracy says no, it didn't cause him to start
     smoking.
          And so again, how can -- how can a statement
     by a company cause you to develop a disease when
     you were smoking already?
          And he says, not for ads, not for statements,
     but because of his brother and because of his
     mother. 2069 That's their historian.  The conspiracy didn't
     cause him to smoke.
          I asked Dr. Proctor the blackboard question.
     I wrote it on the board:  Did he rely?
          He says he does not have an opinion.
          That's their expert.  Their expert can't even
     connect all of these statements.
          And Mr. Alvarez went through all of them.  And
     you heard some pretty emotional statements from
     Mr. Alvarez.  And obviously, he wants to make you
     mad, and you may be mad.  But all of you agree that
     you would decide solely on the evidence.
          There is no doubt, as Judge Dresnick
     instructed you, that you have to find that
     Mr. Crawford proved that something that a tobacco
     company said that was false ended up causing him to
     get larynx cancer.  Their own expert couldn't even
     claim that.
          What did Mr. Crawford tell us about who he
     would trust?  He said that in his entire life, he's
     never trusted a manufacturer more than his own
     doctors.  He's been going to doctors for more than,
     well, at least the earliest records that you saw
     were from 1954, 60 years ago, in the military.
     He's been going to doctors for 60 years. 2070 They said they always talked to him about
     smoking, about diet, about drinking.  He never
     trusted the tobacco companies over his own doctors.
          And no one disputes that he knew that doctors
     believed that smoking was dangerous.  And no one is
     going to dispute, now that you've seen his
     testimony, that he believed it was dangerous.
          At least from 1970, he said it was dangerous,
     he knew it could cause cancer, he was so worried
     about it that he went out and bought a life -- not
     a life insurance, but a cancer insurance policy.
          And again, Mr. Alvarez talked about family.
     Well, they only brought one family member.  The
     only person in the family that came in, we asked
     her about advertising, Janet.
          Did your father ever tell you that he was
     smoking because of these ads?
          She said no, she never heard that.
          We asked Janet Cooke:  "Did your father ever
     mention any of these tobacco groups; if they were
     the ones who were making him think it was safe?"
     Do you think his story is true?  Do you think that
     in 40 years, he would have mentioned it to the
     people who loved him who were against him smoking?
          No.  She can't corroborate.  "Dad never 2071 mentioned any of these things."
          Same thing.  Janet can't say that he ever
     mentioned any of these things.
          Now, when you look at the reliance questions,
     it's going to say:  Was the reliance -- and so he
     had to see a statement, he didn't believe in it,
     and then he had to change his behavior.
          The instruction from the Judge is that if he
     hadn't relied, he wouldn't have gotten the cancer.
     Can they prove that?  Can they prove that reliance
     on a statement was a cause of his cancer?
          We've just seen the evidence.  There isn't
     any.  There isn't any.
          You know what?  In the '60s or '70s when he
     personally believed that smoking was dangerous on
     those warnings when he thought he could get cancer,
     if he had quit smoking, that statistical risk that
     their doctor from Johns Hopkins, Dr. Califano,
     talked about, it would have gone away.
          Here's what the Surgeon General says:  If you
     smoke over a pack a day, after ten years of
     cessation -- that means ten years of quitting --
     the risk begins to approach that of one who has
     never smoked.
          So any smoker, if you could quit for about ten 2072 years, your risk of getting cancer from smoking
     goes back to almost that of someone who has never
     smoked.
          And no one disputes in this case, including
     them; that he could have quit earlier.  They
     admitted to it.  That's why the Judge granted a
     partial summary judgment in Reynolds' favor on the
     comparative fault issue.  It's right in the
     instructions.
          You should vote no on Number 4.
          You should vote no on Number 5 on reliance.
          On Number 6, did he rely after 1982?  Of
     course not.  He told you in 1970, he personally
     believed that the Surgeon General -- that the
     Surgeon General statement was dangerous, and you
     know he personally believed he could get cancer
     from smoking by the early '70s.
          So on 5 and 6, you should vote no.
          Seven and 8 are just the same questions, but
     they're questions about did he rely on a statement
     that was made in agreement?  And he didn't rely.
     And certainly his reliance didn't cause his cancer
     because he knew it was dangerous, and he continued
     to smoke anyway.
          The same question for 1982.  No, he's already 2073 admitted that 12 years before this, he believed he
     could get cancer.  He believed the Surgeon
     General's warnings.
          Now, what they have to decide and what
     Mr. Alvarez has to decide is filters.  He said, "I
     thought filters were safer."
          Here's the evidence.  The evidence shows this
     whole filter is a side issue, a distraction.
          First of all, their doctor, their doctor is
     going to say smoking caused larynx cancer.  He said
     it didn't matter if Mr. Crawford smoked filtered or
     unfiltered.  It would not change his opinion.
          So you have to find that reliance on a
     statement caused his cancer?  Well, no reliance on
     any statement about filters could have had any
     effect on his cancer.  His own doctor says it would
     have made no difference whether he smoked filtered
     or unfiltered.  Their expert would have had the
     same opinion.
          This is the testimony I was talking about
     where Mr. Crawford says he still smoked unfiltered
     cigarettes, even after they were introduced and
     even after all of those ads came out.
          So he wasn't jumping on filters and saying
     they're safe.  They were around for years, and he 2074 was still deciding to smoke unfiltered brands.  The
     first modern filter came out in '54.  We weren't
     smoking filters.  Those ads didn't cause you to go
     out and smoke that brand?  He was still smoking
     unfiltered.
          Now, in rebuttal, Mr. Alvarez or
     Mr. Rosenblum, they have the right and maybe
     they'll show you some of testimony that they gave.
     As I reminded you, remember, there is a difference
     between being asked questions from your own lawyer,
     who is trying to win the lawsuit, on direct, and
     there is a difference then between being confronted
     with cross-examination.  And I mentioned there is a
     reason they call cross-examination "the great
     engine of truth" because you're confronted with the
     real facts, and that's what he said the real facts
     were about whether he smoked filters.
          So he knew smoking was dangerous.
          What was he smoking when he saw that 1970
     warning and he told us he believed it?  He was
     smoking filters.  What kind of cigarettes had the
     warning on the pack?  It was the filters.  So you
     have to ask yourself:  Is it reasonable?  Could you
     really believe filtered cigarettes were safe when
     the Surgeon General's warning is on it and he said 2075 he believed that warning and he believed that his
     smoking could cause cancer?
          Well, he was smoking filters, so he believed
     smoking filters could cause him to get cancer, and
     he still smoked them.
          Now, Mr. Alvarez mentioned family.  Well, does
     his family corroborate it?  Well, does his wife,
     friends, son?  They didn't testify, but they
     brought in his daughter.  And what did his daughter
     Janet say?
          "Did your father ever tell you he thought
     filtered cigarettes were less risky or safer than
     unfiltered cigarettes?"
          He never mentioned it.
          So once again, the family members can't
     corroborate it.  And I'd ask you to remember if he
     thought filters were safer, why did his daughter
     Janet say that when the very first warning came out
     in 1966, that it didn't tell her father anything
     that he didn't already know?
          Why did she say that?
          She thinks that he knew by the time the very
     first warning; that he knew before that and it
     didn't tell him anything new.  She doesn't support
     his story. 2076 Now, if Mr. Crawford thought filters were
     safer because they were going to take out tar and
     nicotine, well, naturally, you'd think he'd be
     looking for some low-tar and low-nicotine
     cigarettes.
          And I asked him.  He knows there is "light"
     cigarettes.  There is a brand called Winston
     Lights.  There is Camel Lights.  There is Winston
     Ultra Lights.  There is Camel Ultra Lights.
          And he said no.  He saw those ads, he knew the
     brands were available.  He never went out, he
     didn't choose his brands.  He didn't choose his
     brands based on what he thought had been done to a
     cigarette to reduce tar or nicotine.  And so the
     idea that if he was really smoking filters because
     he thought they were safer, why wasn't he buying
     the lowest low-tar brands that were available?
     They were in the same brand of cigarettes he was
     smoking.  He didn't do that.
          I'll submit it's because, as you saw in his
     testimony, he wasn't jumping on filters because he
     thought they were safer.
          I asked Dr. Proctor -- we saw the ads that
     Dr. Proctor put up, and they talk about the filter,
     there is no doubt.  Obviously, they're trying to 2077 sell cigarettes.  But not one of those ads say
     smoking a filter is safe.
          And Mr. Crawford already, as we showed you,
     didn't ever see an advertisement.  He said he
     didn't ever see an advertisement that said smoking
     was safe or that it was good or that it was okay.
          He hasn't met his burden of proof.
          But let's say you believe all of his
     testimony.  He thought filters were safer.  Would
     his belief in that statement, is that what caused
     his larynx cancer?  And remember, the instruction
     is if he didn't rely, that but for that, he
     wouldn't have gotten an injury.
          So is there any proof that if there hadn't
     been some ad about filters that he would have not
     had cancer?  Would he have magically quit smoking?
          I put that question to him.  I said:  If
     filters didn't exist, are you saying you were going
     to quit?
          And here's what he said:  Even if filters
     weren't around, he would have continued smoking the
     unfiltered brands he liked.  And he admitted it.
          He admitted it:  "I probably would, yes."
          He's not claiming in 1960, when he might have
     seen a filter ad, that he would have stopped 2078 smoking and avoided it.  He's not claiming that.
     He's telling us today that we would have a man who
     had smoked unfiltered Camels and unfiltered Kools.
     Even he doesn't claim that he was going to avoid
     his risk or he was going to quit smoking.
          Now there may be smokers who could do that.
     Maybe there are people in this class who could
     bring their claims, but those people aren't here
     today, and those people aren't named
     William Crawford.  Because William Crawford says
     that what they said about filters wouldn't have
     changed his smoking.  He would have continued to
     smoke.
          So those are the two questions on reliance.
          And then there are four questions on -- there
     are two questions on addiction, and there are four
     questions on reliance.  And let's talk a little
     about the first question.
          Tammy, I dropped the remote.
          The first question you're going to be asked
     is:  Was cigarette smoking a legal cause of
     Mr. Crawford's laryngeal cancer, his larynx cancer?
          They brought an expert, and nobody disputes
     he's an expert.  The question is what he testified.
     Dr. Califano comes from Johns Hopkins in Baltimore. 2079 Everybody agrees that's a really good medical
     school.  Look what his own medical school says
     about the causes of larynx cancer.  This is in
     evidence.  This is the Johns Hopkins Medical School
     website.  What causes laryngeal cancer?  You can
     see it says the exact cause of laryngeal cancer is
     not known.  However, there are certain risk
     factors.
          Let me ask you to consider this first:  This
     is 2013.  And the plaintiff says that this top
     medical center in the United States still says that
     the exact cause of this type of cancer is not
     known.  Now think back to all of the things that
     they tell you the tobacco companies said that were
     lies when people said we don't know the exact cause
     of cancer.  Well, this is their expert.  Their
     expert's medical center says the exact cause of the
     type of cancer that is in this lawsuit is still not
     known.
          Now, how can it be okay -- how can it be okay
     for Dr. Califano and the Johns Hopkins Medical
     Center to say the exact cause is not known today in
     2013, but they want you to pay this man $15 million
     because a tobacco company had the nerve to say the
     same thing 60 years ago?  These people aren't 2080 tobacco companies.  This is Johns Hopkins Medical
     Center, and they're still saying that the exact
     cause is unknown.
          Look at the American Cancer Society.
     Obviously, they are no friend of the tobacco
     companies.  No friend.  Look what the
     American Cancer Society says about the cause.  Do
     we know what causes laryngeal cancer?  We don't
     know what causes each case of laryngeal cancer.  We
     do know many of the risk factors.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Excuse me.  Objection, Judge.
          He's disputing the Engle findings that
     laryngeal cancer is caused by smoking.
          MR. BELASIC:  I'm not disputing.
          (Sidebar conference.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  This is my objection.
          THE COURT:  I got your objection.
          MR. BELASIC:  The first thing is none of the
     findings apply in this case until they establish
     class action membership.
          THE COURT:  It's been established.  It's res
     judicata.
          MR. BELASIC:  Well, first of all, let me put
     on the record the findings don't lie unless he's a
     class member and they have to prove his case of 2081 laryngeal cancer is caused --
          THE COURT:  Is your --
          MR. BELASIC:  I'm marking it specifically
     where it says we don't know exactly what causes
     each --
          THE COURT:  I'll sustain the objection.
          (Sidebar conference concluded.)
          MR. BELASIC:  So these are the two pieces of
     documentation you saw from the American Cancer
     Society and Johns Hopkins.
          Now, Dr. Califano, their expert, himself
     admitted that there were several causes of larynx
     cancer.  Some he agreed on, and some he didn't.
     You can see here that both Johns Hopkins and the
     American Cancer Society, they list as risk factors
     tobacco use, obviously, alcohol abuse, and then
     something called "GERD."  That's gastroesophageal
     reflux disease, and that's when the stomach acids
     back up and form heartburn and go into your throat
     and start burning the lining of both your esophagus
     an your larynx.  Those were the disputes.
          It was their expert who said that there are
     other causes of cancer in individuals.  It's not
     something some tobacco company made up.  It was
     their expert and the Johns Hopkins Medical Center 2082 and the American Cancer Society say that it
     includes alcohol and GERD, this reflux disease.
          Well, so that's the evidence from those public
     health communities about what different causes of
     cancer are and you have to determine in this case.
          So look who they bring.  There were two
     Joseph Califanos you heard about.  One was an
     attorney in the 1970s, and he was the man who made
     the decision to shut down the less hazardous
     cigarette group, the National Cancer Institute
     group where the tobacco companies were working with
     the government to make a safer cigarette.
          Just coincidentally, the Joseph Califano in
     this case is his son, who is the plaintiff's
     medical expert.
          So let me remind you:  None of his doctors,
     the dozens of doctors you can find in that box of
     records, none of his doctors are here telling you
     that smoking causes cancer.  And you can look in
     those records, and you won't find any, and you can
     be sure that if there was even one shred of paper
     in his medical records that said larynx cancer is
     caused by smoking, of course that would be center
     stage in their case.  There isn't any.  So they had
     to go elsewhere, and they chose Joseph Califano's 2083 son.
          And look what he told you.  He said that he
     charged $600 an hour, and he said he requires a
     retainer, which is an up-front fee of $1,200.  I
     don't care about the money.  What I care about is
     the next question Mr. Murphy asked him.
          He said that $1,200 is for the first two hours
     of your work?
          And Dennis asked him:  "Up until now, have you
     spent the two hours?"
          And he said, "no, I haven't even spent two
     hours working on this case."
          Ladies and gentlemen, there is a thousand
     pages or hundreds of pages of medical records.  You
     saw stacks of the depositions in this case.  How in
     the world -- how in the world could Dr. Califano
     review the medical records and not even work two
     hours?
          Of course, he doesn't know Mr. Crawford.  He's
     not one of his doctors.  He's is an outside hired
     expert who barely even read the medical records,
     and I'll prove it.
          He didn't know what was in Mr. Crawford's
     medical records.  And, by the way, when we asked
     him about alcohol and we asked him about 2084 gastroesophageal reflux disease, he didn't agree
     with the American Cancer Society.  He didn't agree
     with the website of his own hospital.
          And so their own expert doesn't agree with the
     public health community position here, the American
     Cancer Society.  And yet Mr. Alvarez says that you
     should give his client $15 million because the
     tobacco companies disagree at times with the public
     health community.
          The American Cancer Society says one drink a
     day or more than one drink a day increases the risk
     of laryngeal cancer.  That's the American Cancer
     Society's position, and Dr. Califano just says,
     "No.  Trust me.  It's wrong."
          Here's what Dr. Califano said:  He admitted
     that alcohol could cause laryngeal cancer.  And as
     Mr. Alvarez says, he said it was rare, but he
     admitted alcohol was a cause.  And then he told us
     that the first information he got about alcohol was
     from one of the plaintiff's lawyers.  And he said
     it was Mr. Shack.  That's not one the lawyers in
     this room, but it was another lawyer for
     Mr. Crawford who told him, quote, Mr. Crawford
     drank barely, if any.
          Well, I'm going to show you.  He didn't have 2085 all of the alcohol records or he didn't look at
     them.  But he admitted that if there was more
     drinking, more drinking than he had assumed and
     more drinking than he saw in the records, then
     alcohol could have played a role.
          Well, we know there are records that showed
     that Mr. Crawford excessively drank alcohol.  Let
     me talk about this.  I mean, ladies and gentlemen,
     no one -- this isn't a case about whether he's an
     alcoholic.  It has nothing to do with drinking --
     it has nothing to do with him being a good man.
          Their expert came in and said alcohol is one
     of the other causes of laryngeal cancer.  We have a
     right to see if there is evidence.  This is the
     evidence on alcohol use:  He excessively drinks
     alcohol.
          Well, that's contrary to Mr. Crawford's own
     testimony.
          And here's another doctor.  "His alcohol use
     persists on a daily basis, but has improved.  He
     used to drink excessively."
          That's contrary to his testimony.  And you
     have to decide if he's excessively drinking alcohol
     now, even after he got laryngeal cancer -- we're
     going to talk about that you shouldn't be drinking 2086 at all if you've got laryngeal cancer -- you have
     to decide is he credible when he says he didn't
     drink more than one or two drinks a week in the
     '50s and in the '60s and in the '70s?  Well, we're
     just looking for the evidence on alcohol use, and
     this is what his doctors reported.
          We can see here that he was advised to cut
     down on alcohol.  That's what "ETOH" is.  You can
     see he was drinking up to three -- either wine or
     beers -- a day.  You know the American Cancer
     Society says more than one drink a day increases
     your risk.
          But at times, we see that he definitely is
     telling his doctors different things.  His records
     prove it.  In April, the patient doesn't drink.  In
     May, he's drinking two to three times a week.  Even
     more contradictions.  He's saying he's drinking one
     to three beers a day; but the same month, he tells
     the doctor he never drinks.  And a few months
     later, he says he never had a drink in the past
     year.  Again, all we care about is whether there is
     sufficient evidence to rule out alcohol.  Now,
     there is no way there is.
          Dr. Califano, their expert, he didn't even
     look at these records.  Or if he did, he forgot 2087 about them.  And when a man like Dr. Califano says
     he spent only two hours, we know it's impossible
     for him to get the information.  He was relying on
     something that attorney from Mr. Crawford, someone
     named Mr. Shack, had told him.  He hadn't gone
     through these records.
          I asked Mr. Crawford this just flat out:
     Isn't it true that since you've had laryngeal
     cancer, that your doctors tell you not to drink
     because it could cause laryngeal cancer again?
          Yes.
          And so he knows that.  He knows from his own
     doctors that drinking can cause laryngeal cancer.
     That's both evidence that alcohol could have been a
     cause the first time around, cannot be ruled out.
     You know what?  It's also evidence that he did just
     like everyone else.  People do things that are bad
     for their health, not because they're forced to and
     not because it's a horrible addiction.  He chooses
     to drink alcohol, even though he's been warned,
     even though he knows it could cause laryngeal
     cancer.
          Now, the other potential cause that we asked
     Dr. Califano if he could rule it out was GERD, this
     gastroesophageal reflux disease.  And he told 2088 Mr. Murphy that there was no evidence that he had
     GERD.
          And you're going to see that was a surprising
     statement because GERD is all over the medical
     records.  It is mentioned over and over and over
     again.  He never checked the records.  Their expert
     didn't do his homework.  He came in, he spent less
     than two hours, and he said smoking had to be the
     cause.
          First of all, you didn't get the military
     records that say way back in the '50s, Mr. Crawford
     was reporting chronic stomach problems.  Chronic
     symptom problems.  I know that doesn't say "GERD,"
     but let's look.  And here we are, very specific.
     "Reflux.  Reflux disease."  This is right at the
     University of Florida for the pre-op evaluation.
     In other words, this is when he was going in for
     his surgery.
          Now, it's hard to believe but their expert,
     Dr. Califano didn't even know some of the most
     important medical records in this case.  When
     Mr. Crawford had his surgery and had he done his
     homework, instead of just saying, Well, it had to
     be smoking, he would have seen that Mr. Crawford
     had reflux, which is another cause of cancer. 2089 And here we go, in Martin Memorial, he has a
     history of reflux.  2006 diagnosis:  Esophageal
     reflux.  Pre-op diagnosis: GERD, which is reflux.
     The patient has been seen with GERD.  He has a
     history of GERD.  GERD, it's all over the medical
     records.
          Now, you have to evaluate the credibility of
     every witness.  Now, you didn't have -- because the
     deposition was read, you didn't get a chance to see
     his facial expressions, et cetera.  But I submit to
     you that under oath, under oath, Dr. Califano said
     this patient did not have GERD.  This man had no
     history of GERD.
          I'm not calling people liars.  You decide.
     He's said he didn't have a history of GERD.  That
     is absolutely false.  And the reason has to be, the
     only explanations are either he never looked for
     other risk factors because he wants to blame
     smoking and he's not even going to see if there is
     evidence of GERD or alcohol; or he did have the
     records, which means he didn't do his homework or
     he knew it and he simply ignored it.
          There is no explanation.  What he said was
     dead wrong.  This guy's doctors have been saying
     over and over again that he has this history of 2090 reflux.  We saw the American Cancer Society and
     Johns Hopkins say that those are potential causes.
          We don't have the burden of proof.  I can't
     prove a negative.  I can't prove something that
     didn't happen.  They have to prove what did happen.
     They have to prove that his cancer is caused
     specifically by smoking.
          Well, we asked Dr. Califano, he got his cancer
     in this area called the glottis.  What about
     nonsmokers?  Where do they get their cancer?
          Same exact place.  They get cancer in the same
     place that someone who didn't even smoke would get.
          Then he talked about what has been the history
     and the course of Mr. Crawford's cancer.  And
     obviously, he mentioned that many people that have
     laryngeal cancer die.  Mr. Crawford did not.
          And he was asked about survival rates:  Is
     there a clue in the survival rate to tell whether
     the particular case of larynx cancer is associated
     with smoking or not?
          And he admitted that nonsmokers, the larynx
     cancer that is not caused by smoking, that leads to
     a better survival rate.  And that's another piece
     of evidence that is consistent with the fact that
     his larynx cancer has not been proven to be caused 2091 by smoking because he has a survival rate that is
     more like people who never smoked.
          You saw some questions about testing.  And it
     was interesting that the plaintiff's emphasized
     that there was a test for a virus called "HPV."
     You've never heard a word about HPV from me.  No
     one is claiming HPV is a cause.  It's not a cause.
     It's not in this case.  But they spent a lot of
     time basically bragging, "hey, we did a test," and
     it proved he didn't have HPV.  No one is claiming
     he did.
          But here's the test that Dr. Califano said
     they didn't do and that they could have.  He said
     there are tests for genes, and these genes are
     called "tumor suppressor genes."  They are genes
     that are activated, and they're usually associated
     with smoking-related cancers:  P16, P53.  That's
     what Dr. Califano said.  Those are the types of
     tests that can tell if an individual cancer is
     related to smoking.  They didn't do it.
          So they did the test for something that's not
     even in the case.  He said it was nearly worthless
     to perform that test, and they want to get credit
     for it.
          But what they didn't do is the test that their 2092 own expert said could have told us.
          So even Dr. Califano, Dr. Califano who wants
     to not look at the medical records and ignore the
     other causes, even he admitted that that test
     wasn't done.
          They have a burden of proof, ladies and
     gentlemen.  And I submit that once you go past the
     fact that none of his own doctors in all of those
     records never found that it was caused by smoking,
     they have already failed.
          But when Dr. Califano comes in and we prove
     that he ignores the other causes, that he ignores
     the other causes, he says he doesn't agree with the
     American Cancer Society and the public health
     experts, and then admits they could have done this
     test and didn't, there is no way they've met their
     burden of proof.
          As you saw, in an individual case of larynx
     cancer, it's very difficult to determine the exact
     cause.  They haven't met their burden of proof, and
     none of his doctors back it up.
          Now, let's talk about Question 4, and that's
     comparative fault.  So let's back up before we get
     to 4.
          Here is the order you'll be getting them in. 2093 We already discussed Number 1.  They have failed on
     their burden of proof.  They're trying to argue
     something that his own doctors never found.
     They're trying to use a doctor who didn't even look
     at the medical records on these key issues, and you
     should find no.  They did not meet their burden of
     proof to establish that cigarettes were a legal
     cause of his cancer.
          On Number 2, the issue of whether he's
     addicted, we've already talked about that.  You
     should find no.
          On Number 3, was addiction, not smoking, was
     addiction a legal cause?  We know from all of the
     evidence you saw from Mr. Crawford that it wasn't
     addiction that was causing him to smoke because
     when he changed his mind, when he said one year
     from now, "I'm not going to smoke.  I'm going to do
     this plan.  I'm going to taper down, and I'm not
     going to relapse," suddenly, addiction had no
     effect.  Addiction wasn't the reason he was
     smoking.  But addiction definitely wasn't a legal
     cause under the instructions the Judge gave you.
          We talked about reliance.  And in his own
     words, once again, on cross-examination, he
     admitted he did not rely.  And so on 5 and 6, you 2094 should find no.
          And on Questions 7 and 8, you should also find
     no.
          Mr. Alvarez asked for $15 million.  I have no
     idea where he got that number.  I have no idea
     where they get that number for a man who said that
     tobacco companies didn't make him start to smoke,
     who said when he made up his mind, he could do it.
     I have no idea where they get that number,
     15 million for a man who said 20 years before this
     injury that he believed smoking was dangerous.
          But if you do reach this, if you do reach this
     level, you are going to be talking about
     comparative fault.
          We know he's admitted that his brother is the
     only one who got him started, And his mother is the
     one who bought him cigarettes.  You see all the
     evidence that he didn't rely.
          When you do comparative fault, consider the
     following:
          From the '50s on, he read articles saying it
     could cause cancer.  He was familiar with the
     newspapers and magazines we've shown.
          By the '60s, his own daughter says, the
     warning wasn't telling him anything he didn't know. 2095 By the '70s, he personally believed he could
     get cancer from smoking cigarettes.
          By the '80s, he continued to smoke.
          All during that time that he believed it was
     dangerous and that he said it could cause cancer,
     he was smoking these filters.
          And now he's saying, "I'm not responsible."
          Let's do a test.  When he saw a piece of
     information that said and convinced him that
     smoking was dangerous, what was his reaction?  Did
     he quit and then avoid his cancer?  No.  He said he
     believed the Surgeon General, and it had no effect.
          When tobacco companies said something or when
     he went a year without seeing a tobacco company,
     did he quit smoking?  No.
          Was there someone sitting at R.J. Reynolds
     that could have made a choice for him?
          And the answer is no.
          But what happened when he made the plan, as he
     told Dr. Samuel at the examination, that for the
     first time he made a serious effort to quit, yet he
     admitted to Dr. Samuel that hadn't made serious
     efforts before, what happened then?  Did he quit
     smoking?  Did he quit part of his smoking?  No.  He
     quit all of his smoking. 2096 And what in his own words was the only reason
     that he stopped smoking?  Was it 50 percent
     something and 50 percent Reynolds, or 5 percent
     because they say he's going to be 5 percent
     responsible?
          No.  He said the only reason and the only
     change was that he changed his mind.  And it was
     his mind.  It wasn't R.J. Reynolds' control.  When
     he changed his mind, his smoking stopped
     100 percent, and he never relapsed, even though
     every day there were Kools in the house from his
     wife.
          And think about that.  If he was really an
     addict, do you think he would go 12 years without
     picking up a pack of Kools?  This is a man that
     changed his mind, and 100 percent of his smoking
     stopped.  And he has admitted, as you saw in the
     instructions, that he is a cause of his own injury.
          You should find 100 percent responsibility
     because nothing that Reynolds did was going to make
     him quit, and nothing that Reynolds said made him
     start.  But everything that he decided made him
     quit, and all of his smoking stopped when he made
     the decision.  Nicotine didn't change.  If he was
     addicted, that didn't change.  What changed was his 2097 mind.
          Mr. Alvarez talked about punitive damages.
     And you need to know that punitive damages is a
     request for more money.  It's going to be paid to
     Mr. Crawford.  So it's not going to anyone else.
     It's to Mr. Crawford.
          The Court is going to instruct you to
     determine if he is entitled to punitive damages, to
     extra money, and that's money over and above the
     15 million that Mr. Alvarez is asking for now.  You
     would have to find, first of all, you can't use the
     findings.  Mr. Alvarez says this is the law of the
     case.  Well, it's not on punitives.  Judge Dresnick
     is instructing you:  You cannot consider the
     findings from the prior lawsuit.  Those findings on
     negligence and concealment, you can't consider
     them.  This is his claim.  As the Judge has
     instructed you, on this claim for punitive damages,
     you may not seek to punish Reynolds for any harm
     suffered by any person other than Mr. Crawford.
          So all of those statements about 400,000
     deaths or diseases he didn't have, this is only for
     Mr. Crawford.  You can't compensate for other
     smokers.  Other smokers may have valid claims.  Who
     knows?  That's not in this lawsuit.  Only 2098 Mr. Crawford is.
          And the Judge will tell you that you can't
     seek to punish Reynolds for any harm inflicted upon
     Mr. Crawford except those caused by the punishable
     conduct.
          And what this means is the things that
     Reynolds did that were legal, the things that
     weren't part of the conspiracy that they're talking
     about, Reynolds has a right to make cigarettes.
     Cigarettes are legal.  And Reynolds had a right to
     advertise in the 1930s and 1940s.  Dr. Proctor told
     you there was no conspiracy, no conspiracy at all
     when he started smoking and that the conspiracy did
     not cause him to start smoking.
          And finally, the Court's instruction to you,
     you can't punish Reynolds for conduct that didn't
     cause harm inside the state of Florida.  Inside the
     state of Florida.  That is Judge Dresnick's
     instruction to you.
          And you can take into account any mitigating
     evidence.  I'm going to just show you some of the
     mitigating evidence, some of the reasons.  Remember
     that the standard that Mr. Alvarez said is they
     would have to prove that Reynolds had an entire
     lack of care and that that entire lack of care, 2099 under the instructions, has to result in causing
     his injury.
          Well, they say it's because you concealed.
     Let me ask you this:  Were the risks of smoking
     really secret from someone like Mr. Crawford?  Were
     the risks of smoking secret such that he should
     be -- that we should be punished and he should get
     even more than 15 million?
          Well, Dr. Proctor admitted that 100 years ago,
     people talked about smoking causing throat cancer
     100 years ago, not just today; that nicotine as a
     poison was known for centuries.  Nicotine was the
     reason people smoked.  That was known 100 years
     ago.  That is their expert.  And that's what they
     have to show is reason to punish.  This is
     something that was known.  We knew 100 years ago.
     The State Department of -- Health Department of
     Florida was talking about addiction.
          Dr. Proctor agreed in the Alabama schools, in
     the Alabama schools, remember, he lived in the
     state of Alabama.  And Alabama required, as you can
     see, everyone in every grade, regular instruction
     in all grades on the effect of tobacco.
     Dr. Proctor didn't dispute this is what the
     textbooks in the Alabama schools said. 2100 Nicotine is a poison.  If some people get so
     used to it that they want to smoke all the time,
     they can't do without it -- obviously, that wasn't
     Mr. Crawford because when he chose to quit, he did.
     And it says telling fourth graders in the 1940s
     that tobacco harms the throat, the same area where
     he got his cancer.
          I'm just going to flip though these.  You've
     seen all of these.  You know since the 1920s, the
     '30s, the '40s, some of most popular magazines in
     the country printed what Dr. Proctor said was
     secret.  And when you're taking into account has
     Mr. Crawford proven that Reynolds had such an
     entire lack of due care and harmed him so much that
     Reynolds should be punished, we already know that
     he said 20 years earlier he knew the risks.
          We know when Reader's Digest and Newsweek and
     all of the popular magazines of the day and in the
     Alabama newspapers, the newspapers that Dr. Proctor
     never read, the newspapers where he grew up, it was
     repeatedly covered, over and over and over again.
          From the Surgeon General's report, look what
     the health officials said in the 1950s.  The
     Surgeon General himself said, Our position is we
     have informed the public.  He's not saying the 2101 public has been deceived or Mr. Crawford,
     certainly.
          Look at what the National Cancer Institute
     said:  This is an exceedingly valuable way of
     informing the public.
          There is no reason to give punitive damages
     when the public was informed according to these
     officials.
          Here is the coverage of the Surgeon General
     report.  This is in Alabama, where he lived.  Here
     it is in Florida.  Here is the Health Department
     saying nearly everyone has heard about it.  Here is
     the warning label that he saw that his daughter
     said he already knew the risks when this came out.
     Even in Greensboro, the small town, in the weekly
     newspaper, repeatedly covering smoking and causing
     cancer.
          This is the 1970 warning that he said that he
     believed.  And from then on, there is no dispute he
     said he believed that smoking was dangerous and
     that it could cause cancer.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Belasic, you have about
     another five.
          MR. BELASIC:  Okay.  I'm going to need about
     ten minutes. 2102 THE COURT:  All right.
          MR. BELASIC:  Now, this was supposedly -- this
     was the conspiracy that Dr. Proctor talked about,
     Hill & Knowlton.  And the first thing that I want
     to remind you is he said the conspiracy didn't
     cause Mr. Crawford to smoke.  Well, but this is
     Mr. Crawford's case, and he has to prove that.  And
     his own expert says it didn't cause him to smoke.
          Dr. Proctor admitted that CTR; that when they
     ran that ad, it actually scared people.  It didn't
     fool people; it scared them into cutting down.
          The Surgeon General says that these health
     claims -- he showed you all these and said he made
     health claims -- look what the Surgeon General says
     happened:  Intended to reassure they were actually
     likely increasing consumer awareness of the
     suspected health risks of smoking.  And so now they
     want to punish you for something that even the
     Surgeon General says actually increased consumer
     awareness because when people saw ads about the
     Kools taste or effect on the throat, all it did was
     remind them again why smoking was controversial and
     why smoking was dangerous.
          We don't have to guess because we know that
     Mr. Crawford has said for at least 20 years before 2103 he smoked or before he got cancer, before he quit,
     that he knew those risks.
          They were going to show you -- unfortunately,
     that was the video where Dr. Koop -- they didn't
     play the audio.  This was the last statement from
     Dr. Koop, the famous Surgeon General.  This is the
     last time he weighed in on this case.  And this was
     in 2002.
          Look what he said:  The choice to light is
     always yours.  He doesn't say an addiction is the
     cause of your cancer; that once you smoke or once
     you call yourself addicted, you're just inevitably
     going to get it.  He said the choice to light up is
     always yours.  That's the Surgeon General.  No
     matter how much you smoked, the choice is always
     yours.
          They showed you this right on the last day
     with our expert, Dr. Samuel, the 2010 Surgeon
     General's report.  Look what it says.
          No one can make you quit.  No one can do it
     for you.  Even if you smoked for many years, you
     can quit.  So despite everything they say about the
     tobacco industry, people can quit.  They're not
     being stopped.  And they are quitting.
          Look, in just four years after the warning, 2104 30 million people quit.  30 million.  By 1982,
     30 million people had quit, and 95 percent just did
     it on their own.  There is no reason to award
     punitive damages for a legal consumer product that
     30 million people could quit, and the people who
     quit do it on their own, just like Mr. Crawford
     did.
          Dr. Koop said a few years later, it was up to
     40 million, and 95 percent did it on their own.
     And their own expert, Jack Henningfield, says it's
     now up to 60 million people.
          If that's a conspiracy and if Mr. Crawford
     could actually meet his burden of proof and you had
     to decide a conspiracy to get people to smoke when
     in fact 60 million people quit smoking, I submit to
     you that that is simply an improper amount of money
     to ask for.  To ask for $15 million for a man who
     knew the risks for 20 years and admits he could
     quit and says it was only his changing of his mind
     that did it, and now they want extra money.
          Look at what Dr. Henningfield said about the
     design of cigarettes.  Are they really more
     dangerous?  He said even if you did a
     roll-your-own, take roll-your-own tobacco and put
     it in paper, it would be just as addictive. 2105 Today's modern cigarettes aren't more addicting.
          He talked about ingredients, but the
     government has known about those for 30 years.  The
     FDA regulates them, and there is no indication that
     any ingredient in any cigarette that Mr. Crawford
     ever smoked had any relationship to his cancer.
     The FDA is regulated.
          They said the filters were a sham.  And what
     was the evidence for that?  There was one document
     that said something about the illusion of
     filtration, all right?  Has anyone ever looked at
     the people that smoke filters and see if they get
     more or less cancer than the people who don't?
     Yes.  The Surgeon General has, and many other
     studies.
          Here's what the Surgeon General has said over
     the years -- this is when Mr. Crawford was smoking:
     People who smoked filters with lower amounts of
     tar, they get less lung cancer.
          1981, Surgeon General:  Today's filter-tip
     cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer.
     That's the Surgeon General, not a tobacco company.
          1989, again, this was the year he quit
     smoking, so these are talking about the kind of
     cigarettes he smoked:  Smoking filters reduces the 2106 risk of lung cancer.
          Now, they can show other studies, and perhaps
     they will, that dispute this.  But let me ask you:
     Does this prove that the tobacco companies are
     horrible liars that were doing a scam?  The
     Surgeon General himself says that the people that
     smoke filters, they tend to get lower cancer rates.
     That's not a bad thing.  That's a good thing.
          There is no way that this filter issue means
     that he should get even more money.  There is no
     entitlement to punitives.
          In 1990, lower risk of lung cancer for people
     who smoke filters.
          Now, you're entitled to take into account any
     mitigating factors.  You heard that R.J. Reynolds
     worked with the government to make safer
     cigarettes, and it was called the Tobacco Working
     Group, the less-hazardous cigarette program.  You
     heard that R.J. Reynolds president, 1968, 50 years
     ago, told his employees, told the head of research:
     You should push the work concerning tobacco and
     health.  Foster a relationship with the government
     and a request for mutual understanding, and let's
     continue and increase our efforts to make a safer
     cigarette.  This is a secret document, too.  And 2107 it's not saying let's hide stuff or not make a
     safer cigarette.  He's telling them to cooperate
     with the government and make a safer cigarette.
          And so you heard that for ten years, there was
     a government program, and then it was shut down.
     It was shut down by the father of the man they
     chose out of all of the doctors.  It was shut down
     by Mr. Califano, the lawyer that was with HEW.
          After that, the government abandoned their
     efforts to make a safer cigarette, even though they
     thanked Reynolds for their cooperation.
          But Reynolds didn't stop trying to make a
     cigarette.  Look what they did -- or a safer
     cigarette.  They made Premiere.  The research
     showed there was less carcinogens in Premiere.
          Remember, this is the secret government
     meeting.  It's a secret government meeting from the
     Office of Smoking and Health in 1989.  Dr. Proctor
     admitted that while he may have heard about it, he
     had never even read this is.  This is the
     government saying there are less carcinogens in the
     Premiere cigarette.
          They said it was so safe, they were actually
     worried about it.  The panel was concerned about a
     cigarette that is actually safer.  The Premiere 2108 studies indicated that cancer risk associated with
     smoking Premiere was lowered significantly, but it
     didn't change heart disease.
          So R.J. Reynolds made a cigarette that
     significantly lowered the risk of cancer.  Was the
     government happy?  Did they say, "You guys have
     acted in good faith; that is a good thing to do for
     health"?
          No, they were worried with it.  They were
     actually concerned that Reynolds might make a safer
     cigarette.  And what do they say?  They say, "Let's
     go to war.  Let's not wait for research but go to
     war against Reynolds' new product, the new, safer
     cigarette."
          What do they do?  Here they are.  They're
     bragging about getting Premiere pulled off the
     market with negative publicity.  Look what they
     conclude, what the government concludes.  They
     reached a consensus that they need to get an expert
     panel to attack, to attack the new products.
     That's a product they thought was safer.
          Mr. Alvarez talked about outrageous conduct.
     What would you think if Reynolds had invented a
     safer cigarette, and they quashed it?  And if he
     had a secret document that said, "we can make a 2109 safer cigarette"?  Because he doesn't.  And he
     hasn't shown you that.  I've shown you this.
          Who was it that bragged about killing the
     safer cigarette?  Who was it that stopped Reynolds
     from putting it on the market?  Dr. Proctor
     admitted it was the United States government.  And
     look what Proctor said, Dr. Proctor:  "That's very
     interesting.  It makes the government look kind of
     pathetic there."
          I think "pathetic" is an understatement.
     Reynolds spent an enormous amount of time to make a
     safer cigarette, and the government got it banned.
     When you consider whether Mr. Crawford gets
     millions of dollars more because he said he's
     entitled to punitives, remember, the only safer
     cigarette that was going to reduce the risk of
     cancer was made by Reynolds, and the government
     banned it and laughed about it in that meeting.
     Dr. Proctor said they were pathetic.
          Let me finish up with this:  One of the things
     that Mr. Alvarez said, he said, "we should get
     punitive damages because there is a need to deter
     other companies' future bad conduct."  And you
     should know that the tobacco industry today is
     completely different than it used to be.  What they 2110 claim was done, everything they complained about,
     is now subject to regulation.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Objection, Judge.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BELASIC:  Your Honor, this is --
          MR. ALVAREZ:  You know what?  Go ahead and say
     it.
          MR. BELASIC:  Dr. Proctor said it.  The FDA
     regulates the tobacco industry.  They regulate the
     manufacturing of cigarettes, the marketing, the
     distribution.
          I asked Dr. Proctor:  "Does the FDA have
     control over ingredients now?"
          He said yes.
          So it's not a secret.  They're now regulated
     by the Food and Drug Administration like a drug.
     The FDA even controls nicotine deals.  The
     government, the government agency regulates them,
     and they can regulate marketing to young people.
          So you have a society now in which tobacco
     companies, the manufacturing of the cigarette, the
     advertising, and what goes in it is controlled by
     the government regulatory agency, the FDA.  They're
     subject to the same restrictions.  There is no need
     to deter that kind of conduct.  They don't have the 2111 power to do what they want.  The government
     regulates them.
          And all of these institutes, CTR, TIRC,
     they're long gone.  Dr. Proctor said they were
     disbanned in the late '80s.  It's been 15 years
     before they ever existed.  And now on Reynolds'
     website, it says right off the bat that smoking
     causes disease, that it causes cancer, and it's
     addictive.
          There is not going to be whatever he calls the
     "conspiracy."  That's no longer ongoing.  There is
     no longer a dispute.  And for that reason, there is
     no way that Mr. Crawford is entitled to get
     punitive damages on top of a damages award that
     they haven't even justified in the first place.
          And in my last minute, I'd like to remind you
     of one thing, and that's when Mr. Crawford says
     it's his legal cause, even if -- even if you found
     that he met some definition, and they don't have a
     doctor to back it, and they don't have the official
     definition, and none of his own doctors believed he
     was addicted, did -- it actually, legally and
     directly, cause his disease?
          No.  Because there is something in the middle,
     something that can stop the smoking and could stop 2112 him from ever getting a disease.  And there is a
     man in the middle.  That man is Mr. Crawford.  And
     the reason we say that is because Mr. Crawford said
     that nothing changed when he stopped smoking.
     Nothing changed except his mind.
          And you can't think of a case where someone
     says, "I have had a horrible injury and it was
     caused by someone else" and you could just change
     your mind and avoid it.  But that's this case.  And
     that's what Mr. Crawford said.
          He was the man in the middle.  No one could
     choose for him.  Reynolds didn't make him smoke.
     Those advertisements didn't make him smoke.  And he
     knew the risks.  When he changed his mind,
     suddenly, addiction had no effect on him, even if
     he could prove it.  Addiction was not the legal
     cause of this man's cancer.  If it was smoking, it
     was the choices that he made and the decisions that
     were up to him.  For that reason, you should vote
     no on the last question as well.
          Thank you for your your time, ladies and
     gentlemen, and for your concentration.
