          MR. KAISER:  May it please the Court, Counsel,
     ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning.
          JURORS:  Good morning.
          MR. KAISER:  What I'm going to do in my
     closing argument is put the verdict form up, and
     I'm going to, as best as I can, based on the
     evidence in this case, help you answer each
     question. 2541
          So I'm going to begin with number 1, "Was
     Antonio Cuculino addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine, and if so, was that addiction a legal
     cause of his coronary heart disease?"
          And I've got to tell you, the issue of
     addiction in this case is simple.  And why do I say
     that.  You heard evidence, Mr. Cuculino tried
     NICOTROL spray, the inhaler.  Mr. Cuculino tried
     Wellbutrin, the drug.  Mr. Cuculino tried laser
     therapy.  Mr. Cuculino tried acupuncture.
     Mr. Cuculino tried hypnosis.  Mr. Cuculino went to
     a smoking cessation clinic.  Mr. Cuculino was
     prescribed Chantix.
          So there is two questions.  Number one, what
     does it mean that he tried all of these different
     smoking cessation aids?  It means that addicted
     smokers must find it very hard to quit if they have
     all of these things on the market in order to help
     you quit.
          And number two, and most important is this:  A
     person who does not have a compulsive need to
     smoke, a compulsive need to use a psychoactive
     substance, can put it down anytime they want and
     walk away because they are not addicted.
          The distinction is an addicted smoker that 2542
     needs things to help him quit, that's the
     distinction.  You would never need to give someone
     who is not addicted Chantix.  You would never need
     to give them anything to help them stop because
     they are not addicted in the first place.  No
     doctor in his or her right mind would write a
     prescription to a nonaddicted smoker for Chantix,
     because we have heard that Chantix has very serious
     side effects, it gives you nightmares, suicidal
     thoughts, it's bad for your heart.
          And so it is a real simple issue here as
     Dr. Goldman, our expert that we called, said in all
     of the thousands of patients that he has treated
     for addiction, in all of the thousands of patients
     he has counseled for smoking, he has never once
     prescribed any smoking cessation aid to a
     nonaddicted smoker.
          The issue is simple, as to number 1, the
     answer is "Was Antonio Cuculino addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine?"  It is a
     resounding yes.
          "Was that addiction a legal cause of his
     disease?"  That answer is yes as well.  Why?  The
     fact that Mr. Cuculino had a compulsive need to
     smoke cigarettes, a psychoactive substance, meant 2543
     that he was not able to quit.  If he was not
     addicted, he could have put the cigarettes down and
     avoided getting sick.
          If he was told in 1989 you've got to stop
     smoking because of your health and he wasn't
     addicted, unless he was crazy or a lunatic, he
     would be able to put the cigarettes down and walk
     away and never smoke again.
          So the addiction caused the heart disease
     because he had this compulsion to use a
     psychoactive substance, that's all that means.
          So on your verdict form, when you consider the
     evidence, number 1 is yes.
          Number 2, "Was smoking cigarettes a legal
     cause of Antonio Cuculino's coronary heart
     disease?"
          You've heard from Dr. Feldman, you heard from
     Dr. Phillips.  One of the most important
     instructions for you is going to be the
     believability of witness instructions.  You saw
     Dr. Phillips answer questions on direct, you saw
     him answer my questions on cross.  There was quite
     a difference, wasn't there?
          Dr. Phillips was the person whose opinions are
     continuing to evolve.  Dr. Phillips is the person 2544
     who never apparently read Marie Cuculino's
     deposition.  Dr. Phillips is the person who never
     looked at the insurance application and the medical
     application until they were sent to his attorney
     this week -- last week.  Dr. Phillips was the
     person who, when information did not support his
     opinions, he discounted that information.  He
     discounted the insurance applications.
          Dr. Phillips was the person who when asked on
     cross examination whether he mentioned one iota,
     one time, diffuse disease in his deposition started
     out by saying I think I did.  When he was pressed
     further, he said I don't remember.  And when he was
     pressed further, he said no, I didn't.
          Dr. Phillips was the person who when he was
     asked wasn't this the first time you mentioned the
     fact that, in your opinion, Mr. Cuculino didn't
     follow his doctors' orders, he said, "I thought I
     said that in my deposition."
          "Do you remember saying it?  Let me show you
     your deposition," I said.
          "I don't remember."
          And finally when pressed, "No, I didn't say
     it."
          That's Dr. Phillips. 2545
          And so when you consider what Dr. Feldman had
     to say about it, you'll see that Mr. Cuculino's
     heart disease was absolutely caused by smoking.
     Because even Dr. Phillips will agree that the
     consistent thing we know, the consistent fact we
     know is that Mr. Cuculino smoked from a young age,
     he smoked a lot, and he smoked for a long time.
     Even Dr. Phillips agreed with that.
          And if you recall from the testimony of
     Dr. Feldman, Dr. Feldman started out and he told
     you that Mr. Cuculino's heart disease was premature
     cardiovascular heart disease because he had his
     first heart attack at 49 years of age.  No question
     about it.
          Dr. Feldman also told you that he went from
     coronary artery disease to coronary heart disease
     by virtue of having a heart attack.  So in 1994,
     according to Dr. Feldman, when Mr. Cuculino had his
     heart attack, he developed coronary heart disease.
          Dr. Feldman told you of the modifiable risk
     factors he was able to identify, first and foremost
     was cigarette smoking, and also high blood pressure
     that was basically controlled, and at high, it was
     only mildly high.
          Dr. Feldman also said that blood pressure 2546
     alone, given Mr. Cuculino's age when he had his
     heart attack, would not have contributed to that
     extent that would have caused Mr. Cuculino to have
     his heart attack at 49 years old.  It would have
     had to have been the combination of smoking, first
     and foremost, along with blood pressure.  And he
     said something else about the combination of the
     two, if you remember.
          Dr. Feldman also talked about this metabolic
     syndrome, he said that there was really no problem
     with Mr. Cuculino's weight up until the time he had
     his heart attack.  And he told you that "It is very
     important, the interaction between cigarette
     smoking and mild high blood pressure can be
     synergistic."  And remember how he explained that.
     It's not one and one is two, it's one and one can
     be five, one and one could be ten, that's how he
     explained the synergistic effect.
          Remember what he said, not only is cigarette
     smoking an independent risk factor all by itself
     that it can contribute to heart disease, but he
     said when you have cigarette smoking along with
     other risk factors like high blood pressure, that
     even causes the high blood pressure to be more of a
     risk factor.  That's called the multiplicative 2547
     effect or the synergistic effect.  So cigarette
     smoking on its own is a risk factor, and cigarette
     smoking coupled with another risk factor is even
     more of one.
          And remember Dr. Feldman said there was no
     evidence of this metabolic syndrome at the point
     when Mr. Cuculino had his heart attack.
          And so again, as Dr. Feldman said in his
     opinion here, was that "The overwhelming majority
     of this gentleman's cardiovascular disease in 1994
     was related to his significant cigarette smoking,
     coupled a little bit with the synergy of mildly
     elevated blood pressure with no evidence of a
     significant lipid problem, that his cholesterol --
     that's his cholesterol, no evidence of significant
     blood sugar problem and no evidence of metabolic
     syndrome."
          And something else Dr. Feldman said, "That
     when you smoke in terms of damage to your heart,
     there is a dose response."  And what does that
     mean?  That means that every single dose of smoking
     contributes to the disease process.  So you can't
     exclude one brand of cigarette from another.  Every
     little bit causes damage to the extent to where
     Dr. Feldman said there is a direct toxic effect of 2548
     cigarette smoking from the first cigarette.  The
     very first cigarette starts the disease process.
          And he also -- remember he said, "If you stop
     smoking, talk in terms of risk reduction."  And he
     said, "If you stop smoking, there is a period of
     about one and a half to five years where your risk
     goes down to where you are the equivalent of a
     nonsmoker."  Now, don't get that confused with any
     suggestion that if you quit smoking, the plaque
     that had built up, the damage that had been done
     goes away.  That damage stays there.
          Because remember what Dr. Feldman said?  "Even
     when you stop smoking and you have progression, you
     could have progression when every other risk factor
     is controlled."  Remember he said that.  And also,
     the fact is that the cigarette smoking still
     contributes even if you have stopped because the
     cigarette smoking has caused the damage up until
     the point that you do stop.  So there is no problem
     with the fact that Mr. Cuculino had progression
     after he stopped smoking because the damage was
     done from his 50 years of smoking.
          The bottom line is, as Dr. Feldman told you,
     it was the cigarette smoking that caused
     Mr. Cuculino's heart disease.  And so there is no 2549
     question, nothing else caused it.  The only other
     thing that caused it was his mildly high blood
     pressure, but as Dr. Feldman said, it was the
     cigarette smoking that was a substantial cause of
     Mr. Cuculino's heart disease.
          So in answer to number 2, "Was smoking
     cigarettes a legal cause of Antonio Cuculino's
     coronary heart disease," the evidence suggested it
     was, and you should answer yes.
          Now, the next part of the verdict form is
     called legal cause.  And after you've answered yes
     to the first two questions, you will then have the
     benefit of the Engle findings as Judge Cueto read
     them to you.  And that means, as you know by now,
     we don't have to put on any evidence to prove any
     of these findings.  And so the legal cause part on
     the verdict form, if we're able to show legal
     cause, we have proven that the -- we have proven
     our claim for strict liability and we have proven
     our negligence claim, because we have proven that
     the cigarettes that Antonio Cuculino smoked that
     were manufactured by Philip Morris and RJR caused
     his disease.  And what's legal cause?  Just what I
     said, that the cigarettes that were manufactured by
     the defendants caused Mr. Cuculino's heart disease. 2550
          So let's take R.J. Reynolds.  You remember in
     opening statement, Mr. Reid came up with this
     figure of a seven-year pack history of smoking
     their brand of cigarettes.  Mr. Cuculino smoked
     seven years of R.J. Reynolds cigarettes when he
     smoked Pall Malls.
          And so you take a seven pack-year, that could
     be a pack a day for seven years.  And then the
     question becomes, did that cause, did that
     contribute to Mr. Cuculino's disease.
          Well, of course it did because remember when
     Mr. -- Dr. Feldman said, it's a dose response.  So
     the fact that Mr. Cuculino quit smoking R.J.
     Reynolds product in about 1965 means nothing,
     because he switched to another brand and continued
     smoking, so that the disease process continued
     after he quit smoking R.J. Reynolds brands.
          And so by way of illustration, as Mr. Reid
     said in his opening statement, if he had a
     seven-year pack history of smoking, if he smoked a
     pack a day of his brand for seven years and quit,
     then the smoking of his brand didn't cause disease.
          Well, let's see that.  Let's put up the
     seven-year?
          MR. REID:  Could I ask what we're putting up 2551
     before we put it up?
          THE COURT:  What is it that you are putting
     up?
          MR. KAISER:  We're putting up how many doses
     that would be.
          MR. REID:  Oh, okay.
          MR. KAISER:  So if you have a pack a day for
     seven years, and there is 365 days in a year, that
     would mean there is 2,555 days where Mr. Cuculino
     smoked a cigarette for every one of those days.  If
     you take that number of days and you multiply it by
     20, which is the number of cigarettes in that one
     pack, that amounts to 51,100 cigarettes in that
     time period.  Now, how many puffs does one take in
     an average -- on the average of a cigarette?  One?
     Certainly more than that.  Two?  Ten?  Let's say
     eight.  If based on eight puffs of a cigarette --
          MR. REID:  Objection, there's no evidence of
     that in the record, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Excuse me.
          MR. REID:  I object, there is no evidence of
     that.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to tell the jury that
     remember that what the lawyers say during this
     phase of the trial is not evidence.  Rely on your 2552
     own memory of what the evidence is in this case,
     okay?
          MR. KAISER:  Use common sense and just figure
     out how many puffs someone would take of a
     cigarette before it is done, and eight is probably
     conservative.  And if you take eight and multiply
     it by the number of cigarettes, you end up with
     408,800 puffs over a seven-year period.  The
     question then becomes of the 408,800 puffs of all
     of those chemicals in the cigarettes, can you say
     that that wouldn't contribute to Mr. Cuculino's
     disease?  And of course it would.  Because by the
     time he starts smoking Philip Morris' brand of
     cigarettes, when he starts smoking Philip Morris'
     brand of cigarettes, he's already got 408,800 puffs
     invested in the bank, and that doesn't go away.
          And so there is no question, he has to smoke
     now 408,800 puffs less of his new brand before he
     gets his illness.  So absolutely, his smoking of
     R.J. Reynolds cigarettes contributed to his disease
     in that respect just by virtue of the number of
     puffs over that seven-year period.
          Secondly, he was addicted to those cigarettes.
     And the fact that he was addicted meant he had this
     compulsive need to continue smoking, and it doesn't 2553
     matter if he continued smoking R.J. Reynolds brand
     or another brand, the fact is he was addicted to
     their brand of cigarettes, which caused him to
     continue smoking whatever brand it was.  So that
     fact in and of itself that he was addicted and
     couldn't stop contributed to the disease process.
          So you have two reasons, his addiction to R.J.
     Reynolds cigarettes, his addiction to the Pall
     Malls, and the number of puffs of whatever
     chemicals that were in there, we know there are
     carcinogens and a whole bunch of other chemicals,
     and you add that together, was that significant?
     Certainly was.
          So the answer to the part of the question "Was
     smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendant R.J.
     Reynolds Tobacco Company a legal cause of Antonio
     Cuculino's coronary heart disease?"  The answer is
     yes.
          The same question, "Was smoking cigarettes
     manufactured by defendant Philip Morris a legal
     cause of Antonio Cuculino's coronary heart
     disease?"  Well, obviously, if smoking R.J.
     Reynolds cigarettes was a substantial cause, a
     legal cause, and he smoked -- Mr. Cuculino smoked
     their brand for about seven years, the fact that he 2554
     smoked Philip Morris' brand for almost 40 years,
     obviously, smoking those cigarettes was a legal
     cause of Mr. Cuculino's disease.  Remember, it's
     the dose effect, it's the combination.  There was
     not just one brand of cigarettes smoked here.
          If you had a situation where seven years of
     smoking wasn't enough for Mr. Cuculino to get his
     disease, in combination with the additional 40
     years, that would mean, and this is silly, that
     would mean that he could smoke a brand for seven
     years, another brand for seven years, another brand
     for seven years, another brand for seven years and
     have 35 years of smoking these different brands for
     seven years, but he wouldn't be liable, he wouldn't
     be sick from anyone's brand.  Now we know that's
     inane.
          So in answer to those questions, yes, yes, and
     finally, we are on next question, number 3, which
     is the reliance component.  And the question is,
     "Please state as to each defendant whether Antonio
     Cuculino reasonably relied to his detriment on that
     defendant's statement or omission of material fact
     or omitted material information concerning the
     health effects or addictive nature of smoking
     cigarettes not otherwise known or available to 2555
     Mr. Cuculino, and if so, whether such reliance was
     a legal cause of his coronary heart disease."
          Remember Dr. Proctor's testimony.  He was the
     historian of science.  And what he talked about was
     the fact that early on, before cigarettes became
     popular, it was the actions of the tobacco
     companies, including R.J. Reynolds, including
     Philip Morris, that popularized cigarettes.  And he
     explained to you the various methods by which the
     cigarette companies used to popularize their
     cigarettes.  And one of the things he talked about
     was their mass marketing efforts, where they
     utilized every medium available.
          Remember skywriting, and billboards, and
     radio, and television, and they got their message
     across and they had the funding to do that, so that
     using all of these methods of mass marketing,
     cigarette smoking, according to Dr. Proctor, was
     normalized.  The cigarette companies, R.J. Reynolds
     and Philip Morris, created a climate at the time
     that Mr. Cuculino started smoking such that it was
     a normal behavior, and that's why, when
     Mr. Cuculino was asked why did you start smoking?
     He gives the answer that everybody else gives who
     started at that time.  Because, what, everybody was 2556
     doing it.  It was cool to do it.
          Why do people respond in that way when they're
     asked?  Because that was the climate that was
     created by the tobacco industry, where you could
     walk into this courtroom in 1950 and smoke a
     cigarette.  Where you could walk into a doctor's
     office in the '50s and smoke a cigarette.  Where
     you could go into any public building and smoke a
     cigarette.  Where you could sit at your desk all
     day long and smoke a cigarette.  Where you could
     ride in a compact elevator with a bunch of people
     and smoke a cigarette.  Why you could go to a
     college and sit in a classroom and smoke a
     cigarette.  Why you could go on an airplane and
     smoke a cigarette.  Why you could walk into a
     restaurant and smoke a cigarette.
          You see the pattern here?  Cigarette smoking
     was normalized.  It was a normal part of behavior.
     And people like Mr. Cuculino saw the ads.  When he
     walked into a store, he saw posters.  When he
     walked on the street, he saw billboards.  When he
     was able to watch television, when his father let
     him, he saw commercials on TV.  And remember when
     he was on the witness stand, what did he say?  He
     said he saw that little guy Johnny, and he 2557
     identified with Johnny because at the time, he was
     the same size as Johnny.
          And what did he tell you?  He told you that
     Johnny would say "Call for Philip Morris."  And you
     know what Johnny didn't say?  "And they'll kill
     you."  And he started smoking.
          So it's not a question of him relying on one
     statement, it's a question of his relying on
     thousands of statements, thousands of statements
     that came from the advertising campaigns of R.J.
     Reynolds and Philip Morris.
          And you heard Mr. Cuculino describe to you why
     he switched to Marlboros, his wife was smoking
     Marlboros, but he was very familiar with Marlboro
     cigarettes because he said they used to be a lady's
     cigarette and Mr. Cuculino wasn't going to smoke a
     lady's cigarette.
          And you saw the Marlboro story and they
     transform this cigarette that was a woman's
     cigarette into a man's cigarette.  Where a man
     smoked that cigarette.  Where cowboys with tattoos
     on their hands smoked that cigarette.  Where
     someone like Mr. Cuculino could be a macho man
     smoking that Marlboro cigarette.
          So can I tell you what statement it was he 2558
     relied on?  Of course I can't.  But I can certainly
     tell you that because Mr. Cuculino saw all these
     ads and was exposed to their advertising campaign,
     he saw and heard thousands, thousands of statements
     from the tobacco companies.  And he relied on those
     statements that he heard, and at no time when he
     started to smoke at eight did he ever know or was
     told by the cigarette companies that, by the way,
     this stuff will kill you.  This stuff will get you
     addicted.  Because Johnny Roventini wasn't telling
     him that.  And the Marlboro Man wasn't telling him
     that.  And that's the reliance component.
          And I submit to you that on both of these
     reliance questions, number 3 as I read it, as to
     both companies, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris,
     the answer is a resounding yes, because each one of
     these tobacco companies advertised their product,
     Marlboros, Pall Malls, they each advertised their
     products, and it doesn't mean a lick.  It doesn't
     mean a thing that when Mr. Cuculino saw Johnny
     Roventini, he didn't smoke their cigarettes.  What
     it means is that he got their message regardless of
     the brand he ultimately picked because they were
     all in this together.
          And number 4, speaking of together, "Please 2559
     state whether Antonio Cuculino reasonably relied to
     his detriment on a statement or omission of
     material fact made in furtherance of that
     defendant's agreement to conceal that omitted
     material information concerning the health effects
     or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes not
     otherwise known or available to Mr. Cuculino, and
     if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of
     his coronary heart disease."
          For the same reasons I already explained to
     you, the answer for R.J. Reynolds, yes, for Philip
     Morris, yes.  There is no question, ladies and
     gentlemen, about this man's reliance on their ad
     campaigns and their statements that they made.
          And it doesn't matter if Mr. Cuculino didn't
     read the Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers.  It
     doesn't matter if he read the publications that
     they sent to the doctors.  It doesn't matter if he
     read the white papers that were sent to the
     senators.  What matters is from that information
     that was conveyed to those people, the climate was
     maintained so that he still thought it's fun to
     smoke cigarettes.  That's what that means.
          So the fact he didn't see the Frank Statement,
     big deal.  What he did see was the ad campaigns. 2560
     That's reliance on their advertising.  And they
     weren't truthful in their campaigns for him -- to
     him.
          And so that's the concealment and the
     conspiracy or the agreement to conceal.
          And so next on your verdict form is the
     apportionment of fault.  And lest you think for a
     minute that this case, as you were told in opening
     statement, was about just Mr. Cuculino, you are, in
     the words of Mr. Heimann in his deposition, dead
     wrong.  This case is about the choices that were
     made by Philip Morris.  This case is about the
     choices that were made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company.  And this case is about the choice that
     Mr. Cuculino ultimately made when he was eight
     years old to start smoking.
          And remember we spoke in jury selection about
     what age are people held responsible and
     accountable for the things that they do?  At what
     age do you think people are responsible?
          And by and large, the folks said maybe 16 or
     older.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Objection, Your Honor, it's
     outside the record.
          THE COURT:  Overruled. 2561
          MR. KAISER:  Do you think someone like
     Mr. Cuculino, when he was eight years old, made an
     informed choice to smoke cigarettes?  Do you think
     you could say, "That's Mr. Cuculino's choice,
     that's his fault, because he should have known
     better?"  Do you think Mr. Cuculino should have
     been responsible at eight years old for starting
     smoking because he didn't go to a public library
     and check out the medical journals that had these
     studies on epidemiology from the '50s?  Do you
     think Mr. Cuculino is responsible for not going to
     the library and reading those articles that were in
     German and Spanish?  And the answer is of course
     not.
          And the cigarette companies, R.J. Reynolds and
     Philip Morris, knew that.  What better person to be
     seduced by the allure of the rod, of the cigarette
     than an eight-year-old?  What better person to be
     seduced by the allure of the athletes pitching the
     product and the actors and the actresses pitching
     the product and the politicians pitching a product,
     an eight-year-old or an adult?
          Cigarette companies knew exactly what they
     were doing when they were targeting people like
     this man to pick up a cigarette and smoke. 2562           And so the question becomes, well, who is at
     fault here?  Who is at fault here?  We've already
     said we accept some responsibility for
     Mr. Cuculino's maybe not trying hard enough to
     quit.  And I'm going to tell you what, we don't
     accept one iota of responsibility for
     Mr. Cuculino's choice to start smoking because
     that's their fault.  That's Philip Morris' fault,
     that's R.J. Reynolds' fault.  Let me demonstrate
     how.
          And you remember, these are the companies'
     internal documents that were never supposed to be
     published, that were confidential documents.  And
     what's not on here, ladies and gentlemen, is that
     in 1953, remember, R.J. Reynolds had a chemist, a
     bench chemist, named Claude Teague, and Claude
     Teague wrote this memorandum to people in his
     company, and talked about the risks of tobacco
     smoking, the carcinogens in tobacco smoking, and
     the fact that tobacco in cigarettes caused cancer.
     They knew that in 1953.  Well, did any other
     companies other than R.J. Reynolds know that in
     1953?  You bet you.  You bet you.
          What do we have here?  You remember their
     response, the cigarette companies' response?  In
Veritext
Cuculino v RJ Reynolds
Volume 18
January17, 2014

     1953, they responded to the medical evidence of the
     dangers of smoking for one reason.  Do you think it
     was for health concerns?  Do you think it was for
     public safety?  Absolutely not.
          Their only reason for responding was because
     of their bottom dollar, because their shares of
     stock were dropping.  They could care a lick about
     the public.  They wanted their shares of stock to
     rise because they were losing money.
          And they met at the Plaza Hotel on December
     14th of 1953.  And what did they do?  They didn't
     hire medical doctors to research this issue.  They
     didn't hire medical people to see how they were
     going to respond to the public.  They hired the
     largest public relations firm in the country,
     Hill & Knowlton.
          And as a result of them hiring Hill &
     Knowlton, there was this December 1953 forwarding
     memo that was issued, confidentially.  And what did
     they say in this memo?  The Hill & Knowlton people
     were interviewing these tobacco researchers.  And
     what did they say?  "Fortunate for us that
     cigarettes are a habit they can't break."  Look at
     that.  Fortunate.  They were happy about it.
     Because they knew that cigarette smokers couldn't 2564
     break their habit of smoking.
          Early on in 1953, these defendants knew about
     addiction.  And they were happy about it.  Because
     they were going to get young smokers smoking their
     product, and they were going to get them for a long
     time.
          And they also said wouldn't it be wonderful,
     "Boy," with an explanation, "Wouldn't it be
     wonderful if our company was the first to produce a
     cancer-free cigarette?"  What does that mean?  It
     means in 1953, these people that got together to
     join and form this conspiracy at the Plaza Hotel
     knew that their cigarettes caused cancer.
          And what was their response, when they had
     this information before Mr. Cuculino had it,
     because remember, he didn't go to the library and
     read the articles and interpret the articles,
     Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds had this
     information before Mr. Cuculino had it.  They had a
     choice, do we tell people like Mr. Cuculino, an
     eight-year-old boy?  Do we tell the public so they
     could be warned about what's going to happen if you
     do buy our product?
          No.  No.  They chose to not tell the public.
     That was their choice. 2565
          Now, whose fault is that?  Is that
     Mr. Cuculino's fault?  Of course not.  Is that R.J.
     Reynolds' fault?  Is that Philip Morris' fault?
     You bet it is, because they made the choice, not
     Mr. Cuculino, to not tell them.  They didn't tell
     them about addiction, they didn't tell them about
     the health risks of their product in 1953,
     interestingly enough, when this man started
     smoking, at eight years old.
          And so what did they do.  Two weeks after this
     meeting in December of 1954, they issued their
     Frank Statement.  They issued their promise that
     they made to consumers, knowing full well about the
     cigarettes cause cancer and it was addictive, and
     what do they do?  They're going to be committed to
     hiring the best researchers to get to the bottom of
     this controversy.  Well, they knew there wasn't a
     controversy.
          Dr. Proctor told you there was already a
     scientific consensus about the dangers of smoking.
     And yet what did they do?  They created this ruse
     to fool the public into believing that they were
     going to hire these researchers to research the
     issues of smoking and health.  And you know what?
     They did hire researchers.  They hired competent, 2566      decorated researchers who did everything but
     research on smoking and health.
          And you saw in the Frank Statement, they're
     pledging, A, an assistance to the research effort
     into all phases of tobacco use.  And paramount to
     the companies was the health and safety of the
     community.  And we know that's poppycock.  Because
     they knew at the time what their cigarettes were
     doing and didn't tell them.
          And they issued this bogus Frank Statement
     that they were going to be committed to research.
     And you saw the names of the companies that were
     there, you saw the names Philip Morris, American
     Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson, which became
     R.J. Reynolds.  R.J. Reynolds was there.  All the
     heads of the big tobacco companies were there and
     they all signed on the dotted line when the Frank
     Statement was issued.
          And this didn't last for a week.  This didn't
     last for a month.  As Dr. Proctor told you, this
     campaign to create doubt about the health risks of
     smoking, this fake controversy that they caused,
     that they created, the defendants and others,
     lasted for 50 years.  50 years.
          And you see after this, more examples.  1963,
Veritext
Cuculino v RJ Reynolds
Volume 18
January17, 2014

     we got Brown & Williamson, and they later became
     part of R.J. Reynolds, what did they say in 1963?
     Moreover, nicotine is addictive not habituating, it
     is addictive.  Which they knew from 1953.  1963,
     they still know it's addictive and they also know
     they're not selling cigarettes because they taste
     so good.  They don't sell their cigarettes because
     it's so pleasurable after a nice hot cup of coffee.
     They're selling their cigarettes because they are
     in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive
     drug.  And what better way to get nicotine to your
     brain than that little rod called a cigarette.  And
     they knew it.  And they knew it, and didn't say a
     word to Mr. Cuculino.
          Is that Mr. Cuculino's fault because they
     didn't tell him?  Of course not.  That's the
     seller's fault, that's the seller's fault like the
     analogy to the car and the buyer who buys a car not
     knowing about the dangers because the seller
     doesn't tell him.
          And we move on.  1964, Philip Morris, what did
     they say?  The Surgeon General's Report comes out.
     Pretty alarming because now the Surgeon General is
     saying there is no question cigarette smoke causes
     cancer in men.  Big news.  It made big news. 2568
          And what was the response by Philip Morris?
     Was the response, look, this is really serious, it
     is nationwide about the health risk of smoking, do
     we tell the public?  Do we agree with what the
     Surgeon General says?  No.  Instead, all they were
     worried about was giving smokers a psychological
     crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
          Concerned about the public's health?
     Concerned about Mr. Cuculino's health?  Of course
     not.  They were concerned that someone like
     Mr. Cuculino might quit if he heard about the
     Surgeon General's Report, which he said he didn't.
     And so in that vein, they were more concerned with
     making sure that people like Mr. Cuculino, through
     their efforts, were given a psychological crutch to
     continue smoking.  Don't worry about this health
     scare, it's nothing.  They were more important.
          How are they going to do it?  Let's use humor
     and satire, apply the light touch.  Let's don't be
     serious and agree with anything.  Satire.
          And then we see almost 20 years later, the
     Tobacco Institute in their Roper Proposal, what did
     they say about their campaign of doubt?  Their
     strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed,
     which means in 1972 they were lauding their success 2569
     of creating doubt.  And they even said, what was
     the strategy?  A holding strategy consisting of
     creating doubt.
          Just like the evidence said in 1953, and now
     we're up to 1972.  Creating doubt about the health
     charge without actually denying it.  Because they
     know for 20 years or more already what cigarettes
     could do.  They knew 20 years before how addictive
     it was.  And they admit in 1972 that their strategy
     was brilliantly conceived, and it was a holding
     strategy to create doubt, and they continued it up
     until 2000.
          These are the choices that were made by the
     tobacco companies, by R.J. Reynolds, by Philip
     Morris, not Antonio Cuculino.  So when you are
     apportioning fault, can you give any fault on that
     to Mr. Cuculino?  Of course you can't because he's
     not making the choice to create doubt.  He's not
     making the choice, this campaign of creating doubt.
          And there is more.  And you remember how we
     finished our case.  We played excerpts from the
     talking heads, from the executives of the cigarette
     companies.  And what did they say?  Remember the
     mantra that Dr. Proctor was talking about.  "If we
     find anything damaging in our product, we'll take 2570
     it out," knowing full well they couldn't take it
     out.  "If we find anything damaging in our
     products, we'll close our business."  Oh, come on.
     And that was the mantra.
          And you see a 1972 planning memo by Claude
     Teague, 1972.  And what is he saying in 1972,
     almost 20 years after their conspiracy began?
     "Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both
     habituating and unique."  They were giddy about it.
     "Happily."  This is in their own confidential
     documents.  Happily for them, our smokers get
     addicted and they are going to have to use our
     product for a long time.  And in 1978, Philip
     Morris, what are they writing?
          And remember you heard in Mr. Reid's opening
     statement, "You are not going to hear anything that
     the Tobacco Institute -- Industry Research
     Committee was a front.  There is not going to be
     any evidence of that."  And what is Philip Morris
     saying in 1978, almost 25 years later?
          "The TIRC was set up as an industry shield in
     1954."  Remember, Dr. Proctor said that it was a
     shield, it was a distraction from the truth.  "TIRC
     is acting as a front."  It was a shield and a front
     in 1978.  Privately they are acknowledging it.  Are 2571
     they telling the public?  Should Mr. Cuculino know
     that, oh, I shouldn't believe this stuff, it was
     all a front, a shield?  Of course not.  But they
     know it.
          And then we go up to 1994, you saw the Waxman
     hearings, where each of the companies' executives
     under oath were asked whether or not smoking is
     addictive, and each one in turn "Smoking is not
     addictive.  We believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.  Nicotine is not addictive."  This is
     1994.  "We don't believe it causes cancer."  In
     1994.  Who is at fault for making all these
     statements?  Mr. Cuculino?  He didn't utter a word.
          It's the sellers' fault.  It's not buyer
     beware here.  It's their fault.
          This case is not about Mr. Cuculino, it's
     about the defendants and Mr. Cuculino and your
     ability to apportion fault based on the evidence in
     this case.
          THE CLERK:  30 minutes.
          MR. KAISER:  And with that, I have some
     questions here that you need to think about when
     you hear the closing arguments from defense counsel
     and consider these questions and see how the
     defense attorneys are going to respond to that. 2572
          And we're going to consider a balanced at
     fault so that, number one, why do the defendants
     fail to address their statements made in their
     confidential internal documents?
          Remember all you heard in opening statement
     from one of the attorneys was that, well, yes, you
     are going to see some of these internal documents,
     and there were some stupid statements.  Well, you
     see you heard that in opening statement.  That's
     not evidence.
          And you certainly heard no evidence from this
     witness stand from anyone explaining why these
     statements were made and why they were stupid.
     Didn't hear anything about that.
          And so you've got to question why do the
     defendants fail to address their statements?  Why
     don't they pick up their internal documents in
     front of you and say this is why we said that?
     This is what we meant when we said the TIRC was a
     front.
          This is what we meant when we were giddy about
     cigarettes being addictive.  This is what we meant
     when we said happily, that people will get
     addicted.  This is what we meant when we said
     nicotine is an addictive drug.  This is why we 2573
     didn't address the public when we knew in 1953 that
     cigarettes were addictive and they could kill
     people.  So keep in mind during the closing
     arguments why didn't they address those arguments?
          And you know what, they won't do it in their
     closing argument.  They will not.  You will not
     hear any explanations as to why they won't address
     their statements.  And you know why they won't
     address their statements?
          Because if they do address their statements,
     they have to admit fault and if they don't address
     the statements, you know they're wrong, you know
     that's an admission by silence of their fault.  And
     you won't hear a word about documents and why they
     made these stupid statements.
          And secondly, why do they act as if they don't
     exist?  Why is it when they question Dr. Proctor
     they want to put out these few articles in the
     newspaper and these Reader's Digest articles that
     Mr. Cuculino didn't read and the Florida Health
     Notes from 1900 before Mr. Cuculino was born and
     the 1605 Counterblaste to Tobacco, and all of these
     things they want to show that oh, Mr. Cuculino
     would have known all this stuff, he would have
     known that the cigarettes were banned, the sale of 2574
     cigarettes were banned in 1908 in Florida.  He
     would have known all that stuff.
          Why do they act that they don't exist?  Why
     don't they comment on their white papers they
     distributed to hundreds of thousands to combat that
     information?  Why -- ask yourselves, why don't they
     get up here and talk to you about their health
     notes and their letters, their newsletter that they
     were sending out talking about bald people and lung
     cancer and people born in March, about all these
     publications they were sending doctors and senators
     and all these influential people?
          Ask yourself, why do they keep acting like
     that?  Why won't they talk about their response to
     the Reader's Digest articles and their response to
     all this other information that might have existed
     in LIFE magazine?  And they won't do it.
     Guaranteed, they won't address why they ignored
     their own attack to try to discount this message
     which they did.
          Remember Dr. Proctor, they were very
     successful in getting people to believe their
     message.  So you have to ask yourself why are they
     acting like that?  Well, because if they don't
     exist, all there would be is evidence that 2575
     Mr. Cuculino should have known about this bad
     information, that's why they do that.
          And if they come up here and start talking
     about their response, they're going to have to
     admit fault.  And if they ignore it, which they
     will, by silence, they're admitting fault.
          When the defendants knew by the '50s, and I
     have already showed you, 1953 that cigarette smoke
     contained carcinogens and could cause cancer, why
     was it their choice not to tell the American public
     and Mr. Cuculino?  You see if they get up here and
     respond, and guaranteed they won't.
          And ask that question, why did you all get
     that information, know that information and not
     tell anybody?  If they get up here and admit that,
     they're admitting fault.  If they get up here and
     don't say anything, their silence is an admission
     of fault.
          When they knew that nicotine was an addictive
     drug in the '50s, why did they choose, not
     Mr. Cuculino, why did they choose not to tell the
     American public?  That's a question you need to ask
     and see if any of these defense attorneys are going
     to say this is why we didn't tell the consumer.
     They're not going to do that.  They're going to 2576
     ignore it.
          The fact is if they did talk to you about it,
     they would have to admit that they were at fault.
     If they don't talk to you about it, their silence
     speaks volumes because they know they're at fault
     and they can't talk about it and they won't.
          While professing to accept an interest in
     people's health through the Frank Statement and
     cooperating with those tasked with safeguarding the
     public health, why did the defendants ridicule the
     Surgeon General's Report?  Remember on
     cross-examination, well, weren't the defendants
     thanked by the Surgeon General for their
     contribution?  They were thanked.  They got a thank
     you.
          And you know what they didn't do?  They didn't
     tell the Surgeon General's Report {sic} what they
     knew about addiction.  They didn't tell them they
     knew that nicotine was an addictive drug.  They
     didn't tell them they knew about the carcinogens in
     their product.  They didn't do any of that.  But
     they professed to cooperate with the Surgeon
     General, and the second his reports were issued in
     '64 and '72 and '88, they ridicule him.
          Now, why do they do that?  Why on the one hand 2577
     are they publicly able to say, look what we're
     doing, and privately -- and publicly, they're
     ridiculing them?  See if you get a response to
     that.  The response is going to be they got a thank
     you.  They gave him The Green Monster, that book of
     bibliographies where you could buy it for $8 and
     mail it.  That's what they did.
          Why did the defendants respond to the strong
     evidence linking cigarettes to cancer, of which
     they were already aware, with a campaign designed
     to create doubt about the health risk and addictive
     nature of cigarettes for the next 50 years?  That's
     on them.  That's not on Mr. Cuculino.
          See if they get up here and talk about their
     campaign to create doubt for 50 years, and you know
     they won't because if they do, they'll have to
     admit fault, and if they ignore it, it still
     doesn't go away.  Their silence speaks volumes.
          Did the defendants want Antonio Cuculino to
     believe their message about more research being
     needed, no proof that cigarettes were dangerous,
     bad things would be removed in cigarettes if they
     were found, and they would close their business if
     it was found that their cigarettes were dangerous
     to health? 2578
          Of course, they wanted him to believe that
     because if he believed that, he continues smoking
     because the jury was still out and they're not
     going to address that with you.  Because if they
     address it to you, they're going to have to admit
     that they were at fault.  They're not going to do
     that.  You know why?  They take zero fault here.
          They say they are zero percent at fault and
     it's all on Mr. Cuculino as if he's to blame for
     all of these things.  He's to blame for their
     knowledge; he's to blame for their concealment;
     he's to blame for their not disclosing the
     information that they knew.  Of course not, that's
     silly.
          And finally, if Mr. Cuculino did believe their
     message, who is more at fault, Mr. Cuculino?  Or
     the people that are trying to make him believe in
     their denialist message in their controversy that
     they created?  Of course the cigarette companies.
     And so that's --
          THE COURT:  Who has got a phone on in here?
          MR. KAISER:  And that's the seller's fault.
     That is R.J. Reynolds' fault.  That is Philip
     Morris's fault.  That's the fault of all the
     companies that got together in 1953.  And so what's 2579
     the fault of Antonio Cuculino here?  Antonio
     Cuculino maybe, maybe didn't try hard enough to
     quit.  That's it.  That's his fault.
          When Antonio Cuculino was eight, I've already
     been through this, did he make an informed
     decision?  Did he have the judgment to be able to
     determine whether or not he was doing something
     that was sound?
          And, of course, the answer is no.  And the
     tobacco companies knew that.  And that's why they
     targeted people like Antonio Cuculino, because they
     knew they were the ones who were going to be the
     most convinced to start smoking cigarettes because
     it was cool.
          And so we get to Mr. Cuculino's fault.  And so
     how much do you want to put on him?  Well, I mean,
     there is different ways to do it.
          And the bottom line is this:  At some point,
     it really became common knowledge that smoking is
     bad.  Whether Mr. Cuculino heard it or saw it, in
     1989 when the doctor in the medical record told him
     after he had chest pains you need to quit, okay?
     That was on him.  That was on him.  Did he heed the
     message?  No, he didn't.  He did not try.  That's
     on him. 2580
          There is no question about it.  We accept
     responsibility for Mr. Cuculino when he was told in
     1989 you've got to stop and he didn't try, that's
     his fault.  That is his fault.  And in 1990, that's
     his fault.  And in '91, that's his fault.  Up until
     2000, he finally did try and quit.
          So what do you have, you have 11 years where
     Mr. Cuculino failed to try to quit and we accept
     responsibility to that.  Now, 11 years, we put 11
     percent for him and put 89 for the defendants
     because after 2000, Mr. Cuculino does try and quit
     and he tried everything under the sun you heard.
     Now, do you really think he's not trying when he's
     spending money, when he's spending time and he's
     going through all of these things and he takes
     Chantix, not once but three different sessions
     knowing of the risk because he's having nightmares?
          Can you really say that, you know, he just
     didn't try hard enough, he just wasn't motivated,
     because some doctor after the fact said, "Well, you
     must not be motivated."  "Yeah, I guess you were
     right."  What does that mean?
          The fact is from 2000 until the time he
     stopped, he tried.  And you can't fault him for
     trying.  And you can't fault him for that.  And he 2581
     did quit.  And the only reason he was able to quit
     in 2009 was because of Chantix.  And even the good
     Dr. Phillips acknowledged that all the other
     smoking cessation aids are not good.  They're not
     successful.
          But Mr. Cuculino thankfully was able to quit
     in 2009.  So put 11 percent on him.  He
     acknowledges that responsibility.  For the time
     that he at least didn't try, there is no excuse for
     that.  He was put on notice in 1989 from the
     doctor.  Put that on him.  And you've got 11
     percent and 89 percent for the defense.
          And so when you fill out the verdict form,
     however you want to do it, Philip Morris and R.J.
     Reynolds, the total is 89, however you want to
     break that down, and 11 for Mr. Cuculino.
          Let's talk about damages.
          We talked about in jury selection the fact we
     are seeking non-economic damages, something you
     can't really quantify, but I'm going to help you do
     it.  Everything we do in our lifetime is based on
     units of time.
          We all wear watches because we are driven by
     time, we have to be somewhere at a certain time.
     You go to bed at nighttime, you get your eight 2582
     hours of sleep, you go to work, eight-hour,
     ten-hour day.  Everything is based on hours.
          Athletes play sports, quarters in football,
     time.  15 minutes a quarter.  Basketball 12 minutes
     a quarter.  College students take courses based on
     hours, three-hour course, four-hour course, 15
     hours a semester.
          Everything we do is based on time.  People
     that work for a living, they get paid by the time
     that they work.  They get paid per hour.  You take
     an athlete, they make tremendous sums of money for
     what they do.  They work hard, they do well, they
     get paid for what they do.  They have an off
     season, they go on vacations, they get ready to
     play the next season.
          Actors and actresses make astronomical sums of
     money for what they do.  They entertain people,
     they make lots of money, they finish a movie, they
     go home, they go on vacation, they come back and
     make another movie.  They work hard.  They make a
     lot of money.  Teachers, they teach kids, they do a
     good service, they don't make as much money.  What
     is it, $30 an hour.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Objection, Your Honor, outside
     the record. 2583
          THE COURT:  Sustain.
          MR. KAISER:  They make money.  They teach
     kids.  They go home after the day, they have the
     summers off, and they come back and they teach
     kids.  Expert witnesses they get paid for what they
     do.  What do they get paid, $750 an hour to
     testify?  They do their job, they do their review,
     they give their opinions and they go home.
          Well, Antonio Cuculino got a job also.  Philip
     Morris and R.J. Reynolds gave Antonio Cuculino a
     job when they lured him into smoking and the job
     was that he was going to suffer from progressive
     heart disease.  That's the job that he was given.
          And I say progressive because it's not going
     to get better, it's going to get worse, and that's
     because of the cigarettes that he smoked.  And so
     Mr. Cuculino never in his mind would have applied
     for this job.  In a million years would he want
     this job.  In a million years would anybody want
     the job that Mr. Cuculino was given.  Of course
     not.
          Mr. Cuculino has no benefits with this job.
     Mr. Cuculino has no vacation time with this job.
     Mr. Cuculino has no down time with this job.  It is
     not an eight-hour job, ten-hour job, it's a 24-hour 2584
     job because his disease doesn't go away.
          And Mr. Cuculino doesn't have a retirement
     plan.  Mr. Cuculino retires when he dies, whenever
     that may be.  And so the question becomes should
     Mr. Cuculino be compensated by the hour just like
     other people are that work?  Of course.
          Other people volunteer.  Other people want a
     job.  Mr. Cuculino didn't.  Other people enjoy
     their work.  Mr. Cuculino obviously doesn't enjoy
     his job.  So the question then becomes what is an
     hourly rate that we can assign to Mr. Cuculino
     based on the acts of the tobacco companies in this
     case.
          You know, what is it that's going to be a just
     and appropriate figure?  Who in their right mind
     would want to trade places with Mr. Cuculino and
     take this job.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Objection, golden rule.
          THE COURT:  Sustain.
          MR. KAISER:  Would someone do it for a million
     dollars an hour?  Probably not.  Would someone do
     it for anything?  Probably not.
          MR. REID:  Objection, that's a continuation of
     the same argument, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained. 2585
          MR. KAISER:  I'm not.
          THE COURT:  Sustained, move on.
          MR. KAISER:  So we have to arrive at a figure.
     And what I've done here is to give you different
     versions of --
          MR. REID:  Could we come sidebar, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Certainly.
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
          MR. KAISER:  And so what is fair and just and
     appropriate under the circumstances in this case?
     Let's look at Mr. Cuculino.  What's his life like
     since he's gotten this disease?  You've heard what
Veritext
Cuculino v RJ Reynolds
Volume 18
January17, 2014

     his daily activity is.  He sits and watches TV.
     His wife works in Philadelphia as a cashier in a
     CVS.
          While he used to be active and go fishing and
     tinker with his race cars and go lobstering and he
     owned boats, he doesn't have that anymore.  He
     can't certainly go on the water now for fear of
     having a heart attack and not be around any
     hospital in time, so he doesn't do that, he sold
     his boat.
          He can't walk around the island like he used
     to because he gets chest pain and he is wedded to
     his nitroglycerin, he has to spray it because he
     gets his angina, this shortness of breath and chest
     pain.  And so he is sedentary now.
          And we know that the doctors tell him he needs
     to exercise, but this man can't, his arteries are
     done.  And so he sits in a sedentary lifestyle
     watching television.  What did he tell you?  Their
     marriage is a lot different now than it was before.
     There is no intimacy in the marriage, you have
     heard that.  That is something that's lacking now,
     it's very important and it's lacking.
          And Mr. Cuculino has told you that he thinks
     constantly about what can happen with the next 2589
     heart attack.  He fears that next heart attack
     because he believes he could die.  And just a --
     you know, it's a terrible thought for him to have
     to go through every day, thinking to himself that
     as I'm walking, as I'm sitting, I could just have
     this one heart attack and I'm not going to survive.
     And that's what happens, he's got this progressive
     disease and he keeps thinking about this.
          And Mr. Cuculino told you that the way he
     feels now is that he believes he is a burden to his
     wife.  How sad is that?  That because of his health
     reasons, he is a burden to his wife.
          And so Mr. Cuculino's life right now is really
     doctors' appointments, hospital stays, and 15
     medications a day.  And it's only going to get
     worse because the disease progresses.  But in terms
     of damages, take the time that he was diagnosed in
     1994 and go 15 years to when he stopped smoking.
     And assign a damage award for just that.
          And you don't even need to go further if you
     don't want to.  Even into the future, you don't
     need to go any further than that, and what's a
     comparable figure.  This is what I believe the
     evidence shows.  And you could go to a high range,
     a low range, or a mid range. 2590
          Based on the evidence in this case, $10
     million is appropriate in order to compensate
     Mr. Cuculino for the injuries that were caused by
     the defendants in this case.
          THE CLERK:  12 minutes.
          MR. KAISER:  You might go lower, you might
     want to go higher.  But what I'm saying is, confine
     yourselves to the period of time that Mr. Cuculino
     was ill with heart disease from 1994 up until the
     time in 2009 that he quit.  It's up to you.  You
     might decide, no, he's entitled to future damages.
          You've heard the defense say, well, if the
     progression of the heart disease is continuous and
     he's not smoking, it mustn't be from smoking.  But
     that's not the case.  The case is that smoking is
     still attributable to his progression because the
     damage is there.
          All I'm asking and all Mr. Cuculino is asking
     is that he be compensated up until the time he
     stopped smoking about $10 million.  And there is
     more because this case has shown by a greater
     weight of the evidence that Mr. Cuculino -- that
     the defendants should be punished for their acts.
     And we believe we've proven by a greater weight of
     the evidence that Mr. Cuculino is entitled to 2591
     punitive damages.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Your Honor, object.  That's
     the wrong burden of proof.
          MR. KAISER:  By clear and convincing evidence
     on this one.  We have to prove entitlement to
     punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence,
     which is a different standard than the greater
     weight.
          And we have shown you by clear and convincing
     evidence, number one, the tobacco companies knew
     about the health risks of smoking their product and
     chose not to tell the public.  That wasn't by
     accident, that was by design.  That's intentional.
     That's reprehensible.
          The defendants wanted smokers like
     Mr. Cuculino to become addicted to their
     cigarettes.  They wanted them to start smoking at a
     young age and continue smoking for a long time.
          The defendants marketed their cigarettes to
     people that were impressionable like Mr. Cuculino.
     They engaged, the defendants did, in a conspiracy
     to create doubt about the health risks and
     addictive nature of smoking.  Didn't last for a
     day, it didn't last for a week, it lasted for 50
     years.  That was by design, not by accident. 2592
          The defendants lied to the public about the
     health risks of smoking.  They created this
     controversy that didn't exist, and it continued for
     50 years.  The defendants lied to the public about
     nicotine not being addictive when they knew full
     well from 1953 on that their product was addictive
     and that they were selling nicotine, not
     cigarettes.
          Millions of people have been harmed from the
     defendants' intentional acts from smoking
     cigarettes, and they know that.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Objection, Your Honor,
     Williams, State Farm.
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. KAISER:  That was already ruled on in
     the --
          THE COURT:  Well, let's go sidebar.  Please,
     no speaking objections.
          (The following is at the bench.)
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Your Honor, this is harm to
     others.  It's Williams/State Farm.
          MR. KAISER:  And this is what you allowed in
     because it goes to reprehensibility.
          THE COURT:  Okay, overruled.
          (In open court.) 2593
          MR. KAISER:  Millions of people have been
     harmed from their products, from their intentional
     acts.  And what does that mean?  That goes to their
     conduct, their reprehensibility.  And if you find
     that their conduct is reprehensible, then we are
     entitled to punitive damages.
          And you know what else?  They continued flue
     curing their tobacco.  Remember Dr. Proctor talking
     about that?  They continued to do that knowing that
     flue curing was what allowed smokers to inhale the
     smoke and get that smoke all the way into their
     lungs.
          And they continued to do that even after they
     knew about the dangers of their smoking.  All that
     had to be done was to not use flue-cured tobacco so
     that people like Mr. Cuculino couldn't inhale the
     smoke and perhaps they wouldn't have gotten
     diseases.
          And so when you consider all of these factors
     here, we have shown by the clear and convincing
     evidence that Mr. Cuculino is entitled to punitive
     damages in order to punish the defendants for their
     conduct and to deter them and others from future
     conduct.
          And so, ladies and gentlemen, I ask that you 2594      consider the evidence in this case, you consider
     the testimony of the witnesses in this case, and
     that you award Mr. Cuculino $10 million
     compensatory damages for his pain and for his
     suffering as a result of his progressive heart
     disease, as well as finding that he is entitled to
     punitive damages.  Thank you.


          MR. KAISER:  If you noticed on that Harry
     Reasoner clip, what did he say?  He was talking
     about choice as it related to adults.  He didn't
     say anything about children eight years old.  He
     said the responsibility of the choice is with an
     adult.  So consider that.
          Let me just run again, the sequence of the
     verdict form, I promise I'll be brief this time,
     and as far as addiction, I don't mean to beat a
     dead horse because it really isn't a choice
     anymore, but let's just talk about a couple of
     things here.
          You know, was it a question of Mr. Cuculino
     just enjoying that cigarette so much?  Or was it a
     question of addiction?  And number one, look at all
     the attempts he made to quit.
          And as I said before, when the man was on
     Chantix with all of the risks and the side effects,
     and he even told you he had these nightmares, but
     he still took it and he took all of these things
     because, why?  Because he was addicted.
          He didn't need any of these things if he
     wasn't addicted.  All he needed to do was to throw
     the cigarettes down and walk away.  And this is 2679
     pure common sense.  It's simple why an addicted
     smoker is different than someone who is not
     addicted.  The nonaddicted smoker doesn't need
     that.  This is due to an addiction, not enjoyment.
          And the fact that Mr. Cuculino was able to
     quit on Thanksgiving or days after Thanksgiving of
     2009, you have heard not one shred of evidence
     other than from Dr. Goldman.  That doesn't mean
     that he was able to quit the day before.  That
     doesn't mean that he was able to quit in 1956.
     That doesn't mean anything.  It meant that he was
     able to quit on the day that he was able to quit.
     That's all.
          Number two, this is a man who is smoking after
     heart attacks.  He's smoking after these
     catheterizations and stentings.  He's got about 13
     stents in his arteries.  He's smoking after heart
     bypass surgery.
          You think this is a man who, despite all of
     these things, enjoyed smoking so much that he's
     going to continue to do it knowing that this is
     what is going to happen to him?  Or is it a
     question of maybe the man is addicted and he's
     addicted to this psychoactive substance?
          Number three, no, he enjoyed it because, as he 2680
     said, it relaxes him.  Now, remember, and I don't
     want to get it, but we showed you a document during
     the case, and in that document, from Philip Morris
     I believe, what did it say?  What's the reason
     people give when they are asked about why they
     smoke?
          Two responses:  It relaxes me or it stimulates
     me.  And the conclusion was these people don't know
     why they're smoking because the complete polar
     opposites of what people are telling or saying for
     why they smoke, it relaxes me, it stimulates me.
          If Mr. Cuculino really thought cigarettes
     relaxed him, then there must have been something
     really pathological going on because consider this.
     If he needed a cigarette every hour or 20
     cigarettes a day for 50 years because it relaxed
     him, then what's going on with his health that he
     needed to be relaxed that often during the daytime
     every day for 40 years?
          The bottom line is when he says it relaxed
     him, what it did was it got rid of the withdrawal
     symptoms and the jitters if he didn't smoke.
     That's what this means.  It relaxes me, read I'm
     addicted, and I'm not getting withdrawal symptoms
     when I smoke, that's why I smoked 20 cigarettes a 2681
     day for 50 years.
          This is a man who stopped going to movies,
     according to his wife, when he was no longer
     allowed to smoke inside the theater.  This is a man
     who, if he was in a car, he couldn't stop -- and he
     needed to smoke, he would make the person stop the
     car so he could get out and smoke.  That's not
     someone who enjoys it so much that he needs to do
     this; that's the person who is addicted.
          And we put up here one pack per day for 15
     years.  Now, what does that mean?  You know, just
     figure out something that a person could like.  A
     person could like eating pizza.  A person could eat
     pizza once a week.  A person might get sick of
     pizza after a couple of weeks and decide, you know
     what, I'm not having pizza this Friday.  I might
     not have it next Friday.  That's someone who likes
     something, but they don't have to do it constantly.
     They'll get bored of it, they'll get sick of it.
          But to think that Mr. Cuculino smoked a pack
     of cigarettes a day for 20 years, do you think
     that's enjoyment?  Do you think maybe if it was a
     question of his enjoyment and not his addiction,
     that maybe he'll take a day off because he's bored,
     maybe I'll take a weekend off? 2682
          I don't need to smoke, I'm busy.  Maybe I'll
     take a week off.  I've been doing this 30 years,
     I'm getting a little sick of it.
          No.  The point is he was addicted and couldn't
     stop during that time.  It wasn't a question of
     enjoyment.
          And finally, if you figure out 50 years of
     smoking -- and I could do the same thing with puffs
     based on eight puffs per cigarette.  If you have a
     pack a day for 50 years, and there is 365 days, and
     365 days in a year amounts to 18,250 days of
     smoking, which translates into 365,000 cigarettes
     that Mr. Cuculino smoked, times eight puffs on each
     one, that's 2,920,000 puffs of cigarettes.
          We know that for every one of those 2,920,000
     puffs, he got doses of nicotine.  And we know that
     nicotine is an addictive, dangerous drug.  How many
     puffs do you think it takes to become addicted?
     2,920,001?  I mean, 2 million was certainly enough,
     2,900,000 puffs was certainly enough to where
     Mr. Cuculino was addicted to the nicotine in the
     cigarettes that he smoked.
          It's not a question of motivation.  It's not a
     question of not trying.  Mr. Cuculino was addicted
     to smoking.  And ultimately, it was the Chantix 2683
     that he took that took out the urge to smoke, and
     that's why he was able to quit.
          As far as the heart attack and his coronary
     heart disease and whether or not the smoking caused
     it, look, this is simple.  Take Dr. Feldman's
     credentials against Dr. Phillips' credentials.
     Because both expert witnesses have the ability to
     consider the same records, to review the same
     depositions, to review everything that they got,
     and yet their conclusions were totally opposite.
          Well, how do you explain that?  Someone is
     wrong.  So if you just take their credentials,
     you're going to see one is a lot more controllable
     than the next.
          Dr. Feldman has been publishing since the '80s
     and continues to publish to this day.  Dr. Phillips
     has not published in 30 years.  Dr. Feldman has
     been the principal investigator on countless
     studies, including relating to smoking cessation,
     including related to metabolic syndrome.  Dr.
     Phillips has not done anything related to smoking
     and health and never been a lead investigator in
     that regard.
          Dr. Feldman has lectured worldwide on the
     subject of presentation as it relates to coronary 2684
     artery disease, which includes smoking and health,
     and he told you he's been doing this for years and
     lectures worldwide.  Dr. Phillips has not.
          Dr. Feldman has actually written and published
     on metabolic syndrome.  Dr. Phillips has not.
     Dr. Feldman has one case remaining after he
     testified in this case where he is going to serve
     as an expert witness.  Dr. Phillips after he leaves
     has 15.
          The bottom line is Dr. Feldman is a
     cardiologist who happens to be an expert witness on
     occasion.  Dr. Phillips is an expert witness who
     happens to be a cardiologist on occasion, and who
     gets $750 for his testimony, and you see what you
     get when you pay $750 for someone like him.
          And I submit to you, based on the credentials
     and lack thereof and based on how that man appeared
     on the witness stand that he was not credible
     whatsoever.
          And you know what, Mr. Reid alluded to this,
     and the fact is that the best truth mechanism, the
     best truth-telling mechanism we have is through
     cross-examination.  Because you saw how this man,
     Dr. Phillips, answered questions on direct, and you
     saw how he answered my questions on 2685
     cross-examination.
          And his demeanor changed dramatically.  And
     his answers changed dramatically.  And his memory
     changed dramatically to where he was stammering and
     apologizing and not remembering.
          And how many times did I take his deposition?
     I said it was serious heart disease.  And he said
     it was moderate three-artery disease where he
     didn't mention one word about diffuse disease until
     yesterday.
          So I submit to you when you evaluate the
     testimony, it's Dr. Feldman who is the credible
     witness here and not Dr. Phillips.
          And you know what, what's interesting is here
     is Dr. Phillips basically telling you that
     Mr. Cuculino had every risk factor under the sun
     except smoking.  And he even used demonstratives.
     Didn't even mention the word "smoking".  "It became
     lifestyle choices."
          Even if he had every risk factor, do you know
     why smoking is still a substantial cause of his
     heart disease?  Because according to Dr. Feldman,
     smoking magnifies every other risk factor if they
     exist.
          Smoking is the substantial factor whether it's 2686
     an independent risk factor as Dr. Feldman said or
     whether it's combined with other risk factors.
     There is no doubt in this particular case, and
     according to Dr. Feldman's testimony that it was
     the 50 years of smoking a pack a day of cigarettes
     from day one up until he finally stopped, and even
     the progression later, that caused the heart
     disease, that caused the coronary artery disease.
          And it does not matter whether Mr. Cuculino
     stopped smoking R.J. Reynolds products in 1965 or
     1966.  You don't look at it in isolation because
     Dr. Feldman said, remember, it's a dose response.
          So all those questions that I was -- that I
     failed to ask Dr. Feldman?  No, there was not a
     failure to ask that question.  Dr. Feldman answered
     the question.  There is a dose response to smoking.
     So from the first puff on, you are contributing to
     the disease so that 480,000 puffs later, you are
     along the way for a disease.  And just because
     Mr. Cuculino didn't have a heart attack in 1965
     when he stopped smoking Pall Malls doesn't mean
     that he didn't already have disease progressive, he
     most certainly did.
          Remember what Dr. Feldman said, in young
     smokers, you see plaque developing.  You could live 2687
     with plaque development for a long time until it
     finally manifests itself with a cardiac event, and
     that's what happened in this case.  There is no
     question on the verdict form, yes, to both
     questions that Mr. Cuculino's heart disease was a
     result of his smoking cigarettes.
          Now, the comparative fault in this case -- let
     me just backtrack for a sec.  One more thing on
     addiction.  Ms. Gallagher made something about
     Mr. Goldman's simplistic definition of addiction.
     Interestingly, you did not hear from any expert
     from the defense about addiction to give a more
     complex definition.
          You heard Dr. Goldman, they didn't refute his
     testimony with their expert.  Dr. Proctor, by the
     way, they didn't call -- the defense didn't call
     their own historian to say, no, no, Dr. Proctor is
     wrong, let me explain.
          The defense used Dr. Proctor as their own
     witness when they got their exhibits in through
     him.  I'm sure Dr. Proctor would love to have some
     other experts be able to testify just as he does to
     save him from flying around Florida all the time.
     But the bottom line is, they didn't have anyone
     come in there and contradict anything that 2688
     Dr. Proctor had to say.
          Now, comparative fault.  And I'm not going to
     go over the charts again.  But you know what, the
     answer lies in their own documents.  The answer
     lies in the document that I showed you early on
     Battelle Hippo, and it says it all about
     comparative fault so I can just be brief.
          Remember the Battelle Hippo I showed you that
     says they're in the business of selling nicotine?
     On page 3 of that document it goes on "It is
     difficult to assess the effect of the report," that
     was the Surgeon General's Report, "on causes of
     action arising prior to its issuance.  Logically,
     it would be argued the report does no more than to
     collate preexisting knowledge, knowledge as
     available to the buyer as the seller.
          "But logic might, in the minds of a jury,
     yield to the emotional reaction that if this
     knowledge was available to the seller, it was up to
     him, having the means to do so, to make the product
     safe.
          "A jury might, whether instructed or not,
     operate on the theory of comparative negligence.
     True, the buyer was negligent in smoking a product
     he knew was dangerous, but was lulled by the seller 2689
     and the seller's negligence was the greater in
     failing to make his product safe."
          There is your answer by the defendants right
     there.  And more telling is the fact that at the
     time Mr. Cuculino started smoking as an
     eight-year-old boy, he didn't know the dangers of
     smoking.
          So while it was certainly his choice to pick
     up that cigarette and he'll tell you it was his
     choice to pick up that cigarette, he picked up that
     cigarette as an ill-informed eight-year-old boy,
     and that's because tobacco companies, R.J. Reynolds
     and Philip Morris, when they knew in 1953 that
     their cigarettes caused cancer and their cigarettes
     were addictive, they didn't tell him and they had
     every opportunity to tell Mr. Cuculino and chose
     not to.  They chose not to.
          And something else.  You've seen them say,
     well, Mr. Cuculino could just quit any time when he
     didn't know that it was bad for him.  You know, the
     warnings did go on the packs of cigarettes, and
     Mr. Cuculino recalls seeing a warning.  But he said
     I didn't pick up my cigarettes to look at a warning
     on the side of the pack.  I picked up my cigarettes
     to get a cigarette and smoke it. 2690
          And so when Mr. Cuculino saw a warning on the
     cigarette pack, the problem is, and tobacco
     companies know it, "the entire matter of addiction
     is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney
     can have in a lung cancer cigarette case.  We can't
     defend continued smoking as free choice if the
     person was addicted."
          That's again the words of the tobacco
     industry.  And so even if Mr. Cuculino, after 20
     years of smoking, sees a warning on a pack of
     cigarettes, what's he going to do?  He's addicted
     at that time, and there's a lot more to it than
     just knowledge of a warning.
          When a person is addicted, an addicted person,
     what do you think their reaction is when they see
     something like a warning on a cigarette?  What do
     you think their reaction is wherein they are in
     denial?
          They want to see anything they can that gives
     them the incentive and the psychological crutch to
     continue smoking, to continue their addiction.
     They want to hear that, hey, smoking might not be
     bad.  Smoking is hazardous.
          But there is no lung cancer, there is no --
     what's the interpretation that Mr. Cuculino is 2691
     going to take away from the warning that says
     smoking might be dangerous?  He's going to look at
     that and say, well, it might not be.  I can
     continue smoking --
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Objection, we're outside the
     record here.
          THE COURT:  Sustain.
          MR. KAISER:  In 1966, when the cautions went
     on the cigarette, what did the government say, not
     the tobacco companies.  "Caution:  Cigarette
     smoking may be hazardous to your health."  Now,
     what is an addicted person going to do when he sees
     that caution?  It's not endorsed by the Surgeon
     General, it wasn't a warning made by the tobacco
     companies, it was the government that mandated it.
          From 1953, when R.J. Reynolds and Philip
     Morris knew about it, did they tell Mr. Cuculino?
     Did they warn him then?  Did they do it in '54,
     '55, '56?  No, they didn't.  No, they didn't.
          Now, let me briefly talk about reliance.  And
     there is some suggestion that the advertising
     campaign that was raised by R.J. Reynolds and
     Philip Morris and other tobacco companies somehow
     didn't talk about smoking and health.  Well, wait a
     minute, didn't we see commercials during our case 2692
     in chief?
          "More doctors smoke Camels than any other
     brand."  Isn't that a health risk -- isn't that a
     health concern there?  "More doctors smoke Camels."
     "Guard against throat scratch."  "Look at your T
     zone."
          Every one of the advertisements concerned
     health.  Every one of the advertisements promoted
     the safety of the cigarette and the beauty of the
     cigarette and the concealment, it is the
     concealment in this case that is key because what
     the tobacco companies were doing when they were
     advertising their beautiful product with their
     beautiful women and their outdoor activities and
     their yachting and their country club scenes, they
     weren't telling the smoker that their product was
     unsafe.  They weren't telling the smoker that their
     product was addictive and they knew it and so that
     is the smoking and health aspect of this.
          It doesn't matter if Mr. Cuculino read the
     Frank Statement.  It doesn't matter if you talk
     about the Counterblaste that King James wrote.  It
     doesn't matter if he didn't read Columbus's diary.
     It doesn't matter if he didn't read John Adams'
     letter to his priest.  What matters is that 2693
     Mr. Cuculino relied on the advertising campaign by
     the tobacco companies every step of the way and as
     I said before, when little Johnny, who he
     identified with, Mr. Cuculino, made his pitch to
     call for Philip Morris, he didn't say these
     products will kill you and addict you and it is
     that on which Mr. Cuculino relied.
          And what do I mean by that?  Remember the
     climate that was created by the tobacco companies
     when they glamorized their cigarettes in the
     movies, when they made it the thing to do so that
     everybody that started smoking said it is cool, you
     will be an outsider if you don't smoke, and that's
     why people like Mr. Cuculino, the leader of the
     pack, the person who is his own man, he started
     smoking because he said it was the cool thing to
     do.
          Well, picture it on the other extreme.  What
     happens if when Mr. Cuculino was a kid, the climate
     was such that it is today, where smoking is bad and
     everybody knows it, where smoking is restricted and
     you can't smoke everywhere that I talked about
     earlier, where smoking was seen as something that's
     bad and everyone knows it's bad and everyone knows
     it can cause cancer because a lot of people have 2694
     firsthand experience with family members that have
     become sick?
          What happens if the climate back -- now was
     like it was when Mr. Cuculino was a kid, who was
     just starting out?  Mr. Cuculino, as the defense
     portrays as his own man, as someone who couldn't be
     told what to do, as the leader of the pack, well,
     if cigarette smoking back then was as uncool as it
     is today, don't you think the leader of the pack
     might not have started smoking?
          That's what reliance is and that's what
     happened in this case.  They played upon
     Mr. Cuculino's age.  They played upon
     Mr. Cuculino's lack of judgment.  Mr. Cuculino was
     eight years old and certainly relied to his
     detriment on the advertising campaign of the
     defendants in this case.
          And finally on damages, you could compute
     actually an hourly amount based on what I am asking
     you to impose here, $10 million.  You could
     actually figure out on your own how that would
     equate into an hourly rate to compensate
     Mr. Cuculino, and you might go back and arrive at
     this hourly figure and you might decide, you know
     what, that's not even enough, he deserves more or 2695
     you might say, you know what, maybe it should be a
     little less.
          But that's for you to decide.  We're not
     trying to make Mr. Cuculino rich in this case.
     We're trying to hold the tobacco companies, R.J.
     Reynolds and Philip Morris, responsible for his
     heart disease.  That's all we're trying to do.
          And the punitive damages, Mr. Reid puts up all
     these requirements that we have to show.  Well,
     don't you think we've shown their reckless
     indifference to human life when they know that
     people like Mr. Cuculino, eight years old, who was
     impressionable, and they know their products kill
     people and they know their products addict people
     and they don't have a care in the world because
     they didn't tell him?
          Doesn't that smack of intentional, an
     intentional act, a reckless disregard of someone's
     life like his, when they know this information and
     they don't say a word?
          But they helped the Surgeon General and the
     Surgeon General thanked them profusely and they
     ridiculed the Surgeon General every step of the
     way.  Why?  Why?  That's why these companies need
     to be published for their intentional acts, for 2696
     even having the gall to target kids like
     Mr. Cuculino when he was eight years old, to target
     people like that to get smoking, because they
     wanted someone like Mr. Cuculino to smoke, like
     Mr. Heimann said in his depo, they wanted people to
     smoke at a young age.
          They wanted people to smoke a lot.  They
     wanted people to smoke for a long time.  They
     wanted people to smoke their brand.
          THE CLERK:  15 minutes.
          MR. KAISER:  And that's intentional.  That's a
     reckless disregard, and that's why they deserve to
     be punished in this particular case.
          Now, I ask when you go back to the jury room,
     you consider all of this evidence and you
     compensate Mr. Cuculino for his injuries caused by
     Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.  Thank you very
     much.
