          MS. GALLAGHER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Going morning, ladies and gentlemen.
          JURORS:  Good morning.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Mr. Cuculino lives his life
     the way he wants to, without regard to the
     consequences of his decision.  And he always has.
     Going back to when he was eight years old, and he
     got in trouble on purpose so he and Billy could
     create a diversion to go smoke a cigarette that
     they knew they shouldn't; by giving an excuse, an
     asthma excuse to get out of gym in high school;
     seeing a girl on a porch and taking his car and
     running it over the sidewalk and pinning a
     neighborhood kid against the wall; participating in
     illegal and dangerous street racing, then drag
     racing and motorcycle racing, continuing to race
     after a motorcycle accident put him in the hospital
     for six months.
          Mr. Cuculino may not have graduated high
     school, but he used his street smarts throughout
     his life to get the things he wanted and to do the
     things he wanted.
          But now, Mr. Cuculino says he's a victim, that
     he knew nothing about the health risks of smoking
     until after he had his heart attack in 1994, that 2596
     he was fooled, that had he only known that there
     were health risks of smoking, he wouldn't have
     started smoking or he would have quit sooner.
          But his lifestyle choices tell a different
     story.  And his smoking decisions are consistent
     with his other lifestyle choices.
          You heard throughout the course of this trial
     the lifestyle choices that he made, and many of
     them had the potential for serious health
     consequences.  You heard that he had a poor diet.
     You heard that he didn't exercise.  You heard that
     even after he was diagnosed with hypertension and
     diabetes, he didn't change that pattern.  He
     continued to eat poorly, and he continued not to
     exercise.  He didn't take his medications as
     prescribed.
          Why?  Because Mr. Cuculino lives life on his
     terms.  And that's okay.  Because those are his
     decisions to make.  But because those are his
     decisions, he is the one responsible for the
     consequences of his decisions.
          Mr. Cuculino was the only person who could
     decide whether to smoke or whether to quit.  Nobody
     could do that for him.  As he told you, it is a
     personal decision.  A person decides whether they 2597
     are going to smoke or whether they are going to
     quit.
          And you know that he really feels that way
     because now, after all these years and all that he
     has gone through with his heart disease, that he
     believes is related to smoking, he wouldn't tell
     his adult daughter not to smoke because it's her
     decision.  It's a personal decision.
          And we all have the freedom to make decisions
     about how we are going to live our lives.  We all
     make a decision whether we are going to smoke,
     whether we are going to exercise, whether we are
     going to eat right.  And those are our decisions to
     make.
          We have the freedom to make those decisions,
     but with that freedom comes accepting the
     responsibility for the consequences of those
     decisions.  And it is for his freedom to make those
     decisions that he is asking you to award him $20
     million.
          Now, like Mr. Kaiser, I want to go through the
     questions on the verdict form with you.  But I'm
     going to go in a little different order, because
     that way I don't have to repeat myself.  So I'm
     going to start with question 2 and then go back to 2598
     question 1.
          But as I go through these questions, I'm going
     to put up some boards here that I think tell you
     everything you need to know to answer those
     questions.
          So let's start with question 2.  Question 2
     is, "Was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of
     Antonio Cuculino's coronary heart disease?"
          What did you learn from Dr. Feldman?
     Dr. Feldman said, "And it's your opinion that if
     Mr. Cuculino had never smoked, that he still would
     have developed coronary artery disease, it just
     would have been later in life?"
          And his response, "Correct."
          Now, you notice when Mr. Kaiser was going
     through the questions, that all of the questions in
     this case were about Mr. Cuculino.  They're not
     about other smokers.  They're not about whether
     other smokers' diseases were caused by smoking
     cigarettes.  It's about Mr. Cuculino.  This case is
     about whether smoking was the legal cause of his
     heart disease.
          Now, you've heard the term "legal cause"
     several times, and the judge gave you an
     instruction on it.  You might have noticed it was 2599
     quite long.  But what legal cause basically comes
     down to is was something a substantial contributing
     factor.
          In this case, but for Mr. Cuculino's smoking,
     would he have gotten heart disease?  Or put another
     way, would he have gotten it anyway, even if he
     didn't smoke?
          And both experts told you that Mr. Cuculino
     was going to get heart disease.  The difference in
     their testimony is when he was going to get it.
     Dr. Feldman said, yes, Mr. Cuculino was going to
     end up with heart disease, he just didn't tell you
     when.
          Now, you heard a lot about Mr. Cuculino's
     lifestyle choices, probably more than you cared to
     hear about his lifestyle choices.  And you heard
     about the variety of risk factors that Mr. Cuculino
     had for the heart disease that he got.  And there
     were a number of risk factors mentioned, and
     Mr. Cuculino had just about all of them.
          And another interesting thing is that
     Dr. Feldman and Dr. Phillips both agreed that
     Mr. Cuculino had all these risk factors, it's just
     that Dr. Feldman quibbles with when Mr. Cuculino
     first had these risk factors. 2600
          And in thinking about the testimony between
     these two doctors, I want you to think about who
     knew the records, who knew the dates, who knew when
     medications were given, who knew Mr. Cuculino's
     health history and looked at those and put them
     together, and that was Dr. Phillips.  He is the one
     who put them all together for you.
          So let's look at some of the risk factors that
     both experts agree Mr. Cuculino had.  Family
     history.  Let me start with that one.  Remember
     what Dr. Feldman said when his patients ask him
     what do I do to make sure I don't get heart
     disease?  Pick your parents carefully.  Well, you
     can't do that any more than Mr. Cuculino couldn't
     do that.
          Mr. Cuculino couldn't pick his parents, both
     of whom had heart disease and died of heart
     troubles.  He couldn't pick his parents.
          Likewise, he couldn't pick his parents with
     regards to his HDL.  Remember the good cholesterol?
     As Dr. Phillips explained to you, we have two kinds
     of cholesterol, we have good cholesterol, HDL, and
     then we have bad cholesterol, LDL.  And you want
     the HDL to be high and the LDL to be low.
          And unfortunately for Mr. Cuculino, he has 2601
     that genetic marker that gives him low HDL.  And as
     Dr. Phillips explained, there is not really much
     you can do about that.  That's just genetics.  So
     there is nothing he could do about that, but
     because it is genetic, as Dr. Phillips explained,
     he's had that for a very long time.  It's not like
     LDL that comes along gradually, that you develop
     over time.  HDL is something you are born with.
          So Mr. Cuculino had HDL, a low HDL, and that
     was a significant risk factor.  And we know that he
     had that before his heart attack, because as
     Dr. Phillips said, he's had that likely since
     adolescence.
          So let's look at bad cholesterol.  The LDL was
     too high.  Now, you've heard some conflicting
     testimony on this.  You've heard that there are
     records that show that Mr. Cuculino had -- was on
     medications for his high bad cholesterol back to
     the '70s.
          And then you've also heard Mr. Cuculino come
     in and say I wasn't on medication for cholesterol,
     whether it was triglycerides or LDL, back in the
     '70s.  This is the same person who told you that he
     doesn't remember dates and can't tell you what
     medications he's on now. 2602
          But you know what?  It doesn't matter.
     Because what both experts agree was that at the
     time Mr. Cuculino had his heart attack in 1994, his
     doctors immediately put him on cholesterol
     medication.
          You don't put a person on medication to reduce
     their cholesterol if it's not high.  So although we
     don't have a chemistry, a lab value like we do
     later on, that tells you the specific numbers, you
     know that in 1994, Mr. Cuculino had to have high
     cholesterol, otherwise, his doctors wouldn't have
     put him on medication for it.
          And high cholesterol, the bad cholesterol, is
     like conditions -- other conditions Mr. Cuculino
     has, like diabetes, like hypertension.  You don't
     wake up one day and have high cholesterol.  It is
     something that happens over time.
          So although we don't know how long
     Mr. Cuculino had high bad cholesterol for sure, we
     do know that he had it before he ever had his heart
     attack.
          Another risk factor, age and gender.
     Mr. Cuculino can't help it that he's a man and that
     men are more likely to get premature heart disease.
     That's one of those things you don't have any 2603
     control over.  He also can't control that he's
     growing older.  We all are.
          And Mr. Cuculino, as Dr. Feldman told you, the
     prime time for men to start developing coronary
     artery disease is between 40 and 60.  And
     Mr. Cuculino was smack dab in the middle of that
     with his coronary artery disease at 49.  Another
     thing he could not control.
          But then we can talk about something that
     Mr. Cuculino would have some control over, his
     hypertension.  And again, there is a question
     here -- there is a question here as to whether
     Mr. Cuculino had hypertension, if he was on
     medications for hypertension going back to the '70s
     or if it was the '80s.
          Remember, there were three records from three
     different hospitals that all recorded that he was
     on blood pressure medication back into the 1970s,
     '78.  Well, that information had to come from Mr.
     or Mrs. Cuculino, because doctors don't make
     histories up.
          Again, Mr. Cuculino says, no, I was not on
     medication for that in the '70s, but we do know
     that Mr. Cuculino was on medication for high blood
     pressure at least as of 1987.  And we know that it 2604
     was likely before that, because the first record we
     have says that it is a blood pressure checkup,
     checking up what has already been diagnosed.
          And as Dr. Phillips told you, the medications
     he was on and the doses that he was on indicate
     that this was not his first appointment for blood
     pressure, that you first start with one diuretic
     and you work up, because if you give somebody too
     much blood pressure medicine, it's going to get so
     low, they'll pass out.
          So clearly he had been being treated for his
     blood pressure for some time.  But again, how long
     he was being treated for his blood pressure doesn't
     matter, because at the time of his MI, we know that
     he was being treated for hypertension.  He was on
     medications for it.  In fact, he had been on five
     different classes of medications in order to
     control his blood pressure.
          And, as you saw in these records, this record
     is from 1991.  "Patient's hypertension appears to
     be out of control due to poor compliance with
     meds."  He wasn't taking his medications as he was
     supposed to.
          And let me digress here for a minute.  Because
     I think the plaintiffs may be trying to say that 2605
     Mr. Cuculino has only been noncompliant with meds
     recently since he got on Medicare.  And that's for
     you to determine whether they have the money to
     do -- to pay for those drugs.
          But this is back from 1991.  Back in 1991,
     Mr. Cuculino wasn't compliant with his medications.
     He told you he doesn't like taking medications, he
     doesn't even like taking his heart medications.
     This is not something new.  This is a lifestyle
     choice that Mr. Cuculino has done throughout his
     life, because he doesn't like medicines, so he
     doesn't take them.
          Now, getting back to our list of the risk
     factors that Mr. Cuculino had.  He had
     hypertension.  And the thing that you also know
     about hypertension from both experts is that you
     can control it to some extent.
          If you take your medications like you are
     supposed to, you have a much better chance of
     controlling your hypertension.  If you watch your
     diet, if you exercise, you can help with your
     hypertension.  And Mr. Cuculino wasn't doing that.
          What other risk factors did Mr. Cuculino have
     for heart disease?  The things we call lifestyle
     choices, diet, exercise, and smoking. 2606
          Now, you heard about Mr. Cuculino's weight and
     you saw the chart of BMIs that showed that he was
     overweight, not obese, but that he was overweight
     in the years leading up to his heart attack.  And
     he also had central obesity, or, as Dr. Phillips
     called it, the apple shape rather than the pear
     shape.  Men often get the apple shape, and for
     whatever reason, that is connected to a higher risk
     of having a cardiac event, and Mr. Cuculino had
     that.
          Mr. Cuculino didn't exercise.  The records are
     all over the place.  You know, he goes down to Key
     West, he's on disability, he's walking five miles a
     day, then he stops walking, then he walks two
     miles, then he's capable of walking a mile, then he
     can go up stairs, and then he can't.  It's all over
     the place.
          But what we do know is that Mr. Cuculino was
     not exercising on a regular basis.  That is also a
     risk factor for having cardiac -- or coronary
     artery disease, and he was smoking.
          And then the last thing you heard about as a
     risk factor for his heart disease was metabolic
     syndrome.  And that may be something that you were
     not familiar with before you came into this 2607
     courtroom.
          Dr. Feldman agreed that Mr. Cuculino had
     metabolic syndrome, he just said it was after he
     had his heart attack.  Well, Dr. Phillips explained
     to you why and how he knows that Mr. Cuculino had
     metabolic syndrome before his heart attack.  And he
     told you what the criteria is, that there are five
     different factors, and if you have three of them,
     then you have metabolic syndrome.
          And so what do we know about Mr. Cuculino?  We
     know that he had hypertension, one of the factors;
     we know that he had low HDL, the good cholesterol;
     and we know that he had central obesity, or just
     meaning he carried his weight around his middle.
          That qualifies him for a diagnosis of
     metabolic syndrome.  And he had all three of those
     things at the time of his heart attack.  He may
     also have had high triglycerides, don't know that
     because we don't have a lab panel to tell us that.
          But by 1996, he had the other two factors.  He
     had high triglycerides and he had a high blood
     glucose, the precursor to diabetes.
          And metabolic syndrome is a very significant
     risk factor for heart disease and for coronary
     artery disease. 2608
          So if Mr. Cuculino had all these in 1994, how
     do you know which one or ones were a substantial
     contributing factor to his heart attack, to his
     coronary artery disease?
          Well, Dr. Phillips helps you with that,
     because Dr. Phillips explained to you that there
     are two kinds of coronary artery disease.  One is
     focal, where you have the whole artery, and you
     have one place that is blocked, that is clogged.
     And then there is diffuse coronary artery disease
     where you take the entire artery and you look at it
     and it's got different buildup of plaque all the
     way through the artery.  It may be 30 percent here,
     it may be 50 percent here, but it is spread or
     diffuse throughout the artery.
          And that's important because diffuse coronary
     artery disease, diffuse plaque buildup is
     associated with metabolic syndrome, not with
     smoking.
          And how do we know that he had diffuse
     disease?  We know it from the doctors who did his
     heart catheterizations.  Remember Dr. Phillips and
     Dr. Feldman explained that doctors go in with these
     instruments that are getting smaller and smaller
     and have these little cameras on them, and so they 2609
     can see what is going on in there, and they take
     pictures, and that is how they can then decide
     where to put stents, where blockage needs to be
     dealt with.
          And the doctors in those cath reports, way
     back to 1994, described Mr. Cuculino's coronary
     artery disease as diffuse.  That's how you know
     that it was the metabolic syndrome that was the
     substantial contributing factor to his heart
     disease, not smoking.
          Now, since 1994, Mr. Cuculino has continued to
     gain weight and he has developed diabetes.  And as
     the doctors told you, diabetes is a risk equivalent
     for heart disease, for coronary artery disease.
     And what that means is that it is a very, very,
     very significant risk factor.  Metabolic syndrome
     is the precursor to diabetes.  And he has had those
     and his heart disease has progressed, it's
     continued to get worse.
          Now, the other piece of evidence that tells
     you why smoking is not a substantial contributing
     factor to Mr. Cuculino's heart disease is that he
     quit in 2009.  And since 2009, he's had procedures
     in 2011, he's had procedures in 2013.
          And remember what Dr. Feldman told you here. 2610
     When you quit smoking, you get the benefit of that
     decision immediately.  Within one to five years,
     your risk of coronary artery disease, that risk
     factor goes down to someone who has never smoked.
          So if smoking were a substantial contributing
     factor to Mr. Cuculino's heart disease, you would
     expect that when you remove those cigarettes, when
     you take them away, when he quits, that he would
     not continue to have this heart disease.  And he
     has.  As recently as October of this year, he had
     four -- of last year, he had four more stents put
     in.
          So the answer to the first question -- I'm
     sorry, the second question, "Was smoking a legal
     cause of Mr. Cuculino's heart disease?"  Is no.
          Now, let me talk about the first question.
     And the first question is, "Was Antonio Cuculino
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if
     so, was that addiction a legal cause of his
     coronary heart disease?"
          That's really a two-part question, because
     it's was he addicted, and then was addiction the
     legal cause of his heart disease.  And I've already
     talked about heart disease, so I'm not going to do
     it again.  Let's talk about the first part of that 2611
     question, was Mr. Cuculino addicted.
          Now, Dr. Goldman came in with his simplistic
     definition and said, you know, anybody who smokes a
     pack a day for a number of years, that person must
     be addicted.  But remember in this case, we're not
     talking about all smokers, we're talking about
     Mr. Cuculino.  And so the question is not whether
     other people are addicted to cigarettes, it is
     whether Mr. Cuculino was.
          And you need to consider what Dr. Goldman told
     you about deciding whether somebody is addicted.
     And he told you that you can't label somebody as
     addicted unless they try to quit.  And he also told
     you you can't quit if you don't try.  Pretty
     obvious.
          So your job is to look at all the times that
     Mr. Cuculino said that he was trying to quit
     smoking and decide if those were real quit attempts
     or if those were simply attempts to get everybody
     to leave him alone.
          Now, you've heard a lot about the different
     quit attempts, and you'll be happy to know I'm not
     going to go back through them again with you now.
     And I don't need to because there are a few
     undisputed facts about all of them that tell you 2612
     everything you need to know about Mr. Cuculino's
     quit attempts.
          Mr. Cuculino never tried to quit during the
     '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, or the '90s,
     when millions of other people tried to quit.  He
     never even attempted it.
          But once you look at his quit attempts, what
     you will see is that not one of them were his idea.
     Either his doctor said you need to quit, let me
     give you this; or his wife would read something,
     would investigate something, and she would then
     give it to Mr. Cuculino and say you need to try
     this.  Never once did he investigate anything on
     his own to deal with his smoking.  It all came from
     somewhere else.
          And the only thing that you have to look at is
     was this -- were these real quit attempts, was he
     really, really trying.
          Mr. Cuculino never asked for help in quitting.
     In fact, you know that the only -- the time he was
     offered different quit attempts by his doctor, he
     refused it.
          You've seen this record.  This is from 2005.
     And this will be in evidence.  This is a 2005
     record.  "Smoking, patient states he will not stop 2613
     smoking because it relaxes him."  Those were
     Mr. Cuculino's words.  "He refuses all offers of
     smoking cessation aids and therapy."
          And why do I put this up?  Because it's in
     2005, right in the middle of all those quit
     attempts that Mr. Cuculino told you about and
     Mrs. Cuculino told you about, none of which were
     his idea.  When he's talking to his doctor, he
     says, no, I don't want any of it.
          You decide whether he really wanted to try to
     quit, or was it what Mrs. Cuculino told you.
     Remember, she got up here and said, "Yes, he said
     he was going to quit, he said he was going to quit,
     but it was just words.  He never followed up with
     actions."
          Or as Dr. Carabelli told him, deep down
     inside, you don't want to quit.  And when he
     thought about what Dr. Carabelli told him, he said,
     "You know, I thought he was right.  That made sense
     to me."  At least that was his testimony in 2012,
     before he came into this courtroom.
          So it's not surprising that Mr. Cuculino
     wasn't successful with these quit attempts because
     he really wasn't motivated to try to quit.
          And the plaintiff wants you to believe that it 2614
     was Chantix that got Mr. Cuculino to quit, Chantix
     and only the Chantix.  Well, think about the
     Chantix.  Mr. Cuculino went on Chantix in 2006.  He
     went on Chantix in 2008.  And it didn't work.  He
     reduced the amount that he was smoking, but he was
     still smoking.
          And then in 2009, he gets back on the Chantix,
     the exact same drug, taking it the exact same way,
     and it works.  Well, what was the difference?  His
     wife threatened to leave him.  For once,
     Mr. Cuculino was actually motivated to stop
     smoking.  You can't quit if you don't really try.
     For once he was motivated.
          And it was funny, because in this courtroom,
     Mr. Cuculino came in and said, "Yeah, but I didn't
     believe her, she was just kidding.  It wasn't a
     real threat."
          But back in his deposition in 2012, he's
     admitted saying, that was his sworn testimony, "If
     I didn't quit smoking, I wouldn't be married.  If I
     wasn't successful, it would cost me my marriage."
          You decide what was the difference between the
     first time he tried Chantix, the second time he
     tried Chantix, and the third time he tried Chantix.
     It was that he was motivated because his wife 2615
     threatened to leave him.
          Mr. Cuculino is not an addict.  An addict is
     somebody who does not have control over the
     substance they are using, the substance controls
     them.
          You heard after Mr. Cuculino quit in 2009 how
     over the next year, when he was with his
     brother-in-law or his friends, they were all
     smoking cigarettes, he would say, "Give me one,"
     and he would smoke a cigarette and put it down.  He
     didn't go back to it.  While they were all smoking
     in the truck for three hours, he did not go back to
     smoking.  And he did that about eight times in the
     year and hasn't touched them since.  He was in
     control of his smoking.
          And we also know that Mr. Cuculino wasn't
     smoking because he was addicted to the nicotine for
     another reason, actually a series of reasons.  In
     1970, he was in the hospital for six months with
     his burns after his motorcycle accident.  For two
     weeks of that, he was in a coma, he couldn't smoke.
          In 1994, he was in the hospital for five days.
     He couldn't smoke.  In 1999, he was in the hospital
     for ten days and couldn't smoke, and then he came
     home and was on pain medication and was dopey and 2616
     didn't smoke for some period of time, weeks after
     that.
          Now, why is that important?  Because
     Dr. Goldman told you that nicotine leaves your body
     in 24 to 48 hours.  He told you that the side
     effects from withdrawal are over in the first
     couple of weeks.
          So when Mr. Cuculino woke up from his coma,
     when he got out of the hospital in 1994, when he
     got out of the hospital in 1999 and got over his
     dopiness from the pain meds, it wasn't nicotine
     that made him smoke.  The nicotine was long gone
     from his body and could not be responsible for a
     physical urge to smoke.  It was gone.  Mr. Cuculino
     made the decision to start smoking again, and
     that's why he did it.
          So Mr. Cuculino cannot be classified as an
     addict.  He was not addicted.  But that's the first
     part of the question.  The second part of the
     question is whether his addiction, the presumed
     addiction, whether that was the legal cause of his
     heart disease.
          And again, we've got that legal cause.  But
     for his addiction, would he have his heart disease.
     And the "but for" in this case means the plaintiff 2617
     has to prove that his addiction was so strong that
     he could not overcome it in time to quit and avoid
     his injury.
          So let's look at the evidence.  We know that
     Mr. Cuculino quit smoking in 2009, so we know that
     he can.  He told you that he enjoyed smoking, and
     that deep down, he just didn't want to quit.
          He told you about how he lied to his wife and
     lied to his doctors, not because he was embarrassed
     about the amount he smoked, but because he just
     wanted them to quit bugging him.  He did not want
     his wife bugging him about smoking.  He did not
     want people telling him what to do about his
     smoking.  Those were his decisions, and he wanted
     to be left alone.
          But even if you put that label on Mr. Cuculino
     and say he was addicted, and even if you say that
     smoking was a substantial contributing factor, you
     can't say that it legally caused his heart disease.
     Because if he could have quit, he could have quit
     in time to avoid his injury.
          And what this comes down to, was it addiction
     that kept him smoking, or was it his decision to
     smoke that caused his heart disease?
          Because if you believe, and I'm telling you, 2618
     he is not an addict and it's not a substantial
     cause of his heart disease, but assuming those two
     things, go back to what Dr. Feldman told you, the
     declining risk, that if he had quit smoking, one to
     five years later, it would be unlikely that smoking
     was a cause of his heart attack.
          And what do you know, 1989, the first time
     Mr. Cuculino was told to quit smoking, at least the
     first time it's documented in a medical record that
     he was told to quit smoking, and quit smoking ASAP,
     that was five years before his heart attack.  And
     that is what Mr. Kaiser told you was Mr. Cuculino's
     fault, that in 1989, he should have quit smoking
     when his doctor told him to.
          And if you look at Dr. Feldman's testimony, it
     would have been less likely that smoking had
     anything to do with the heart attack.  That's their
     own expert talking.
          Mr. Cuculino had a right to make the decisions
     he wanted to about smoking, but he is also
     responsible for those decisions.  And the answer to
     question number 2 is no, because Mr. Cuculino
     wasn't addicted and it wasn't the legal cause of
     his heart disease.
          Now, let me mention one other thing about 2619
     question 2.  It's a two-part question.  You can
     believe that Mr. Cuculino was not addicted, or you
     can believe that Mr. Cuculino's smoking was not the
     legal cause of his heart disease.  And if you
     believe either one of those things, the answer to
     the question is no.
          And the six of you don't have to agree.  Three
     of you may think he wasn't addicted, three of you
     may think it was not a legal cause of his heart
     disease.  That still means the answer to question
     number 2 is no.
          Now, when you get to the end of question
     number 1, it actually tells you no, if you answer
     no, you're done, you go home.  And I'm sure you
     would like me to just kind of sit on down now so
     you could get on with this process, but it's my job
     to summarize all the evidence for all the questions
     in this case, and so I'm going to go through these
     others.
          Now, the next one I want to address is
     question 4.  And this question -- question 4 is
     whether Mr. Cuculino reasonably relied to his
     detriment on a statement or omission of material
     fact concerning the health effects or addictive
     nature of smoking cigarettes not otherwise known or 2620
     available to him.
          It's the health effects or addictive nature of
     nicotine.  Mr. Kaiser got up and talked about, you
     know, there was all these people smoking, it was
     normal, it was normalized.
          That's not what this question goes to.  This
     question specifically talks about health effects or
     addictive nature of smoking.  It has to be that the
     tobacco companies said something or didn't say
     something about health effects or about addiction
     that Mr. Cuculino relied on that was the legal
     cause of his injury.  There is that legal cause in
     there again.
          In other words, was it something that the
     tobacco companies said or didn't say that fooled
     Mr. Cuculino?  It's not whether everybody is
     smoking.  That has nothing to do with this
     question.
          So let's look at whether Mr. Cuculino was
     fooled.  First of all, he told you he's not aware
     of any statement, anything he heard from Philip
     Morris or R.J. Reynolds, anything about cigarettes,
     nothing about health risks, nothing about
     addictive, he didn't hear any of it.
          I asked him about CTR, TI, TIRC.  Hadn't heard 2621
     any of those.  And then when I asked him:  "Before
     this lawsuit had you ever heard about the Frank
     Statement Mr. Kaiser talked about in his closing?"
          His answer was:  "Who?
          "The Frank Statement.
          "No."
          Mr. Cuculino didn't hear anything from the
     tobacco companies.  And if he didn't hear anything
     from the tobacco companies, he certainly could not
     have relied on it.
          Dr. Proctor came in, Dr. Proctor, their
     million-and-a-half-dollar expert witness from
     California, came in and walked through what was
     going on in the world and in the tobacco industry
     through the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and on.
          And he told you a lot of cigarette -- he told
     you about a lot of statements the companies made,
     and he showed you a bunch of documents.  But he
     didn't connect it to the plaintiff.  And
     Dr. Proctor specifically told you, "That's not my
     job.  I am not the biographer of the plaintiff.
     I'm just here to tell you what's going on."
          Well, that's not enough, because the plaintiff
     has to prove that he relied on something that the
     cigarette companies said.  This case is not about 2622
     the general public, it's not about other smokers,
     it's about Mr. Cuculino and what Mr. Cuculino heard
     or saw and relied on.
          They have to prove some connection between all
     those statements on those boards, between the
     various documents, they have to prove a connection
     between those and Mr. Cuculino, and they cannot,
     because you can't prove connection and reliance
     that I made a smoking decision, that I didn't do
     something because of my smoking on something that I
     never heard.  That's just not possible.
          And that's why -- you know, Mr. Kaiser says
     why aren't they talking about their documents?
     That's the reason I'm not talking about their
     documents is be- -- our documents, RJR's documents,
     is because they are meaningless in this case if
     Mr. Cuculino never relied on them, much less saw
     them or heard of them.  That's why we won't waste
     your time talking about these documents with no
     connection to Mr. Cuculino.
          So let's talk about the information
     Mr. Cuculino did have about cigarette smoking and
     health.
          THE CLERK:  20 minutes.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  Thank you. 2623
          He had information from the packs themselves.
     You remember the warning that he remembered was the
     warning from 1971.  "The Surgeon General has
     determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to
     your health."  That's what he remembered.  But he
     also told you he wasn't interested in the warnings,
     that they did not concern him.  And they didn't
     concern him because he did not think anything could
     happen to him.
          Now, Mr. Cuculino wants you to believe that he
     knew nothing about the health risks of smoking
     until 1994, that he had never heard that smoking
     could cause lung cancer until two years ago.
          But it's up to you to weigh the plaintiff's
     credibility.  And one of the instructions the judge
     read you was about credibility.
          And two of the things he said that you should
     consider in determining the believability, the
     credibility of the witness was any interest the
     witness may have in the outcome of this case and
     the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness
     considered in the light of all the evidence in the
     case and in the light of your own experience and
     common sense.
          Mr. Cuculino hadn't heard that smoking was 2624
     associated with lung cancer until two years ago?
          Now, there are things I want you to keep in
     mind when you are thinking about this evidence and
     what Mr. Cuculino knew or didn't know.  And you can
     start with his family experience.  Mr. Cuculino
     watched his father with emphysema from the time --
     the 1960s and saw him die of heart disease.
          Mrs. Cuculino came in and said, "Yeah, I knew
     his emphysema was related to smoking.  I knew my
     mom's was related to smoking."
          Mr. Cuculino, the person with the monetary
     interest in this case, says, I didn't know.  He
     never -- says he never understood the health risks
     of smoking.
          But you have to consider something else he
     told you.  Because the really telling thing that he
     said was "I never thought it would happen to me."
     He never thought it would harm his health.  He
     understood that cigarette smoking could be
     dangerous, he just didn't think it would happen to
     me.  What is the "it" other than disease from
     smoking?
          In 1994, when the plaintiff was in the
     hospital after his heart attack, and his wife
     looked at him when he asked her for a cigarette, 2625
     she said, "What are you doing?  Look where this has
     gotten you."  In 1994, look where this has gotten
     you.
          And what does he say?  "If it's going to
     happen, it's going to happen."
          Does that sound like somebody to you who is
     confused about why he's there, is confused about
     this now affecting his health?
          He understood the health risks of smoking long
     before he ever had his heart attack, he just never
     thought it would happen to him.
          And it would make sense that Mr. Cuculino
     would know about the dangers of smoking.
     Dr. Proctor, we walked him through about all the
     different things and the general public, how people
     have been talking about cigarettes being addictive
     for hundreds of years, people talking about the
     health risks of smoking for hundreds of years, and
     how all of this information during the 1950s became
     a really big story, continued through the '60s.
     Mr. Cuculino said I never saw it, I never read the
     newspapers.  But his wife did.
          Mr. Cuculino was not waiting on the tobacco
     companies to tell him something he didn't know.
     Let's look, in 1985, these warnings went on the 2626
     side of cigarette packs.  Every single package that
     Mr. Cuculino picked up from 1985 had these warnings
     on them on a rotating basis.  "Quitting smoking now
     greatly reduces serious risks to your health."
     That's 1985.  That's exactly what Dr. Feldman told
     you about, the reducing risk.
          Another one, "Smoking causes lung cancer,
     heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate
     pregnancy."  And what did Mr. Cuculino tell you
     about these warnings?  They just didn't interest
     him.  They didn't concern him.
          What was it that the tobacco companies were
     supposed to tell Mr. Cuculino that were not on
     these cartons, that were on every ad, in 1971 every
     ad had those warnings on them.  That's the only
     direct communication Mr. Cuculino ever had from the
     tobacco companies were the warnings on the
     cigarette packs and the ads, and he chose to ignore
     them.
          Now, let's talk about why Mr. Cuculino started
     to smoke.  Because you heard the story about Billy
     coming in and bringing the cigarette to school and
     they snuck the cigarette and smoked it while
     they're clapping the erasers.
          Well, what did Mr. Cuculino tell you?  That he 2627
     had never really thought about smoking before Billy
     brought that cigarette in.  It wasn't ads that made
     Mr. Cuculino smoke.  Billy is the reason
     Mr. Cuculino started to smoke.
          And then Mr. Kaiser talked about Johnny and
     the "all call for Philip Morris."  Remember that in
     this question, it's not about did they advertise
     products, did Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds
     advertise products.
          That's not what gets you to question number 4.
     Question number 4 is asking about concealment about
     health effects or addiction.  They said
     Mr. Cuculino identified with Johnny because they
     were both small.
          Fine.  Didn't affect anything about his
     cigarette smoking.  He didn't smoke Philip Morris,
     he was smoking Pall Malls.  And there is nothing
     about Johnny that was saying something about the
     health effects of smoking.  He's advertising a
     product.
          Now, the plaintiff smoked Marlboro cigarettes,
     you heard this, again not because of advertising
     but because his wife did.  He goes home one day,
     he's out of cigarettes, smokes one of his wife's
     cigarettes, likes the taste, likes the fact that 2628
     it's filtered and he doesn't get tobacco in his
     mouth.  That's why he switched to Marlboro, not
     because of some ad campaign.
          And even if he switched to Marlboros because
     he liked the Marlboro cowboy, that's not something
     the tobacco company is saying about the health
     effects or addiction.
          And that's what you have to have is for the
     plaintiffs to connect some information about the
     health effects or addictiveness that Mr. Cuculino
     relied on.  And we go back to the fact that he
     could not have relied on anything they showed you
     in this courtroom because he never saw it.
          So the answer to question number 4 is no.
     Now, comparative fault, that's the next question.
     This is where you decide the amount of fault, if
     any, and again, I don't think you get here, because
     I think you answer no to question 1 and you're
     done.
          But this is where you would allocate fault
     between the different -- Mr. Cuculino and the
     companies.
          And there is one thing I want to correct here,
     because Mr. Kaiser made it sound like you take
     fault in the air and compare it to Mr. Cuculino. 2629
     He was talking about all these boards and all the
     things that he says the tobacco companies did
     wrong.
          And you may not like what the tobacco
     companies did.  You may not like what they said.
     But this question doesn't ask you if you like the
     tobacco companies or if you think they did and said
     some stupid things.
          What it says is, "Please state the percentage
     of fault that was a legal cause of Antonio
     Cuculino's coronary heart disease."  You can't take
     fault in the air, again, we've got to have a
     connection to Mr. Cuculino, a legal cause of his
     heart disease.
          So again, these statements don't apply to
     anything in this question unless they can connect
     it to Mr. Cuculino.  And you can't put a zero by
     Mr. Cuculino's name because he's already told you
     and Mr. Kaiser got back up here in closing and said
     he's responsible from 1989 on.  1989 on when he
     could have quit.  Consider that.
          And it's interesting because supposedly the
     reason Mr. Cuculino couldn't quit was because he
     was too addicted to quit, and yet he did.  Think
     about that when you are answering this question. 2630
          Another thing you should consider when you are
     answering the comparative fault question, if you
     get there, is Mr. Cuculino's noncompliance with his
     diet, with his exercise, and with his medications.
     Because there is nothing Philip Morris or R.J.
     Reynolds had to do with that.
          There was nothing Philip Morris or R.J.
     Reynolds did or didn't do that kept Mr. Cuculino
     from complying with his doctors' orders.  And
     remember this question asks about comparative fault
     for the heart disease he got.
          This is something that Mr. Cuculino said on
     cross-examination.  "Smoking is a decision that
     each person has to make for themselves?
          "Yes."
          And think about that when you are answering
     this question, because it was his decision to
     start, it was his decision to continue.
     Mr. Cuculino never relied on anything that the
     plaintiffs have put up here.  There is no
     connection.
          He didn't pay attention to the cigarette
     warnings on the packs.  He didn't think they would
     apply to him.  Because deep down, he just didn't
     want to quit. 2631
          THE CLERK:  Ten minutes.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  His smoking decisions were his
     own.  And for that reason, if you get to this
     question, you put a hundred percent on
     Mr. Cuculino.
          Now, the next question is about damages.
     Here -- since I only have 10 minutes, I'm going to
     cut a little bit out of this and just talk about
     what was the cause of Mr. Cuculino's heart disease.
     "If it's going to happen, it's going to happen."
          Both experts told you that Mr. Cuculino was
     going to get his heart disease, they just differ
     about when he was going to get his heart disease,
     and they differ about the reasons he was going to
     get his heart disease, but that he was.
          And so they're not asking, and if I heard
     Mr. Kaiser right, they're not asking you to
     compensate Mr. Cuculino for all of his heart
     disease because he would have gotten it anyway.
     Whether that's one year later, five years later,
     there is no testimony on that.
          But you are being asked to compensate him for
     the heart disease that they are claiming occurred
     earlier because he smoked, not for all of his heart
     disease.  Keep that in mind. 2632
          And also keep in mind that Mr. Cuculino has
     had one heart attack.  They told you in opening
     that Mr. Cuculino had had four heart attacks.
     Well, you now know, after listening to both of the
     cardiologists, that Mr. Cuculino had one heart
     attack 20 years ago.
          Now, the bad news is that Mr. Cuculino would
     have ended up with his heart disease whether he
     smoked or not.  But the good news is, as both
     cardiologists told you, is that he has had no
     permanent damage to his heart.  That his heart
     still beats, still pumps like a normal person's
     heart would, someone who hasn't had all of his
     cardiac history.
          So he has no permanent damage to his heart,
     and that's probably in response to the great
     medical care he's received.
          Keep that in mind when you are talking about
     damages.  And I'm not going to suggest a number to
     you, because I don't think you're going to get to
     this question, but I think $10 million is an insane
     amount of money and an insane amount of money to be
     asking to award somebody for some undetermined of
     time for heart disease that he was going to get
     anyway. 2633
          Now, the last question is about punitive
     damages.  And let me just say the purpose of
     punitive damages is not to compensate.  That's what
     you do with the damages question.  Punitive damages
     are in addition to that.  So if you get this far,
     which I don't think you will, you are not asking --
     being asked to award damages to compensate
     Mr. Cuculino, you will have already done this.
     This is on top of that.  These are additional
     moneys.
          And as the judge explained, there is a
     different burden of proof.  It is not a
     preponderance of the evidence, it is clear and
     convincing.  It is more compelling and persuasive.
     It must be lacking in confusion and has such weight
     that it produces a firm belief or conviction
     without hesitation.
          You have to really, really believe that the
     plaintiff is award -- entitled to punitive damages
     to award them.
          And those Engle findings that Mr. Kaiser
     talked about are not enough.  Those don't get you a
     yes to this question.  The plaintiff has to bring
     you more.
          Now, remember that this case -- this question 2634
     is still about Mr. Cuculino.  It's not about
     punishing for other smokers or what other smokers
     may have seen, what other smokers may have relied
     on, diseases other smokers may have had.  This is
     about harm to Mr. Cuculino.  It can only be for
     harm to him.
          And when thinking about this, think back to
     Mr. Cuculino's lifestyle decisions.  He's the one
     who made the decisions to smoke.  He told you he
     was not interested in any information on smoking
     and health.  In fact, he told you if it's not about
     cars, I'm not interested in it at all.  Think about
     that when you are looking at this question.
          You should put in -- if we get to this -- if
     you get to this question, we'll be back, we'll have
     another -- plaintiff may put on evidence.  Philip
     Morris will put on evidence, RJR will put on
     evidence, and we'll have another closing argument.
     But you're not going to have to do that because the
     answer to that question is no.
          I'm about to sit down, and Mr. Kaiser gets to
     come back up here.  Mr. Kaiser gets to come back up
     here after Mr. Reid does his closing argument.  And
     I don't get to come back up and say, wait, he's
     wrong. 2635
          And so while Mr. Kaiser is giving his rebuttal
     and he's going on about things on these boards, I
     want you to ask yourself, what would Ms. Gallagher
     say if she could stand up.
          MR. KAISER:  Objection as to what she would
     say.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MS. GALLAGHER:  I want you to think in your
     head what does this have to do with Mr. Cuculino?
     Where is the connection to Mr. Cuculino?  Because
     as you know, I got up in opening and I said this
     case is about Mr. Cuculino, it's about his decision
     to smoke and not to quit despite knowing the risks.
     Mr. Cuculino, whose decisions were not impacted in
     any way by anything the tobacco companies said or
     didn't say.
          And his testimony said it best.  "Smoking is a
     decision that each person has to make for
     themselves."  Mr. Cuculino's decisions were his
     own, and he should be responsible for those
     decisions.
          Thank you for your attention today.  Thank you
     for your attention over the last two weeks.  We
     really appreciate your commitment to this jury
     service.  Thank you. 2636


          MR. REID:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
     please the Court.
          Good afternoon.
          JURORS:  Good afternoon.
          MR. REID:  Good news and bad news, once again
     I'm last, but once again it's almost lunch.  That's
     the bad news.  The good news is I'm not the very
     last today, so Mr. Sloman or Mr. Kaiser will get
     that at the end of the day.
          As you noticed in the last week or so, I
     haven't said a lot in this case.  I cross-examined
     Dr. Proctor because he talked about some very
     specific -- a few specific things that related to 2639
     my client this last week with the medicine, the
     medical issues.
          I haven't said very much.  And there really --
     I want to say, first of all, that we really do
     appreciate it on behalf of the several thousand
     employees of R.J. Reynolds, Ms. Rodriguez,
     Miss Hurwitz, we all appreciate what you're doing,
     as do all the parties.
          Lawyers typically don't get to be on juries,
     so I haven't been on one, but I'm told that it's
     always amazing how the synergy -- you heard
     something about synergy, you're going to see that
     with, you know, this person remembers this fact,
     this person remembers this fact, and pretty soon
     you remember everything.
          And that's why the system works and that's
     why, as I told you earlier, I always ask for jury
     trials in cases that I've handled.
          But there are really three reasons why
     Mr. Cuculino's claims really have no relationship
     to R.J. Reynolds.
          Could we see the first slide, please?
          First of all, and I'll talk about these a
     little more, he smoked a minimal number of
     cigarettes.  Secondly, he stopped smoking R.J. 2640
     Reynolds cigarettes 30 years before the heart
     attack.
          And finally, the concealment that is alleged
     in the case had nothing to do with Mr. Cuculino
     deciding beginning to smoke, starting to smoke,
     continuing to smoke, or choosing not ever to try to
     stop earlier than he actually did.
          Now, on the minimal number, and you heard
     Mr. Kaiser was talking to you about so many puffs
     and so forth.  The simple fact is six to seven
     pack-years, based on the evidence that you've heard
     from the plaintiff, is less than 10 percent of the
     total smoking.
          I don't know how many puffs that is, but in
     this case, it's a minimal amount compared to the
     total smoking that Mr. Kaiser claims to have caused
     the problem in this case.  So those are the reasons
     overall why R.J. Reynolds should not be in this
     case.
          Now, you will be instructed that you've really
     been trying two separate cases.  Much of the
     evidence would relate to both parties.  And, in
     fact, Ms. Gallagher has given you all the reasons
     for entering a verdict in favor of both defendants.
     And I don't want to repeat all of that. 2641
          If you'll look at the verdict form, number 3,
     number 3, you've seen that.  Those two questions
     apply to both companies, and I'm not going to talk
     about those issues any more because I think you've
     heard the reasons for putting the X or the check or
     whatever you decide to do on the other side.  But
     there is evidence about R.J. Reynolds that I will
     discuss with you in some detail.
          Now, the Court will instruct you or has
     instructed you that you can -- that you must
     consider the claims of the parties separately.
          Can we see number 4?
          And this is the instruction that was given.
     "Several distinct claims."  "Each is separate from
     the other."  "You should consider the evidence as
     it relates to each claim separately."  That means
     in considering the Reynolds' claim, you ignore the
     smoking and so forth related to Philip Morris.  You
     act as if these were two separate cases.
          We try them together for convenience sake, but
     you have to break them apart and you have to look
     only at the Reynolds evidence for Reynolds and
     Philip Morris evidence for Philip Morris.
          And, in fact, as you've seen, and we'll get to
     those later, the later questions break it out and 2642
     ask you specifically to answer a question about the
     plaintiffs' relationship with Philip Morris and the
     plaintiffs' relationship in this case with R.J.
     Reynolds Tobacco Company.
          There must be causal relationship between what
     the plaintiff claims and my client in this case.
          Now, causation is very important and we've
     talked about it.
          Could we see the next slide, please, number 5?
          Now, I've told you about the bridge because
     that seemed to me to be a pretty good icon of what
     we're talking about here.  On the one hand you've
     got R.J. Reynolds products and conduct from 1953 to
     1965.  Then you have -- and on the other side you
     have Mr. Cuculino's heart disease, 1994 and
     whatever he continues in the future.
          And for this case, it's not driving across,
     you get across with evidence.  And that's how you
     get across the bridge.  And when I talk about the
     bridge of causation, that's what I mean.  There has
     to be a causal relationship between R.J. Reynolds
     and the claims made in this case.
          Now, that means in effect -- if you remember
     during voir dire, the judge instructed the panel
     about that.  We were talking about one of the 2643
     findings.  He pointed out there still has to be
     proof of the causal relationship to the plaintiff.
          R.J. Reynolds admits today, and has for over a
     decade, that smoking could be addictive, that
     smoking can cause injury.  Plaintiff spent a lot of
     time in this case trying to prove those two facts,
     and you didn't hear anybody get up and contest
     those two facts.
          But you had a lot of testimony brought out
     with Dr. Proctor and others trying to prove to you
     something that's really not in dispute in this
     case, because this case, as Ms. Gallagher said, is
     about Mr. Cuculino.
          Now, the legal standard is to produce or
     contribute substantially to producing --
          Number 6, please.
          -- and you've heard this already today, I
     won't belabor it.  That's what you have to show.
     That's the connection, that something R.J. Reynolds
     did or said produced or contributed substantially
     to producing Mr. Cuculino's heart disease in this
     case.
          And I would submit to you, ladies and
     gentlemen, with all respect, that plaintiff has not
     carried his burden relating to heart disease and 2644
     its relationship to R.J. Reynolds.
          Now, there are a couple of undisputed facts
     I've mentioned already.  Six, seven pack-years of
     smoking.  And 30 years between the cessation of the
     R.J. Reynolds smoking and the heart attack.
     Stopping R.J. Reynolds in '65, '66 time period.  So
     with those two facts that are not in dispute, there
     are three bases for rendering a verdict in favor of
     R.J. Reynolds.
          Could we see slide, number 7?
          Number one, there has been no evidence at all
     that in 1965, when Mr. Cuculino stopped smoking
     Reynolds' products that he had any heart disease
     whatsoever.
          Number two, there is no evidence that
     Mr. Cuculino's heart disease in 1994 was related to
     smoking RJR brands, which stopped in '65.  And
     number three, by 1970, Mr. Cuculino's risk of heart
     disease from smoking our brands would have been the
     same as a person who was a nonsmoker because he had
     quit our product in 1965.
          Now, to try to get around what's the obvious
     conclusion, the obvious result, you heard counsel
     this morning arguing that Dr. Feldman said that it
     was a -- the first cigarette started the disease, 2645
     that the damage stays, he said, with you -- I tried
     to write all this down -- that it still contributes
     35, 40, 45 years later, that the damage is already
     done.
          It would have been very simple when
     Dr. Feldman was here on the stand, in order to try
     to carry the burden, the plaintiff could have said,
     "Dr. Feldman, did plaintiff's smoking before 1965
     cause the heart disease in 1994?"
          Wasn't asked that question.  Wasn't asked.
          Another question that would have been easy to
     ask, "Dr. Feldman, would seven pack-years of
     smoking 30 years before the heart disease have been
     a cause of the heart disease?"  That wasn't asked.
          A question could have been asked, "Would seven
     pack-years of smoking lead to some sort of problem
     in your lungs that would then cause you to have a
     heart condition 30 years later?"  That wasn't
     asked.
          So really what happened today is you heard
     lawyer argument about this, because Dr. Feldman
     answered this question.  Dr. Feldman told you the
     answer to all of these questions would have been no
     if he had been asked.
          Let's see slide 8. 2646
          Dr. Feldman said, "How do you explain that,
     once you stop smoking, what happens to your risk?"
     This was not my question, this was plaintiffs'
     counsel's question.  Well, it -- then he added
     "with respect to smoking as a risk factor."
          And Dr. Feldman didn't say -- well -- he could
     have said, well, you have these residues and you
     smoke a little bit and it still keeps going or the
     harm starts -- all these things that Mr. Kaiser
     told you today, he could have said it still
     contributes, the damage is already done, instead he
     said, "It's been estimated from the time you stop
     as it relates to your risk for heart disease, but
     certainly heart disease, that anywhere between a
     year to year and a half and maybe up to five years,
     you revert back to your risk of coronary heart
     disease as if you didn't smoke."
          A person who never smoked does not have that
     disease, does not have those problems in the lungs
     that counsel told you about.  They do not have the
     beginning of any sort of disease.  A person who
     never smoked has none of that.
          Dr. Feldman said, "You are the same as a
     person who never smoked."  They didn't ask him the
     direct questions, they came up with this argument, 2647
     he answered the questions with that.
          Now, can we go to the next slide?
          That's why when you get to this question, it's
     number 2(b), and you are asked specifically, "Was
     smoking cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds a
     legal cause of Mr. Cuculino's coronary heart
     disease?"
          The evidence requires that you answer that
     question no.  There is no evidence that supports
     anything other than a no to that question.
          Now, the other claim that counsel makes
     against my client is that we concealed something.
     And he claims that we concealed facts relating to
     smoking and health, and that that caused him to
     take some action or refrain from taking action.
          Well, once again, the bridge of causation
     applies.  They have got to show that what was
     concealed had some causal relationship between R.J.
     Reynolds -- and that's why I talk about conduct.
          Number one there, the first line says brands.
     We talked about that.  The second is conduct.
     There has to be some causal relationship.  And so
     the Court has instructed you, --
          Could we see slide 11?
          It's not concealment, -- it's common sense. 2648
     If you know it, it's not concealment.  And
     specifically in this case, it's not just knowing
     it, it's otherwise -- "not otherwise known or
     available."
          So if it's available, that's the same as
     knowing and you just choose not to do it, not to
     pay attention, not to read it.
          Now, you've heard -- the claim seems to be
     here that the only source of information that
     exists about smoking is the tobacco companies.
     That's Mr. Kaiser's argument.  He said over and
     over why didn't the tobacco company tell them.
          And if you remember Dr. Proctor --
     Ms. Gallagher said this to you a minute ago that
     Mr. Cuculino wasn't waiting for the tobacco
     company.  Well, that's Dr. Proctor's testimony in
     this case.  I asked the question.  "Do you believe
     people are waiting for the tobacco company to tell
     them about the harms?"  And he said, "No."  Because
     you get information from many, many sources.
          So I'm not going to go through it all again,
     but I made a chart.  It's a little busy.
          I'm sorry, 12.  Yeah.
          All right.  I'll tell you what that -- it's
     kind of off the screen.  That's a timeline across 2649
     the bottom.  On the left side, in the blue, those
     are all the common knowledge things that you heard
     about, going all the way back.  Christopher
     Columbus, Mark Twain, van Gogh.  That was the
     cigarette in -- from Dr. Proctor's book, you
     remember the cigarette in the skeleton?  Florida
     banning it, nicotine fit, and so forth.
          Then you move into the '50s, and you see the
     blue line going across, from the '50s on, there is
     coverage of smoking and health in the popular
     media, and that was LIFE magazine and things like
     that, Reader's Digest.
          Then in about 1919, it was the prohibition era
     where smoking was actually banned because of health
     concerns.  Then you pick up with the warnings on
     every cigarette pack.  Every time Mr. Cuculino
     picked up a cigarette, he got that -- after 19 --
     after 1965 or '66 rather, he got a direct personal
     warning.
          Now, Mr. Kaiser did all that calculation about
     how many puffs.  Well, I could do the same
     calculation about take all those cigarettes and say
     he was warned every time he took a cigarette out
     and that's going to be, you know, a huge, huge,
     huge number. 2650
          But the point is, he was warned every time he
     picked up a pack of cigarettes.  Warnings on
     advertisements and warnings through public service
     announcements.  So that's what was out there in
     general.
          And then the red boxes are personal direct
     warnings from Mr. -- and Ms. Gallagher went through
     all these today, the mother-in-law, the Surgeon
     General's Report that he'd heard about at one
     point, emphysema, the heart attack, his wife quits,
     his wife constantly saying -- and the bottom tells
     the whole story.
          The testimony is that from 1950s on, until --
     into '94 with the heart attack, he did not want to
     quit, he did not try to quit, and, in fact, he
     testified "I didn't even think about quitting."
          And you heard Dr. Goldman say, "You are not
     addicted unless you have several things, one of
     which is you've got to try to quit."  And that
     makes sense.  How do you know you can't quit if you
     never tried?  And that's the case we have here.
          Now, I'm not saying that Mr. Cuculino read all
     this or necessarily knew all this, but this is
     what's out there, this is what people are talking
     about. 2651
          When you walk by the Philadelphia Inquirer,
     remember you saw that in the opening, I showed you,
     and Dr. Proctor was familiar, big, giant headlines
     about the relationship between smoking and health
     in the Surgeon General's Report.  National news.
     You saw much of that.  That's what's out there.
     And that's why it's otherwise available.  It's
     available.  And when his wife knows about it and
     tries to get him to quit, that's available.
          So nothing was concealed from Mr. Cuculino.
     Just because he didn't get a letter from the
     companies -- but he did, in 1966, did get, as
     Ms. Gallagher pointed out, a warning every time he
     picked a pack up.  That's his one communication
     with the companies, and he has reasons he said he
     ignored them.
          Let's go to the next slide.
          Let's see, was this getting through.  And then
     you heard testimony about all these different
     polls, and two-thirds believed in '64, 81 percent
     strongly, all the way up into the '80s, 90 percent
     believed.
          Remember, he said there was some polls have
     you heard and then some do you believe.  Well,
     that's a do you believe poll.  Mr. Cuculino says he 2652
     didn't ever know that there was a problem with this
     until much later, in fact, two years ago with lung
     cancer.
          But that's what was getting into the public.
     I submit to you it is available.  Whether he chose
     to pay attention to it or act on it, it is
     available, and it was throughout his entire smoking
     life.  So --
          Slide number 15.
          Those are the two slides relating to
     concealment.  They have to show that there was an
     omission of material fact, a legal cause, that's
     where causation comes in, that's the bridge of
     causation, a legal cause of the coronary heart
     disease.
          And I submit your answer to those questions
     should be no because it was either known or
     otherwise -- it was otherwise known or available,
     and that's the test that the Court has instructed
     you that you must follow in rendering a verdict in
     this case.
          I did want to just mention the admission of
     fault on Mr. Cuculino's -- Mr. Cuculino says --
     told you that he did not know over this period that
     smoking was risky, that he'd learned it later and 2653
     then learned it two years ago about lung cancer.
          But he says that his attempts to -- his fault
     is based on his failure in the frequency and
     duration.  That means he didn't try hard enough and
     he didn't try long enough.
          Well, now, let's look at slide 16.
          Let me tell you what that means.  It means
     that he really did know smoking was dangerous, why
     else would he admit that I should have tried
     harder?  It really means that he always had the
     ability to quit.  What does he say, "I could have
     quit, I just didn't try hard enough and I didn't
     try often enough."  And finally, until 2009, there
     was never a serious effort to quit, and
     Ms. Gallagher went through all of that with you.
          So when he says I can -- it's my fault based
     on duration and frequency, you wouldn't make that
     admission unless you knew these things.  If you
     honestly believe I didn't know smoking was bad for
     me and I couldn't quit, he would not have made
     these admissions.
          But he did because the evidence really
     suggests, even though Mr. Cuculino has told you I
     didn't know, I didn't hear, I, you know, lived
     under a rock or something, even though he said all 2654
     of that, the evidence suggests that he did know and
     it was there and he chose to ignore it.  And it's
     not concealed.  It's not concealed.
          Now -- slide 17.
          This is the -- I just filled in for my client.
     You've heard the evidence.  We shouldn't get to
     this question.  I should have said that early on.
     The rules are such that we have to argue about
     everything or talk to you about everything.  I
     don't want to say argue with you.
          The rules are we've got to talk about
     everything because we don't get to come back, you
     don't get to answer the first two and then come
     back and discuss the second.  So we have to talk
     about everything.
          And you have heard the evidence of about --
     about my client's smoking and why it is -- because
     of the minimal level, it should not be in this case
     at all, and I submit when you get to this question,
     Ms. Gallagher has already suggested to you that her
     number should be zero as well, and I agree with
     that.
          Now, the last thing I want to talk to you
     about is punitive damages.  As you heard, the
     plaintiff in this case is making the claim, and 2655
     that claim says essentially that he wishes you to
     render a judgment, a verdict in this case, that
     punishes my client.  That punished.  And as you
     heard, the burden of proof, --
          Number 18, please.
          -- is different.  It's not tilting the scales,
     it's not a greater weight, it's evidence -- it's --
     it's clear and convincing.  Evidence that is
     precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and has
     such weight that it produces a firm belief or
     conviction without hesitation.  That's a high
     standard.  And you're going to be asked yes or no.
     This is going to be a yes-or-no question.  That's
     the standard that has to be met in this case.
          But let me tell you the kind of behavior the
     judge has instructed you.  I know it's -- you'll
     get a chance to take all these instructions back,
     you'll get them in the jury room, but when you hear
     them the first time, you may not -- we lawyers, we
     toil over every sentence.
          But let's look at the next slide.
          Because this is the behavior that you have to
     show, as the instructions have told you.  You have
     to show that my client and Philip Morris -- that
     our behavior was gross and flagrant.  That we 2656
     exercised reckless disregard toward Mr. Cuculino.
          Remember, I'm going to tell you this in a
     minute, but the bridge of causation applies.  So
     all of this behavior that they're talking about has
     to be directed and has to cause injury to
     Mr. Cuculino.
          It has to demonstrate an entire lack of care.
     A conscious indifference to what you should do.
     Wanton or reckless disregard for safety and
     welfare.  Reckless indifference to the rights of
     others.  Intentional violation to those rights.
          You have to decide that some of that -- that
     describes our behavior by clear and convincing
     evidence.  That's what's required.
          Now, there are several concepts about punitive
     damages that I would like to share with you.
          Number 20, please.
          First, as you've heard, these are not damages
     to compensate somebody.  If you get to this point,
     and, of course, we don't believe you should, but if
     you get to this point, you will have already passed
     the compensatory damage number, so you are not
     awarding any dollars in this phase for the injury
     or anything.  This is purely to punish my client.
     So the damages are over and above. 2657
          And the punitive damages do not go to the
     government, they don't go to a public health
     agency, they don't go to any sort of antismoking
     advertisements or Cancer Bites.  They go to
     Mr. Cuculino.
          And as you heard, there will be a separate
     phase to determine an amount if you get there.  And
     most importantly, those Engle findings have nothing
     to do with punitive damage.  The Engle findings
     were decided, remember I told you at the beginning,
     this was that other jury who had never heard of
     Mr. Cuculino and made these findings in general,
     that still have to be causally related.
          The findings were established by a greater
     weight of the evidence.
          So back to the findings, they have nothing to
     do, it should not be considered at all in your
     determination in this case about whether or not you
     wish to punish my client.
          Now, as I said to you, 21, we'll look at it
     again.
          Sometimes in a case, I've done this once
     before and I actually drew a bridge, but it looked
     so bad I decided I would copy a -- because it just
     helps kind of make the point. 2658
          There has to be a connection.  Whatever
     behavior you find to have caused or to warrant
     punitive damages has to have connection to
     Mr. Cuculino.  It can't be injuring anybody else.
     It has to be directly related, causally related.
     So the same analysis of causation applies.
          And as you've heard, or will hear, you can't
     award Mr. Cuculino damage because someone else was
     injured, because they can bring their own case if
     they have one.  And it has to be conduct that
     occurred in Florida.
          And I submit to you that the plaintiff has not
     carried the burden in this case to prove beyond --
     or, I'm sorry, almost misspoke.  To prove by clear
     and convincing evidence that the behavior that
     you've heard about with regard to my client, R.J.
     Reynolds, rises to the level.
          Now, where -- let's think for a minute about
     where this evidence that you've heard came from.
     It came from the testimony of Dr. Proctor and some
     documents that were admitted.  And Dr. Proctor, as
     you've heard, earns millions of dollars doing what
     you saw him do here in his direct testimony,
     getting on the stand and basically giving exactly
     the same testimony, without any difference, because 2659
     it's -- as he said, I don't care about the
     plaintiff, that's not my job, I'm just going to
     give you this presentation that I put together.
          And he's done it time and time again, all over
     the state.  He's earned millions of dollars.  And
     most importantly, Dr. Proctor, this is part of a
     goal, he's trying to carry out one of his goals,
     and you heard that, his goal is to create a
     situation where adults do not have the right to buy
     and use tobacco products.
          Dr. Proctor has said, and he said it in front
     of you, that he wants to ban cigarettes.  And he
     can have that view, but as you know, the Congress
     of the United States has declared that adults can
     use tobacco.
          But Dr. Proctor, this is part of his strategy,
     "A lot of big verdicts against tobacco companies
     will put them out of business or do something
     negative to try to help in my goal," Dr. Proctor's
     goal, "of ending smoking."
          So I want to talk about some of the evidence.
     And you know it's interesting.  I'm going to show
     you some evidence about how my client has behaved
     over the years, what we've done.  And if I brought
     in a person from my company and that person 2660
     testified --
          MR. KAISER:  Objection as to if he brought
     anybody in.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. REID:  And if he told you what the company
     did and they cross-examined and they would say
     would you work there, Dr. Proctor is the source of
     what I'm going to tell you, because he could not
     deny these facts.  He didn't tell you -- you know,
     there is a -- there is a saying that
     cross-examination is one of the great rights of
     litigants in the country.
          Because you can -- you can bring in a witness,
     he can have credentials, he can have everything,
     and until cross-examination -- well, Dr. Proctor
     didn't tell you any of this that I'm going to tell
     you now when he was on direct examination.  But
     when he was on cross-examination, the person who --
     whose testimony is really forming the basis of this
     claim for punitive damages, I want to tell you what
     he did.
          First he told you that something called the
     Council for Tobacco Research, and you've heard that
     mentioned this morning, was a front organization,
     it did distraction research, didn't really study, 2661
     in fact, you heard this morning counsel argue it
     never studied smoking and health issues.
          Well, Dr. Proctor had a different view on --
     after he said all that on direct, this was his view
     on cross.
          Number 25.
          He admitted that they spent over 350 million
     on projects, they funded projects, 7,000 reports
     and medical articles, 600 articles cited by the
     Surgeon General.  That's an interesting question.
     Dr. Proctor says, "None of their work had anything
     to do with smoking and health."
          If that's the case, the Surgeon General's
     Report is about what?  Smoking and health.  Why
     would the Surgeon General cite 600 articles in a
     report about smoking and health if those 600
     articles didn't have anything to do with smoking
     and health?  But Dr. Proctor told you -- told you
     that to start with.  They funded ten future Nobel.
          And most importantly, many of the studies that
     they did were also funded by the government and
     funded by the public health organizations.  So
     clearly, they were carrying out legitimate research
     concerning smoking and health.  He calls it
     distraction. 2662
          Let's look at slide 26.
          I just pulled these ten up to show him.  And
     most of those things, it's hard for most of us here
     to pronounce and I certainly -- we all know --
     remember we talked about nano something and pico
     something.
          I just said, "How many of these have you
     read?"
          He said, "Well, I have read some, not many."
          And these ten I just found when I did a search
     and here they are and he admitted.  And he admitted
     that these all relate to smoking and health.  And
     you can tell they do.  Cigarette smoke inhalation.
     Tracheobronchial epithelia, that's the lung area
     related to smoking.  Addictive aspects of smoking.
     Important determinants of pulmonary resistance.
          Did he bring you a single article in and show
     you an article and said, see, this is what I'm
     talking about, this is distraction research.  He
     hoped that you wouldn't know this is what the
     research really was.
          And he said a fairly dramatic thing, he said,
     "And these people," meaning my clients,
     "organizations that they funded, they would cut off
     your funding if you said smoking causes a disease." 2663
     And I want you to think back.  Did he show you a
     single case where that happened?  Don't you think
     if that happened, he would be the first one and it
     would be part of his books and he would put it into
     his presentation?
          And you saw no evidence that that happened.
     No evidence at all.
          THE CLERK:  15 minutes.
          MR. REID:  Thank you.
          In fact, I'll show you a couple, when we look
     later, where there was actually a finding relating
     smoking to cancer, a study, and, he admitted, oh,
     yeah, they funded that, and it was exactly what he
     claimed they never funded.  So that was it.
          You also heard that the Surgeon General
     commended, and counsel said we didn't do anything,
     but remember we're going to talk about it in a
     little bit where we gave them all the information
     about the constituents and we were involved, and
     they commended the companies.
          Number 27.
          We worked closely with the federal government
     and the health community, National Cancer
     Institute, trying to develop a safer cigarette.
     Funded research, did all those things, came up with 2664
     some new ideas, and in the end, he admitted that
     the Surgeon General -- that the head of HEW,
     Mr. Califano, canceled the program because it was
     no longer politically appropriate to work with the
     tobacco industry, even trying to find a safer
     cigarette, and that's why it was canceled.
          Should my client be punished for doing --
     should they be punished for the CTR, should they be
     punished for this, should they be punished because
     they were rewarded -- or commended.  19 --
          Number 28.
          You heard about Dr. Teague today again and
     this was his study.  This was the literature.  And
     remember I showed it to him, it had 75 articles.
     I'm not saying that individual citizens needed to
     go to the libraries and read articles in Spanish.
     But this was, as Dr. Proctor said, a responsible
     thing to compile this.  This would have been known
     to people in the field who then would do studies
     and release their results and get it in the popular
     press.
          So to suggest that I'm saying Mr. Cuculino
     should have gone -- that's laughable almost to say
     that he would go and look in the library and look
     at one of these.  That's not the point at all.  The 2665
     point is, R.J. Reynolds as early as 1953, before a
     lot of those studies happened, was trying to do
     this.
          And let me just say, this talk about documents
     and why, I told you in the beginning there were two
     things to ask about documents, does it relate to
     Mr. Cuculino because of the bridge of causation;
     and secondly, was it ever the policy of the
     company.
          And Dr. Proctor agreed that the article in '72
     by Dr. Teague that counsel mentioned this morning,
     he could never establish or find out if it ever
     became anybody's policy because it was on
     stationery, remember, it was done part of his study
     at a university to get an MBA.  So that's why I
     told you to ask those questions because they
     already talked about that document.
          Number 29.
          We invented technology to study the compounds
     in smoke.  And we didn't keep it to ourselves.  We
     did an eight-year study, we gave it to the
     government.  We did the results disclosed in open
     conferences, hardly something you ought to be
     punished for as counsel is arguing in this case.
     Counsel made some light, I would say, of The Green 2666
     Monster, said you could get it for $8.
          Could we see the next slide, please, 30?
          Counsel, counsel said, well, that was just an
     $8 book.  That's just an $8 book, but it cost a lot
     of money to compile and it was thousands -- it was
     a million words, Dr. Proctor complimented it, and
     it had articles in there that the tobacco company
     would not exactly find helpful because Dr. Proctor
     said it had both sides and the Surgeon General used
     it in its landmark work.
          And finally, number 31, Dr. Proctor told you
     about how my client spent over a billion dollars to
     develop non -- non-burning technology, heating
     technology.  It hadn't worked.  It reduces
     carcinogens.  It failed, the first one failed.  The
     second one is still being sold.  Should we be
     punished for doing that?
          Now, could we put back up slide, let me see,
     24, please?
          THE CLERK:  Ten minutes.
          MR. REID:  Thank you.
          That's what I just went through.  And I submit
     to you that all came from Dr. Proctor's testimony
     and he's the principal witness who talked about
     this, and for all of those reasons, he suggests 2667
     that we should be punished for those -- for that
     activity.  And I submit to you, I submit to that we
     should not be and that you should answer no to that
     question.
          Mr. Cuculino is seeking $10 million now and
     seeking extraordinary damages beyond that.
     Notwithstanding some facts, notwithstanding that,
     number one, he hasn't been able to carry his burden
     with regard to smoking Reynolds's products 30 years
     before he had this condition, the heart condition.
          By the way, when you go back and look at
     documents of counsel, there were about 12 documents
     entered -- of all these millions and millions of
     documents that Dr. Proctor has written three books
     about, they could only find 12 to put into
     evidence, and we talked about two of them,
     Dr. Teague's, and there was another one where we
     described generally our research, and there were a
     couple of -- and he talked about the talking heads.
          There were two 30-second clips of the
     president of Reynolds and -- two different CEOs of
     Reynolds at the very last two, and that's it.  That
     is the evidence in this case, less than a dozen
     documents, none of which relate to Mr. Cuculino.
     And that includes documents relating to the 2668
     companies that Reynolds merged with.
          So, number one, Mr. Cuculino is asking you to
     turn him into one of the wealthiest human beings in
     this area, to award $10 million because he couldn't
     prove that my client hurt him, my client was
     responsible for his injury.  He smoked a little bit
     of my cigarettes a long time ago.  He's asked for
     this money notwithstanding that he continued to
     smoke and hold onto the risks.  He continued to
     smoke because he never seriously tried to quit.
          Put 33 up.
          You've seen this before, but that summarizes
     what was in the chart.  He seeks this money even
     though he was always able to quit and he did quit
     eventually.  And so as Ms. Gallagher told you, we
     don't believe that these damages are warranted in
     this case.
          MR. KAISER:  Objection to what counsel and
     anybody else believes.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. REID:  Our position in this case, my
     client's position is they should not be damage --
     they should not have any damages awarded and
     specifically not the punitive damages.  We talk
     about it because we have to.  Sometimes if we 2669
     don't, I expect they would get up and say, well, he
     must agree with it if we don't mention it.  But you
     understand that our position, the company's
     position is there should be no damage award in this
     case.
          So finally, I want to go back to where it all
     started.  This case is first and foremost about
     Mr. Cuculino.  And the idea -- and his choice.  And
     the idea of choice as relates to cigarettes has
     been around a long time.
          And if you look at slide 35, you heard this
     testimony, on three different occasions, '77, '82,
     and '86, the Surgeon General of the United States
     said exactly what we've said in this case, that
     smoking is a personal choice health issue, and it's
     exactly what Mr. Cuculino said when you saw the
     board up here a minute ago, a personal choice
     behavior, an addictive behavior, and the individual
     must decide.
          That's what the Surgeon General -- how it's
     been described and that's why we started this case
     by saying this is about Mr. Cuculino and what he
     chose to do.
          And it was interesting, that last quote that
     you saw when he said something to the effect of he 2670
     didn't think it should be a choice, someone should
     have the right, that's so interesting because if
     you recall, at the end of the case, you saw a clip,
     or at some time you did, I want you to see that
     clip right now.
          Because it was 50 years ago, and yet it has
     such application to this case, and it's so similar
     to what Mr. Cuculino himself has expressed a belief
     in.
          Show that.
          THE COURT:  Harry froze up.
          MR. REID:  Yeah.  Yeah.  One minute.  Yeah.  I
     always makes the guys a little nervious when this
     happens.
          While he's trying to do that, let me tell you
     one more thing.
          And if you get it fixed --
          (Video clip played as follows:)
          MR. REASONER:  In this type of a country, it
     comes down to you whether you like it or not.  No
     one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is
     now quite clear no one is going to tell him it is
     good for him either.  The decision is his.  The
     decision and the health that may depend on it.
          This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night. 2671
          (Video clip stopped.)
          MR. REID:  Thank you.
          The last thing I want to say is that
     unbeknownst to you, that you have entered into an
     agreement with the parties here, all the parties.
     You have agreed and we have agreed -- first of all,
     we have agreed that you get to decide this case,
     judge and jury.
          That means you go into the room and nobody can
     come in.  And it's not like I told you in the old
     days where you could be put in jail if you get the
     wrong result.  You get to decide, and we have
     said -- and we can't criticize what you do, and
     you'll come out and we'll get your result.  You
     have the total unfettered right to decide the case.
          But you have promised the parties something,
     and that is you have promised the parties that you
     will decide the case on the law and the evidence
     and you won't decide it because it's a big company
     or you won't decide it because somebody 50 years
     ago wrote a think piece at a college paper.
          MR. KAISER:  Objection.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Let's wrap it up.
          MR. REID:  You will decide on the facts and
     the evidence and that's why this works.  That's the 2672
     pact between the parties and jurors.  So I'll sit
     down now, and as Ms. Gallagher said, I won't get a
     chance to respond.  The worst thing a lawyer can do
     is sit down and never speak to you again.
          Again, on behalf of all of the folks on our
     side of the room, I want to thank you for your
     attention, and we totally look forward to your
     verdict.
