                    CLOSING ARGUMENT
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Good morning, ladies and
    gentlemen.
         We've been together now for two weeks.  So I
    probably don't need to introduce myself, but you
    know that I'm Bill Geraghty and along with Hassia
    Diolombi, we represent Philip Morris USA in this
    case.
         And I think it goes without saying it's been a
    long trial.  Right?  I think we're all happy that
    we're getting close to the end.  And I want to start
    my closing with what I said to you two weeks ago.
    And, that is, we want to thank you for your jury
    service.  We understand it is a tremendous sacrifice
    for you-all to have spent the last two weeks or so
    with us, and we really appreciate it.
         And the judge made the comment, but there is no
    question we all know you've been very attentive.
    You've been extremely patient with all the
    questioning, even when it went beyond 5:00 at night.
    And, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, you asked some
    of the more insightful questions of the witnesses.
    So no question you were paying a lot of attention. We appreciate that all very much.  So let me just
    say thank you at the very start.
         We're getting very close to the end of the
    case.  And pretty soon, you're going to go off and
    retire to deliberate.  And the judge is going to
    give you a verdict form and a set of instructions
    that will give you the issues that you will be asked
    to decide in this case.
         But before you head off to deliberate, this is
    my last opportunity to summarize the evidence that
    we've seen and heard over the last two weeks.
         And when I spoke to you two weeks ago, I told
    you the plaintiff would spend a lot of time talking
    about statements and ideas expressed by Philip
    Morris, many of which were made 30, 40, and in some
    instances more than 50 years ago.
         And we told you two weeks ago we would not try
    to defend all of those statements.
         Philip Morris made statements and had ideas
    that today no one would say or think.
         But I also told you that if that is all this
    case were about, if all this case were about was
    whether cigarette company executives made
    inappropriate statements, we wouldn't have spent the
    last two weeks here together.  But we did. And we did, ladies and gentlemen, because this
    case isn't about all cigarette smokers.  This case
    isn't about whether we think people should or should
    not smoke cigarettes.  This case is about Lamar
    Danielson.  It's about his life and the decisions
    that he made.
         And that's why, when you ultimately get the
    verdict form from Judge Jones, you will see that
    every single question on that verdict form asks you
    specifically about Lamar Danielson.  Not about all
    cigarette smokers and not the general public.
         Now, Mrs. Danielson brought three expert
    witnesses:  Dr. Hurt, Dr. Cummings, and Dr. Burns.
         Each of whom has been testifying against Philip
    Morris, you now know, for decades.
         Dr. Cummings told you he's made over
    $1 million, and Dr. Burns told you he's made
    $3 1/2 million testifying in cases like this against
    Philip Morris.
         And Dr. Cummings showed you the same documents
    and the same videotapes that he's shown in the 100
    other trials in which he has testified.
         And he tried to tell you that the dangers of
    smoking were somehow hidden from Lamar Danielson,
    but what did Lamar Danielson's family and friends tell you?
         Not a single person who knew Lamar Danielson
    walked into this courtroom and testified that he
    didn't know that smoking was dangerous, that he was
    somehow confused about the health risks of smoking.
    No one told you that.
         Instead, what they told you was the exact
    opposite of that.  They told you that Lamar
    Danielson was strong, intelligent, and
    well-educated.  A man who lived his life the way he
    wanted to live it.
         You heard that Micah Danielson was trained as a
    nurse at the age of 19 in 1972.  Lamar Danielson was
    trained as a funeral home director and an embalmer
    at the age of 20 in 1973.
         He knew smoking was dangerous for many years.
    He saw firsthand the difference between the dark and
    blackened lungs of heavy cigarette smokers compared
    to the pink, healthy-looking lungs of nonsmokers.
         Nobody told you that he ever heard or read or
    saw any statement about cigarette smoking and health
    made by a tobacco company.
         And I apologize, again, for drinking water;
    but, otherwise, I'm not going to be able to get
    through this if I don't. You will learn that Mr. Danielson was the kind
    of person who made his own decisions in life.  He
    did what he wanted to do no matter what anyone told
    him and that included smoking cigarettes.
         You heard what he said to his family members
    and friends when they told him cigarette smoking is
    dangerous.  You need to quit.
         These are the things that Mr. Danielson told
    his sister-in-law, his mother-in-law, and his
    mother.
         "Come on, sis.  Get out of here.  Stop being
    holier than thou.
         "This is what I do.
         "I'm going to smoke cigarettes."
         That's what he told his family and friends.
         So ask yourself why Mr. Schultz spent nearly an
    hour trying to persuade you that Mr. Danielson was
    tricked into smoking cigarettes for 20 or 25 years.
    That's not the evidence that you've heard in this
    case.
         Now, you're going to hear about certain
    findings from an earlier class action.  Judge -- the
    judge will instruct you about those, and there's no
    dispute about this, ladies and gentlemen.  Those
    findings that you'll see in the instructions don't tell you how to answer any of the questions on the
    verdict form.  That's because by your verdict and
    your answer to some of the specific questions on
    that form you will get to decide whether those
    findings --
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Your Honor, I object to this line
    of argument.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  I'll overrule the objection.
    Thank you.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  That's because by your answers
    to specific questions on the verdict form
    Judge Jones will give you, you'll get to decide
    whether those findings apply in this case and to the
    lifestyle choices that Mr. Danielson made.
         After all, this case is about Lamar Danielson.
    Mrs. Danielson has now asked you to award her and
    her family millions of dollars in damages for her
    husband's decision to smoke cigarettes.  Something
    that you all now know he enjoyed doing for years.
         I told you in my opening statement that this
    case presents a very simple question:
         Are we going to hold Philip Morris
    responsible -- legally responsible for Lamar
    Danielson's decision to smoke cigarettes and award
    Mrs. Danielson millions of dollars in damages for that when the evidence clearly demonstrates that
    they lived their life exactly the way they wanted to
    live it, that they smoked cigarettes because that's
    what they wanted to do, and they had no interest --
    no real interest in quitting smoking until the very
    end.
         You are the only jury who has heard the
    evidence in Lamar Danielson's case, and you get to
    decide the issues in this case.
         Now, in a moment we're going to walk through
    the significant events in Mr. Danielson's life, and
    I'm going to show you that everything we told you
    about Mr. Danielson in our opening statement has
    proved to be true.
         I talked to you about the sources of evidence,
    and I asked you to pay close attention to the
    important sources of evidence.  So what did I mean
    by that?
         Well, what I meant by that was that everything
    that we showed you during this course of the trial
    came from something that Mr. Danielson told one of
    his own doctors; something that Mr. Danielson,
    himself, wrote down in one of his own insurance
    application forms; or it comes from something that
    one of his close family members, friends, or coworkers told us about him.
         Those are the sources of evidence.
         And I also told you in my opening statement two
    weeks ago that many of the things that
    Mrs. Danielson would tell us during the course of
    this trial would be contradicted by what her husband
    told his own doctor many years ago back in 1994, by
    what he wrote down in those insurance application
    forms, and by what other friends and family members
    told us.
         And I told you, ladies and gentlemen, that you
    would get to be the judges of the facts, and
    Judge Jones told you that at the very beginning this
    morning.
         You get to decide what testimony you choose to
    believe.
         Judge Jones will give you this instruction on
    the believability of witnesses.
         Here's what it'll say:
         "In evaluating the believability of any witness
    and the weight you will give the testimony of any
    witness, you may properly consider" -- and you'll be
    given a series of factors, but these are two of
    those.
         "You can consider any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case."
         And by "interest," we mean a financial interest
    in the outcome of the case.
         "You can also consider the reasonableness of
    the testimony of the witness considered in the light
    of all the evidence in the case and in the light of
    your own experience and common sense."
         We encourage you, we ask you, we implore you
    use your common sense when you evaluate the evidence
    in this case.
         "You can accept or reject any testimony you
    hear in this case, in whole or in part."
         That is your job, ladies and gentlemen, and
    your job alone.
         Now, let me give you an example of when
    Mrs. Danielson told us one thing -- told us one
    thing that was contradicted by all of the other
    evidence that you had heard in this case.
         You heard about him quitting in the late 1980s.
    This is Mrs. Danielson's trial testimony.  This was
    last Friday:
         "QUESTION:  So then you don't recall your
    husband ever quitting for longer than four days to
    maybe -- I think you said seven or eight days,
    perhaps in 1993 or thereabouts? "That's what I recall."
         Mrs. Danielson doesn't recall her husband ever
    quitting for longer than that.
         What was the other evidence you heard?
         Her son Billy Danielson, he told you his father
    quit smoking for a couple of months to a year.
         Lamar Danielson himself told his doctor,
    Dr. Williams, in 1994 that he quit for four months.
         Ray Danielson, his older brother, said, "My
    brother quit, and he gained 25 to 30 pounds after he
    quit smoking."
         But Mrs. Danielson told you, "I don't remember
    that.  I don't remember any of that."
         What did she tell you about what she knew about
    whether cigarette smoking was dangerous?
         Well, I asked her flat out, and she said --
    again, this was on Thursday.  She said she really
    wasn't sure what she knew.  Here's the question and
    the answer.
         "You knew when you met your husband, Lamar
    Danielson, that smoking was bad for your health?"
         This is the answer she gave to you from the
    witness stand under oath:
         "Honestly, I don't know that I really had
    thought about it that much.  I knew that -- that in the course of the nurse's training that I probably
    had heard stuff about it."
         Well, then I confronted her, ladies and
    gentlemen, with what she had said under oath in her
    deposition back in 2009 before the trial started.
         This is what she said:
         "QUESTION:  You knew when you met Lamar that
    smoking was bad for your health?
         "Yes."
         Unambiguous, unequivocally, but this is what
    she tried to tell you when she testified on
    Thursday.
         Ladies and gentlemen, Judge Jones will instruct
    you that you get to use your common sense and
    personal life experiences to decide whether or not
    you are going to believe some of the things
    Mrs. Danielson and the other witnesses have told
    you.  That, again, is your job, and your job alone.
         Now, I did tell you this case was about two
    words in my opening statement.  I told you it was
    about control and responsibility.
         And we're going to walk through all the
    significant events in Mr. Danielson's life here in
    just a few moments.  And as we do that, I would
    encourage you, once again, to ask yourself the following series of questions:  Who was in control
    of his lifestyle choices and his decision to smoke
    cigarettes for 25 years?
         Who was in control of his efforts to quit
    smoking?
         Who controlled his motivation to quit?
         Was Mr. Danielson addicted?
         And if so, was he someone whose addiction was
    so strong, so substantial -- to use the words of the
    Court's instruction -- that he was robbed of his
    free will?
         And, finally, did Mr. Danielson rely on
    anything that Philip Morris said or failed to say
    about the health risks of smoking?
         After hearing the evidence in this case, you
    know that Lamar Danielson wasn't paying attention to
    anything the cigarette companies were saying.  He
    wasn't waiting for Philip Morris to tell him
    cigarette smoking is dangerous; you need to quit.
    Mr. Danielson was the only person making those
    decisions in his life.
         The truth is, and the evidence has now shown
    over the last two weeks, that he enjoyed smoking
    cigarettes.  Everyone agreed with that.
         Mr. Schultz just told you that 25 minutes ago; and for many years he wasn't interested in quitting
    smoking.
         And in this country we all have the right to
    make decisions for ourselves.  Even decisions that
    today sitting in this courtroom, with the benefit of
    hindsight, we might say were not in his best
    interests.
         We believe in free will.  That is a fundamental
    principle upon which our country was founded.  You
    do have the right to make your own decisions in
    life.
         But with that right comes the obligation to
    accept personal responsibility for the consequences
    of those decisions.
         Ask yourself:  Have you heard any evidence that
    nicotine robbed Lamar Danielson of his free will?
         You've heard no evidence of the sort.
    Everybody told you he was strong, hard-working,
    intelligent, well-educated.  That he made his own
    decisions in life.  Just look at how he lived his
    life and the things he accomplished.
         Now, let me talk briefly about the burden of
    proof and then we're going to get right into the
    facts that you've heard.
         You've seen documents and medical records and insurance forms and you've heard testimony.  Micah
    Danielson bears the burden of proof of every issue
    in this case by what is called the "greater weight
    of the evidence."
         So what does that mean?  That means she was
    required to prove -- produce more persuasive and
    convincing evidence to outweigh the mountain of
    evidence that we've presented during the course of
    this trial; that Mr. Danielson was always in control
    of his own lifestyle choices; that he was not some
    hopeless addict; that addiction to cigarettes was
    not the legal cause of his lung cancer and death;
    and the plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of
    proof on these issues and I'll explain that to you
    as we walk through all the evidence.
         So with that in mind, let's get started and
    let's review what you've heard about Mr. Danielson
    over the last two weeks.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, this is a disclaimer
    or whatever you want to call it; but this is the
    same exact timeline, the same exact timelines that I
    showed you two weeks ago when I gave my opening
    statement.  And I'm going to show you that
    everything we put on these boards we've proven to
    you. So let's start at the beginning.
    Mr. Danielson, as you know, was born in 1953 right
    here in Pensacola.  His parents are Norman and
    Myrtle Danielson.  He's the youngest of three
    children.
         You heard he was raised in a very strict
    Baptist family.  You also heard that his mother for
    many, many, many years has been strongly opposed to
    cigarettes and alcohol.
         And she told everyone, her husband, her
    children, anyone who would listen that she didn't
    think people should smoke or drink.
         In fact, you heard that his father, Norman
    Danielson, Senior at one time smoked cigarettes and
    drank alcohol; but he quit in 1957 when Lamar
    Danielson is just four years old, because his
    mother, his wife told him she did not want him to
    smoke or drink.  That's all undisputed, ladies and
    gentlemen.
         Now, Mr. Schultz tried to suggest to you that
    somehow Philip Morris hid the fact that cigarette
    smoking could cause lung cancer; that cigarette
    smoking could be addictive for the American public.
    Well, ladies and gentlemen, you know after the
    evidence you've heard, that is simply not true and certainly not the case as far as Lamar Danielson is
    concerned.
         We can go all the way back -- Dr. Cummings told
    you that in 1899, 1899, the State of Florida banned
    the sale of cigarettes in this state because it was
    known at that point in time that cigarette smoking
    could be dangerous and addictive.
         He told you as far back as 1907 -- we showed
    the documents; they're in evidence -- that the
    Florida Department of Health declared cigarettes to
    be the worst form of tobacco addiction.  The worst
    form of tobacco addiction in 1907.
         You heard that 100 years ago people used terms
    like "coffin nails" and "cancer sticks" to refer to
    cigarettes.  They said that cigarette smokers were
    nicotine fiends and they suffered from nicotine
    fits.
         That's the evidence you heard.  Dr. Cummings
    told you all of that when he testified.
         Years later you now know Mr. Danielson used the
    same exact terms to describe cigarettes and to refer
    to his own cigarette smoking.
         Here's the testimony from his coworker, Lawana
    Joyner.  This was Ms. Joyner's testimony.  She
    testified a week ago Friday. "Now, in talking to Mr. Danielson about smoking
    and just your general conversations, the two of you
    would use slang terms like 'coffin nails'?
         "ANSWER:  Yes.
         "You had also used the term 'cancer sticks'?
         "Yes.
         "You also use the term 'nicotine fit'?
         "Yes.
         "And he was -- when he was waiting on families
    sometimes Mr. Danielson would joke with you that he
    was having a nicotine attack, correct?"
         Her answer is, "Yes."
         Lawana Joyner remembers all of this.  But
    remember Mrs. Danielson?
         "Ma'am, you don't recall a single conversation
    you ever had with your husband in the 18 years you
    were married where you discussed the health risks of
    smoking?"
         Her answer was:  "No.  I don't remember any
    details.  I'm not saying it didn't happen; I just
    don't remember."
         But that's what Lawana Joyner told you, ladies
    and gentlemen.
         You know, in the 1930s, '40s, and '50s, we
    showed you all the articles from magazines like Reader's Digest that said that cigarette smoking
    could cause cancer, that cigarette smoking can cause
    people to become addicted.
         Dr. Cummings agreed with that.
         As we move into the early 1950s, we showed you
    this mouse skin painting study and the article from
    LIFE magazine in 1953.  Dr. Cummings agreed that
    these articles, this news was front page in
    newspapers and magazines all across the country.
         And Dr. Cummings agreed that in 1954, when
    Lamar Danielson was just an infant, based on all of
    these studies, 90 percent of the people in a poll
    said that they had heard about recent studies saying
    that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer in
    1954.
         That's the evidence you've heard.  That's what
    Dr. Cummings told you.
         So the fact that nicotine could be addictive
    and the fact that smoking could cause lung cancer
    were not secrets known only to Philip Morris.
         Now, let's move forward to the next page of the
    timeline.  And let's go to 1964.
         You know that in January of 1964 the Surgeon
    General issues a report that says cigarette smoking
    causes lung cancer. Lamar Danielson is ten years old when this
    report comes out.  And you've seen the article.
    We've showed it to you.  This is the front page of
    the Pensacola News Journal from January the 12th,
    1964.  Report links cancer in cigarettes.  He's ten
    years old.
         We showed you the news report from CBS News and
    Harry Reasoner, every American was told in 1964 that
    cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.  That's the
    undisputed evidence in this case.
         Dr. Cummings told you the 1964 report was
    historic.  The medical event of the century.  And
    Mr. Schultz just showed you that cigarette
    consumption chart.  1964 is the peak and it has
    continued to go down ever since.  That's what the
    evidence shows in this case.
         Now, let's move back up above the blue bar.
    You know that Norman Danielson, his father, is a
    funeral home director at other funeral homes and in
    1965 he opens Faith Chapel Funeral Home; and this is
    the business that just a few years later Lamar
    Danielson himself is going to join.
         That brings us to 1966.
         You heard that Congress passes a law that
    requires the very first warning label on cigarettes and that warning says "Caution:  Cigarette smoking
    may be hazardous to your health."
         This is 1966.
         Lamar Danielson, at this point, is about 12
    years old when that warning first appears on packs.
         Ladies and gentlemen, there is no dispute in
    this case that every single cigarette that Lamar
    Danielson ever smoked came from a pack that had a
    federally-mandated warning label.  There's no
    dispute about that in this case.
         Now, let's go back up above the blue bar and
    here we are in this period of time.  His father,
    Norman Danielson, Senior doesn't need to be told
    that cigarette smoking is hazardous.  He quit years
    ago; but he sees the difference -- his father sees
    the difference between the dark and blackened lungs
    of heavy smokers and the pink, health-looking lungs
    of nonsmokers when he does embalming of bodies that
    had been autopsied.
         He explained that to you, ladies and gentlemen.
         You also know, based upon everything you've
    heard, his mother continues to be a strong advocate
    telling everyone, don't smoke and don't drink.
         1967, Lamar Danielson begins high school.  And
    somewhere in this period of time -- we don't really know when; it's not very clear in the evidence --
    1969, 1970, 1971 -- Mr. Danielson begins to
    experiment with cigarettes and alcohol.
         That's what you heard from Jerry Pate.  Jerry
    Pate told you they would hang out at Faith Chapel
    Funeral Home on Friday nights and they would drink
    beers, smoke cigarettes, and watch television.
    That's what Mr. Pate told you.
         Now, the plaintiff wants you to believe that
    Lamar Danielson was somehow constantly smoking as a
    14-, 15-, 16-year-old; that he was a chain-smoker.
    That's what they've told you.  That's what they've
    told you.
         Well, remember what Lawana Joyner told all of
    us about Lamar Danielson's mother.  A very strict
    Baptist person.
         Now, remember, this is -- she's talking about
    the 1980s here.  This is Lawana Joyner.
         "QUESTION:  While you were working at Faith
    Chapel, you had an opportunity to meet
    Mrs. Danielson?  And this is Mrs. Danielson, Lamar
    Danielson's mother.
         "ANSWER:  Yes, I did.
         "QUESTION:  I think you described her as a
    force to be reckoned with.  A force to be reckoned with.
         "ANSWER:  Yes, she was.
         "QUESTION:  Did she ever say anything about her
    son's smoking?
         "ANSWER:  Oh, yes.  She hated it.  Hated it."
         Remember what Lawana Joyner told you.
         When Lamar Danielson is an adult in his 30s and
    working at the funeral home, if they knew that
    Mrs. Danielson was coming, they hid all the ashtrays
    and they pulled out the air freshener and they
    sprayed because they did not want her to know that
    they were smoking.
         So, ladies and gentlemen, ask yourself:  If she
    talked to her son and told her son not to smoke when
    he was a 30- or 35-year-old adult, what do you think
    she was telling him when he was 15 or 16 or 17?
         Do you really think that Lamar Danielson was
    chain-smoking Marlboro Red cigarettes in front of
    his mother at the age of 15 or 16?
         Use your common sense.  Use your common sense
    and apply your life experiences to the evidence that
    you've heard.
         Now, this is what Lawana Joyner told you, but
    remember what -- what did Mrs. Danielson say?  Micah
    Danielson. Well, she thinks her mother-in-law might have
    been opposed to smoking, but she doesn't really
    recall her mother ever -- her mother-in-law ever
    saying anything.  But this is what Lawana Joyner
    remembers.
         Now, you also heard testimony from Beverly
    Milsted.  This is his older sister.  What did she
    tell you?  She was just two years older than Lamar
    Danielson.  She lived in the same home with him the
    whole time he was in high school.
         "QUESTION:  And you also never saw him smoking
    in high school; is that right?
         "ANSWER:  Yes.
         "QUESTION:  The first time that you noticed
    your younger brother smoking was when he came back
    from mortuary school down in Miami, Florida?
         "ANSWER:  When I saw him at the funeral home,
    yes."
         So, ladies and gentlemen, while Mr. Danielson
    likely tried cigarettes and alcohol when he was in
    high school, he wasn't smoking on a regular basis.
    The evidence is clear on that point.
         So that brings us to 1970; and in 1970, when
    Lamar Danielson is 16 years old, there's a new
    warning and the warning now says the Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous
    to your health.
         That's when he's 16 years old.  This is 25
    years before he's diagnosed with cancer.
         One year later, all cigarette ads are taken off
    of the television and radio.  They're banned.  And a
    year after that, in 1972, this warning label is
    required to appear on all cigarettes.
         That's the undisputed evidence that you've
    heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen.
         Now, let's go back up above the blue bar.
         In June of 1971, Lamar Danielson graduates from
    high school, and he travels to Miami, and he attends
    the Miami-Dade College of Mortuary Science for two
    years, from 1971 to 1973.
         You heard he takes science classes, anatomy,
    chemistry and pathology.  And just like his father
    before him, he learns how to embalm bodies.  It's a
    process by which you make incisions in the body, you
    remove all the blood, and then you replace that
    blood with embalming fluid to preserve the body for
    purposes of the funeral and the viewing.
         And we know, ladies and gentlemen, Lamar
    Danielson saw the same thing that his father saw.
    He saw the dark and blackened lungs of heavy cigarette smokers compared to the pink,
    health-looking lungs of nonsmokers.
         Jen, could you put that up on the screen,
    please?
         Can everybody see that?  I'm going to pull this
    down so you can see that better.
         Am I blocking you from seeing that?  Okay.
         We showed this picture during the testimony of
    Dr. Cummings.  He said, "Yeah, I've seen this in an
    autopsy.  On the left is the healthy-looking lung of
    a nonsmoker.  On the right is the darkened, diseased
    lung of a heavy cigarette smoker."
         That's what he told you.
         And you heard the process.  Initially, the
    medical examiner would open up the chest cavity and
    remove all the organs, including the lungs, during
    the medical examination.  And then they would put it
    all back inside the chest cavity and send it to the
    funeral home.  And the embalmer, in this case Lamar
    Danielson, would have to reach into the chest cavity
    and remove all the organs, including the lungs,
    during the course of the embalming process.
         Later the process changed.  And what happened
    was the medical examiner, after the autopsy, would
    take these organs and put them in biohazard bags and send the body and the bags, with the lungs, to the
    embalmer, to the funeral home director.  And the
    funeral home director would have to remove the lungs
    from those biohazard bags and put them back into the
    chest cavity so the body could be embalmed and then
    prepared for the viewing in the funeral.
         That's the evidence you've heard in this case,
    ladies and gentlemen.
         There is no debate, no dispute that Lamar
    Danielson would have seen these lungs this
    frequently as an embalmer.
         This is the testimony of his father.  You
    remember his nickname was Swede, Swede Danielson.
         "QUESTION:  As part of his work here at the
    funeral home, do you know whether Lamar ever saw, I
    guess, a body come in where the person had had lung
    cancer, for example, and you could see that the
    person had been a smoker and it had caused his
    death?
         "ANSWER:  Oh, yes.  I mean, that's the one
    thing that would really throw you for a loop,
    because, first of all, they used to do autopsies at
    the funeral home.  And the lungs we'd look at.  A
    lot of times the fingers would be just coated.
         "QUESTION:  So their fingers would be actually discolored?
         "Oh, yes.  But, I mean, the lungs, you could
    sure tell it on the lungs."
         That's his father, Swede Danielson, a funeral
    home director and embalmer himself telling you, "Of
    course my son saw this.  Of course my son saw the
    difference between the lungs of a smoker and the
    lungs of a nonsmoker."
         So, ladies and gentlemen, there is no question
    that Lamar Danielson regularly sees the difference
    between the healthy lungs of a nonsmoker and the
    dark and diseased lungs of a heavy cigarette smoker.
    He sees the fingers and nails of smokers that are
    coated with years of nicotine.  He learns to fill
    out death certificates after the physician has
    determined the cause of death.
         You heard all of that from several witnesses
    during the course of this case.  And Mr. Danielson
    learns all of this when he's at mortuary college;
    when he's 18, 19, 20 years old; around the same time
    he's smoking cigarettes on a more regular basis,
    because he's no longer living in the same home with
    his mother.
         So let's move to the next page of the timeline.
         You know that in 1973, he graduates from mortuary college.  He comes back to Pensacola and
    starts working as a funeral director with his father
    at Faith Chapel Funeral Home.  He becomes the
    youngest certified funeral home director and
    embalmer in the State of Florida.
         You heard the testimony, because of the unique
    nature of Lamar Danielson's job, he is reminded
    every single day that life is short.  Death can come
    unexpectedly.  And the choices we make in life can
    indeed affect how long we live and how we die.
         Mr. Danielson takes death calls.  He goes to
    the hospital and the nursing home to pick up the
    bodies of recently deceased.
         He meets with families to make the funeral
    preparations.  He embalms the bodies of the
    deceased.
         He prepares obituaries to be printed in the
    newspaper, and he fills out and completes death
    certificates after, again, the physician has
    determined the cause of death.  And, ladies and
    gentlemen, this is what he does day in, day out as a
    funeral home director.
         So the evidence is overwhelming that based on
    his education and his work as a funeral home
    director, Lamar Danielson sees the damage that cigarette smoking can cause at a young age, and he
    sees it firsthand every single day as a funeral home
    director.
         Now, you know, in 1976, he meets his future
    wife, Micah Danielson.
         I've already shown you her testimony where she
    said she knew smoking was dangerous before she ever
    met her husband.  But after the evidence you've
    heard, how could there be any dispute?
         Before she ever met Lamar Danielson, her father
    was diagnosed with emphysema that she attributed to
    cigarette smoking.  She was taught in nursing school
    that cigarette smoking causes disease.  She worked
    in the cardiac care unit at Sacred Heart Hospital
    treating patients with heart disease, many of whom
    smoked cigarettes.  She told you it was common
    knowledge, common knowledge that cigarette smoking
    was bad for your health before she ever met her
    husband.
         But remember what she said in the courtroom
    when she was on the witness stand?  She refused to
    admit that she or her husband really knew -- really
    knew smoking was dangerous.  She said -- and this a
    direct quote, "Hearing and believing are two
    different things."  That sounded like something you would have heard Dr. Cummings say.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Your Honor, I object to that one.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  She said, "I don't know if my
    husband knew that smoking was dangerous.  I never
    told him that."
         She said a doctor told her in 1986 that it was
    okay if she smoked 10 cigarettes when she was
    pregnant with her daughter.  And in response to one
    of the questions that, ladies and gentlemen, one of
    you asked, she said that gave her assurance that it
    was okay for her and her husband to smoke
    cigarettes.
         So how do you square the facts you heard about
    Lamar Danielson with the testimony that his wife
    gave?
         It's really very simple, ladies and gentlemen.
    She said all of these things on the witness stand
    after she filed a lawsuit in which her lawyers have
    now asked you to award her and her family more than
    $17 million in damages.
         Based on all of the evidence you've heard,
    ladies and gentlemen, it should be painfully obvious
    at this point that Lamar Danielson and his wife
    enjoyed smoking cigarettes.  They loved smoking cigarettes.
         Mrs. Danielson flat out told you she enjoyed
    smoking.  But despite that, despite that, despite
    being married to Lamar Danielson for 18 years, she
    did not want to admit that she knew that he enjoyed
    and loved smoking cigarettes.  She said, "I assume
    he enjoyed smoking.  He appeared to enjoy smoking.
    It seemed to me that he enjoyed smoking."
         But, ladies and gentlemen, use your common
    sense.  She is 100 percent confident that her
    husband was addicted; 100 percent confident that she
    saw him experience all these withdrawal symptoms
    you've heard about.  But she's not sure whether her
    husband of 18 years really enjoyed smoking
    cigarettes?
         And that's why I asked her, ladies and
    gentlemen, if her husband enjoyed drinking coffee
    and drinking beer, going boating and fishing,
    hanging out in his backyard and grilling with his
    friends, watching his favorite college football
    team, because the truth is -- and the evidence now
    shows -- you can't live with someone for 18 years
    and not know what they enjoy, what they love doing.
    That's what being in a relationship is all about.
         But she finally did admit she would buy him Marlboro Red cigarettes when she went to the grocery
    store because she acknowledged she knew that would
    make him happy.
         Ladies and gentlemen, that's not addiction.
    That's pleasure.  That's enjoyment.  That's knowing
    what it is that will make a loved one happy.  Think
    about that.  Think about that.
         Mr. Danielson loved smoking cigarettes when he
    drank coffee in the morning.  He worked long hours
    at the funeral home.  It was very stressful.
    Smoking helped him cope with that stress.  When he
    came home after work, he liked to unwind and relax
    by smoking cigarettes and drinking beer.
         Lawana Joyner had no problem telling you
    straight up, "Mr. Danielson enjoyed Marlboro
    cigarettes.  He enjoyed the taste of Marlboro Red
    cigarettes."
         Coworkers said he liked to blow smoke rings.
    But Ms. Danielson did not want to admit what your
    common sense tells you must be true.
         Mr. Danielson drank about a six-pack of Busch
    beer almost every night, again, not because he was
    addicted to alcohol, but because he enjoyed it.
    Ricky Stokes called him his three-beer helper.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, smoking and drinking helped Mr. Danielson relieve stress, relax and
    unwind after a long day at work.  That's what Lamar
    and Micah Danielson wanted to do, and that is what
    he enjoyed doing for many, many years.
         Now, both Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings told you in
    this period of time when Lamar Danielson begins
    smoking cigarettes, there is a strong anti-smoking
    movement in this country.
         Remember what Dr. Burns told you.  Dr. Burns
    told you that way back in 1975, 40 years ago, he
    said -- he was quoted as saying, "More Americans
    know smoking is dangerous than know the name of the
    president of the United States."
         Dr. Burns said that 40 years ago.  Of course,
    Mr. and Mrs. Danielson knew.
         Mr. Schultz has tried to tell you that all of
    these warnings and health messages were somehow
    being drowned out by statements made by the Tobacco
    Institute or other cigarette companies.  But the
    evidence you heard has shown just the opposite.
    Smokers in America are quitting by the millions
    because of the same messages, the same warnings that
    Mr. and Mrs. Danielson received.
         You heard Dr. Cummings tell you between 1964,
    when that very first Surgeon General's Report came out, and 1979, this period here (indicating), 30
    million Americans quit smoking.  30 million.  That's
    two million people every single year.
         They've heard the same information as
    Mr. Danielson.  It may take some of them more than
    one try, but millions make the decision to quit, and
    they quit for good.  And you heard Dr. Hurt and
    Dr. Cummings tell you, almost all of them quit cold
    turkey with absolutely no assistance of any kind.
         Now, that brings us to 1979 here, and we're
    going to talk about this period of time.  And I
    mentioned Mark Twain earlier during this trial.
    He's also quoted as saying that "there are lies,
    damn lies, and then there are statistics."  That was
    his way of saying that statistics can be misleading.
         And plaintiff's experts have tried to use
    statistics in this case to persuade you that no one
    can quit smoking, and that the most misleading
    statistic of all you've heard is this one that only
    3 to 5 percent of smokers successfully quit.  That's
    what they've told you.
         Ladies and gentlemen, again, use your common
    sense.  Look at the evidence you've heard in this
    case.
         Swede Danielson; Jerry Pate; Dr. Hurt, himself; Ray Danielson; Becky Wiggins; Lorraine Sanders;
    Micah Danielson, 100 percent of them quit
    permanently.  The quit rate in this case, 100
    percent.  That's the evidence that you've heard.
         Use your common sense, ladies and gentlemen.
    There are several former smokers among you.
         Now, you know that in 1979, Ray Danielson quit
    smoking around that same period of time.  Micah
    Danielson's sister, Becky Wiggins, quits.  Around
    the same period of time, maybe a little bit later,
    Lorraine Sanders quits.
         And you know that during this period of time
    both Lorraine Sanders and Becky Wiggins begin to
    talk to Lamar and Micah Danielson about quitting.
         You heard that Becky Wiggins was a nurse
    herself.  She worked on the oncology floor treating
    cancer patients.  She was taught in her nurse's
    training that smoking could cause lung cancer.  Let
    me show you her testimony.  This is Becky Wiggins.
         This was read to you, ladies and gentlemen.
    Ms. Wiggins said -- was asked the following
    question:
         "While you were a student studying to become a
    nurse, do you recall learning that smoking could
    cause lung cancer? "Oh, yes.  Yes.
         "QUESTION:  That was something that was taught
    to you in school?
         "ANSWER:  Yes."
         Ms. Wiggins remembers this.
         One of you asked Ms. Danielson a question,
    "Well, what were you taught in nursing school?  What
    were the courses you were taught?  Were you taught
    this?"
         She didn't remember.  She couldn't recall.
         Ms. Wiggins refers to herself as a reformed
    smoker, and you heard the testimony.  She got up on
    a soapbox, and she started to talk to Mr. Danielson.
    She began to tell him about her experience as a
    nurse treating cancer patients, and she would tell
    him, "You need to quit.  You need to quit."
         And so how did Mr. Danielson respond?
         Is he shocked or surprised to hear his
    sister-in-law tell him that cigarette smoking can
    cause lung cancer?  Of course not.
         Does he tell her that he wants to quit?  No.
    That's not the evidence you heard.  This is the
    testimony that you heard.
         He told Becky Wiggins, "Get out of here.  This
    is what I do. "Stop being holier than thou."
         That's what Lamar Danielson told his
    sister-in-law.
         And he would say the same thing to his
    mother-in-law when she would encourage him to quit
    smoking.
         So the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, is, at
    this point in time, he has no interest in quitting.
    He and his wife continued to enjoy smoking and
    drinking, and that's what they want to do.
         Now, Mr. Schultz mentioned to you yesterday
    that he may have told his sister-in-law, "Well, I'm
    hooked on cigarettes."
         Well, remember he's tried to take that one
    passage -- that one passage and put it in front of
    Dr. Dorce yesterday, but Ms. Diolombi said, "Well,
    read the entire passage."  And when the entire
    passage was read, Ms. Wiggins said, "Well, you know,
    we were joking.  And he and my father -- my father
    would joke that he was hooked."
         But what you never heard in that passage was
    that he ever told Becky Wiggins, "I want to quit.
    I'm trying to quit, but I can't."  Because that
    conversation never took place.  That never happened.
         This is what he told her (indicating). Now -- so the truth is, ladies and gentlemen,
    and the evidence will show, that for many years
    Mr. Danielson had no real interest in quitting.  He
    enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and he loved Marlboro
    Red.
         Marlboro Red was his brand, and he would crack
    jokes with people and say, "Hey, I'm the Marlboro
    Man.  Call me the Marlboro Man."  That was the only
    brand he would ever smoke.
         One of you asked this question, very
    interestingly.  You asked, "Did he ever bum
    cigarettes from anyone else?"  And the answer you
    know is he never did.  Ask yourself this question.
    If he was truly an addict and just needed nicotine
    to feed that addiction, why didn't he ever smoke
    other people's cigarettes?
         So unlike the 30 million people who quit as of
    1979, Lamar and Micah Danielson are not interested
    in quitting at this point.  And that's not because
    Philip Morris is somehow kept the health risks of
    cigarettes hidden from them.  Every pack he smoked
    has a warning label on it.  He knows the difference
    between the dark and blackened lungs of a heavy
    smoker and the pink, health-looking lungs of a
    nonsmoker.  His wife is a nurse, and people are telling him he should quit smoking.
         In fact, Dr. Burns, again, was quoted in 1981
    as saying, "95 percent of people are thoroughly
    aware of the health dangers, and 90 percent believe
    that their own health will be affected."
         Now, that brings us to 1985.  And you know
    there's now a rotating series of warnings.  One of
    which that says:
         "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease,
    emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy."
         We know Mr. Danielson read these warnings.  You
    heard Dr. Cummings tell you that he was reading one
    of the warnings out loud at the funeral home and
    commenting that the warning label was different than
    on the pack of someone else there.
         But these warnings don't tell Mr. Danielson
    anything he didn't already know.  In fact, you heard
    from Ms. Joyner, his smoking buddy, they were
    calling cigarettes "coffin nails" and "cancer
    sticks" and joking about having "nicotine fits" and
    "nicotine attacks."
         Ms. Joyner also testified that she told
    Mr. Danielson that she had several family members
    who were cigarette smokers who had developed throat
    cancer.  That she was concerned about her health, and that she had decided to quit smoking.  That's
    what she told him.
         Does Mr. Danielson tell Lawana Joyner, "You
    don't need to be concerned about your health;
    cigarette smoking hasn't been proven to cause
    cancer; that's what the Tobacco Institute says"?
         Ms. Joyner testified -- she told you he knew,
    he was aware that cigarette smoking was harmful to
    health.
         He simply asked Ms. Joyner, "Is it going to
    bother you if I continue to smoke around you?"
         So he's courteous, of course.  But he wants to
    smoke, and he continues smoking, despite these
    conversations they had about throat cancer.
         Now, that brings us to the late 1980s.  You
    know their daughter Sandi is born in '86, but here
    we are in the late 1980s.  I've got '87 here.
         Mr. Schultz has seemed to quibble with the idea
    of whether he quit smoking in '87 or the late '80s.
    Ladies and gentlemen, I don't think it really
    matters.  Micah Danielson said the first time she
    recalls him ever quitting was 1987.  That's what she
    said.  That's why we've got that on the board.  If
    it was 1988 or 1989, I don't really think it makes a
    whit of difference.  What's important is what actually took place.
         Mrs. Daniel -- Mrs. Danielson admitted to you,
    ladies and gentlemen, that up until this point in
    time her husband never told her, "I want to quit
    smoking.  I don't want to smoke cigarettes anymore."
    That's what she told you.
         That's the evidence that you've heard.
         And even when he decides to quit in the late
    1980s, it's not because he's concerned about his
    health.  Mrs. Danielson told you it was because of
    costs.  They were building a new home.
         Now, Mrs. Danielson claimed her husband only
    quit smoking for a few days, but the evidence shows
    it was four months or longer.  Let's review the
    evidence that you've seen and heard.
         I told you her son, Billy Danielson -- told you
    about him earlier.  Now, remember -- here's what I
    want to remind you.  Interestingly enough, when
    Ms. Gilmer was asking the question, "Do you remember
    how long your father quit smoking," he said, "No, I
    don't really recall."
         That's what he said when plaintiff's counsel
    was asking the question, but then Ms. Diolombi
    showed him his deposition under oath before the
    trial. And this is what Mr. Danielson, then, said:
         "You've testified that you thought your father
    actually did quit for several months, maybe even a
    year, and then started back up, correct?
         "Correct."
         That's what Billy Danielson said on the witness
    stand last Thursday.
         We know what Lamar Danielson told his doctor in
    1994.  You've seen this medical record a gazillion
    times at this point, but Mr. Danielson told
    Dr. Williams he stopped for a period of about four
    months but had started again to smoke for some
    period of time.  This had to have been in the late
    1980s because no one other than Mrs. Danielson
    recalls Lamar Danielson even trying to quit in 1992
    or 1993.  That's the evidence you've heard, ladies
    and gentlemen.
         The plaintiff says, "Don't believe what Lamar
    Danielson said to his own doctor.  Don't believe
    this.  He never quit for four months."
         The fact that he quit for four months or more
    is important because you heard what the plaintiff's
    own experts told you.
         No. 1, all the nicotine is out of your system
    in 72 hours.  Right? The withdrawal symptoms you heard about.  The
    withdrawal symptoms subside within two to three
    weeks after a cigarette smoker quits.
         No. 3:  Those so-called permanent brain changes
    that you heard about, the upregulation or increase
    in the nicotinic receptors, well, even Mr. Schultz
    told you, Dr. Hurt and Dr. Dorce -- they both told
    you they revert back to normal in six to
    eight weeks.  Only Dr. Cummings tried to tell you
    something different.  Only Dr. Cummings, who is not
    a medical doctor.
         You heard that Lamar Danielson told his older
    brother Ray that he was unhappy about the amount of
    weight he had gained.  He gained about 25 or
    30 pounds, according to his brother.  And he thought
    that if he went back to smoking that might help him
    to lose it.
         We also know during this period of time that
    Mrs. Danielson does not quit smoking.  She keeps
    smoking.  We also know that Mr. Danielson continued
    to drink beer.
         And Dr. Hurt told you that if you continue to
    drink alcohol, if your spouse continues to smoke
    around you, it's going to be that much more
    difficult to ultimately quit for good. He told you that about his own situation.  He
    said whenever my wife and I ever tried to quit
    smoking separately, we failed.  When we went
    together, when we tried to quit smoking together, we
    succeeded.
         Mrs. Danielson told you on Friday morning that
    she was relieved that her husband decided to resume
    smoking in 1987.
         And that, ladies and gentlemen, tells you all
    you need to know about their collective attitude
    about smoking.  It's the late 1980s.  They know
    smoking can cause lung cancer and other diseases.
    But at this point, they don't really want to quit
    smoking.
         Now, let's go to the last page of the timeline.
         Mr. Danielson continues to receive warnings
    that cigarette smoking is dangerous to his health
    but doesn't make an effort to quit.  You heard in
    1990 he went to see a dermatologist to have a lesion
    removed from his nose.  The doctor tells him, "You
    need to quit."  No evidence that he tries to quit.
         Now, between 1987 and 1994, when he quits for
    good, you did hear that he may have been given the
    patch.  That's on this very same record we have
    here. We know that he was diagnosed by
    Dr. Crosswright with a case of bronchitis in 1993
    and may have been given the patch at that point in
    time.  Mrs. Danielson doesn't recall the details.
    She's not exactly sure when.  So that's about all we
    really know.
         So, ladies and gentlemen, that brings us to
    November of 1994.  You know that Mr. Danielson is
    starting to feel bad.  He goes to see Dr. Williams,
    that's the record we have up there on the right.
    And he's told that he has lung cancer.
         And told that he has a potentially fatal
    diagnosis, Lamar Danielson quits smoking for good in
    November of 1994.
         And he quits drinking at the same point too.
         You heard what Ms. Joyner and Mr. Stokes said.
    I'm not going to show you their testimony, but
    Ms. Joyner told you, after he came back from the
    doctor and was told that he likely had lung cancer,
    he takes his pack of Marlboro Reds and he hands them
    to Ms. Joyner and says, "I'm done.  I'm done."
         Two days later, he's called down to Baptist
    Hospital.  Ricky Stokes drives him to the hospital.
    And Ricky Stokes says, "He was smoking a cigarette
    in the car when we were driving to the hospital. And when we turned onto I-10, he flicked that
    cigarette out the window, and he said, 'I'm never
    having another.'"
         "I'm never having another."
         Shortly after her husband is diagnosed, you
    heard that Micah Danielson, herself, quits smoking.
    That's what she told you.  And, unfortunately,
    ladies and gentlemen, Lamar Danielson passes away on
    November the 17th, 1995.
         And that's the story, ladies and gentlemen.
    That's the story that we've seen and heard over the
    last two weeks.
         Now, in the time that I have left, I'd like to
    talk to you about the questions you're going to be
    asked to decide on the verdict form.  Let me show
    you the first question that you're going to be asked
    to decide.  The first question on the verdict form
    will say:
         "Was addiction to Marlboro cigarettes
    containing nicotine a legal cause of the death of
    Norman Lamar Danielson?"
         And you'll see in the instructions the Judge
    gives you that question can be broken down into two
    subparts.
         "No. 1:  Was Lamar Danielson addicted?  And if so, was his claimed addiction a legal cause of his
    lung cancer and death?"
         If you answered "No" to this question, ladies
    and gentlemen, that is a verdict for Philip Morris.
    If you answer "Yes," that's a verdict for the
    plaintiff, and you've decided that you're going to
    award Mrs. Danielson and her family damages.
         So was Lamar Danielson addicted to cigarettes?
         Let me remind you -- and you heard Mr. Schultz
    say this -- the Court has not and will not give you
    a definition of what it means to be addicted or a
    set of medical criteria that you use to determine
    whether Mr. Danielson was addicted.
         So what's the evidence you've heard?
         Well, again, somebody asked a very important
    question that was lost on all of us lawyers.  One of
    you said did any of his own doctors -- did any of
    Mr. Danielson's own doctors ever determine or
    diagnose that he was addicted?
         And Dr. Dorce answered that question for you.
    The answer is absolutely not.  You can look through
    all the medical records we have and the answer is
    absolutely not.
         Now, I told you the plaintiff and her experts
    would say you know what?  It's really very simple. Just count up the number of cigarettes that
    Mr. Danielson smoked per day and see if he smoked
    early in the morning; and if so, he's addicted.
         Those are the two questions under the Heaviness
    of Smoking Index.  And, ladies and gentlemen, it
    should come as no surprise to you why the plaintiff
    wants you to use that test in this case.
         You saw it.  You're considered addicted even if
    you score zero.  Even if you score zero.
         You heard from Dr. Cummings, who is not a
    medical doctor and who acknowledged he cannot
    diagnose anyone as addicted.  He told you on the one
    hand addiction is a brain disease.  He told you
    that.  A chronic, relapsing brain disease.
         But, on the other hand, Dr. Cummings told you
    if you smoke just one cigarette per day, just one
    cigarette per day, you're addicted.  That's what
    Dr. Cummings told you.
         What kind of standard is that to diagnose a
    brain disease, a brain disorder?
         And, ladies and gentlemen, that's one of the
    reasons why we brought up this issue of alcohol and
    beer drinking.  We never suggested to you that
    Mr. Danielson was an alcoholic; that he had some
    problem with alcohol. We've told you consistently from day one that
    he drank a six-pack of beer every day and smoked
    cigarettes every day for the same reasons:  Because
    he enjoyed them, because it's what he wanted to do.
         But Dr. Cummings says, well, he did drink every
    day so maybe he was addicted.
         Think about that for a second, ladies and
    gentlemen.  According to the standard that the
    plaintiff wants you to use in this case, if you
    smoke just one cigarette per day and have just one
    beer every day, then you're an addict.  An addict.
    And you've lost your free will, and you no longer
    have a choice about the decisions you make.
         Ask yourself:  Does that make any sense?
         Dr. Burns told you the same thing.  He's made
    more than three and a half million dollars
    testifying in cases against Philip Morris.  And
    guess what, ladies and gentlemen?  In every single
    case he has testified that the cigarette smoker was
    addicted.  Every single case.
         Again, that shouldn't come as a surprise to
    anybody, given what he told you.
         So ask yourself, ladies and gentlemen:  Is that
    the way we diagnose someone with an illness in this
    country?  Of course not.  Of course not. And that's why plaintiff, ladies and gentlemen,
    has fought so hard to convince you that
    Mr. Danielson was some chain-smoking fiend.
         THE COURT:  You have 30 --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  If you are --
         THE COURT:  I'm sorry, you have 30 minutes.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you, Your Honor.  I
    appreciate that.
         If you are truly addicted, it is a mental
    disorder just like Dr. Dorce told you.  But we just
    don't label millions of people as addicts because
    they smoke a certain number of cigarettes.
         And that's also why, ladies and gentlemen, I
    was saying a moment ago, they're trying to convince
    you so badly that he was a chain-smoking fiend
    smoking two and a half to three packs of cigarettes
    per day.
         They brought you Jerry Pate, a local golf pro,
    to tell you that Lamar Danielson was a chain-smoker
    when he was in high school.  Mr. Pate was on the
    stand.  He was under oath.  He said he was a
    chain-smoker in high school.
         Micah Danielson told you that wasn't true.
    Micah Danielson told you that wasn't true.
         Does anyone really believe that Lamar Danielson was chain-smoking as a high school student in front
    of his mother, Myrtle Danielson?
         But that's why Mrs. Danielson and her lawyers
    want you to believe that he was smoking two and a
    half to three packs of cigarettes a day because they
    want it to be only about the number of cigarettes he
    smoked per day.
         So they refused to accept Mr. Danielson's own
    statement.  Lamar Danielson's own statements, they
    refused to accept these because from their
    perspective the numbers aren't high enough.
         I've tried to put it all on one page here, but
    you saw the insurance application forms, the life
    insurance application forms.  Mr. Danielson filled
    one out in '83, '84, '86, and 1990; and, of course,
    he speaks to Dr. Thomas Williams in 1994.  And,
    ladies and gentlemen, he is remarkably consistent
    over the course of an 11-year period.
         Told you he smoked a pack a day; a pack a day;
    a pack to a pack and a half a day; a pack and a half
    a day; and, again, in November '94 to Dr. Thomas
    Williams, one pack to a pack and one half of
    cigarettes a day.
         That's what Lamar Danielson said years before
    anybody was thinking about filing a lawsuit. So it will be up to you, ladies and gentlemen,
    to decide whether that's enough in a court of law
    when both sides agree that addiction is a disease, a
    mental disorder that requires a diagnosis by a
    qualified medical doctor, or whether more should be
    required, particularly when plaintiff is asking for
    millions of dollars in damages.
         We brought you Dr. Daphne Dorce, a medical
    doctor and a psychiatrist who is board certified in
    addiction medicine.
         She told you she's diagnosed and treated
    thousands of patients to addictions to all sorts of
    substances; and she's counseling thousands of
    cigarette smokers.
         She gave you a real set of medical criteria to
    determine whether Lamar Danielson was addicted:  The
    DSM.
         We put it up on the screen.  We walked you
    through her analysis.
         Ms. Diolombi asked her all the questions and
    then she answered all of your questions, ladies and
    gentlemen.  She told you Lamar Danielson was not
    addicted to cigarettes.
         So at the end of the day, you have to ask
    yourself whether the plaintiff's evidence is sufficient in a court of law or should more be
    required, like tangible and reliable evidence that
    doesn't come from a source that has a financial
    interest in the outcome of the case.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, I think, at this
    point, based on the evidence you've heard, the
    answer should be obvious.  Mr. Danielson was not
    addicted.  And your answer to this first question
    should be no for that reason.
         But even if you ultimately decide that he was
    addicted, your work is just beginning because you
    still have to answer the second part this question.
         Micah Danielson still has the burden to prove
    by the greater weight of the evidence that his
    addiction was, quote, a legal cause of his lung
    cancer and death.
         Now, the Court gave you an instruction or will
    give you an instruction on legal cause; and,
    honestly, the language in the instruction is hard to
    follow, even if you're a lawyer.
         So let me give you the same example that I gave
    you at the very beginning of the case to try to help
    you understand the concept and distinguish it from
    medical cause.
         Imagine right out in front of the courthouse someone walks across the street and they get hit by
    a bus.
         Well, the bus is the medical cause of why they
    suffered injuries; but in order to understand legal
    cause, you would need to know more.
         Did he have the right-of-way when he crossed
    the street?
         Was the light green or was the light red?
         Was the person paying attention when he walked
    across the street?  Or was he distracted, texting on
    his iPhone, listening to music with earbuds in?
         Did he cross the street that day knowing that
    that bus would be there every single day?
         You would need to know these things to
    understand legal cause.
         And in a case like this, ladies and gentlemen,
    the question of legal cause really boils down to
    quitting, motivation to quit, and whether you're
    really motivated to quit smoking.
         Ask yourself this question, based on all of the
    evidence you've heard:  Was Lamar Danielson's
    claimed addiction so strong, so substantial that it
    stood in the way of a motivated and committed effort
    on his part to quit smoking?
         The evidence in this case is undisputed that Lamar Danielson never once tried to quit smoking
    until the late 1980s.
         Mrs. Danielson told you that he never tried to
    quit.  He never expressed any desire to quit, until
    that point in time.  And Dr. Cummings, who read all
    the depositions, agreed.
         The truth is -- and the evidence has shown --
    that he enjoyed smoking cigarettes, just like he
    enjoyed drinking beer; and for many years he had no
    real interest in quitting.  Actions speak louder
    than words.
         When he quits in the late 1980s he quits
    smoking cold turkey for four months or more; and he
    does that despite the fact that he continues to
    drink beer and despite the fact that his wife is
    still smoking around him.  She acknowledged to you
    that she continued to smoke around him.
         And just think about that for a moment.  The
    fact that he quit for four months under those
    circumstances demonstrates that he had tremendous
    control over his cigarette smoking when he wanted to
    do so.
         And he did the same thing again in 1994; but
    this time he quit smoking for good because, at that
    point, he knew he had to.  He knew he had to. The truth is -- and the evidence has shown --
    that before he was diagnosed with cancer in 1994,
    Mr. Danielson didn't want to quit.
         You heard the experts tell you if you don't
    want to quit, you're not going to quit.  It's kind
    of obvious.  Right?  But this is what Dr. Cummings
    told you.
         It takes motivation to quit smoking.  If you're
    not motivated to quit, you're not going to quit,
    obviously.  And if someone doesn't want to quit,
    they are not going to quit.
         His answer was true.
         Plaintiff wants to blame nicotine and Philip
    Morris and Marlboro cigarettes, but nicotine did not
    rob Mr. Danielson of his free will.  And you don't
    need to take Dr. Dorce's word for it.  Remember what
    the plaintiff's own experts told you.
         Despite everything you've heard about the
    engineering of cigarettes, nicotine receptors and
    brain changes -- all of those things -- what did all
    three -- Dr. Hurt, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns --
    tell you?
         Anyone can quit smoking if they're motivated to
    do so.
         60 million Americans have quit smoking, many of whom smoked cigarettes with the same design features
    as Mr. Danielson.
         Most of these people would be considered
    addicted according to the plaintiff's standards.
    But most quit cold turkey with no assistance
    whatsoever.
         And this final one is from Dr. Hurt.
    Motivation leads to trying to stop.  Trying to stop
    smoking does ultimately lead to most people
    quitting.
         That's from the plaintiff's own expert, ladies
    and gentlemen.
         And where does motivation come from?  Ask
    yourself.  Motivation comes from within each and
    every one of us, not from a nicotine patch, not from
    the Nicorette Gum.
         The nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent
    these 60 million people from understanding that
    smoking is dangerous and from exercising their free
    will to stop.
         And you've heard no evidence that Mr. Danielson
    was any different.  He was intelligent.  He was
    well-educated.  He was strong-willed.  He received
    many warnings over the years.  And he smoked in the
    face of those warnings.  And he had every right to make that choice.
         But it was his informed decision to smoke in
    the face of all those warnings, ladies and
    gentlemen, and not decide to quit until the very end
    of his life.  That was the one and only legal cause
    of his cancer and death in this case.
         Mrs. Danielson claims her husband was addicted.
    But addiction did not force Mr. Danielson to smoke.
    He smoked because that's what he wanted to do.
         And that's what this question, ladies and
    gentlemen, is all about.
         You've heard all the evidence.  Mr. Danielson
    was in control, not Philip Morris, not the nicotine
    in cigarettes.  And your answer to this question
    should be no and your verdict should be for Philip
    Morris.
         I've just got a few more questions to cover on
    the verdict form.  And let me try to do that
    quickly.
         Question No. 2 is going to ask you to compare
    the percentage of fault or responsibility that you
    would assign to Mr. Danielson and Philip Morris, if
    you get that far.  I don't think you'll get that
    far.  I don't think you'll get past the first
    question; but if you do, let me briefly respond. Mr. Schultz told you that Mrs. Danielson
    accepts some responsibility for Lamar Danielson's
    smoking.
         So what does it mean to accept responsibility
    for the decisions we make in life?
         Well, imagine someone like Mr. Danielson who
    drinks alcohol.  Right?  We know he drank alcohol.
    Many people drink alcohol.
         Imagine a person who goes out one night and
    they have just a few too many drinks.  They wake up
    the next day with a hangover.  Your eyes are
    bloodshot.  You're bleary-eyed.  You stumble to the
    mirror.  You look at yourself in the mirror and you
    said, you know what?  I'm only 25 percent
    responsible for my decision to have those drinks
    last night.
         No one says that, ladies and gentlemen.  No one
    says that.
         And certainly Lamar Danielson was not the kind
    of person who would have said that.
         Was anyone else responsible for the decisions
    that Lamar Danielson made to smoke cigarettes for 25
    years?
         The facts of this case show loud and clear that
    Lamar Danielson got up every single day and made his own decisions in life.  No one else made those
    decisions for him.
         "Accepting responsibility" means just that,
    accepting full responsibility for the consequences
    of one's actions.  And that's what you should put
    down if you get to Question No. 2 on the verdict
    form.
         There should be no question that a strong and
    intelligent and hard-working man is 100 percent
    responsible for the decisions he makes in life.
         Now, again, I don't think you're going to get
    this far on the verdict form.  But after Question
    No. 2, there's a Question No. 3, and a Question
    No. 4, and because Mr. Schultz raised it, let me
    talk briefly about those questions.
         I'm going to try to read Question No. 3 to you.
    It's a little involved.
         "Was the concealment or omission of material
    information regarding the addictiveness or the
    health effects of cigarettes or both by Philip
    Morris USA a legal cause of the death of Norman
    Lamar Danielson?"
         Well, that's quite a mouthful.
         There's a companion Question No. 4 that goes
    along with it that's worded very similar, except it refers to acts in furtherance of agreement, and it
    lists a series of tobacco companies.
         So, really, the first question, Question No. 3,
    is referring specifically to Philip Morris.
    Question No. 4 simply broadens the question to
    include the Tobacco Institute and other
    tobacco-related entities.
         Mr. Schultz told you that Mrs. Danielson
    accepts some responsibility for the decisions that
    Mr. Danielson made.  But if you answer "yes" to
    either Question No. 3 or No. 4, then the plaintiff
    is asking you to award her 100 percent of the
    damages.  Those percentages of responsibility that
    we talked about with respect to Question No. 2, they
    go out the window.  And the plaintiff would get to
    keep 100 percent of any damages if you decided to
    award damages in this case.
         Is that accepting responsibility?
         They say they accept responsibility, but if you
    answer two questions the way they want you to answer
    them, then they say, "We don't accept any
    responsibility."
         Let me try to simplify these two questions for
    you.  Basically, what you're being asked to decide
    is:  Did Lamar Danielson smoke cigarettes because Philip Morris or another cigarette company failed to
    disclose a material fact about the health risks or
    addictive nature of smoking?
         So you may be asking yourself, what is a
    "material fact"?
         There is an instruction on it.  I believe it's
    Instruction No. 15 in the package.  "A 'material
    fact' is one that is of such importance that
    Mr. Danielson would not have acted as he did but for
    the concealment or omission of that fact."  That's
    the instruction.
         THE COURT:  You have 15 minutes.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Thank you.
         In other words, to answer "yes" to these
    questions, plaintiff had to prove to you that Lamar
    Danielson would not have smoked Marlboro cigarettes
    had Philip Morris or some other tobacco company told
    him that "smoking causes cancer.  Smoking is
    addictive.  You need to quit."
         Ladies and gentlemen, you know there is no
    evidence to support that conclusion.  In fact, it's
    difficult to conceive of anything more material than
    what Mr. Danielson did every single day when he
    handled the lungs of cigarette smokers and
    nonsmokers. Jen, could you put that up just one more time?
         What information could Philip Morris have
    provided that would have been more material, more
    dramatic, more important, ladies and gentlemen, to
    Mr. Danielson than seeing lungs like this on a
    regular basis?
         And so what evidence did plaintiff present to
    meet her burden?
         Well, Dr. Cummings came in here and he showed
    you a bunch of documents, and he did that to try to
    make you angry.  He wanted you to be angry in the
    hope that you would look past the undisputed facts
    that Mr. Danielson was intelligent and
    well-educated; that there was a warning label
    telling him that cigarette smoking was dangerous
    from the time he was 16 years old; that he was
    trained as an embalmer as a teenager to see the
    difference between the darkened lungs of heavy
    smokers and the health lungs of nonsmokers; and that
    there's absolutely no evidence that Lamar Danielson
    believed smoking was not dangerous because of
    something a cigarette company said or did not say.
         And to overcome this lack of evidence,
    Mr. Schultz tells you, "Well, you can infer these
    things.  You can infer these things."  But the Court will tell you they need to be reasonable inferences.
         And what Mr. Schultz is asking you to make are
    gigantic leaps, gigantic leaps that are essentially
    assumptions.  He's asking you to assume that
    Mr. Danielson didn't know that smoking was dangerous
    and then to further assume that if Mr. Danielson had
    read one of those internal tobacco company
    documents, he never would have smoked cigarettes.
         In fact, the evidence you've heard in this case
    squarely contradicts those assumptions.  You heard
    direct evidence about the things that Mr. Danielson
    learned on his job about the health risks of smoking
    and the things that his family members told him.
    All you have to do is look at how Lamar Danielson
    reacted when his family and his friends and his own
    doctor told him he should quit.
         Did he say, "My goodness, I've never heard that
    cigarette smoking can cause disease?"  No.  He said,
    "Come on, Sis.  Give me a break.  Get out of here.
    This is what I do."
         Those are the things he told his family member
    [sic].  He said these things to his closest family
    members and friends not because he was confused
    about the health risks of smoking, but because he
    wanted to smoke cigarettes.  It's what he wanted to do even though he knew he was making a lifestyle
    choice that came with the potential for serious
    health risks.
         Use your common sense, evaluate the evidence,
    and consider it in the light of your good judgment
    and life experiences.
         Mr. Danielson didn't listen to his mother.  He
    didn't listen to his mother-in-law or sister-in-law.
    He didn't listen to his doctor.  What makes any of
    us believe that he would have listened to anything a
    cigarette company had to say?
         The answer to Question Nos. 3 and 4 should be
    "no."
         Now, let me address quickly the issue of
    damages.
         I don't think you're going to get here, but I
    need to respond.  Mr. Schultz asked you to award a
    total, a grand total of over $17 million in damages
    for the decisions that Mr. Danielson and only
    Mr. Danielson made.
         That's an incredible sum of money.  Imagine a
    family, ladies and gentlemen, that may make only
    $50,000 a year.
         You know how many years it would take that
    family to earn just $1 million? MR. SCHULTZ:  Your Honor --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  It would take them --
         MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm sorry, Mr. Geraghty.
         THE COURT:  Approach the bench, please.
         (The following proceedings were held outside of
    the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. SCHULTZ:  We have an order in limine that
    we're not to discuss wealth or poverty of the
    parties -- an order in limine that we're not allowed
    to discuss wealth or poverty of the parties, No. 1.
         No. 2, the issue this jury is asked to decide
    is to valuate the loss to this family and their
    husband and father, not whether that's a lot of
    money to them or not.  That's not the question
    they're charged to ask.  This couldn't have any
    possible relevance to the facts that they're asked
    to decide in the case.
         THE COURT:  Thank you.  Response?
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, he picked 6 million
    and $3 million essentially out of thin air without
    giving them any real guidepost as to how he arrived
    at that.
         I have to simply be able to explain to the jury
    in what context that that is a tremendous amount of
    money and to point out why that amount of money is unsupported by the evidence in the case.  It's a
    fair comment given what he was allowed to say.  I
    objected to one of his arguments.  Your Honor
    overruled that objection.  I think I have to, in
    fairness, be permitted to respond.
         THE COURT:  The problem is you're not comparing
    apples to apples.  It's because what you're
    comparing is the cost of living of a moderate income
    family with the amount you suggest as pain and
    suffering.  Compensatory damages are agreed to, so
    it's not another issue.  So it can only be related
    to the noneconomic damages.  And so you're not
    comparing the same thing.
         This is misleading argument on the whole, so I
    will sustain the objection.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.  I
    understand you've ruled.  I don't want to belabor
    it.  There's no evidence of the income either.
         I'll leave it at that.
         THE COURT:  Thank you.
         (The following proceedings were held within the
    hearing of the jury.)
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Mr. Schultz asked you for $17
    million.  That's an incredible sum of money, ladies
    and gentlemen.  What is the evidence you've heard that supports a number like that?  How do you even
    get to 1 million, let alone 17 million?
         I've said it several times, but we're talking
    about a case where every pack of cigarettes that
    Lamar Danielson ever smoked had a federally mandated
    warning label on it.  He had a job that constantly
    reminded him of the damage that cigarette smoking
    can cause.  He had family members who told him to
    quit many times over the years.  Smoking was
    something that Lamar Danielson wanted to do, that he
    enjoyed doing.
         And Mrs. Danielson never once told him, "I want
    you to quit smoking.  I think you should quit."  He
    never expressed any interest in quitting until the
    late 1980s.
         Should Mrs. Danielson and her family be made
    millionaires when the evidence shows that Lamar
    Danielson lived his life exactly the way he wanted
    to live it?
         And in this case, ladies and gentlemen, you
    don't have to speculate about how much Mr. Danielson
    would have earned over his lifetime and provided to
    his family.  The parties have agreed to that amount,
    and that's what's called the "economic damages."
         These are damages to compensate for the loss of money the family would have received if
    Mr. Danielson had continued to work and ultimately
    retired at a normal age of retirement.  We've
    already agreed to that number, ladies and gentlemen.
    There is no dispute about that.  And the number that
    we agreed to before the trial started was $2.3
    million.
         Now, you saw it was broken down into several
    pieces, and I won't go over those pieces, but we
    agreed to $2.3 million.  That, ladies and gentlemen,
    in and of itself is a lot of money.
         Now, I don't think you should award damages in
    this case.  But if you disagree with me, I would
    submit that 2.3 million adequately compensates
    Mrs. Danielson and her daughters.
         But that's only one component of compensatory
    damages.
         Plaintiff also asked you for a combined $15
    million, 6 for Mrs. Danielson, and 3 for each of her
    children in pain and suffering.  And, ladies and
    gentlemen, that's above and beyond the $2.3 million
    that we have agreed is an amount that compensates
    the plaintiff and her family fully for the financial
    support that Mr. Danielson would have provided.
         Again, we don't believe damages are appropriate in this case.  But if you were inclined to award any
    damages for pain and suffering above and beyond that
    2.3 million-dollar number, I would suggest that a
    more appropriate number is 250,000 to 300,000 per
    family member.  That's $3.5 million total.  That's
    still a tremendous amount of money.  It would take a
    family making $50,000 a year --
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Judge, this is the same
    objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustain the objection.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I'll move on.
         THE COURT:  Thank you.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Here's the bottom line
    Your Honor -- ladies and gentlemen.  If you decide
    that Mrs. Danielson and her family are entitled to
    recover damages for a lifetime of decisions that
    Mr. Danielson and only Mr. Danielson made, use your
    best judgment to decide what you think is a fair
    amount.
         But understand, there is no dispute about the
    amount of money he would have earned and provided to
    his family.  That amount is $2.3 million, and that
    is still a tremendous amount of money.
         Two more issues, and I'm going to sit down,
    ladies and gentlemen. The final question on the verdict form asks
    whether you find by clear and convincing evidence
    that punitive damages are warranted against Philip
    Morris.
         If you answer "no" to that question, you never
    get to the issue of punitive damages.  So let me
    talk briefly so you understand what you are being
    asked to decide.
         You're not being asked to decide the amount of
    punitive damages.  The issue here is whether, by
    clear and convincing evidence, plaintiff has shown
    that she is entitled to punitive damages.
         Now, I want to make sure that if you get to
    this issue, you clearly understand what you have to
    decide.
         When you look in the instructions, you will see
    that "clear and convincing evidence" is defined.
    It's a much higher burden than the greater weight of
    the evidence.  It will say that you need to find
    that the evidence was precise, explicit, lacking in
    confusion, and that it produces a firm belief or
    conviction without hesitation about the matter at
    issue.  In other words, you need to be really,
    really, really convinced that punitive damages are
    warranted. Punitive damages can only be based on conduct
    that relates specifically to Lamar Danielson
    himself.  This case is about Lamar Danielson, not
    all cigarette smokers, and not the general public.
         Lamar Danielson, ladies and gentlemen, always
    had the information available to him to make an
    informed decision about whether he wanted to smoke
    cigarettes or whether he wanted to quit.
         He always had the ability to quit smoking
    whenever he was truly motivated to do so.
         He simply did not want to quit for good until,
    unfortunately, it was too late.
         You've heard no evidence during this trial that
    anything that Philip Morris did or did not do, said
    or did not say, caused Mr. Danielson to begin
    smoking or to continue smoking.
         So, ladies and gentlemen, given the evidence
    you've heard, the plaintiff has simply failed to
    meet her burden to prove by clear and convincing
    evidence that punitive damages are warranted in this
    case.  Your answer to that question should be "no."
         Now, I'm going to sit down here in just a few
    minutes.  And Mr. Schultz will have one more
    opportunity to speak to you, and that's because, as
    you've heard, the plaintiff bears the burden of proof.
         Now, I don't know exactly what Mr. Schultz will
    say, but I can imagine he's going to say some very
    critical things about Philip Morris.  I'm almost
    certain of that.
         But, as you listen to the things he says, ask
    yourself -- every time he says something, ask
    yourself what does this have to do with Lamar
    Danielson?
         What does it have to do with Lamar Danielson?
         A strong, intelligent, and well-educated man
    who you now know enjoyed smoking cigarettes and who
    had no real interest in quitting until the end.
         The truth is, ladies and gentlemen, we do enjoy
    a tremendous amount of freedom in this country.  We
    have the right to make decisions for ourselves and
    lifestyle choices that are not always in our best
    interests.  And with that freedom comes the
    obligation to accept personal responsibility for
    those decisions.
         And in the end, ladies and gentlemen, that's
    what this case is all about.
         Are we going to hold Philip Morris legally
    responsible for the decisions made by a strong,
    intelligent, and well-educated man, who lived his life the way he wanted to live it and who smoked
    cigarettes because that's what he wanted to do?
         That's what this case is all about.  And based
    on all the evidence you've heard over the last two
    weeks, the answer should be clear.  Based on the
    evidence you've heard in Lamar Danielson's case, the
    evidence supports one and only one true verdict, and
    that is a verdict in favor of Philip Morris.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I am done.  This is the
    last time I'm going to have the opportunity to
    address you, and I simply want to leave you with
    this:
         I can speak -- I know on behalf of Hassia and
    myself that it has really been a privilege and an
    honor to present this case to you, to present the
    evidence to you.  We know how attentive, how
    patient, and how indulgent you've been with the
    process.  And all I can really say at the very end
    of the day is thank you very much for all of that.
         So thank you.
