         MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Counsel.
         Good morning, everybody, and welcome back to
    the last day of trial.
         I thought about it yesterday after you rendered
    your verdict.  It would have been very easy for
    you-all to check no on the punitive damage box and go home.  It's been a long trial.  It's been an
    exhausting trial for everybody, especially for folks
    who have to sit in the jury box all day long.
         But you were conscientious and you didn't take
    the easy way out, and that's why you-all were chosen
    as jurors in the first place.  We appreciate that.
    We appreciate you fulfilling your duty, your
    obligation as jurors.  And we thank you for your
    time.
         Again, this will be my last chance to do that.
    I'm not going to spend very long at all.
         You've seen all the evidence in the case.  I'm
    not going to stand here for an hour and show you all
    the stuff we showed you with the day and a half of
    testimony from Dr. Cummings.  You've seen that
    evidence.  You've been through it in the jury room.
    You've been through it in the trial.
         What we saw yesterday was testimony from
    Dr. Peter Lipowicz of Altria Client Services.
    Philip Morris, essentially.  And I told you in my
    opening that you would hear a lot about FDA
    regulation.  And you did.
         And I asked you when you listen to that
    evidence, ask yourself as you're listening to it,
    whether Philip Morris would acknowledge its past misconduct, all of the evidence that you heard from
    Dr. Cummings.
         And the reason I asked you that -- if we could
    have the ELMO, please, Ryan [sic] -- comes from the
    jury instructions that you'll get.  There are far
    fewer of them in Phase II.
         There are really three purposes for punishment
    that you'll find in the jury instructions:  To
    punish or to deter Philip Morris, deter it going
    into the future from misconduct; and that's what all
    that FDA evidence is about:  Should we be deterred
    going forward or does the FDA have handcuffs on us
    now?
         And the FDA does have extensive regulatory
    oversight on the cigarette industry, including
    Philip Morris, and we should all be very glad for
    that.  But that's only one part of the picture.
    Deterring others is also a purpose for punishing
    Philip Morris for the evidence that you've seen in
    this case.
         That includes auto manufacturers,
    pharmaceutical companies, Wall Street, banks,
    anybody who might get it in their head that a good
    way to make a lot of money would be to commit fraud.
         Your verdict in punishing Philip Morris can serve as a deterrent to other companies who may
    think about doing the same thing Philip Morris did
    for nearly 50 years.
         The primary purpose, we submit, is right here
    in the jury instruction:  To punish Philip Morris
    for the harm caused by the death of Norman Lamar
    Danielson.
         That's the evidence that you saw in the trial.
    Dr. Lipowicz did not address that in any way on
    cross-examination -- on direct examination.
         When I crossed him, I asked him, directly, does
    Philip Morris today in this courtroom acknowledge to
    this jury that Philip Morris misled the American
    public, misled Lamar Danielson about the health
    effects of smoking?  And he denied it.
         They don't take responsibility for that.  We
    gave them a chance and they didn't.
         I asked him does Philip Morris acknowledge that
    it misled the American public and Lamar Danielson
    about the addictiveness of their products during his
    lifetime?  And sitting here today, in front of you,
    he denied that.
         And then I asked him, did Philip Morris target
    kids in the marketing of their cigarettes?  You've
    seen all that evidence.  The evidence doesn't go away.  We all know the truth.  He denied that as
    well.
         So it's great and everyone needs to be happy
    and feel safer that the FDA regulates Philip Morris
    and the other cigarette companies today; but that's
    not the only reason that you're here.  You should
    ask yourselves in the jury room:  How different is
    Philip Morris if they won't even admit that they did
    anything wrong?
         You saw this during the trial.  This is from
    the Tobacco Institute.  That's what they said
    internally during Lamar Danielson's lifetime.  It's
    what I gave Dr. Lipowicz a chance to admit yesterday
    on the stand.  And here, again, 2015, he denied it.
         The cigarette industry committed a 50-year
    scheme of fraud.  That's what it was, fraud,
    conspiracy, and concealment.
         And their answer, it seems today, is we didn't
    do that; but if we did, we're better now so please
    don't punish us.
         The FDA has control over us now so there's no
    need to punish us for that 45 or 50 years of
    misconduct in the past, which is about Lamar
    Danielson, which is who we are here about.
         When people break the law, do we just ask them please stop, thank you for stopping, now you can be
    on your way?  Or do we punish them for breaking the
    law?  Of course we punish them.  Philip Morris
    doesn't get a gold star because it stopped
    committing fraud in the year 2000.
         We're not going to thank them for stopping the
    fraud.  They should never have done it in the first
    place, and they should be punished for it.
         You'll see in the jury instructions -- we can
    take that down, please, Matt.  I almost said Ryan.
    Ryan, just so you know, had a baby so we have a new
    Ryan.  I think I called him Ryan yesterday, but...
         You'll be told in the jury instructions that
    you can only punish for the death of Lamar
    Danielson.  You're not here to punish for the death
    of other people that you heard about at trial.  Only
    for Lamar Danielson.
         And you are the only jury who can punish for
    Lamar Danielson's death.  This is the only trial
    where that can happen.  All the payments that you
    heard about yesterday have nothing to do with
    punishing Philip Morris for the death of Lamar
    Danielson.
         There will never be another trial where Philip
    Morris can be punished for his death.  You are the jury who can do that, and you're the only jury who
    will ever be able to do that.
         If I can have the ELMO, please, again, Ryan
    [sic].
         The jury instructions tell you what you're
    allowed to consider in making that determination.
    You can consider the nature, extent and degree of
    misconduct and related circumstances.
         And I asked you Tuesday and I ask you again
    today to consider whether you've ever heard of a
    longer, more extreme, more outrageous example of
    corporate misconduct in our nation's history ever.
         Talk about it in the jury room and search your
    minds to see if you can come up with an example of
    more extreme behavior, behavior more deserving of
    punishment.
         That is one of the considerations that you
    have.
         The other is Philip Morris's financial
    condition.  And you'll see in jury instruction 7
    that Philip Morris has a net worth of $3,554,000,000
    reported in their last financial report.
         Net worth is defined in the jury instruction as
    total assets minus total liabilities.
         An asset is all the economic resources Philip Morris has.  Liabilities are all its debts and
    financial obligations, like those user fees that you
    saw yesterday to the FDA.
         Subtract all that out and you're left with
    $3 1/2 billion dollars.
         You heard yesterday that Marlboro cigarettes is
    still the No. 1 cigarette in America, just like it
    was when Lamar Danielson was smoking them as a
    teenager.
         You heard they're still putting ammonia in
    Marlboro cigarettes, just like they were when Lamar
    Danielson was a teenager.
         When you deliberate, ask yourself how different
    really is Philip Morris today from the Philip Morris
    that you saw throughout the trial.
         We heard a lot during the trial about choice
    and personal responsibility.  Philip Morris made a
    choice in 1953 to conspire to defraud the American
    public, including Lamar Danielson.  They made a
    choice to maximize the addictiveness of their
    products, while they denied that they were addictive
    at all.  They told you yesterday they still deny
    that addiction to nicotine causes disease, even
    today.
         Philip Morris has to be held responsible for their choices and you're the only jury who can do
    it.
         The verdict, the instructions will tell you,
    has to bear a reasonable relationship to the
    underlying verdict.  I would submit to you that a
    fair and just verdict for the death of Lamar
    Danielson would be $7 1/2 million for Lamar
    Danielson.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I would object, Your Honor.
    Constitutionally excessive.
         THE COURT:  Approach, please.
         (The following proceedings were held outside of
    the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I'm objecting to plaintiff's
    counsel making a request for an amount of punitive
    damages that would be constitutionally excessive.
    He's asking them to award an amount that would be
    constitutionally excessive.  So I object to that and
    I would move for a mistrial.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Constitutionally excessive
    of what the amount the jury came back with in
    derogation of their clear instructions?  Or in -- or
    constitutionally excessive of what you guys
    stipulated it should be?
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I think it's both, Your Honor. The jury awarded $325,000.  The amount he has asked
    for is 20 times that.  And it's three to four times
    the amount that, even if Your Honor were after the
    trial to award 2.3 million in economic damages, it
    would still be constitutionally excessive.
         So it's a constitutionally excessive amount.  I
    don't think plaintiff's counsel can urge the jury to
    award an amount that would be excessive and violate
    our due process right; so I object, and I move for a
    mistrial.
         THE COURT:  Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  The due process analysis is based
    on the judgment that's ultimately entered in this
    case, and we have a good-faith basis to believe that
    2.625 and 7.5 is within a 3-to-1 ratio.
    Single-digit ratios would be acceptable on that.
    It's clearly not excessive.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you.
         I will deny the motion and deny the motion for
    mistrial.
         (The following proceedings were held within the
    hearing of the jury.)
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Philip Morris doesn't like the
    amount that I just asked for, and that's the whole
    idea -- MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
    that comment.  That's inappropriate.
         THE COURT:  I'll sustain the objection.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  7 1/2 --
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I would ask the comment be
    stricken.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Let me say this.  Again, the
    Court considered a legal objection, and the comment
    that Philip Morris doesn't like the amount that was
    asked for is a statement of evidence by the
    attorney.  And I remind you that what the attorneys
    say is not evidence for you to be considered -- to
    be considered by you in the case.
         But he's certainly welcome to make an argument;
    but to comment on what the attorney's objection was,
    it would be inappropriate.
         So I'll sustain the objection as I have and
    simply ask you to disregard that portion of -- of
    the plaintiff's counsel's comment.
         Thank you.  You may continue.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Your verdict has to get Philip
    Morris's attention.  Punishment has to get Philip
    Morris's attention.  If they're going to be deterred
    in the future, if other companies are going to be
    deterred from this sort of misconduct, you have to render a verdict that will get their attention.
         We submit to you $7 1/2 million is that number.
    It can be more; it can be less.  You are the jury.
    That's why you're here.
         I appreciate your time.


         MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         The purpose that would be served, ladies, is to
    punish Philip Morris for the harm caused by the
    death of Lamar Danielson, and that's in the jury
    instruction that you will receive.  That is the
    purpose that would be served.
         I want to be very clear:  You have never heard
    me suggest Philip Morris should be punished or held
    liable in any way for just selling cigarettes.  We
    didn't bring you a case and put on evidence that
    Philip Morris sells cigarettes; and, therefore, you
    should award money to the plaintiff.
         We didn't put on a punitive damage case or
    cross-examine Mr. -- Dr. Lipowicz about the mere
    fact that they sell cigarettes.  Don't be distracted from the issues that are in the jury instructions.
         This doesn't have anything to do with lifestyle
    choices or why people smoked.  This phase of the
    trial is about Philip Morris and Philip Morris's
    misconduct.
         Everything that you've heard that Philip Morris
    has done since Lamar Danielson died is something
    they could have done before Lamar Danielson was
    born.
         And then Lamar Danielson would be the
    14-year-old boy Mr. Geraghty just described to you,
    who in his lifetime never saw a TV ad, never heard a
    radio ad, never saw a billboard ad.  Would go into
    retail with limited cigarettes behind the counter.
         He would never have heard a statement from the
    Tobacco Institute.  He would never have heard a
    statement from Philip Morris.  All the documents
    would be open.  They wouldn't be secret.
         What difference would that have made in Lamar
    Danielson's lifetime?  We wouldn't be here today if
    they had done in 1953 what they're trying to take
    credit for in 2015.  That's why they deserve to be
    punished.
         $7 1/2 million, ladies.  If I could, I'd ask
    for 75 million.  I'd ask for 750 million -- MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I would object to
    that commentary.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  I would ask for 750 million if I
    were allowed to.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I object to that and make a
    motion, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Motion is denied.  Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  We asked for a reasonable amount
    within the bounds of the law.  And we're asking for
    it.
         Again, Mr. Geraghty wants you to send a message
    to Philip Morris that this is all about the present
    and the future.  That's not what the jury
    instructions say.  They say it's about Lamar
    Danielson.
         You don't -- you can agree that Philip Morris
    has no need for deterrence and thank God the FDA is
    there.  Finally somebody got their arms around
    Philip Morris, and things have changed; and it is
    good for my kids, your kids.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Your Honor, I object to that.
         THE COURT:  Please approach the bench.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  A motion --
         THE COURT:  Please approach the bench. (The following proceedings were held outside of
    the hearing of the jury.)
         THE COURT:  Go ahead and make your motion.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  That's a Golden Rule argument.
    That is completely inappropriate argument.  I move
    for a mistrial.  He just told them that's good for
    my kids; that's good for your kids.  He cannot do
    that.  That's a Golden Rule.  I move for a mistrial.
         THE COURT:  Thank you.
         Response.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  It's not a Golden Rule argument,
    Your Honor.  I think they just said it's a good
    thing.  I'm saying it's a good thing.  I'm not
    saying they should be held liable for it.  That
    would be a Golden Rule argument.
         THE COURT:  I'm going to reserve ruling on your
    motion and then we'll have a chance to visit it and
    then you can make further argument later.
         You may proceed.  Thank you.
         (The following proceedings were held within the
    hearing of the jury.)
         MR. SCHULTZ:  There is no dispute in this case,
    ladies, it's a good thing.  There's FDA regulation
    at Philip Morris now.  That's not what the jury
    instructions will tell you this is all about.  It's about the death of Lamar Danielson.
         The message to Philip Morris shouldn't be thank
    you; we're glad you're doing better now.  The
    message should be we won't forget what you did, no
    matter how long it takes to get you into a courtroom
    in front of a jury of your peers.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I object to that comment as
    well, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule the objection.  Thank
    you.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  Motion --
         THE COURT:  Denied.
         Go ahead.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  Philip Morris -- thank you,
    Your Honor.
         Philip Morris is the same person in the eyes of
    the law that it was 50 years ago and 60 years ago.
    In the eyes of the law, Philip Morris is the same
    person that met at the Plaza Hotel.  The same person
    who contributed money to forming the TI.  The same
    person who told America some women prefer having
    smaller babies.  The same person who committed all
    of the misconduct that you saw in this trial.
         They are the same person in the eyes of the law
    standing here.  They don't get a free pass because they outlived Lamar Danielson.
         Corporations, no matter how rich or powerful,
    they are not above the law.  They're people just
    like we are.
         MR. GERAGHTY:  I object and move to strike that
    comment, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  Thank you.
         MR. SCHULTZ:  You can't put a corporation in
    jail, though.  That's one difference.  All you can
    do as a jury is award money damages; and money is
    the only thing Philip Morris has ever cared about.
         For over a thousand years in our jury system
    we've asked juries just like you to punish
    wrongdoers; and that's what we're asking you to do
    today.
         Thank you.
