MR. BAYUK: Thank you, Your Honor.
May it please the Court, Counsel, Ms. Davis.
Good afternoon.
THE JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. BAYUK: I want to start where Mr. Alvarez did, and there's really no other place to start but to thank you for your service, thank you for your time and your attention.
As he said, the system doesn't work without you, and that's true. I also want to thank you for your patience in this case because you've had to be here two weeks. And as the argument that you just heard demonstrated, much of what the evidence has been in this case doesn't help you decide any issues about Mr. Davis. The entire -- almost the entire closing presentation you just heard from Mr. Alvarez doesn't relate at all to Mr. Davis.
And you-all know, I told you this a week from today, I was standing up here giving you the opening a week and a day ago, and from the get-go,
I told you this is a case about one smoker, and it's about one smoker only.
This is a case about Mr. Booker Davis. It's a case about what impacted him, why he made the
decisions he did, why he smoked. Those are the issues that you're going to need to decide when you go back in the room and deliberate at the end of the arguments today.
That's the evidence. You need evidence about those things to decide this case, not generic tobacco company documents, not generic history, not reference, and you've heard a number of times this morning, to other smokers, smokers in general, and not argument trying to put Mr. Davis with other people when the plaintiff has brought you no proof of any connection like that.
You've heard a lot of argument about that, but you didn't hear much evidence of that. And so I want to refocus you on what the evidence is in this case and how it helps you decide the issues in Mr. Davis' case.
The burden of proof has been something that's been discussed with you-all since jury selection, over and over and over again. You have a clear understanding by now that the plaintiff has the burden of proof in the case, and their burden is to bring you evidence about Mr. Davis and about his smoking, not about -- again, not about generic conduct. They have to bring you evidence specific
to him.
The instructions tell you -- and you-all have a copy of the instructions. They tell you that you can't base your verdict on argument. And the judge has told you what the lawyers say isn't evidence. You can't base your verdict on argument or rhetoric. You can't base it on sympathy, and you can't base it on generic evidence that has no relation to Mr. Davis.
Some of the instructions -- this tells you what the evidence is. This is Instruction Number 2. It tells you, "The evidence in this case consists of the sworn testimony of the witnesses, exhibits received in evidence, and all facts that may be admitted or agreed to by the parties."
That's the -- this confines what you consider in the case when deciding.
This tells you that you can't base your decision on argument. You can't base it on things like -- like you heard this morning, you know.
Look at all these documents, look at what they were saying, and people were believing it, yeah, and Mr. Davis, he must have believed it, too. Or he smoked this cigarette because look at this advertisement. That's argument. That's rhetoric,
but that's not evidence.
The plaintiff has the burden to bring you a connection to Mr. Davis.
Instruction Number 24, sympathy. And the judge has told you this a number of times. And this goes back to jury selection as well and opening statements. In reaching your verdict, you can't let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion, or these other issues influence your decision in any way.
And, you know, particularly important, and it's going to be more important as I get to the end of the closing, is the sympathy issue. Because you've heard sympathetic testimony in this case. A few days ago Ms. Patsy Davis testified, and after Ms. Davis testified, you heard kind of in sequential order the testimony of her and Mr. Davis' five children.
And at some points there was emotional testimony, no doubt about it. And it's an emotional issue to lose a parent, to lose a father. You wouldn't be human if you didn't have sympathy for that. Everyone feels sympathy for that, but the instruction tells you that is not a proper basis of consideration in this case. That doesn't
help the plaintiff meet their burden of proof. It can't be used.
And so it's really important to understand that, and it's going to be very important to understand that as we discuss the nature of the damages evidence in the case, which we're going to get to again.
I'm actually going to walk through the verdict form in order rather than jumping ahead and starting with the last question first in a -- what you heard was a request for punitive damages in this case. I'm actually going to focus on the evidence as you're going to answer these questions and decide it about Mr. Davis, because you will see -Could we switch to the Elmo, Ryan, please?
You'll see I told you this in opening statement that you're going to get a verdict form at the end of the case. And you're going to know that this is Mr. Davis' case, and you have to use evidence about Mr. Davis, because every question on the verdict form has his name on it. Every question, except the last one, and even the last one says under the circumstances of this case.
Some of the questions have his name more than one
time.
And so when you get to the end of the -- when we get to the end of the closing, we talk about the damages question. You know that evidence is going to relate to Mr. Davis.
And you've heard a lot of evidence related to that issue, related to the issue of this loss of relationship. And you've heard a lot of evidence because you have to consider what the nature of that relationship was. You have to have the full picture of what that relationship was. And so we're going to talk about that as we get to that part of the verdict form.
But it's important also to remember, again, generic evidence doesn't help you. This is clearly exemplified by the Engle findings. You've heard about the Engle findings. If the plaintiff carries the burden of proof that Mr. Davis is a class member, if they carry that burden, you've heard these Engle findings come into the case. They come into the case for your application if you find class membership. They don't have to be re-proven. They can't be questioned. It's a fact of how this case has gotten.
You heard this case stems from something
called the Engle case, which was tried over ten years ago. That case involved all of the documents you saw, the general claims about whether there was concealment, what was said to people in the public. That's not this case.
Again, as I said in opening, if that jury in that case had heard evidence about Mr. Davis, you wouldn't have been here for the last two weeks.
That's why you're here. And so generic evidence, again, doesn't help you, and evidence -- time spent with you simply to re-prove the Engle findings, which don't have to be re-proven, doesn't help you.
And so you have to think about why your time, you know, from opening statement, last Wednesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Monday, was evidence of people who knew nothing about Mr. Davis.
Nothing.
The plaintiff spent the first three and a half, four days of your time in this case bringing you generic evidence and simply re-proving the Engle findings, which doesn't help at all carry your burden about Mr. Davis' claims, the claims she's making about Mr. Davis.
I'll give you some examples. Dr. Proctor was on the stand for almost three days, for almost
three days, and it came right after I finished my - my opening statement. And I suggested to you-all to use a filter, to keep your eye on the ball as you sit here day after day, does what you're hearing, the evidence coming from the witness stand, does it help you decide anything in this case. Does it relate to any question you are going to have to answer on that verdict form.
And Dr. Proctor, one of the first things he told you on cross-examination was, "I don't know anything about the smoker in this case. I don't know what he knew or didn't know or what he saw."
Dr. Proctor told you he's made $4 million traveling around the state in dozens of trials just telling the same story without any idea if it's even relevant to the issues in the particular case. But that's what they started their case with.
Then you saw a video, over two hours of testimony from Jack Henningfield, who is a psychologist, a PhD. What did he tell you? His deposition was taken in 2009, five years before any of the witnesses in this case gave testimony, before they gave depositions.
He said, "I don't know the behavior of the smoker or smokers in this case." And, of course,
you know he didn't mention Mr. Davis' name one time. He doesn't know who Mr. Davis is.
And so this generic evidence don't help you answer the questions that you have to answer. The generic experts, they don't know anything about Mr. Davis' smoking behavior, his smoking history. They don't know anything about whether Mr. Davis was addicted. And that's important because the first part of the argument you heard this morning was maybe ten minutes, five, ten minutes on of course Mr. Davis was addicted.
Dr. Henningfield said if you smoked a pack a day, if you do this and do that -- and you -- you don't have to use a definition of addiction. You guys do the math. You do the math.
That's argument. That's generic evidence.
But that doesn't carry the burden of proof in this case about addiction.
They don't know anything about the cause of Mr. Davis' death. They don't know whether addiction played any role in Mr. Davis' claimed lung cancer and death. And they don't -- the generic experts don't know anything about whether Mr. Davis died because he was relying on something from the tobacco industry in making his smoking
decisions. Again, they don't answer the questions that you're going to have to answer.
So why -- you have to ask yourself. Why did the plaintiff spend all of your time, the majority of the time you've been here, why did they spend time bringing you evidence, bringing you all the documents that Mr. Alvarez showed you for the last hour and ten minutes, when they won't need to do that. They have the Engle findings, if they meet their burden on class membership.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, improper legal standard.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, the Court will give you the law and, you will follow the law that the Court gives you, not the law that the lawyers recite. And that goes for both counsel.
MR. BAYUK: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Not just Mr. Bayuk.
MR. BAYUK: Yes, sir. Thank you, Your Honor.
See, you have to ask yourself why did the plaintiff take up your time doing that instead of bringing you evidence that you would need to prove Mr. Davis -MR. ALVAREZ: My objection is different. He's attacking the way I presented the case, and I think
that's improper. It's a different objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: I suggest to you the plaintiff doesn't have the evidence to carry their burden of proof.
And you know -- you have all the evidence now. And so I'm going to walk through and demonstrate for you why there has been a complete failure of proof on every question that you have to answer, a complete failure of proof on all of the plaintiffs claims to carry her burden.
And it starts with this. And these are similar to slides that I previewed for you in opening to say keep an eye out for whether you see this evidence over the next week or two. See if the plaintiff brings you this evidence, which would help prove their claims.
Because there has been a lot of discussion, again, generically, about, you know, youth targeting and advertising. And so because this is Mr. Davis' case, you would think they would need evidence about why Mr. Davis started smoking, what impacted him. And they do. But they don't have that evidence.
You heard no witnesses who knew anything about
why Mr. Davis became a smoker. You didn't hear from any witnesses who knew Mr. Davis when he became a smoker to give you any information about that.
Again, this youth targeting and, you know, letters to fifth graders in Oregon or -- it's all in a quest for punitive damages, but it has nothing to do with this case. It has nothing to do with Mr. Davis' experience.
They brought you no witness to connect this, quote, youth targeting to any smoking decision by Mr. Davis. It's argument, but they don't have the evidence to make it relevant to this case.
Same thing racial targeting. And Mr. Alvarez, you know, in his closing earlier showed you documents about Winstons and said, you know, they were trying to get every -- every part of the market and they marketed differently to African Americans and to whites and they had special targeting for African Americans.
The judge cleared this up for you the second day Dr. Proctor was on the stand. He read you a curative instruction that said, "You heard testimony from Dr. Proctor yesterday regarding the marketing of Winston cigarettes to African
Americans. I instruct you that Winston cigarettes were marketed to African Americans in no different way than how they were marketed to Caucasians."
So when there is argument to you this morning of -- directly contrary to what the judge told you to cure this issue, you have to think about why are you even being talked to about that in closing?
What is -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: What -- you have to think about why the documents and the argument you heard from the plaintiffs closing relates in any way to this case, because it doesn't. It doesn't.
Make it broader to cigarette advertising, to any ads you saw, because you saw a lot of ads. You saw print ads. You saw videos. You saw women singing the Marlboro song. And you saw, you know, what Dr. Proctor said were people lighting each other's cigarettes in sexuality.
What did it have to do with this case? How many witnesses testified that Mr. Davis made any smoking decisions on advertising? Not a single witness you heard from in the case.
Similarly, you know, it's the plaintiff's
burden to bring you evidence that Mr. Davis' smoking decisions were made in reliance upon something from the tobacco industry. How many witnesses told you that, that that happened? None. Not a single person, from the witness stand or reading the depositions to you or the experts, nobody came in and gave you that proof that the plaintiff needs.
And then there -- there is this issue about proving when Mr. Davis smoked a cigarette made by my client, when he smoked Winston cigarettes over the course of his smoking history.
The number of witnesses who knew the brand that Mr. Davis regularly smoked before the 1970s, before he was in his 30s, no one. No one even told you what he was smoking for the first 15 to 20 years of his life. That's a profound lack of evidence the plaintiff doesn't have. The plaintiff doesn't have that evidence.
To put it another way, the people who actually saw him smoke a Winston cigarette, the first time someone saw him do that, was when he was 34 years old. 34 years old.
He had been smoking, according to the plaintiff who says that he told her he started at
around 14 or 15, he had been smoking for almost 20 years before anyone can say he was smoking an R.J. Reynolds cigarette. That's what the evidence is in this case.
And what does that mean in terms of information that he got about what he was doing and whether it was dangerous? Well, you heard the evidence. Based on the time period when someone says, "I saw him smoking a Winston cigarette," there was a warning on every pack of those cigarettes that told him what he was doing was dangerous to his health.
Every single pack was a warning when he was smoking my client's cigarettes. That's the nature of the evidence in the case.
The medical issues. The number of medical records in the two-year span leading up to Mr. Davis' death, no medical records. And I'm going to show you what Dr. Villa said about that.
I'm going to show you what he said about it on cross-examination, because it was sort of a different story than what you heard this morning.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: I'm going to show you his
testimony so there is no dispute about what he said. But one of the things he said is he's never had a case he's testified in that's had less records than this case, that has less information than this case.
And the plaintiff has the burden to prove the cause of death, but they don't have any record evidence to do that.
The number of treating doctors you heard from who testified that Mr. Davis died from lung cancer caused by smoking, no one did. No one came in here and testified about that. Dr. Villa did. He was a retained expert who had never met Mr. Davis. He never treated Mr. Davis.
And there was some discussion, I can't remember if it was on direct exam or redirect examination, about, you know, asking you saw these treating physicians in the medical records that you had, and there was discussion in closing about that.
You saw treating doctors listed in the medical records who knew about Mr. Davis and would have had all this information. You didn't hear from any of those people in this case. If they knew all this information, if they knew way more than Dr. Villa,
as Dr. Villa said, these people would have known everything. You didn't hear from any of them. You heard from a paid expert about it.
The number of witnesses that testified Mr. Davis died from smoking R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes, the answer is no one. And I'm going to show you Dr. Villa's testimony about that, but no one.
And so when I say there has been a complete failure -- complete and total failure of proof in the case, this is all of these zeros. This is the kind of evidence that the plaintiff needs to prove their claims in this case, and they don't have any of them.
Finally, the number of witnesses who told you that Mr. Davis said he regretted smoking, he wished that he hadn't smoked, or that he blamed tobacco companies, even -- you remember Ms. Patsy Davis testified to this on cross-examination. She's the plaintiff, the person who is bringing the claims, asserting the claims in the case, the person who knows the most about Mr. Davis' smoking to make these claims.
And even at the end of his life, the last two and a half years when he has a cancer diagnosis, he
resumes smoking, I asked Ms. Davis, you know, he knew he had cancer. You knew, you admitted it a decade before that. He understood that smoking was dangerous. It could kill him, could shorten his life. Did he ever then blame the tobacco companies? He never said that.
And more to the point, he never said he wanted to sue, knowing that he was harmed, knowing that he had cancer, knowing that he had the knowledge long before that about what smoking could do, he never said he was interested in bringing this lawsuit.
Ms. Davis brought this lawsuit.
And so you didn't hear any evidence about Mr. Davis saying anything, saying he was misled or anything like that. That would be evidence that would be relevant if it existed for you, but it doesn't. It doesn't exist.
And so what did the witnesses tell you about Mr. Davis?
I'm going to show you the same -- the same board that I went over with you in opening to tell you what I expected the evidence to be and the evidence is. The evidence has established all of these facts.
Again, no evidence that Mr. Davis started or
continued smoking because of anything the tobacco companies said or did. There -- at the close of the case, you have all the evidence now, there is simply no connection that the plaintiff has put on to Mr. Davis and the tobacco companies in terms of the smoking decisions.
Number two, despite being repeatedly warned since at least the 1960s, since around 1961, with his first wife, Mr. Davis chose to continue smoking for decades without ever trying to quit.
And we're going to look at the testimony, but you know why he continued smoking. You heard from the witnesses. You heard from the witnesses with no stake in the case about why he continued smoking, and it was because he chose to, because he enjoyed smoking, because he loved smoking. And that evidence is undisputed.
Number three, every pack of R.J. Reynolds cigarettes that anyone saw him smoke carried a warning label telling him what he was doing was harmful to his health, was dangerous to his health. Again, that is undisputed.
And number four, when Mr. Davis got serious about quitting, he quit. You've heard -- and we're going to talk in a little bit about what the
evidence was on quit attempts, but, again, there was really no dispute that in 1994 Mr. Davis announced that he was going to quit. He threw away his cigarettes for the first time. He threw away his ashtrays for the first time, things he had never done before. And he quit and he stayed quit for five months and he had zero problem doing it, no problem at all, no withdrawal, no craving, no issue with it.
Number five, you've been told, and Ms. Davis admitted it from the witness stand, the plaintiff admits Mr. Davis was at fault for his own death because he could have tried harder to quit. That's undisputed, too. You heard the admission and you heard from the witness stand, Mr. Davis is at fault for causing his own injuries. And we're going to talk about what that admission means. And finally, the plaintiff cannot prove Mr. Davis died from smoking R.J. Reynolds cigarettes. And we're -- I'm going to show you the testimony so there's no mistake about it from Dr. Villa on that issue.
But really, this one admission from the plaintiff, this one admission from Ms. Davis, answers just about everything that you have to decide. It actually answers the first five of
these points, because I -- this is on cross-examination. I asked Ms. Davis, you know,
"As the plaintiff in the case, you agree that it was Mr. Davis' decision and his decision alone to smoke cigarettes?"
And you-all know by now that's consistent with what you heard about his personality and doing what he wanted to do, smoking was his business. But the plaintiff, who is making all of the claims, bringing the claims in the case, and now is asking for $37.5 million in the case, as you just heard, testified to you just a couple days ago that, in terms of what was driving Mr. Davis' smoking and who was responsible and who was in control of that, it was his decision alone, not related to the tobacco companies, not in relation to the warnings that he was getting when he's smoking every Reynolds cigarette and it's continuing to be his decision, he's being told what he's doing is dangerous. This, as I suggested to you, answers just about every question you have to decide. This speaks to everything -- and this is the plaintiff in this case.
And so back to the failure of proof. And now we're going to walkthrough the verdict form issues
to explain exactly what the evidence was, but the plaintiff failed to prove each and every one of these claims, the cause of death, the cause from smoking Reynolds cigarettes, class membership, addiction causation, that if he was addicted, that it was the addiction that caused him to get lung cancer and die, and finally, a total failure of proof that Mr. Davis died because he relied on tobacco company statements.
And I would suggest you actually don't need to think much more about that than how you've heard it presented to you this morning, which was after the long discussion about punitive damages, the multiple slides, that this is the pathway to punitive damages, this is a quest for punitive damages.
Then there was a slide that just had questions 3 and 4 and check marks. And check marks. You were told there's a lot of questions on the verdict form, just check all of them yes. That's how it was suggested to you. Just check all of them yes, we've carried our burden on everything.
But the evidence doesn't support that.
And so with that, I'm going to start with question number 1 on the verdict form, class
membership. And I've suggested that this is how -how to look at it in the opening. Mr. Alvarez explained that it does encompass three different components. The plaintiff has the burden to prove medical causation, addiction, and then addiction causation. There's three different hurdles, and it's not enough in this question that you prove one. It's not enough that the plaintiff proves two. They have to prove all three in order to prove to you class membership.
And so we're going to walk through the evidence on each of these hurdles.
This is the question. "Was Booker Davis addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?"
And if you -- it says, "If you answered no, you proceed no further except to sign and date the verdict form. If you answered yes, go to question 2." And so let's talk about what the evidence is on this issue.
The plaintiff must prove Mr. Davis died from lung cancer caused by smoking. That's the nature of the plaintiffs burden on this hurdle.
And so two components to this. The plaintiff
did not prove Mr. Davis' cause of death, and they did not prove, they did not carry their burden that smoking caused his lung cancer.
And so what's the evidence? What was the evidence that you heard on these topics?
Well, the plaintiff brought you Dr. Villa.
And as I suggested to you in opening, Dr. Villa is a nice man. I've met Dr. Villa, as you might have been able to tell, a number of times. He's a nice witness.
He came in and was very candid with you that he doesn't have any medical records for the last two years of Mr. Davis' life. He didn't have anything for the two years leading up to Mr. Davis' death.
And what did he tell you? "We are missing a significant amount of records." In fact, out of the 50 tobacco cases that Dr. Villa has testified in, the only cases with less information, he's rejected. He's refused to come to court and testify because he can't render an opinion. That's what he told you, he's rejected those cases.
For this case, he agreed that he's never had a case where he's testified where he's had less information, he's known less about the smoker and
his medical issues and cause of death than you have about Mr. Davis, than you have in this case. Never had a case with less information where he's come into court and testified to a jury.
And so what does that mean for the cause of death? What did Dr. Villa tell you about cause of death?
Well, he told you death certificates do not establish the cause of death. He's unwilling to rely on it to determine cause of death. And here is his testimony. I referenced this a few minutes ago, but here is what he said about death certificates.
The first question relates to what he does in his day job, in his practice, when he's at Mercy Hospital a few miles south of here, I asked about,
"In your practice, Dr. Villa, would you agree that a death certificate is not enough to be able to render an opinion about cause of death in a person; right?"
And the answer is, "Yeah. It just doesn't have enough information."
And then we took it to the courtroom, took it to what he was doing here when he was giving you opinions about Mr. Davis.
And I asked him, "Given your view with death certificates, you don't use them as the basis for opining on someone's cause of death; right?"
And he answered, "In a courtroom? That's correct." And, of course, he was in the courtroom when he told you this. This was two days ago.
He is unwilling at the hospital and he's unwilling in court to base a cause of death opinion on a death certificate.
Then the instructions, Instruction Number 10 tells you the same thing. "A death certificate does not constitute prima facie proof of the cause of death, nor does it create conclusive proof of any fact related to the death." And prima facie proof means, if all you had was the death certificate, that would be sufficient. If it's not prima facie proof, it means you need other evidence to help prove cause of death. The death certificate alone cannot do it. That's what that means. And so this is telling you the death certificate alone cannot prove cause of death.
And so what does that set up? Dr. Villa's admission that, if he ignores the death certificate in this case, he does not have any evidence of what caused Mr. Davis' death, because he doesn't have
any of the records.
If he puts aside the death certificate, he can't tell you what caused the death. And he says if I ignored it, if I ignore the death certificate, that's correct.
But all he had was a death certificate.
What does that mean for you where you have his admissions and you have the jury instructions that tell you a death certificate is insufficient under the law, under the instructions, and according to the only expert you have heard from.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. It's an improper instruction of the law.
THE COURT: The Court will tell you what the law is. You are to follow the instructions of the Court as to what the law is and not that as guided by the lawyers.
MR. BAYUK: The framework that you have is that the instructions, and you have copies of, Instruction Number 10 and the only expert witness testimony on this both tell you you can't use it to prove cause of death, and that's all they have in the case. You have to put it aside. The instructions tell you you have to put it aside because if Dr. Villa says there's nothing else,
there's nothing else to prove it.
And then he went further and told us what could prove a cause of death, what could this corroborating evidence, this additional evidence be that could prove cause of death. He says that the gold standard for determining cause of death is an autopsy, it's the gold standard, it's what you do when you want to be certain about a cause of death. There wasn't one done in the case. There wasn't one done in this case. If there was, that could help plaintiff carry their burden, but there's not.
They don't have that evidence, so they can't prove cause of death.
And then, you know, you heard the testimony about smoking causing the lung cancer, about the squamous cell carcinomas and the cytology versus the histology and that discussion. Dr. Villa admitted there was no tissue, there was no histology taken from Mr. Davis' lung, and that when you look at histology under the microscope, you can see more details that enable you to assess the cancer and what kind it is.
They didn't have that evidence here. He didn't have the evidence to look at it himself because he told you he disagreed with people in
these cases about what things under the microscope show. He told you there's no test done to say that the cancer in Mr. Davis was caused by smoking.
Again, you saw no evidence, you heard no evidence from any treating doctor who determined that Mr. Davis' cancer was caused by smoking. You simply didn't have any of that evidence. And so this is a -- again, the plaintiff has the burden of proof to bring you this evidence, but they have not done it. They have not brought you the evidence that we need to prove the cancer was caused by smoking because they're missing these components.
And again, you're going to have all the medical records in evidence. I think it's only 30 pages, give or take. Look through them and see if you find anywhere where someone wrote down a diagnosis of cancer caused by smoking. You won't find it. You won't find it. And look at the medical records to see if anyone said what caused Mr. Davis' death. You won't find it. And you'll have everything in the jury room.
So bottom line, the first hurdle -- can I have the Elmo, Ryan?
The first component of this first question class membership, you only have to answer it one
time, but because it's three components, the medical causation component is no.
So let me move to addiction. The plaintiff has the burden of proof on this hurdle of class membership. They have to prove Mr. Davis was medically addicted to nicotine, he was addicted to nicotine from a medical standpoint.
And you've heard, and again, it's undisputed evidence in the case, that Mr. Davis did not meet the gold standard test, DSM-5 medical criteria for addiction.
And this -- you know, it was the -- it was the defense's turn to put on evidence yesterday. And, of course, because the plaintiff has the burden of proof, the defense doesn't have to do it. The defense could just say the plaintiff didn't meet their burden, they didn't prove their case.
But in a number of respects, including addiction, we actually brought you evidence not only that they didn't meet their burden, but that they couldn't, that the evidence went the other way, it refuted their ability to prove their case.
And so you heard that evidence on addiction from Dr. Barnett yesterday, who applied the DSM-5.
Now, you heard -- during the plaintiffs case,
you heard, while the plaintiff was on the stand, you heard Ms. Patsy Davis on direct examination tell you that Mr. Davis was addicted. She said,
"Mr. Davis, I thought, was addicted." And -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. This is improper. It doesn't have the whole answer there.
It says "yes." I object to this.
THE COURT: I don't know what -- is this -MR. ALVAREZ: This is a-MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, these are the callouts from the portion, just like Mr. Alvarez did in his -MR. ALVAREZ: I need to approach.
THE COURT: No, no. Overruled.
This is argument, ladies and gentlemen.
You've already heard the facts in the case, and you rely upon your own independent and collective recollection as to what the testimony was.
MR. BAYUK: So Ms. Davis, on her direct examination, was asked the question, told you that she believed Mr. Davis was addicted. And yesterday, right before Dr. Barnett took the stand, we had to publish her sworn answers under oath, before we started trial, her sworn testimony under oath. The judge told you what interrogatories are.
They're written questions that are answered in writing under oath that are served to the other party.
And she was asked the question, "Was Mr. Davis addicted? Do you contend that he was addicted?" And the answer that was read to you said, "I do," but then she contended that he was addicted. But it went on to say, "Addiction is a medical diagnosis. I am not qualified to say whether the smoker was addicted. Doctors will have to say whether the smoker was addicted. Since I can't say whether the smoker was addicted or not, I can't say how long the smoker was addicted."
This is from 2009, her response from 2009. So before trial starts, she says, "I'm not qualified to do it." You need a medical doctor, because it's a medical condition. You need someone who knows about Mr. Davis, who studied Mr. Davis, who studied all we know, all the facts we know about him, and coming -- using criteria to render a medical diagnosis.
And that's why we published this to you, that's why we brought this answer to you because you didn't hear this during the plaintiffs case.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: The evidence you heard from the plaintiff's case was simply her saying that he was addicted.
And so you'll have this in evidence. So the question on this hurdle is, did Ms. Davis, did Patsy Davis prove that Mr. Davis was medically addicted?
Well, what did she bring?
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection. That's not the standard, medically addicted, Judge.
MR. BAYUK: It's what her interrogatory said.
MR. FREIDIN: Yeah, but that's not the standard.
MR. ALVAREZ: That's not the standard.
THE COURT: Rephrase. Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: The question is, did Ms. Davis bring you an expert, a doctor to explain addiction from an expert standpoint and assess Mr. Davis, his smoking, as to whether he was addicted? Well, you know she didn't bring you that. You didn't hear any expert on addiction who knew anything about Mr. Davis. Instead, you got a videotape. You got a videotape from a -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. It's not a
videotape.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you have to rely upon the testimony, whether it was presented by video, whether it was presented by reading of depositions, the same way you would as if the witness had appeared live in an open court, as I told you when they were playing the video or reading the deposition.
MR. BAYUK: And had Dr. Henningfield come live or by video, he knows nothing about Mr. Davis. He told you nothing about Mr. Davis.
Again, he told you, "I don't know the smoking behavior of the smoker in this case."
The plaintiff brought you no specific expert about Mr. Davis and his smoking behavior. As I said, the plaintiff testified Mr. Davis was addicted. But what did she say on cross-examination? When I asked her about this, she said she never told Mr. Davis when they were together that she thought he was addicted. She never shared that with him if she thought that, and that Mr. Davis never said that himself. He never said "I think I'm addicted" to her.
And so the first time that Mrs. Davis says that she thinks Mr. Davis was addicted is after
this lawsuit's filed. In fact, the only time there's any evidence that Mr. Davis was addicted comes from the plaintiff after the lawsuit was filed.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. This is inappropriate, motion in limine.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: So what did the only medical doctor say? The only medical doctor who actually used criteria, DSM-5, medical diagnostic criteria, what did that doctor tell you? That was Dr. Barnett. She told you, first of all, half of people that smoke every day do not meet the addiction criteria from the DSM-5. There's various statistics, they average out at 50 percent. The state-of-the-art book from 2013 says the same thing, about 50 percent of people who smoke every day smoke for reasons other than addiction.
And she went through those. She had a three-column list of all the reasons that people smoke that she is expert in based on her training and experience.
And, you know, there was a demonstrative showed this morning that addictions are 5 or 10 percent of her practice. She told you she treats
hundreds of smokers a year. She assesses hundreds of smokers a year for addiction, for help quitting, even if they're not addicted.
Now, they have other medical -- mental conditions, and that's why they go to a psychiatrist. But she has, over the course of her career, thousands of patients who she's assessed for smoking issues and addiction. She knows the reasons people smoke, and she explained that to you.
And then she explained to you what the evidence is in this case and whether that's consistent with addiction or not. And she went through all of the depositions. There was a discussion on her cross-examination of--1 think she was asked the question, "How do you know all this stuff about Mr. Davis? How can you - how do you know what he did and what he thought and what people said?"
And she said, "I read all the depositions in the case. I read - I read the stack of depositions to learn everything I could about it, thousands of pages, that's how I know. That's how I can apply the criteria."
And she saw, she saw the evidence in the case
that Mr. Davis enjoyed smoking. He smoked for relaxation. He smoked for stress relief. You heard the plaintiff testify that Mr. Davis was an anxious person, just as a matter - just - he always needed to be moving, needed to keep his hands busy, and he smoked for that reason. He smoked for stress relief and anxiety. He liked to smoke with his coffee. The plaintiff, again, told you that. And then his wife, Margaret Davis, told you he loved smoking. He loved smoking. She's got no interest in this case. She's not interested in the outcome of the case. And she told you he loved smoking.
The bottom line is, Mr. Davis smoked for many reasons other than addiction. And that comes from multiple witnesses that you have in evidence. You heard the testimony, again, his wife, he could have quit if he wanted to. He could have quit, but he didn't want to quit because he just wanted to smoke. He loved smoking. He knew it was dangerous.
"I warned him," that's what she said. "I told him he needed to quit, I told him the health risks." He wanted to smoke. And smoking was his business. That's what you heard the witnesses say.
And so Dr. Barnett explained this to you, and she went through the criteria. She went through -you heard there were 11 criteria. You heard that, in the practice of psychiatry, the standard is, if you meet six or more of those, that's considered an addiction.
And then you heard a cross-examination on that, kind of an animated cross-examination, that spent a lot of time questioning her about whether she's in the minority view on that, only she applies the DSM like that, you know. I think she was asked, "Aren't you aware that NIDA, that the federal government Institute on Drug Abuse, the National Institute of Drug Abuse has its own definition on addiction? You know, the jury is not going to be given that definition. Don't you know that this federal organization, this federal agency has a definition of addiction and you don't use that?"
And then it was all shot down with one question on the redirect when it was published to you-all and it was that definition from NIDA and it had the sentence of what they considered. And then it had a footnote that said it's the same thing as six or more criteria from the DSM. The same thing.
And so that's the only medical witness who came to you applied this, applied it in that way, and explained to you in detail why a diagnosis of addiction is not appropriate here. It's not appropriate.
Dr. Barnett explained to you that Mr. Davis controlled his smoking, he controlled where and when and around whom he smoked, with no problem, no withdrawal, no craving, no urge, strong urge or desire to smoke, that the one time he got serious about quitting, he quit with no problem.
And you heard in the testimony from Dr. Henningfield, the video, you heard Dr. Henningfield say that the hallmarks of addiction, in a part that wasn't played for you, the hallmarks of addiction were craving and withdrawal symptoms, because that's what brings people back to smoking when they try to quit.
That's why people fail quit attempts. That's why you have this 5 percent failure rate on a given attempt.
Well, there's no evidence of that in this case. And, in fact, the evidence is the opposite, that when Mr. Davis got serious, he quit for five months, well past the point of craving or
withdrawal, never had those things, never had any problem staying off cigarettes until he resumed at some point after his cancer diagnosis, he's told that he has a limited life expectancy.
We know he liked to smoke, but we also know that whatever the reason he went back to smoking, you heard yesterday, had nothing to do with addiction. Nothing to do with it.
The bottom line is Mr. Davis was one of the 50 percent of people who smoke daily who do not meet the standard that was given to you.
And in the cross-examination, there was nothing done to question these criteria. There was nothing done to say, "Well, let me show you this evidence in the deposition. You know, you said this criteria wasn't met, or this one wasn't met.
Did you consider X, Y, orZ?"
It's because there's no contrary evidence in the case. There's no evidence to do that. That's why the cross-examination didn't focus on that.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. Commenting again on the way we -
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: And again, just compare and contrast Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Barnett.
Dr. Henningfield, of course, is a researcher, not a medical doctor. He told you a little bit into the video that he's not qualified to treat patients, he's not licensed to treat patients.
On the slide you were shown this morning about him, it says he lectures, I think, or it was told to you he lectures to medical students. But what he said in the deposition was he lectures to medical students on how they should apply the DSM.
In fact, in the part of the video that you were shown in closing this morning, there's a book on his -- on the podium in front of him, that's his DSM. That's the DSM in the deposition. That's Dr. Henningfield.
But again, he didn't apply the DSM in this case. He doesn't know anything about Mr. Davis.
In contrast, Dr. Barnett, she's a licensed doctor, she practices over in Tampa. Not only is she a psychiatrist, but she specializes in addiction psychiatry. She's board certified in that. She diagnoses and treats smokers all the time, hundreds a year she told you. She applied the state of the art, the DSM-5, and reviewed everything about Mr. Davis.
And so I would suggest to you, you have all
the evidence. It's not just that the plaintiff failed to carry their burden, it's overwhelmingly that they can't, that they can't based on, again, the unrefuted evidence in the case.
And so, again, you don't answer this three times, but there's been a complete failure on the addiction hurdle of class membership.
And the final hurdle is addiction causation.
This is if you find that Mr. Davis was addicted, did the addiction -- was the addiction a legal cause of his death?
Well, what does that mean? The plaintiff, again, brought no witness to tell you that nicotine addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Davis' death.
Dr. Barnett explained to you yesterday why it wasn't, but you heard nothing in the plaintiffs case. The only time, the only time you heard this concept even discussed over the last week and a day was this morning in the closing argument, where you heard -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. This is attacking the way we prosecuted our case.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. BAYUK: This -- you heard the discussion
in closing earlier today that, you know, you see all this stuff about smoking early and smoking when you wake up and cigarette - a cigarette burn mark on the windowsill. Use your common sense. Of course, that means addiction caused him to smoke against his will or caused him to smoke until he had no choice but to get lung cancer.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. There's no requirement that we prove that, Judge.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: Again, this is why I started by saying you have to rely on evidence, not argument. That's argument to make you overlook the gap, the wide gap in the plaintiffs case.
This wasn't addressed at all in the evidence portion.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: You-all took notes during the course of trial. Look through your notes and see if you found any evidence where anyone said this. Because I suggest to you you won't find it. It didn't happen.
What did happen is, again, the plaintiff admitted that Mr. Davis was himself a legal cause
of his own death. And what does that mean?
Well, it means a number of things.
MR. ALVAREZ: You know, Judge, I object. That's improper. It's not a complete admission of what we admitted to.
MR. BAYUK: Your Honor, we've already discussed this.
THE COURT: You may proceed.
MR. BAYUK: Thank you, Your Honor.
What does the plaintiffs admission mean?
What does it mean to say Mr. Davis was at fault for causing his injuries or causing his death?
Well, it means Mr. Davis chose to smoke for decades without trying to quit, without making a serious quit attempt. It means he was not confused about the dangers of smoking.
Because why would you ever say you were at fault? Why would you admit fault if you didn't know or if you didn't have a choice about what you're doing? Why would you be at fault for that?
So the plaintiffs admission means he knew, and the evidence supports that. The evidence you have supports that he knew about the dangers and the addictiveness of smoking for decades. It means that he had the ability to quit, and you know that
from the evidence. It means he had the ability to quit, and it means he had the responsibility to quit if he wanted to protect his health.
And again, you have the evidence of why he made the smoking decisions that he did and what he got out of smoking and why he continued and why he continued after even Ms. Davis said he knew that by continuing to smoke he was going to shorten his life. He chose to keep smoking, that's part of the admission of fault.
And finally, Mr. Davis could have quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death.
That's what that means. Why else would you be at fault -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALVAREZ: That's not what it means.
MR. BAYUK: Mr. Davis could have quit at a time that would have prevented him from getting cancer and dying. And so I suggest you think of it this way. Did Mr. Davis always have the ability to quit, but he chose to continue smoking, or did nicotine addiction render him powerless over his behavior so that he was compelled to smoke against his will, he could not change the outcome?
And you were shown the jury instruction on this. It says addiction has to be a but-for cause.
That means without the addiction, his cancer and death would not have occurred. It means he had -he couldn't have changed the outcome and prevented his cancer by quitting.
Well, you know from both sides' experts that addiction doesn't prevent smokers from quitting.
Even addicted smokers can quit. You heard any smoker can quit, and addicted smokers quit every day.
You heard what this has meant overtime in this country for people smoking, at the same exact time Mr. Davis was choosing to continue smoking.
You heard starting in the '50s and '60s, millions and millions and millions of people, many of them heavily-addicted smokers, were choosing to quit to protect their health. At the same time,
Mr. Davis, enjoying smoking, being warned, but saying, "I want to smoke." No attempt to quit at all.
Bless you.
At the same time, millions are quitting.
And so was he different? Was he different than the -- bless you -- than the 60 million people
who quit? Well, were the cigarettes he smoked more addictive? No.
Was his brain affected differently? The brain receptors and the dopamine, was it affected differently than people who quit? No.
He wasn't exposed to advertising any different than people who quit. He didn't smoke for longer or start at a younger age than the millions who quit.
And he didn't smoke more, he didn't smoke any more than the people who quit smoking in the millions. What was the difference?
Under the evidence you have, he wanted to smoke. He wanted to smoke until a time when he got serious about quitting, and he quit at that time, in 1994, the first time he was motivated.
And why was that? What was the evidence you heard specific to Mr. Davis and how he lived his life and how he viewed his decisions, including about smoking? You heard he was a smart man, he was strong-willed, he was decisive, macho, not easily manipulated. He believed in and taught personal responsibility, taking responsibility for your choices.
And, you know, at the end of his life, you
heard the evidence he had his cancer diagnosis, he's told to get formal radiation, chemotherapy, he goes for a couple of treatments that helps him.
The medical record says he had drastic improvement or significant improvement, but he decides he doesn't want to live like that, he doesn't want to do that, and that's consistent with how he lived the rest of his life, the other aspects of his life.
But the bottom line is he did what he wanted to do about his life decisions, and he did what he wanted to do specifically about smoking. And all of the witnesses told you, all the people who -you know, not Dr. Proctor, not Dr. Henningfield, not the video of Dr. Villa, people who know nothing about this case, but the people who know about the case told you these things from the witness stand or from the deposition testimony.
They told you Mr. Davis didn't let anyone push him or walk over him. He didn't let anyone tell him what to do or let anyone else dictate his actions. He was the person, he did what he wanted to do, and he considered smoking to be his business.
He was going to make his own decisions about
smoking. These are the witnesses that knew him, what their assessment was from interacting with him before this lawsuit was ever filed, from their experience being with him before this claim was ever filed, this was their experience, that it was his business and he was going to make his own decisions.
Again, I showed you this earlier, but this is Ms. Patsy Davis from the witness stand telling you as the plaintiff in the case, again, the person who is bringing the claims, that it was his decision alone. He smoked because he wanted to smoke, and it was his decision alone.
She told you that in her interaction, her belief, Mr. Davis was a grown man, and that if he wanted to smoke, he was going to smoke. That was her testimony.
You heard his son Terry Davis, who testified the day before yesterday, he was asked,
"Specifically with respect to smoking, from what you observed, he wasn't someone who was going to let anyone else tell him what to do about his smoking."
True.
This is consistent with all the people that
knew, that actually knew Mr. Davis.
And again, his wife told you it was his choice to continue, not he was compelled, not he didn't have a choice in the matter, not, you know, he struggled with addiction and struggled with quitting and couldn't do it. It was his choice to continue to smoke.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. I want to make a motion.
THE COURT: Okay.
You may continue.
MR. BAYUK: Mr. Davis -- again, this evidence is undisputed. There's no evidence Mr. Davis tried to quit smoking before 1984. He smoked for decades before anyone says he had any interest in quitting.
And then in 1984, Ms. Davis, Patsy Davis told you that he started making quit attempts in relation to the birth of his children. He changed his smoking behavior, not smoking around her when she was pregnant. But she says, she told you from the stand that he started doing things to quit smoking in 1984.
The evidence from both her and the medical records is that, in 1994, he got serious and he quit. Before that time, in this ten-year period
that Ms. Davis laid out, he didn't do any of these things that would evidence a desire to quit, a motivation to quit, trouble quitting.
Never asked anyone, never asked Ms. Davis, who he knew had quit smoking in 1983, never asked her for help or support in quitting, never went to a doctor, never sought nicotine replacement, never sought any medication.
And these are the things you heard people do if they want to quit and they need help.
If they want to change their behavior, these are the things people do, go to smoking clinics, try hypnosis, try acupuncture. He did none of that in this case. And that tells you that -- you heard yesterday that tells you he was not interested in quitting. He was not interested in quitting. He was not interested in changing his behavior, changing his business.
And again, in this time period, this ten-year period, '84 to '94, Ms. Davis talks about quit attempts, but a number of other people testified, who knew Mr. Davis, who were seeing Mr. Davis at various times in this time period, none of them said anything about quitting, anything about quit attempts.
So of all the witnesses you've heard, it's just one witness who says there was ever more than a single -- well, we know what happened when there was the single attempt in these corroborated medical records. He didn't do anything different other than throw away his cigarettes, throw away his lighters and verbalize and say, "I'm going to quit smoking."
And he quit right then, no withdrawal, none of these indicia of addiction or struggle. And he quit for five months. And when he resumed, again, the plaintiff from the witness stand told you it was his decision to resume smoking.
He wasn't forced to relapse. He didn't have a relapsing brain disease. He didn't have withdrawal or craving that brought him back into making a failed long-term quit attempt. The evidence from the plaintiff is that he made the choice to resume smoking on his own, his decision alone.
And so -MR. GREEN: An hour, Frank. An hour.
MR. BAYUK: One hour?
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. BAYUK: Thank you, Your Honor.
I hope that was a good pizza break.
THE JURORS: It was.
MR. BAYUK: It actually intervened right as I was about put the last X on the verdict form.
JUROR SEALY: Oh, wow.
MR. BAYUK: We finished talking about I think plaintiff's failure to carry their burden on the last hurdle of class membership. Even if you find Mr. Davis was addicted, all of the evidence refutes addiction causing him to smoke with no choice about it. Even playing an important role, no one told you that. And so based on that evidence, the answer to that third hurdle is no. The answer to question 1 is no.
And I suggest that under the evidence you have, you wouldn't get past that point. But because I have an obligation to explain all these issues to you, we have to walk through all the questions, and I want to show you what the evidence is on those questions, even though I don't think the evidence supports you getting there, we're going to walk through and see what it is.
All right? So the next question on the verdict form, question 2, is this Reynolds - this
Reynolds causation question. "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of Mr. Davis' lung cancer and death?"
And again, this relates to the evidence you have on the time period when people can say Mr. Davis smoked Winston versus not knowing what he smoked or that he smoked anything made by R.J. Reynolds or any other tobacco companies.
And so what's the evidence on this? I thought it was best to illustrate this with a timeline. We put 1954, because the plaintiff said Mr. Davis told her he started smoking in 1954 or 1955, age 14 or 15.
From that time, whenever it was, until 1974, you have no evidence before you of Mr. Davis smoking an R.J. Reynolds brand other than the plaintiff, other than the plaintiff telling you that Mr. Davis smoked one Camel cigarette, a single Camel cigarette, that's the only evidence in front of you in that time period of any use by -- of an R.J. Reynolds brand.
So in 1974, when Booker Davis, Jr., said, I was ten years old and my dad sent me to the store to buy Winstons, that's how I knew he smoked Winstons because when I was ten, he sent me to the
store, and that's when I knew. That was 1974, when Mr. Davis was 34 years old.
So that period of time, this is about 20 years, no evidence of any R.J. Reynolds brand usage, and then of course, you have the Winston cigarettes on the right side starting around 1974.
Dr. Villa, he told you this on cross-examination, then he actually made it even clearer on the redirect. Based on the type of cancer, the location of the cancer that was found in Mr. Davis, and the age at which the cancer was found, just a short period of smoking would have caused his cancer, would have predisposed Mr. Davis to this cancer.
To use Dr. Villa's words, he reached the point of no return after just 15 years of smoking. He was not going to change the outcome after that first 15 years. That first 15 years, when there is no evidence of any R.J. Reynolds brand, it is the plaintiffs burden to bring you that evidence, but it's undisputed, you have nothing about that, you have no evidence about that.
He was predisposed to having cancer of the lung. To put it another way, even if Mr. Davis had quit smoking after that 15-year period, even if he
had never smoked an R.J. Reynolds cigarette, he would have gotten cancer in 1994.
That was the plaintiffs expert telling you
that.
Even if he had never smoked an R.J. Reynolds cigarette, we would be in the same place we are today. He would have gotten the cancer, according to their expert.
Now, the plaintiff didn't bring you any proof that R.J. Reynolds cigarettes caused this cancer. And the reason why is, and, you know, this was discussed with you this morning, that Dr. Villa was posed a hypothetical and said assume there was Winston usage, would that have been sufficient.
And Dr. Villa said, yeah, if I assume that, yeah, that would be sufficient.
But the problem with that is, whether there was that usage or not, he was going to get the cancer, according to Dr. Villa. And there is the jury instruction - let me get my instructions.
There is a jury instruction that basically answers this exact issue. This is the instruction -May I have the Elmo, Ryan?
This is Instruction Number 11 on product use
causation.
And in your instructions, it tells you, "The plaintiff must prove that but for Mr. Davis' smoking of Reynolds' cigarettes, he would not have developed lung cancer and died."
If he had never smoked cigarettes, he would not - if he never smoked R.J. Reynolds cigarettes, he would not have gotten cancer and died. And the admissions I just showed you from Dr. Villa say it doesn't matter whether he smoked R.J. Reynolds cigarettes or not. He was going to get the cancer. That's the evidence before you.
Then, you know, there is this -- there is this language below that that it doesn't need to be the only cause, it can be a cause if it operates in conjunction with another cause.
Well, that doesn't apply here because, again, it's irrelevant whether he ever smoked Winston cigarettes. He was going to get cancer before that.
That early smoking that the plaintiff has no proof on brand usage was going to be the same. That's what their expert came in and told you.
And so if you get to the second question, I'd suggest to you under the evidence you have the
answer has to be no, using the plaintiff's expert's own admissions.
Questions 3 and 4, we're going to take these together because these relate to the concealment and the agreement to conceal. They are worded very similarly.
These require you to find the plaintiff proved that Mr. Davis reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement by Reynolds or the other tobacco companies in agreement that concealed or omitted material information that was not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of lung cancer and death?
That's the nature of these two questions for concealment and agreement to conceal.
Some important instructions that deal with these issues, number 16 and 17, these tell you what the plaintiff has to prove in terms of reasonable reliance and that being a legal cause.
And then you are told what a material fact is, one that is of such importance that Mr. Davis would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission.
It means if he had been told something different, if he had relied on something by the tobacco company, he would not have smoked and died. It would have changed him -- it would have turned him into a nonsmoker. That's the nature of the plaintiffs -- plaintiffs burden on these claims.
The fact is, under the evidence you have now, the plaintiff has no connection between any concealment or agreement to conceal and Mr. Davis' cancer or death.
Much of the case -- again, when I talk about generic evidence, much of the case and much of the closing that you heard today -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: -- much of the case centered on trying to prove concealment, that there was concealment. If you find -- if you get past class membership, there is a finding on that. You don't have to prove concealment. You have to prove the connection, the link to Mr. Davis, and that's what plaintiff failed to prove. They failed to prove that Mr. Davis died because the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were unknown or were unavailable.
And, again, the plaintiff who is bringing the claim, making the claims in the case, answered this question from the witness stand when I asked her, "Is it true, Ms. Davis, that at no time did Mr. Davis ever tell you that he saw or relied on any statements from the tobacco industry in making his decisions about smoking?"
She says, "Yes, that's true."
The plaintiff herself has no evidence of this.
She is the one bringing the claim, and she has no evidence.
And then also these instructions, 16 and 17, you are told that Mr. Davis cannot be found to have reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement if he knew it was false or its falsity was obvious to him or if the facts allegedly concealed were already known or available to him, were already in the public, were already -- even if he didn't know them, were available for him to learn, the plaintiff has to prove that that couldn't have happened for him.
So we're going to walk through the evidence on what was going on around him and then specifically what he knew, what the witnesses told you he knew about the dangers over time.
The fact is, Mr. Davis, under the evidence that you have, Mr. Davis did not die because the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were unknown or unavailable. That's not the evidence.
You heard from Dr. Proctor. I'm going to go a little bit more quickly through these things because you've heard this. You heard this for days last week.
Dr. Proctor told you it's been known fora century, for at least a century, smoking is dangerous. It can be hard to quit. Nicotine can cause addiction, that any -- you saw -- he told you the same thing, it's been known for over a hundred years people know that nicotine's in tobacco, and nicotine is addictive.
Terms like addicted to smoking and coffin nails, slang terms have been used since before Mr. Davis was born. This is one year after Mr. Davis' birth, obviously, clearly, he's not smoking here. And information is available to the public talking about smokers shortening theirs lives, nicotine being a poison.
You were shown a document talking about -- an internal document talking about nicotine being a poison or people not knowing about it. This is
1941 in the Reader's Digest talking about nicotine being poisonous and a toxic substance in tobacco. You heard about this from Dr. Proctor, 1952, this is around the time with all these studies coming out people start quitting by the millions.
There is the rabbit studies, the mice studies.
The various lines of evidence converge and cause people to quit by the millions and tens of millions. But, again, Reader's Digest -- there is a claim that people didn't know smoking could cause cancer -- it's in the Reader's Digest, cancer by every carton that you smoke. 1952, again, before Mr. Davis is ever a smoker, it's known and available in the public.
Dr. Proctor told you the results of all these studies, and it's scaring people, millions of people into quitting, fleeing for their lives because of the fear, the dangers of smoking, all the publicity. He went through the specific quitting because we know from the documents, historic documents how many tens of millions of people quit at different points in time because of this information.
And, again, Mr. Davis, this is the environment he started smoking. All these people are quitting.
There is information, there is a huge blitz around him, and he starts smoking all the while people around him are quitting.
News articles, I mean, you were shown various mediums for how the dangers were put out. It was called a snowflake in a -- in a snowstorm, I think, this morning. But the fact is, these are -- these are just examples of what was in his specific environment tracking through time.
So you know he was born in Valdosta. He moved to Sanford in the Orlando area. This is the 1950s and 1960s, just some examples in his local newspaper about the dangers of smoking; in Miami,
1960,	'62, '63, talking about the dangers of smoking.
And then specific to him you heard from his wife, and she told you, "From the time we were married, I told him he needed to quit. I told him to stop because of the health risks. I told him that it was causing his stomach issues at the time."
And he knew at that time, but he wanted to smoke. Again, a witness with no interest in the outcome of this case telling you 1960, when the first witness that knew Mr. Davis, from the time
they were married, she's telling him he needs to quit.
Dr. Proctor, you heard about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report and all the publicity and all the quitting being celebrated, Dr. Proctor told you this is the beginning of the end of smoking.
What that means is people are quitting and continuing to quit by the millions. Smoking is in a decline, the beginning of the end. It's all known and available. That's what Dr. Proctor's admission is.
Just the publicity in a few days just around the state of Florida about the Surgeon General's Report, headline, front page, above-the-fold news, in the local paper here in Miami, the local papers where Mr. Davis was living, headlines and visuals about cigarettes being in a coffin or being a tombstone.
And then 1965, you've got the Florida Department of Health saying, you know, in our assessment of Floridians, nearly all of them have heard about this report, the '64 landmark report.
And then a warning, you've heard -- you've seen this, a warning or the caution goes on the packs of cigarettes. Every time he smokes in this
four-year period '66 to '70, we don't know what he's smoking, but if he's smoking, every pack has a this warning on them.
You've seen this statement from Daniel Horn, the public health scientist who was there in real time, 1968. You could tell, shout from a rooftop smoking is dangerous, and you would not be telling on -- telling anyone anything they did not already know.
And, again, it's not that they had not already heard or the -- you know, like aliens landing in Roswell, they heard of it but didn't believe it, this is a -- one of the prominent smoking and health scientists in 1968 in real time saying everyone knew. You're not telling anyone anything they don't know already about the dangers of smoking.
The PSAs.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: The moment you stop in most cases, the effects of smoking will begin to reverse themselves till your lungs are nice and clear again.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. BAYUK: Just another example of the ways
the dangers were conveyed to the public, public service announcements on television. The pack warning changes in 1970. Again, before Mr. Davis is ever seen smoking an R.J. Reynolds cigarette, now the packs tell him every time he smokes that smoking is dangerous to his health. That's what the Surgeon General has determined. Every time he reaches for a pack, that's what it says.
The bottom line is Mr. Davis knew smoking was dangerous before he was ever seen smoking Winstons. That's the factual specific evidence you have in this case. That's not argument that there was this concealment and there was a campaign of doubt and people were being misled. That might be for another case, might be for -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: Under the evidence of this case, that's why the generic evidence doesn't help you because you have specific evidence.
Continuing in the '70s, you heard the testimony of Booker Davis, Jr. He told you as early as 1970 he would complain to his father that his father's smoking was disgusting. Later that decade, Mr. Davis told his son he never wanted to
see him smoke. He never wanted to see him smoke.
Well, what does that mean? The only reason for that is Mr. Davis had internalized the dangers.
Of course he knew early on, you heard from his wife, but now he's telling his son what he knows, "Don't smoke. I never want to see it."
And then another avenue of awareness, you heard Dr. Proctor talk about religion and religious organizations being a source of getting information about the dangers out. And this can be, as he said, a very powerful motivator because of people's religious beliefs.
But what was the evidence in this case? This was just another avenue in which Mr. Davis specifically knew the dangers. You heard evidence that Mr. Davis' religious organization taught against smoking. They taught that you needed to quit.
They taught that by continuing to smoke you were poisoning your body by putting cigarettes and smoke in your body. This is at least by 1980, according to the evidence we have, another avenue of awareness and knowledge for Mr. Davis. It's another form of what was known and available specifically to him.
And you've heard this. He was a fan of the news, CNN. He read the newspaper all the time. He kept up with current events. He listened to the radio. His son Terry Davis told you that he made it a priority for himself to know what was going on, to stay informed.
And then the 1980s, you heard the story from Ms. Davis on the stand. You know, they had a discussion soon after they met, 1983. She gets pregnant. He says, "I'm not going to smoke around you," and then he doesn't smoke around subsequent pregnancies, doesn't smoke around any of the kids, specifically because of concern for the dangers of smoking.
And more specific, in the warnings in 1985, the rotating warnings, telling him things like smoking can cause lung cancer and the benefits of quitting on every single pack of his cigarettes, of course he understood the dangers of smoking, and he chose to continue.
You see from the plaintiffs admission. She told you from the witness stand, in 1983, Mr. Davis understood that smoking was dangerous. He understood that he was going to shorten his life if he continued to smoke.
This is -- again, this is the person who is bringing the claim saying he was misled, saying he relied on these things, from the witness stand.
And then advertising. There were a number of the witnesses who said Mr. Davis relied on advertising to make any decision, none.
Ms. Davis kind of put this to rest with this question. You know, and, again, as the plaintiff,
I asked her, "Is it true that Mr. Davis at no time ever told you that he saw or relied on any cigarette advertising in making any decisions?"
"Correct."
The plaintiff admits she -- she doesn't have this evidence. This is what she told you just the day before last.
And then targeted marketing, youth marketing. Then you heard Mr. Davis was born in rural Georgia, south Georgia, Valdosta. Didn't have a TV growing up. No one knew him growing up who could say anything about what he was like or what was his environment.
But nobody came in and told you that he started smoking because of advertising or marketing or targeted marketing or school letters or anything like that. Nothing, none of that evidence.
And then, again, I read you the Court's instruction about this. I don't need to read it again, but this time spent on racial marketing, it has no bearing in this case under the evidence that you have.
And then filters, you know, you heard a lot about filters and saw documents that they are an illusion, or they are a gimmick.
Dr. Proctor on cross-examination was asked specifically about R.J. Reynolds. And he said -in his review of the documents, hundreds of thousands of documents that he's looked at, like 80 million pages of documents available to him, there are no documents from R.J. Reynolds that use phrases like "gimmick" or "illusion" about filters. There is no documents from the time periods in this case, the '60s, '70s, '80s, where internally the scientists at Reynolds are saying, "The smokers are getting just as much, we're not telling them, but they are," there is none of those documents in this case.
There is no documents in that same time period where Reynolds scientists internally are saying that filters don't work, or they are ineffective.
And the converse was admitted by Dr. Proctor. He
has seen documents where Reynolds scientists in this time period are believing internally that filters are working, that filters are safer.
But you heard Dr. Proctor, the tobacco companies didn't tell that to the public. They didn't say filters are safer. They didn't say filtered cigarettes were better. That message came from the public health community, from the Surgeon General and the public health agencies, the American Cancer Society, not from the tobacco industry.
Dr. Proctor told you the public health community endorsed filtered cigarettes. They encouraged the tobacco companies to come up with them in the first place. They were the ones that studied them and reported that they were safer.
And all of the time that Mr. Davis was smoking, the only entity, the only organization or body that was promoting switching to filters was the public health authorities, not the tobacco industry.
And, again, this was publicized. This is just an example of Mr. Davis' local newspapers, the Miami Herald, two articles.
Well, let me back up and at this point address this issue that came up about this witness, Edward
Naylor, because you were read some testimony this morning about filters, and that was -- it was said to you that that was the evidence of reliance in this case. That was the -- that was the connection to some fraudulent statement that Mr. Davis relied upon.
Well, Mr. Naylor's testimony was read to you. Mr. Naylor is the son of the plaintiff, the -- he was the stepson, although not adopted, I don't believe, he may have been, stepson of Mr. Davis.
He testified to you. The deposition was read to you, and he testified -- and some of the testimony was read to you about filters and Mr. Davis holding up the filter and saying, "You know, this keeps the carbon out of my lungs. This makes it safe."
And there were stories. Someone told me I heard about stories in these same news articles.
Well, one of the instructions that you're going to get talks about the believability of witnesses, and it lists a character-- the aspects that you consider when you assess the witness' testimony.
It assess - it tells you to assess interest in the outcome. It tells you to assess the
opportunity to observe what's being testified to, and it tells you to assess the reasonableness of the testimony in light of all of the other evidence that you have.
You have testimony from a number of people, from a number of witnesses who knew Mr. Davis. Not his wife, not the plaintiff, not his younger children, not his older children told you anything like this, that Mr. Davis had a conversation where he thought filters were better or safer or that he switched because he saw something saying that.
And in terms of his wife and his older children, he would have been with them or married to his wife in the time where this allegedly happened. Not looking back in time, like Mr. Naylor does, these people would have been with him when this allegedly happened.
And they were all asked did he do this, did he say this, did he ever say anything about filters or not knowing the dangers or anything. And uniformly, they said no. There is none of that.
There was no evidence to that.
But then even further, if you consider the timing, which Mr. Naylor said this, he said this happened in 1990. This conversation with Mr. Davis
happened in 1990 where Mr. Davis held up a cigarette and said, "This makes it safe. This filter makes it safe."
Think about what was going on in that time period. The plaintiff admitted to you that Mr. Davis understood that he was killing himself, he was shortening his life, and that smoking was dangerous seven years before this conversation is testified to.
The plaintiff says through that seven years,
Mr. Davis was constantly trying to quit smoking. Why would you know that it's dangerous, know that it's shortening your life, and constantly be trying to quit if there's no harm to the cigarette, if the filter is protecting you?
I suggest to you - you heard the evidence. That piece of evidence is inconsistent with every other aspect of this case. It doesn't fit in this case. And most of all, it doesn't fit with what the plaintiff herself told you, Mr. Naylor's mother. It doesn't fit with her testimony in any respect. And so you'll have to give that the weight you think it deserves.
But broadening it out again to the other witnesses and whether there's any evidence of
connection between Mr. Davis' smoking decisions and any impact from a tobacco company or a tobacco industry, all of the witnesses said there's no evidence of this. In all of their interactions with Mr. Davis, he never said anything like this.
They have no evidence of any of this.
Mr. Davis never said he heard any statements, let alone relied on these statements.
And then this was the end of the plaintiffs cross-examination. Now, I asked her, "Did he ever tell" -- "even when he has cancer for the last two-and-a-half years of his life, did he ever tell you that he thought the tobacco companies had withheld something or concealed something?"
"No, he never said that."
"Did he ever tell you that the tobacco companies misrepresented something?"
"No."
"Did he ever tell you that he was fooled or tricked?"
And again, this is a time where he has -- he has his cancer diagnosis and a time when he knows what smoking can do to the body and that it can cause death.
And there's none of this evidence even in this
time period that he's saying, "Hey, now I'm sick, I wish the tobacco company hadn't said it was safe," or "I wish I" -- "this statement that I had seen hadn't said that, because now I'm sick."
That's the kind of evidence that the plaintiff could use to carry their burden, but the evidence is the opposite of that in this case.
And so if you get to these questions on the verdict form, these are questions, again, questions
3	and 4, I suggest to you the only reasonable interpretation of all of the evidence you have is to answer these no.
MR. GREEN: 30 minutes, Frank.
MR. BAYUK: Thank you.
So let me move to the issue of comparative fault. This is Question 5 on your verdict form.
This tells you that you have to assign some amount of fault, up to a hundred percent of fault, to Mr. Davis for his smoking decisions that were the cause of his death.
This is the question, and you see the instruction in the question, that you have to assign some fault up to a hundred percent to Mr. Davis.
You have the plaintiffs admission from the
witness stand here that she admits Mr. Davis was at fault in this case for causing his own injuries and death, and specifically it's related to acts or omissions about the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit. That's the admission of fault.
I've gone over this with you before. This is what the admission has to mean in the case, all of these components. Not confused or could have quit.
It was up to him, the responsibility to quit.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. That's mischaracterizing what my admission is.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: And here, again, this is the plaintiff telling you Mr. Davis, even when he was sick, he never blamed -- he never thought he was wronged. He never blamed the tobacco companies for his smoking or cancer. He never said, "I wished I hadn't smoked" or regretted his decision to keep smoking.
And again, he never said in that last two-and-a-half years if he thought he had been misled or he thought he was hopelessly addicted.
He never said he wanted to blame somebody for it, he wanted to sue the tobacco companies for it.
That's the nature of the evidence in this case.
And this claim, the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of Mr. Davis' death. Not you see all these documents and you don't like them, you think they're bad documents, but there's no connection at all to the case, because there's not. It's not a comparison of who you think was worse or who, you know, who there's more evidence of stuff that's unconnected to Mr. Davis, it's comparing the contribution between the two to specific harm to Mr. Davis.
And R.J. Reynolds' fault starts at zero percent. Again, the plaintiff has the burden to prove every percentage point, each and every percentage point of R.J. Reynolds' fault that caused Mr. Davis' death.
What you've seen, this is kind of a snapshot of the warnings and the information that we walked through, but personalized to him. He ignored repeated specific personalized warnings for decades to quit, for his health, from his wife, starting in
1961,	him warning his children, warnings from the religion, warnings in relation to Ms. Patsy Davis, down to telling the children with Ms. Patsy Davis in this case not to smoke.
That's the nature of the evidence that's
specific to him. And the fact is, the evidence demonstrates that it was, again, his decision alone, his business, he wanted to continue smoking despite knowing the dangers.
The only -- the only fault in the case, as admitted by the plaintiff, rests with Mr. Davis based on what you know about him, based on who had the opportunity for him to change the outcome if he wanted to.
Mr. Davis had the knowledge to do that.
Mr. Davis, you heard, had the control to do that.
And he demonstrated that control in 1994, and he had the responsibility to do that if he wanted to do that.
Another way to think about it is that timeline I showed you of when he smoked Winstons versus when -- there's no evidence of R.J. Reynolds brands usage.
Dr. Villa, we printed Dr. Villa's testimony, that early time period put him on the point of no return.
What that means is any use of Winston cigarettes couldn't have been a cause of his death.
It couldn't have contributed because from 1970 or '69 onward, he was at the point of no return,
again, according to the plaintiffs expert.
So if you get to this point in the verdict form, based on the evidence you have, I suggest to you the answer to this question is 100 percent on Mr. Davis as you see it in that question, as you are allowed to do in that question.
This takes me to the issue of damages. And you heard the claim -- you heard the request during the opening this morning for $37.5 million. $37.5 million in a case where you have evidence that Mr. Davis long knew the dangers and everyone says he made the choice to continue smoking.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge. He's connecting liability with damages, and I object.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: $37.5 million under the evidence that you have in this case. The instructions tell you, first and foremost, any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence, in light of the evidence you have. That means you have to consider what the evidence is on damages. You have to base it on evidence.
Damages, again, the plaintiff has the burden on this issue. Damages start at zero. You don't -
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: The plaintiff has the burden to prove every dollar of damages. That's the nature of the plaintiffs burden. That's what the instructions tell you.
And Instruction 21 tells you what the measure of damages is in this case. It tells you you have to assess the loss of companionship, the instruction, guidance, mental pain and suffering, as a result of the loss of Mr. Davis' parental relationship because of lung cancer and death.
That's the - that's the nature of the damages claim in the case, essentially the loss of their relationship with Mr. Davis.
And this is something that I've brought up with you-all starting in jury selection. I asked you questions on this topic on the issue of this case is going to involve some sensitive issues.
It's going to involve issues that people don't talk about in public, that you don't have as part of everyday discussions. They're not things that people talk about, and specifically looking at someone else's family relationship and assessing it. That's not something that people do on a daily
basis outside the court, and it's not something that's talked about. It can be uncomfortable. It can be very sensitive. I mean, there's no doubt about it.
This is why I asked you about this, and it was in relation to asking you and telling you some of this evidence is going to need to come out in this case, and we may have to cross-examine witnesses and ask them about sensitive topics. And I asked you, "Is anyone going to hold that against me given that there's a claim in the case that requires you to have that full picture of the evidence?"
And that's why the evidence wasn't brought out, because the law tells you, the law requires that you have the full story to assess this claim, to assess the nature of the relationship.
You have to have all of the evidence, and so that was the point of asking you about that in jury selection and about bringing some of this evidence out to you in trial.
And no one had -- it was not fun to do it. No one -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, whether it was fun to do it.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: It was understandably sensitive. I hope that you thought when it was done, cross, it was done respectfully.
MR. ALVAREZ: You know, Judge -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: In any event, what you have to consider is the loss of relationship. In this case, it's the loss of a parent/child relationship, a parental relationship. But the instructions say your charge in the case is it's not assessing the loss of a parent or a father, you have to consider the evidence about this specific relationship, the nature of this specific relationship with Mr. Davis. That's the nature of what you're going to have to do if you get to this question.
And, you know, when you think about a relationship, parent/child relationship, you have to look at it from two perspectives. It requires two people to participate in the relationship, and it requires two people to participate going forward to have that relationship. That's just the nature of a parent/child relationship. Those people have to put things into the relationship to have a relationship.
And in this case, you have a lot of evidence
about what the relationship was like, especially at different periods of time. You've heard that evidence over the last few days, and the reason that you heard it is so that you can assess the specific, because you have to assess what was the relationship and where was it likely to go, what was it going to be like in the future, because the claim is the loss of the relationship because of the lung cancer, the injury, and death.
But, you know, you've heard the evidence that the relationship was lost, there was a loss of relationship, a loss of parental relationship in Mr. Davis, but you know that the evidence is that Mr. Davis is the one that prompted the loss.
And you saw the evidence. You saw that it was Mr. Davis that took himself out of the relationship.
MR. ALVAREZ: Judge, this is inappropriate argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: That he took himself -
MR. GREEN: 20 minutes, Frank.
MR. BAYUK: Thank you.
And so when you assess the claim, again, $37.5 million, it is inconsistent with the evidence you
heard about the nature of the relationship.
Now, of course, as I've said, you heard the testimony from the five children. No one has said a bad thing about them and no one will. I have nothing bad to say about them, at all.
But the evidence that you have is about Mr. Davis' role and what we know objectively about what was going on and his view of that role based on some testimony and based on some documents that we have in evidence.
And so this is a summary of what you heard that -- in terms of Mr. Davis' participation with the family at this time.
You heard that, in 1994, there was conflict between Mr. and Ms. Davis. It culminated in an event where there were some issues at the house that the children were present for. Ms. Davis took the children and went to her sister's house.
Mr. Davis, you've heard the testimony,
Mr. Davis left the house, nobody knew where he was. He wasn't at that time ordered to leave the family.
He voluntarily left, and his son Terry told you we didn't know where he went. Nobody knew where he went for a few weeks, couldn't get in touch with him. We didn't know where he was. At some point
after that, we heard he got an apartment in North Miami, and the kids testified they visited with him. You heard that evidence.
But you saw, because you have to assess this from his perspective, you saw yesterday the legal -- the restraining orders, and particularly the part about the visitation. And you saw that Mr. Davis voluntarily gave up his visitation rights to the children. Because in 1994, he indicated he was going to move back to Sanford, where his older family was. You saw in 1996, three months before the death, a second legal order where again Mr. Davis was given the option to have visitation with the children, and it says he declined it. He declined the visitation.
You saw in that same order that Mr. Davis was ordered to pay child support. And this issue came up when Ms. Davis was on the stand. And I ask -you know, I was asking her if Mr. Davis ever did that. And she -- you know, she said, "I considered the disability payments as child support," or "I considered, you know, when the kids were at his apartment, that was child support." But the fact is he never paid the child support that he was ordered to pay, according to the objective
documentary evidence, the legal that you saw.
And Ms. Davis, I asked her about these orders, and specifically the 1996 order, and she had no memory of it. She didn't remember the details of what would have happened.
And that's fine, but you have the document itself that tells you something happened and what the result was, in terms of her again getting custody of the kids and then requiring no contact at the home, no -- staying within 500 feet away from the home. I mean, that's in black and white on the paper that we have that was published.
And then you have this testimony, some from Ms. Davis, some from Mr. Davis' older children, including Calvin, who was read to you, that at the end of his life, Mr. Davis was leaving to reunite with his older family. He was leaving to reunite with his wife and his older kids in Sanford.
And you heard Ms. Davis testify that, you know, Mr. Davis one day left the house, left the family, and locked the doors to the car and didn't say where -- said he was going to Sanford. She thought his older family, his older kids was on Mr. Davis' mind.
And you heard testimony about his subsequent
stay in the hospital and what he did with his -all of his personal belongings.
And again, I mean, it is uncomfortable evidence.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: This --1 mean, just mapping these things out in terms of Mr. Davis' participation in being around in this last period of his last years before he died, I mean, you could see the period he's living in the apartment, people don't know where he is, and then later on, the second restraining order in October and November of 1996, his son Calvin says, "When I would come down to visit him in Miami, he was always in hotels. He wasn't in the family home. There's a lot of conflicts. He wasn't home, around."
I mean, again, you saw the visitation issues.
And, I mean, the purpose of these orders was to temporarily grant custody of the kids to Ms. Davis, Ms. Patsy Davis. The one legal means in these orders to allow Mr. Davis to have contact with his children was through visitation, as by the terms of these orders. That was his only means to see the children, if he wanted to do that, the only legal
avenue he could do.
And both times, in 1994 and 1996, he gave that up himself. He gave up his only avenue to see these kids.
And then the story at the -- you know, at the end of his life in the hospital, his family, the children and, you know, Patsy Davis, didn't know where he was. He left. And they got a phone call, Ms. Davis got a phone call from Mr. Davis' sister that he was in the hospital, so Ms. Davis went to the hospital. And Mr. Davis told her to leave, told her he didn't want her at the hospital.
And she -- and the children didn't come to the hospital to visit their father when he's in the hospital on his deathbed.
The children didn't go visit him, and he didn't -- there's no evidence he asked to see them. There is evidence of who he asked to see, and it was his older kids. And Ms. Davis says when she got there, the older kids were around. And you heard the older kids, Calvin, say that they -- they were there and there was some conflict with Ms. Davis, but that Mr. Davis was, to them, expressing the intent to move to Sanford, reunite with Margaret, move out of Miami.
And he took all of his possessions, all of the possessions he had in the family home, and he distributed them to his older family, cash, car, bank cards, photos. The one thing he left in his family home, the tools, he told Calvin to go to the family home and take them, to leave nothing in the family home. That's the -- that's the nature of the evidence that you have to assess all aspects of the relationship and his view of the relationship and what the relationship may have been had he not died.
I mean, the evidence we have about the end of his life is that if he never goes in the hospital and dies, what the witnesses say is, the last thing they know is he's expressing an intent to leave this family and go back to Sanford and to give up any right to visit these kids.
That's -- that's -- and it's kind of uncontested in the time period of his life that that's what the evidence is.
And again, this is very sympathetic, and the testimony was sympathetic. There's no doubt about it. The loss of a parent is sympathetic. But again, you can't base your verdict on sympathy, you have to base it on evidence. And that's why we
have to bring you these things so you could assess the relationship. That's the only reason. That's the only reason in this case.
And so their claim for $37 1/2 million, why I suggest to you that it is inconsistent with the evidence in the case, it doesn't -- millions of dollars, when Mr. Davis voluntarily gave up his rights to see the children two times? Millions of dollars when he gave all of his possessions to people other than the kids in the case?
Millions of dollars when he was repeatedly out of the house, in hotels and apartments, in the years before he died and the plaintiff had to file orders prohibiting him from seeing the children in the family home, from coming in the family home?
And millions of dollars when at the end of the -- in his final days, when he's in the hospital, we have evidence of who he -- who he asked to see, who he wanted to see in his final days. And the evidence is it is his children from Margaret, and no one's contested that. That's the nature of the evidence that you have about how to assess this relationship and what caused the loss, what caused the loss of the relationship.
And, look, you know, no one is making any
judgment or blame or anything about -- about how Mr. Davis behaved in this fashion. But the fact is this --1 mean, you heard the witnesses tell you that no one told him what to do, he did what he wanted to do in all respects. They talked about smoking, they talked about his end-of-life care.
You heard evidence about how he related to the former kids and what he -- you know, you heard the testimony from his wife saying, you know, he left them when those kids were the same age as the plaintiff kids in this case, 1975, and that Booker Davis, Jr., had a hard time because his dad left him.
MR. ALVAREZ: Judge, I object to this comparing.
THE COURT: Let's move on.
MR. GREEN: Eight minutes.
MR. BAYUK: Eight minutes? Okay.
And what the relationship was, how Mr. Davis approached relationships in all aspects, that's why we bring in the evidence. I suggest to you that, when you consider the evidence that you have, a verdict of $37 million is not appropriate, is not warranted in the case. That's not what the evidence supports.
So there's a final claim, if you get here.
Going to punitive damages. All right? This is where Mr. Alvarez -- this is where the presentation this morning spent most -- the bulk of his time on this issue.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled. Proceed.
MR. BAYUK: The slides that you were shown all set a path to punitive damages. And you have to find this by clear and convincing evidence. Well, the evidence in this case demonstrates that there's no need to impose punitive damages. If-- the punitive phase, if we go to one, will involve the second part with witnesses and openings and closings and more evidence.
You've heard about this burden of proof.
Well, the burden of proof for punitives, punitive damages, entitlement is clear and convincing evidence. It's the highest burden of proof you can have in a civil case. The highest burden of proof you can have in a civil case. And the instructions tell you what that -- what that burden is, that it requires evidence that is precise and clear and lacking in confusion, that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation that
damages -- that they're entitled to punitive damages.
If you have any hesitation at all about this issue, the instruction tells you they haven't carried the burden. They haven't carried the burden. So punitive damages can only be awarded for harm suffered by Mr. Davis, not for other people, not for anyone else, that you can't punish -- they can't be awarded for punishment for harm to anyone else, and they're in addition to damages that fully compensate the plaintiffs. They are extra, in addition to full compensation.
MR. ALVAREZ: Objection. They're not extra, Judge.
THE COURT: No. Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: The damages are in addition to any compensatory damages that have made the plaintiff whole. And again, they don't go anywhere else but -- they don't go for public health or any -Mr. Alvarez told you that in jury selection. They only go to the plaintiff.
And you can't consider the Engle findings, of course, in assessing punitive damages, but you do consider mitigating evidence. And so what did you hear in this case about mitigation? You heard
Dr. Proctor say Reynolds, R.J. Reynolds tried to make safer cigarettes for 50 years. They developed heat-not-burn technology. They spent a billion dollars trying to develop these cigarettes, Premier and Eclipse, to lower the dangers of smoking to lessen the harm, but they failed because consumers didn't like them, they didn't like the taste of them.
You heard a lot about the Council for Tobacco Research and that it was a front or a shield, but Dr. Proctor told you they contributed $350 million to scientific research, 7,000 articles, 600 articles cited in Surgeon General Reports that deal with the issue of smoking. They funded scientists all over the state, all over the country, ten Nobel Prize winners.
Then they -- there's a claim that this was leakage or distraction research or something.
Dr. Proctor told you they funded articles on the relationship between smoking and COPD, on lung function in heavy smokers, and addiction and withdrawal in the '60s and '70s.
And there was a suggestion about people getting their funding cut off. Dr. Proctor told you none of this happened in this case. There was
no funding cut off with these things. He told you that smoking today is de-normalized. Smoking prevalence is in a rapid decline, it's a horse-and-buggy technology, it's outdated. He said it's obsolete. Smoking, in his words, is on its way out.
And so does this evidence demonstrate that R.J. Reynolds needs to be punished or needs to be deterred from doing something that plaintiff claims harmed Mr. Davis in this case?
The evidence is that punitive -- there has been a complete failure to prove this claim certainly by clear and convincing evidence, the highest burden that exists in these cases.
Dr. Proctor told you youth smoking dropped 66 percent since 1966. Florida, of all the states, has the second lowest youth rates of smoking. And teen smoking rates are at their lowest since 1920. Again, all of this the instructions tell you you can consider -- if you even get to this claim, if you even get to this claim and assess it, you can assess all of this mitigation evidence to say,
"Even if I didn't like things that I saw, there's no carrying of the burden by plaintiff with the evidence, and there's -- there's mitigation
evidence. There is evidence that demonstrates that punishment is not warranted in the case, that there doesn't need to be a second phase of the case."
This comes from Dr. Proctor.
And so if you get to this question, if you find that somehow the plaintiff can carry their burden on the earlier issues that we've gone over on the verdict form, I suggest to you the answer to question number 7 is clearly no.
My few final thoughts.
Did I turn it off?
All right. So I'm going to sit down in a couple minutes. I'm going to leave you sort of where I started and where I started the case in opening in telling you to keep your eye on the ball and focus on the evidence that helps you decide the issues in this case.
And what do you know about Mr. Davis? I said this maybe a hundred times since I've been standing up here. He did what he wanted to do in all respects of his life. No one has come in and contested he did what he wanted to do about smoking and about other things. He wasn't impacted in his smoking decisions as his -- as the plaintiff told you. It was his decision alone, his decision
alone.
And so I'll leave you again with these facts that answer everything you're here to decide in the case. And I would -- you know, I don't get to stand back up after this. Mr. Alvarez gets to come talk to you for some more time in rebuttal. And I would suggest to you to see if he spends that time talking to you about issues specific to Mr. Davis.
If he spends that time talking to you about -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. BAYUK: -- trying to show that he has some connection that's not the tobacco companies did this to the public and Mr. Davis was a member of the public, that he has some evidence that's specific to meet his burden.
See if he talks to you about Mr. Davis continuing to smoke because the witnesses say it was his choice, even though he knew.
See if he talks about something other than just putting up more documents -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BAYUK: And talking about the issues in this case.
It has been a privilege to try the case in
front of you. Again, I thank you for being so attentive. Thanks for your time.
