MR. COFER:
May it please the Court, Counsel, Mr. Denton?
Members of the jury, good morning.
Ms. Wiles, I'm going to be using not the ELMO but
Thank you.
the other.
Thank you. 57
I told you in opening statement that we believe
this case does come down to three pretty simple,
straightforward questions:
did she wait so long to quit?
the defendants do to cause Ms. Denton to smoke and get sick?
Remember back in my opening statement what I told
Why did Linda Denton smoke?
And what, if anything, did
Why
you the evidence would be, that Ms. Denton smoked because
her family smoked, that Ms. Denton always had the ability to
quit smoking, and that nothing that the defendants did or
did not do, said or did not say caused Ms. Denton to begin
smoking.
You may also remember that I began my opening
statement by telling you the things that were not in
dispute, and I told you I was doing that so we could take
those things off the table and we could focus on the issues
in the case.
And I want to begin my closing argument the same
What I want to do is I want to begin with the facts
way.
that are not in dispute, and let's start with the first
Well, members of the
question.
jury, you remember that both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told
you that the most important reason that a person becomes a
smoker is whether their friends and family smoke.
Both of
them told you that.
Why did Linda Denton smoke?
And it's true that we don't know very much about 58 Ms. Denton's friends, but we do know, members of the jury,
that everyone who was important to her in her life smoked.
Her mom smoked.
Her big brother smoked.
Her little brother smoked.
smoked when they met.
Her husband of 30 years, he
Even her daughter Karol smoked.
Her dad smoked.
Given the environment that she grew up in, is it
any surprise that Linda Denton decided to become a smoker?
And you remember that Dr. Burns told you that the
environment we grow up in is a very important factor in
whether someone decides to smoke.
Members of the jury, there was not a single shred
of evidence that Ms. Denton started smoking because of
anything that a tobacco company said or didn't say.
There
was not a single shred of evidence that Ms. Denton was ever
fooled about the risks of smoking or that she relied on
anything that a cigarette company said.
The evidence was that Ms. Denton smoked her first
cigarette after the 1964 Surgeon General's Report, and
essentially every cigarette that she smoked came from a
package that had the Surgeon General's warning on it.
Question 2, why did she wait so long to quit?
We
know there's no question that Ms. Denton had the ability to
quit because she did quit smoking.
Unfortunately she waited
until she was diagnosed with cancer before she put her
cigarettes down for good. 59
There's also no question, members of the jury,
that Ms. Denton personally understood the risks of smoking,
that it was dangerous and it could cause cancer.
Could we go to the next demo, please?
This is the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
is what the Surgeon General concluded in 1964:
smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men."
points that way in women.
The Surgeon General also
determined that cigarette smoking was a habit and not an
addiction because it wasn't intoxicating.
This
"Cigarette
Says it
Now, Dr. Burns told you that the '64 Surgeon
General's Report was a big deal and got a ton of publicity.
He told you that it was on the front page of newspapers.
It
was on the cover of national magazines, and it was reported
on the television too.
Now, Ms. Barnett said in her opening statement
that Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds knew, before Ms. Denton
started smoking, that cigarettes could cause cancer.
Well,
so did she.
And you saw this, but let me show you how Harry
Reasoner reported on CBS News the '64 Surgeon General's
Report.
(Video played.)
MR. COFER:
Ms. Barnett said -- Ms. Barnett told
you in her closing argument that if Philip Morris and
Reynolds had just told Ms. Denton, Linda Denton, that 60
cigarettes were dangerous, she would have had a fighting
chance.
Members of the jury, this was the information that
The
was available before she decided to start smoking.
first time that any witness actually saw Linda Denton
smoking was November of 1966, after she dropped out of high
school and moved in with her sister, Gerry Dawson.
No one
has any credible information before that about when Linda
Denton smoked her first cigarette, what brand she smoked,
what the circumstances were, or how much she smoked.
Now, you've heard about some conversations that
Ms. Denton had with some of her friends and with Mr. Denton.
There's no way to verify whether any of those stories is
accurate because none of the witnesses are here.
All we
have is the evidence that's in front of you.
But probably the most credible story is the one
that Mr. Denton told, and he said that the first time he met
the woman who would become his wife, she was already
smoking.
And she told Mr. Denton,
if his memory's correct, that she'd been smoking, for about
a year, an occasional cigarette with one of her girlfriends.
That was in January '67.
So why is that important?
This label, the first
warning label, went on the cigarette packs on January 1st,
1966.
smoke her first cigarette.
This was 11 months before Gerry Dawson saw Ms. Denton
The evidence is, in terms of 61
people who've seen her smoke, every cigarette she smoked
came in a package with a warning.
evidence, how the warning got stronger and how it got more
specific over the years.
And you heard the
I -- I guess here's the point, members of the
Linda Denton was not a person who began smoking in
Linda Denton began smoking in the
At the time that she decided whether to become a
jury.
the 1940s and 1950s.
1960s.
smoker, there was an enormous amount of evidence about the
risks of smoking, the dangers of smoking, and specifically
that smoking caused cancer.
She was clearly on notice of
the risks from the git-go, from the time that she decided
whether to smoke.
Now, you heard Dr. Burns talk about the difference
Well, there's absolutely no
between someone being aware that smoking can cause cancer
and someone actually understanding that smoking has personal
relevance to their life.
question whatsoever, members of the jury, that Linda Denton
understood that smoking had personal relevance.
literally watched her dad, her mom, and her brother die from
small cell lung cancer that she believed was caused by
smoking.
She
Her husband, Bobby Denton, coughed up blood in
1973, and he quit smoking, and he told Ms. Denton he was
going to quit before he got emphysema or cancer and it 62
killed him.
And I know we've been through it, but let's at
least briefly walk through what Linda Denton knew about the
dangers of smoking and when she knew it, and let's go to the
time line that I've showed you.
When Linda and Bobby Denton first married in
February of 1967 -- you can see it in the end over at the
top -- her father already had emphysema that they both
believed was caused by smoking.
This is after the warning is on the pack.
General's Report.
Now it's her dad has emphysema that they believed was caused
by smoking, yet neither of them made any effort to quit
smoking.
This is after the Surgeon
And why that's important is because Dr. Burns
You remember what he
He said that addiction -- and this is Dr. Burns --
admitted that if Ms. Denton had tried to quit then, it would
have been relatively easy for her.
said?
that addiction, particularly addiction to nicotine, takes a
considerable time to grow in strength and power for the
individual.
He specifically testified that two years into a
person's smoking habit, it would have been much easier to
stop and stay off cigarettes than it would have been later
in life, and that makes sense.
tried to quit.
In fact, Mr. Denton told you that she
But there's no evidence they 63
didn't.
Four years after they were married, in 1971,
Ms. Denton's father died of small cell lung cancer, the very
type of cancer that Ms. Denton, Linda Denton, would be
diagnosed with 25 years later.
21-year-old adult.
make any effort to try to quit smoking when her dad died
from lung cancer from smoking.
She was a mother of two, yet she did not
In 1971 Linda Denton was a
Mr. Denton told his wife why he was
Two years after that, in 1973, Mr. Denton coughed
He decided then and there he was going to quit,
up blood.
and he put his cigarettes down, and he never again was a
regular smoker.
quitting, and this was the very first time -- it was 1973 --
was the very first time Ms. Denton mentioned anything to him
And what he told you was she didn't
about her quitting.
She said she was
throw her cigarettes away like he did.
just going to cut back, but he admitted that she didn't
really even do that.
Now, this is really important, members of the
After 1973 the next time anyone can specifically
jury.
identify a time that Ms. Denton actually tried to quit
smoking was in the 1985/'86 time period.
Now, in '76
and '77, three or four years after Mr. Denton coughed up
blood, both Ms. Denton's mother and brother were having
breathing problems. 64
Her mother had emphysema.
Her mother told
Ms. Denton that her mother believed that smoking caused
those problems, but Ms. Denton did not try to quit.
Three years later, in 1980, her brother died of
small cell lung cancer, and before he died, he told
Ms. Denton that he believed smoking caused his cancer.
Ms. Denton didn't try to quit.
But
Two years later, in February of 1982, Ms. Denton's
mother died of small cell lung cancer, but Linda Denton
didn't try to quit.
Now, both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you
something, and you really didn't need an expert to tell you
this because it's common sense, and that is if you don't
want to do something and you don't try to do something,
you're not going to.
The Surgeon General's Reports tell you that it's
up to the smoker to make up his or her mind that she wants
to quit, and then you have to truly make an effort to quit.
You have to try.
again, what's your common sense -- that's not something that
anyone can do for you.
things happening, the evidence was Ms. Denton did not try to
quit smoking.
And the Surgeon General tells you --
But the fact is with all of those
Why is it important?
We talked about this in
opening statement.
Why is it important?
Well, it's 65
critically important evidence because Dr. Burns told you
that when a person stops smoking, his or her risk of getting
sick from smoking goes down.
enough and stays quit long enough, the risk essentially
returns to that of a never smoker.
And if he or she quits early
And let's get very specific.
Here's what he
testified about Linda Denton.
Dr. Burns specifically told
you that if Ms. Denton had quit smoking by 1981, 15 years
before she was diagnosed with lung cancer, it is medically
more likely than not she would not have gotten lung cancer.
According to Dr. Burns, she could have smoked up till 1981,
when she was 31 years old, and if she had quit then, she
wouldn't have gotten lung cancer.
Here's the bottom line.
The risk was always
Linda Denton and only Linda Denton
within her control.
could make the decision to stop.
one could do for her.
She'd seen it in her own family, and it was up to her to
make a decision whether to accept that risk or to quit
smoking and avoid that risk.
That was something that no
She knew smoking caused lung cancer.
Now, Mr. Denton told you when he testified the
other day that his wife tried really hard to quit and that
cigarettes really had a hold on her.
evidence?
she never threw her cigarettes away.
The evidence was that before she quit for good,
She never got rid of
But what was the 66
her ashtrays or her lighters.
Dr. Cummings told you that is
one way to gauge whether a person is sincere about quitting.
Ms. Denton never tried nicotine gum.
She never
She was prescribed the
tried hypnosis as a way to quit.
patch once in 1994, but according to Mr. Denton, she only
wore it for a day or two, and she smoked while she had the
patch.
Now, you remember seeing the medical record where
the patch didn't make her feel good?
told you that if a person smokes while they're wearing the
patch, it can make them dizzy, and it can make them
nauseous.
Well, Dr. Cummings
The Seventh-Day Adventists held them.
Ms. Denton never went to a stop-smoking clinic.
You heard from Dr. Cummings, there have been stop-smoking
clinics in Jacksonville and around the country since the
1960s.
Cancer Society held them.
held them.
she never asked her family members or friends for help in
quitting.
The American
The American Lung Association
But Ms. Denton never attended a single one, and
The great thing about juries is we bring our
We bring our life experiences when we listen
common sense.
to the evidence, when we're asked to decide the facts.
And
I think back to the old statement actions speak louder than
words.
I know what people told you that Ms. Denton was 67
thinking, but what was the evidence of her actions?
Where
is the evidence that Ms. Denton really wanted to quit and
really tried to quit, really made a sincere, serious effort
to quit?
You heard from Dr. Cummings that a serious quit
attempt is defined as going without a cigarette for at least
24 hours.
That's a benchmark the Surgeon General uses too.
Well, until she quit for good, it's not clear that
Ms. Denton ever went 24 hours without a cigarette.
Mr. Denton said that she would taper off; she
Sometimes
Sometimes that would last
But the bottom line is it's never -- it
would try to cut back, that she would cut down.
that would last for a day or two.
for a few hours.
wasn't clear that she ever actually put the cigarettes away
for more than a day or even for a day.
And if she didn't,
according to the Surgeon General, the first time she made a
serious quit attempt was after she was diagnosed with cancer
in April of 1996.
The plaintiff has an easy answer for why
Ms. Denton did not quit smoking until she was diagnosed with
cancer.
Addiction, the plaintiff says, prevented Ms. Denton
from quitting.
that's not true.
that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking.
Both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you
Well, plaintiff's own experts told you
Dr. Cummings told you that while it may be hard to 68
quit, he believes that every smoker has the ability to quit
Dr. Burns and
smoking, and that included Linda Denton.
Dr. Cummings told you that millions of heavily addicted
smokers in this country have successfully quit smoking.
According to the Surgeon General, 60 million
When they
Americans have quit, and the vast majority of those have
quit without any kind of professional help.
finally decided it was more important to them not to smoke
than it was to smoke, they put their cigarettes down, and
they became nonsmokers.
of the jury, you've heard from all the experts in whether
someone successfully quits smoking is motivation and
persistence.
The most important factor, members
Now, let me tell you something.
I am not trying
to suggest that it's easy for everyone to quit smoking.
For
some people it is; for some people it's pretty hard, and you
But really, isn't that
gotta try, and you gotta try again.
true about everything we want to accomplish in life?
If you
really want something, sometimes you have to work for it?
And the fact that it's not easy, that doesn't mean that you
don't have to work for it.
You have to
sincerely try, and if you don't, it's not going to happen.
Now, I want to talk for a few minutes about the
You have to try.
role of family support when a smoker wants to quit smoking.
Both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you that a family's 69
support and encouragement is an important factor in whether
a smoker is successful in quitting smoking.
Dr. Burns told
you it is very clear from the literature that family support
is an important aid in helping people successfully stay off
cigarettes.
Dr. Cummings told you that he advises family
members of people who want to quit smoking that the kind of
support you give can either help or hold back his or her
willingness and ability to quit smoking.
members of the jury, Ms. Denton did not get support from her
family.
it.
She did not ask for it, and they didn't volunteer
And the fact is,
Now, Ms. Barnett asked, are defendants blaming her
I am not blaming
Let me be very clear.
I am not criticizing them in any way,
and her family?
Mr. Denton or his family for Ms. Denton's decision to
continue to smoke.
but one of the critical issues in this case is why did Linda
Why didn't she quit earlier?
Denton wait so long to quit?
I mean, she obviously had the information she needed, not
just to make a choice, but to make an informed choice.
I agree that a choice without information is not
really a choice, but she had the information to make an
informed choice.
told you that by 1973, when she first said she ought to
quit, that Ms. Denton understood the dangers.
So why didn't she quit earlier?
Dr. Burns 70 When Mr. Denton testified, I thought he was very
candid, and he admitted that by '71, '72, '73, he admitted
his wife knew smoking caused cancer.
Mr. Denton just said
he thought it really had a hold on her.
on her, and that's why she didn't quit.
Nicotine had a hold
Ms. Denton's family believed that it was her
Her family believed it was
decision to smoke or not smoke.
her choice whether to ask for their help or not, and the
fact that she did not ask the people she loved the most for
help, doesn't that tell you something about whether she
really wanted to quit?
One of the first witnesses was her daughter Karrie
She's Ms. Denton's youngest daughter, and she
Forrester.
specifically testified that she never once, never once,
But more importantly,
asked her mother to quit smoking.
members of the jury, she told you why.
You remember what
she said?
She said that her mother was a grown woman, so
she would make her own decisions.
Robert Benjamin Denton, their oldest boy, he
testified he does not remember anyone in the family
He
expressing any concerns to his mother about her smoking.
He
said that was just not something that they talked about.
also testified that Ms. Denton never referred to herself as
addicted, and until she passed away, no one in the family
said she was addicted. 71
But probably the most telling testimony comes from
He testified that over
Mr. Denton, her husband of 30 years.
the course of their marriage, he never took any steps to
help his wife quit smoking, and he never told her that he
wanted her to quit because he believed that was her choice,
just like it was his choice.
He told you from the witness stand, members of the
jury, that while his wife was alive, he believed it was her
prerogative whether to smoke or not smoke.
while Ms. Denton was alive, her family respected her
decision.
capable of making an informed choice about how she wanted to
live her life.
lawsuit is the first time her family ever second-guessed the
choices that Linda Denton made.
They believed that she was an adult who was
And the fact is, members of the jury, this
The fact is cancer.
Now, the only person who did encourage Ms. Denton
Mary Melvin was a
to try to quit smoking was Mary Melvin.
And you heard
nurse, and she was Ms. Denton's best friend.
that Ms. Melvin told Ms. Denton over 50 times that smoking
could cause cancer and that she should quit.
remember what Ms. Denton said back?
Ms. Denton told her best friend when Ms. Melvin was nagging
her?
"Mind your own business and stop telling me that."
In April of 1996, Ms. Denton was diagnosed with
While she was in the hospital, she told her family
Do you remember what
Do you 72
she wasn't going to smoke anymore.
Her daughters went to
the house and scrubbed the walls and the rest of the house
and got rid of the cigarettes, got rid of the ashtrays.
Ms. Denton came home from the hospital and never smoked
again.
Now, let me say, we've heard testimony that maybe
she smoked a cigarette or two.
I showed the interrogatory
responses to Dr. Cummings where Mr. Denton said that after
April of 1996, Ms. Denton quit smoking.
Now, I do want to talk very briefly about
Plaintiff showed you a few ads, and
cigarette advertising.
Dr. Cummings told you that advertising influenced
Ms. Denton's decisions.
that.
Well, there was no evidence of
Plaintiff showed you some television ads for the
brand Philip Morris and Winston cigarettes.
with their proof is those ads aired before Ms. Denton was a
smoker, and they were for brands she didn't smoke.
I mean,
common sense is they couldn't have influenced her too much
if she didn't buy the product.
The problem
Mr. Denton testified the only ads he remembers
discussing with his wife were some old TV jingles.
Could you put the time line back up?
But the evidence was the cigarette ads were taken
They went off the air in 1971, and then
off TV and radio. 73
beginning in 1972, every print ad had the Surgeon General's
warning right on the ads.
There was no evidence that Ms. Denton ever chose a
Ms. -- Mr. Denton told
cigarette based on an advertisement.
you that she didn't buy cigarettes based on cigarette
coupons or promotions.
Denton told you their mother decided what brands to buy
based on price.
advertising influenced any of Ms. Denton's decisions.
There was simply no evidence that cigarette
Karrie Forrester and Robert Benjamin
Now, Dr. Cummings also talked about youth smoking,
and it's true that Linda Denton started smoking when she was
a teenager.
first person who saw her smoke was her sister when she was
16 years old.
As I've already shown you and told you, the
When Ms. Denton was 16 years old, she'd already
left high school, and she was working at a coil factory.
few months later, she was married, and by the time she was
18 or 19, she was a mother.
but she had already entered adulthood.
of a family, she had adult responsibilities, and she was
making adult choices.
Ms. Denton may have been young,
She was taking care
A
Everyone in her family described Ms. Denton as
strong, smart, and resourceful.
Her husband described her
as her own person and someone who, when they made up their
And
mind to do something, would carry through and do it. 74
while that's true, it is true that Ms. Denton started to
smoke when she was a teenager, she continued to smoke as an
adult, and she made those choices, members of the jury, with
full appreciation that smoking was dangerous and could cause
cancer.
Now, I did tell you in opening statement that if
you looked back over the last 60 years at the millions of
pages of documents written by the thousands of employees at
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, you would see they said
some pretty dumb things, and now that you've had a chance to
see the documents and watch the videos, I'm sure you agree.
But I want you to think about how plaintiff showed
They literally took snippets out of
you that evidence.
context from a couple dozen documents and a couple videos,
and they flashed them on the screen, and they had Dr. Burns
and Dr. Cummings read them to you.
They did not put them in
context.
it, when they were written, or even which company the
documents came from.
evidence that any of that affected Linda Denton in any way.
Much of the time, they didn't tell you who wrote
More importantly, they offered no
And let me give you just one example.
You
remember the video where Helmut Wakeham said people could
die from eating too much applesauce?
strange thing to say, even if it were true.
important point is that until cross-examination, you learned
Well, that's a pretty
But the more 75
for the first time that Ms. Denton could not possibly have
seen that video because the first time it was shown was in
San Francisco in the 1990s.
And you probably thought, why is he asking
Dr. Cummings that dumb question:
hear it, it can't affect you."
"If you don't see it or
And you heard he agreed, "Well, that's right."
Because if you don't see it and you don't hear it, it can't
affect you.
And when Mr. -- when Dr. Burns showed you that,
he knew that Linda Denton didn't see it.
couldn't possibly have affected any of her decisions, but he
didn't tell you that.
cross-examination.
that it did.
Because he wanted you to believe
You didn't learn that until
He knew that it
Why?
When you think about those documents or videos,
the question you should ask is, did plaintiff tie any of
those statements to Linda Denton?
that they affected Ms. Denton in any way?
the jury, if the answer's no, then why did they show them to
you?
Did he offer any evidence
And, members of
I want to talk for a moment about filters and
Dr. Burns told you that filters and
low-tar cigarettes.
low-tar cigarettes were marketed as health cigarettes.
He
said that the defendants deceived Ms. Denton and the public
because, in fact, filtered cigarettes were not any safer. 76 Well, let me make a couple comments.
First,
plaintiff did not show you a single statement where the
tobacco companies told the public that filtered cigarettes
You remember, when I
or low-tar cigarettes were safer.
cross-examined Dr. David Burns, it was the public health
community that told the public that filtered cigarettes and
low-tar cigarettes were safer.
The public health community, including the
American Cancer Society and the Surgeon General of the
United States, specifically told the public that while all
cigarettes are dangerous, if you were unwilling or unable to
quit, you should smoke filtered cigarettes and low-tar
cigarettes.
Do you remember?
I marched through the various Surgeon General's
The public health community and the Surgeon
Reports with Dr. Burns and showed you what the Surgeon
General said.
General made that recommendation based on over 50
epidemiologic studies that showed that smoking filter and
low-tar cigarettes, in fact, reduces the risk of lung
cancer.
I asked Dr. Burns to explain what epidemiological
studies were so we would all have the context when we were
considering the statements that the Surgeon General was
making.
No one ever said filtered cigarettes were safe.
The Surgeon General said they were safer, and plaintiff 77
showed you no evidence that either Philip Morris or
R.J. Reynolds ever said anything to Linda Denton or the
public that caused her to believe that filters were safe or
safer.
Dr. Burns told you he himself believed they were
Dr. Burns now says that the Surgeon
safer up until 1997.
General misinterpreted those studies.
Surgeon General did, or maybe the Surgeon General didn't.
But it was public health who was telling the public to smoke
filters and low-tar, not the tobacco companies.
the public health community was encouraging the tobacco
companies to make filtered cigarettes and low-tar
cigarettes.
Well, maybe the
In fact,
Second, Ms. Denton always smoked filtered
She never told anyone why she smoked filtered
She never said she thought filters were risk
cigarettes.
cigarettes.
In fact, Mr. Denton was smoking filtered cigarettes,
free.
Of course,
Marlboro and Winston, when he coughed up blood.
Ms. Denton understood that filtered cigarettes weren't safe.
Her husband was smoking filtered cigarettes when he coughed
up blood and said, "I'm putting these down.
I'm not smoking
anymore because I don't want to get emphysema or lung cancer
and die."
Now, according to Mr. Denton -- and I showed you
those brand charts.
I know it was tedious, but it was 78
And
important, I thought, for you to understand what she smoked,
when she smoked, when she switched to low-tar.
according to the sworn interrogatories and according to the
evidence, Mr. Denton said that Ms. Denton -- the first time
she talked about low tar was when she switched to Basic, and
he said -- and you saw the charts -- that was 1985.
And he
said he remembers his wife told him she was switching to
Basic because she wanted a lower-tar cigarette.
Well, as we now know, that was a mistake because
Basic was not on the
Basic was not on the market in 1985.
market until 1990, and it wasn't marketed as a low-tar
cigarette.
Dr. Cummings.
ultimately he agreed with that.
He and I had a little back-and-forth, but
It was a discount cigarette.
Remember
The evidence is that Ms. Denton first smoked a
low-tar cigarette, Merit and Cambridge, in 1990, and she
never told Mr. Denton why she switched to Merit or
Cambridge.
something Philip Morris told her.
There's no evidence that she switched because of
Ms. Denton's children testified that their mother
never talked about why she smoked the brands she did, but it
was their understanding that she made her brand decisions
based on price.
You heard that sometimes money was tight,
and so she bought the cigarettes that were cheapest.
So those are the facts.
The question is how do 79
those facts help you decide this case?
Can we go to the verdict form?
And this is
Question 1 and 2, and I put these together.
As Ms. Barnett told you and as the Court will
instruct you, the first thing you have to do -- the first
thing you have to decide is whether Ms. Denton was a member
of the Engle class, and there's two questions that go to
class membership.
The first is, was Linda Denton addicted to
cigarettes containing nicotine?
case is over.
question.
cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her death?
If your answer is yes, you go to the next
And that is, was Linda Denton's addiction to
If your answer is no, the
And we're going to talk about legal cause.
We
talked about it a little bit in opening.
about it because it is a critically important concept in
this case, and it's part of what you need to understand to
decide the issues before you.
Ms. Barnett talked
But first, let me say it's plaintiff's burden to
prove both of these, that she was, in fact, addicted and
that addiction was a legal cause of her death.
Now, let's talk about addiction.
You've heard
about how the term addiction, its definition, has changed
over time.
Until 1988 the Surgeon General said that
cigarettes were not addictive because they were not 80
intoxicating.
In 1988 the Surgeon General adopted a new
definition and said intoxication is no longer required.
They are now addictive.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you it's their
Well, as
opinion that Linda Denton was, in fact, addicted.
you've heard, Dr. Burns has been testifying for 30 years,
and he has never once testified that any plaintiff was not
addicted.
Dr. Cummings has been testifying for 16 years,
and like Dr. Burns, he too has never met a plaintiff who, in
his opinion, was not addicted.
And given their tests for addiction, that's not
surprising because basically both Burns and Cummings rely on
the Heaviness of Smoking Index.
questions:
morning, and how much do you smoke?
When do you have your first cigarette in the
That index asked two
And it's like math.
If you're a daily smoker,
you're addicted, and the sooner you have your first
cigarette and the more cigarettes that you smoke, the more
heavily addicted you are.
Well, since Ms. Denton smoked every day and she smoked in
the morning, they told you that's all we need to know.
She's heavily addicted.
That's the test.
That's it.
I want you to think about that for a minute and
apply it to the way we live our lives.
someone's a coffee drinker and they drink coffee most every
You know, if 81 day and they get up and they have coffee in the morning --
for that matter, if before they go to bed, they set one of
the -- the timer so the coffee will be percolating when you
wake up, that person's a coffee addict.
If they drink more
than a couple cups, you're really addicted.
told you he believes he's addicted to caffeine.
Dr. Cummings
Now, Dr. Kaplan told you that psychiatrists and
mental health professionals use DSM-IV as a diagnostic
criteria to make a diagnosis for a mental disorder,
including addiction, and that's what addiction is under the
DSM.
It is a mental health disorder, and there are a list
of criteria that you consider before you diagnose somebody
with a mental disorder.
He told you, based on those accepted criteria, he
He also told
would not diagnose Ms. Denton as addicted.
you, based on the Surgeon General's definition of compulsive
use, he would not diagnose her as addicted because even
though she was a daily smoker, he did not believe that her
smoking was compulsive, that nicotine compelled her to
smoke.
But let me just be very honest with you.
Whether -- whatever test you choose to apply, I'm not sure
it really matters much whether Ms. Denton was addicted
because the real question you have to decide is, was an
addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of 82
And I gave you an example in opening, and I
her death?
bungled it, and Ms. Barnett talked about it today in
closing.
But I'm going to give you this example because I
want you to understand the difference between cause in fact
and legal cause.
And let me tell you, everyone who ever went to law
school and took torts class struggled with this proximate
It gives us all
cause and legal cause.
nightmares when we think back to that first year and these
concepts, but here's the easiest explanation or example that
I can think of.
What does it mean?
So if I walk out of the courtroom today and I walk
But what's the legal cause?
You have
What happened and
I got hit by a truck, right?
Was I texting and the crosswalk said don't cross, and
Was I in
down the street and I get hit by a truck, what's the cause
in fact of my injuries?
That's just obvious.
to ask why did he get hit by a truck?
why?
I stepped out in front of the truck and got hit?
the crosswalk, and I had the crosswalk, and a guy came
around the corner in the truck and was accelerating, smoking
a cigarette, listening to the radio, not paying attention,
talking on a cell phone, and hit me?
You have to consider
the circumstances.
But that's the difference between cause
in fact and legal cause.
Can we put the instruction up? 83 So here's the instruction:
Addiction is a legal
cause of death if it directly and in natural and continuous
sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing
such death so it can reasonably be said that but for the
addiction, the death would not have occurred.
The rest of the instruction just tells you there
can be more than one legal cause, and that's what counsel
told you in her opening statement.
you'll get.
But that's the language
Bottom line is plaintiff has to show that
Ms. Denton was, in fact, addicted and that her addiction was
so strong and substantial that it can reasonably be said
that but for her addiction, she would not have smoked and
she would not have gotten sick.
In other words, plaintiff
has to prove that if Ms. Denton had not been addicted, she
would have quit smoking, and she would not have gotten sick.
Well, members of the jury, there's just no
The one thing that Burns, Cummings, and
evidence of that.
Kaplan all agreed on is that all smokers, including addicted
smokers, have the ability to quit.
They don't all quit, but
And whether they quit
they all have the ability to quit.
depends on their motivation and persistence.
They have to
want to quit and they have to try to quit.
So why did I tell you about the 60 million
Americans who have quit smoking and -- when Burns and 84
Cummings said they thought the majority of those people were
addicted, some of whom highly addicted?
Well, where was the
evidence that Ms. Denton was any different than those 60
million people?
Cummings told you he believed the vast
majority of the 60 million were addicted.
He told you he
believed the vast majority had had brain changes, but that
didn't stop them from quitting.
Where was the evidence that Ms. Denton was any
They didn't offer a single opinion or single piece
different than the 60 million people who successfully quit?
They brought you two, as they described, world-class
experts.
of evidence on that.
different.
They didn't try to distinguish those numbers
because they couldn't, because they had to concede that
addiction does not prevent you from quitting.
They didn't tell you why she was
Ms. Denton always had the ability to quit smoking,
Unfortunately she did not make up her
members of the jury.
mind to do it until she was diagnosed with lung cancer.
You know, plaintiff argues that Ms. Denton tried
really hard to quit.
could only identify four specific times over their 30-year
marriage, four specific times --
Dr. Cummings, Dr. Cummings admitted he
Could you put the time line up?
-- where Ms. Denton actually tried to quit
1973, she said she should quit, but Mr. Denton
smoking. 85 1985, cuts
1994, she breaks her thumb so
The doctor sees she's a smoker.
says, "Well, she really didn't even cut back."
back for maybe a day or two.
she goes to the doctor.
The doctor says, "Here's a patch."
expensive.
on.
It lasted a day or two.
was the end of it.
Yes, she paid for the patch.
Yes, the patch was
Yes, she put it
Yes, she kept smoking.
It made her dizzy and nauseous.
She took the patch off, and that
And according to Dr. Cummings, the only other time
in that 30-year period was after she was diagnosed with
cancer, when she put her cigarettes down and quit for good.
Can we put the question back on?
Members of the jury, Question 1, you decide what
definition you want to apply with respect to Question 1, and
you decide whether you think, using whatever definition --
and there will be no definition of addiction in the
instructions.
whether you think she was addicted.
when you get to Question 2 -- was Linda Denton's addiction
to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her
death? -- the answer to that question is no.
You decide, using whatever definition,
But let me suggest that
Whether you think she was addicted, there was no
evidence that her -- that but for her addiction, she would
have quit.
All of the evidence was that heavily addicted
smokers can quit smoking.
Heavily addicted smokers do quit 86
I'm not saying it's easy for everybody, but what I
smoking.
am saying is what the Surgeon General said, what Cummings
said, what Burns said, what common sense says, that if you
don't really try, it's not going to happen.
Can we put up the next instruction, please?
Well, if you decide that Ms. Denton was a member
of the Engle class and then the Engle findings apply to
her -- and counsel walked through the Engle findings, and
you're going to have those.
that the Engle jury found.
You can see exactly what it was
And if you decide that she was a class member,
There are still some very
then she gets the benefit of those findings, but that does
not mean the case is over.
important questions that you will have to decide.
first, this question:
It will be on your verdict form:
defendant, whether the negligence on the part of the
defendant was a legal cause of Ms. Denton's death.
And the
Please state -- this is Question 3.
Please state, as to each
Would you show the next one too?
Because I want
to talk about these together.
This is Question 4:
Please state as to each
defendant whether the defendant's placement of cigarettes on
the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous
was a legal cause of Ms. Denton's death.
So you're going to have those two instructions, 87
and if you decide the findings apply, then, as Ms. Barnett
told you, it's already been decided that the defendants were
negligent and placed the defective product on the market.
The instructions won't tell you how we were negligent or why
the product was defective, but they will instruct you what
the findings do.
They will also tell you that there's something you
have to decide, and that is whether our negligence or
whether the placement of the product was a legal cause of
Ms. Denton's lung cancer and death.
that by looking at the evidence in the case.
And you can only decide
So let's go through the evidence, and let's see
how Burns and Cummings criticized us and what they said we
did wrong, and think about whether that's a legal cause,
whether that made a difference to Ms. Denton.
Dr. Burns said that what Philip Morris and
Dr. Burns said that smokers
R.J. Reynolds did wrong was that they confused the message
that smoking was dangerous.
need a consistent, repetitive message that smoking is
Ms. Barnett characterized it, we should have
dangerous.
told her they were dangerous; we should have given her a
fighting chance.
That's what we should have done.
Dr. Burns said that when smokers have that
message, they personalize the risk, and they quit smoking.
Well, members of the jury, there may well be smokers out 88
there who were confused about the risks of smoking, but I
respectfully submit that Ms. Denton was not one of them.
Ms. Denton personalized the risk.
Mr. Denton told you that.
anyone to tell you that because you saw the time line where
she saw and -- the personal relevance of how smoking and
cancer affected her life.
But frankly, you don't need
Burns told you that, and
Dr. Cummings admitted that Ms. Denton had an
increasing awareness of the risks of smoking as she watched
The bottom line is Ms. Denton
her family die of cancer.
personally understood that smoking caused cancer when she
watched her dad, her brother, and her mother die of cancer.
And since -- Dr. Burns testified that this all
Dr. Burns testified that if
happened before 1982.
Ms. Denton would have quit smoking by 1981, she would not
have gotten cancer.
Morris or R.J. Reynolds said or did not say was a legal
cause of Ms. Denton's cancer.
needed.
personal message that smoking is dangerous, and if you
believe Dr. Burns, had she acted on it, she wouldn't have
gotten sick.
Ms. Denton had a consistent, repetitive, impactful,
There's no question that nothing Philip
She had the information she
Now, Dr. Cummings had a different theory as to why
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds were negligent and why their
products were defective.
Cummings testified that Philip 89
Morris and RJR designed their cigarettes to make them harder
to quit smoking.
that our cigarettes were rigged to make it harder to quit.
What counsel told you this morning was
And Cummings told you specifically, on direct
He talked about reconstituted tobacco.
He talked about
He talked
He talked about the companies' efforts to
examination, why he believed that was true.
filters.
about additives.
alter pH, and he said on direct examination those design
features made it harder to quit.
cross-examination, Dr. Cummings admitted that that was not
true.
But then on
You remember, I asked him about his testimony
about filters and additives and pH, and I reminded him that
he told you on direct examination that those design features
made cigarettes harder to quit.
question:
current cigarettes are more addictive than the cigarettes
from the 1950s, do you?"
And he said no.
"But, Dr. Cummings, you don't believe that
And then I asked him this
they're more addictive.
He believes there's no change.
He said no, he does not believe
He believes they're as addictive.
On cross-examination, Dr. Cummings took it all
He admitted that none of those design changes made
back.
cigarettes more dangerous or harder to quit, including
additive-free cigarettes. 90 You remember I asked him:
"Are additive-free
cigarettes -- do additive-free cigarettes cause cancer?
"What do you mean by additive-free?
"I mean additive-free cigarettes.
"Well, a filter can be an additive.
"Are additive-free -- do additive-free cigarettes
cause cancer?
"Yes, they do.
"Are additive-free cigarettes addictive?
"Yes, they are.
"Is there any evidence that any cigarette is more
dangerous than any other?
"No, there isn't.
"Is there any evidence that any cigarette is more
addictive than any other?"
According to Dr. Cummings, "No, there isn't."
And the reason why cigarettes are addictive,
because they have nicotine in them, and some people who
smoke will get addicted to nicotine.
Remember, I asked Dr. Cummings, "You agree Mother
He fought with me on that.
Nature put nicotine in tobacco."
I had to impeach him with his prior testimony, but the
bottom line is if it has nicotine in it, it can be
addictive.
And any cigarette where you burn tobacco can
cause cancer because it's the leaves of the tobacco, it's 91
the tobacco itself that when it's burned creates carcinogens
or cancer-causing agents and then causes cancer in some
people.
You heard Burns tell you that of regular smokers,
15 percent of regular smokers will get lung cancer from
smoking.
line is --
85 percent won't, but 15 percent will.
So bottom
THE COURT:
MR. COFER:
THE COURT:
MR. COFER:
So bottom line is Cummings told you on direct
Mr. Cofer?
50 minutes?
That's your mark.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
examination they did all these things to make it harder to
quit.
I listened to him say that, and I've got to tell
you, I was just amazed because I had his prior testimony,
And so when I cross-examined
and I knew that wasn't true.
him, I showed him, and he admitted it.
He admitted that it
doesn't matter whether Linda Denton smoked cigarettes from
the '50s or the '60s or the '70s or the '80s.
None is more
dangerous than any other.
design features did not make any difference.
reason --
None is more addictive.
The
And for that
Let's go back to No. 3, please.
The question:
Please state as to each defendant 92
whether the negligence on the part of the defendant was a
legal cause of Ms. Denton's death.
The answer is no.
She did.
Burns said that the problem was she didn't have a
Cummings
single, consistent, repetitive message.
said the problem was -- and counsel said -- that we rigged
the cigarettes to make them more addictive.
admitted on cross-examination that was not true.
to Question 3, based on the evidence, I respectfully
suggest, members of the jury, is no.
Cummings
The answer
Please put up 4.
And for the very same reason -- please state as to
each defendant whether the defendant's placement of
cigarettes on the market that were defective and
unreasonably dangerous was a legal cause of her death.
the very same reason, the answer is no.
For
Let's go to the next one, fraudulent concealment.
Please
And we can go through this fairly quickly.
state as to each defendant whether Ms. Denton relied to her
detriment -- not did the company say something or not say
something.
concealment or omission of material fact by the defendants
concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking
and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her
death.
Did Ms. Denton rely to her detriment on a
I'm not going to task your patience by going 93 Think of the time line.
Think
Think of the admission
through the evidence again.
of all the information that she had.
that Dr. Burns made, that she knew by '73.
Mr. Denton told you, that she knew by 1973.
suggest that the evidence is overwhelming, members of the
jury, that the answer to this question is no.
Think of what
I respectfully
Could you put up the next one?
go to 6, No. 6, please, question No. 6.
No, actually just
There we go.
This is the same question except it asks whether
we agreed to conceal and whether that was material --
whether she materially relied, detrimentally relied.
the same reason, members of the jury, the answer is no.
had the information she needed to make an informed choice.
There was nothing anyone else could have told her that was
more impactful than what she experienced in her life.
For
She
Now, let's talk about comparative fault.
Would you put Question 7 up?
If you decide that Ms. Denton and the defendants
are responsible for Ms. Denton's death, then you can assign
how much each party's responsible.
something so there's no confusion.
this question, you have to first decide that she was a class
member, that addiction was a legal cause.
You have to then
decide that the negligence or the strict liability or the
You
concealment were legal causes, or you never get here.
But let me tell you
Before you ever get to 94
don't just jump to 7 and, you know, split the baby.
Plaintiff has to prove all of those elements before you ever
get here.
And if you do get here, this is your opportunity
to decide, based on all the facts and the evidence, how
would you allocate responsibility.
Ms. Barnett tell you the plaintiff admits that Linda Denton
was partially responsible for causing her lung cancer.
So
what does that mean?
does that mean?
No witness told you that, but what
Now, you heard
It can only mean that plaintiff admits that
Ms. Denton had the information she needed to understand that
smoking caused cancer and had the ability to quit smoking in
time to avoid her injury, or how could she be responsible at
all?
responsible is an admission that she understood the risks
and had the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid her
injury.
The very fact they told you that she's partially
And based on that admission, if you get this far,
I respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that with Linda
Denton, you put 100 percent because plaintiff is telling you
that she knew the risks, and she had the ability to quit.
Now I want to talk just briefly about damages.
No. 8, please?
Question 8 asks you to award the amount of damages 95
You heard Ms. Barnett suggest
that the Denton family suffered for the loss of
companionship and protection as a result of Ms. Denton's
injury and death.
$15 million.
that.
you get this far and you decide that Mr. Denton and his
family is entitled to recover.
Frankly, I don't even know what to say about
There's really nothing I can tell you to help you if
What we do know is, by all accounts, that Linda
They were married for 30 years,
Denton was quite a lady.
That doesn't change the fact that
and so he's remarried.
she's gone, and I'm sure that he and her family miss her
every day.
not going to suggest any number.
you're going to have to decide on your own.
So if you get this far, members of the jury, I'm
That's just something that
Punitive damages, Question 9.
Question 9 asks
whether you find by clear and convincing evidence -- and
that's a much higher standard; you have a jury instruction
on it -- that punitive damages are warranted against either
Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds in this case.
Now, let me talk for a minute about punitive
damages so you know what it is you are to decide.
not being asked to decide the amount of punitive damages, if
any.
evidence, plaintiff has shown you that he is entitled to
recover punitive damages, that Mr. Denton and his family is
The issue is whether, by clear and convincing
You're 96
entitled to recover punitive damages.
Don't spend one minute thinking about amount.
The
question before you is entitlement, and as counsel told you,
if you get that far, if you make that decision, there will
be another phase of the trial.
You'll have closing arguments.
the issue is have they shown, under the law, that they're
entitled to it.
You'll hear evidence.
You can decide amount.
Here
Well, what you'll see when you look at the
It must be explicit.
instructions, the instructions define clear and convincing
evidence as a much higher standard of proof.
precise.
confusion and of such a weight that produces a firm belief
or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at
issue.
It must be lacking in
It must be
We're not talking more likely than not.
We're not
We're talking a
talking the greater weight of the evidence.
And the reason why is because you
much higher standard.
will have already compensated the Denton family for their
loss.
The issue you'll be asked to decide is whether they
get more money to punish the defendants and to deter the
defendants.
Now, let me say -- and the Court will instruct
When you decide
you -- this case is about Linda Denton.
whether punitive damages are appropriate, you can only 97
You've heard about harm
consider the harm to Linda Denton.
to other people, but this is not a class action anymore.
Other people can bring their lawsuits.
witnesses that some have.
with respect to those claims.
and whether -- based on conduct to her, whether her family's
entitled to get punitive damages.
Other juries will decide that
This is about Linda Denton
You heard from the
I respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that
based on the evidence, that defendants did nothing to harm
Ms. Denton other than selling cigarettes.
evidence that we fooled her in any way.
that she lacked the information to make an informed
decision.
the 60 million people who quit smoking.
There's no evidence she was any different than
There's no evidence
There's no
One last verdict form, No. -- the next one.
This
is 10, and I put 5 and 10 together because I think it's just
easier for you to see.
If you answered
yes to Question 5 -- and that's the concealment -- please
state when, by a preponderance of the evidence, the reliance
occurred.
Question 10 says:
Now, let me make very clear because I think
counsel may have misspoke in her closing.
these events happened.
relied on them and when she did.
We believe, members of the
jury, for all the reasons I told you and basically based on
The issue is whether Ms. Denton
It's not whether 98 the time line, the answer is no to Question 5.
But if you disagree and if you think that she did
rely to her detriment at some point in time, I would
respectfully suggest it certainly was not after May 5th,
1982.
By that time, here -- her dad had died from lung
cancer; her mom had died from lung cancer; her brother had
died from lung cancer; Mr. Denton had coughed up blood.
Dr. Burns admitted that she knew by then.
admitted that she knew by then.
Mr. Denton
So if you get this far, I suggest that the
evidence is overwhelming that the answer to (b), 10(b) --
did she rely after May 5th, 1982 -- is no.
You just check
that no.
Please put up 11.
And this is the very same thing.
It goes:
Did
you -- did you rely on an agreement?
And I know that throwing all these legal at you
right now is difficult, but when you see the instructions
and you think about the evidence, it will make more sense.
But for the very same reasons, the answer to 11(b)
There's no question that by May 5th, '82 -- before
is no.
May 5th, '82, she knew everything she needed to know.
Okay.
Let me just say this on behalf of
everybody.
have, which is the greatest system in the history of the
We could not have the system of justice that we 99
world, if we didn't have jurors who were willing to take
time out of their lives to come in and help parties settle
disputes.
I
know that we have six in you.
All we ask for are fair and unbiased jurors.
On behalf of my client, on behalf of Reynolds, I
believe also on behalf of Mr. Denton and his family, we want
to thank you for your service.
We want to thank you for how
diligent you've been, and we look -- we appreciate the
opportunity to have presented our case.
much for being so patient.
And thank you very
