MS. BARNETT:
Good morning.
Folks, in a little while you're going to go back
to the jury room to deliberate, and when you go you'll have
three jobs.
The first job is to answer the questions on the
verdict form.
The second job is to make sure that everybody
on the jury carefully follows the instructions on the law
that the Court gives you.
And the third job is, before you
answer any of those questions, to explain to each other why
you feel the way you feel about the answers to certain
questions.
And so I want to spend my time this morning
hopefully giving you some ways to do that.
Denton 14
we sued.
Now, I told you at the beginning the reasons why
There were four reasons.
The first reason is because the cigarette
companies knew their products were dangerous and deadly, and
they chose to lie about it.
It started in 1954, long before
Linda Denton ever picked up her first cigarette, and there's
been no witness to come in here and say, "Oh, that's not
true.
clear.
They created a doubt
where there was no doubt, a controversy where there was no
controversy, even though their own scientists told them that
cigarettes caused cancer.
That's not what happened."
They lied about cigarettes.
It's been perfectly
And not only that, they knew people were worried
about cancer, that people were worried about the health
risks, and so in addition with the lies and the
psychological crutch that they provided, they also gave the
illusion of filtration, cigarettes that were supposed to be
healthier and safer but which weren't.
And we know Linda Denton started on filtered
cigarettes that were supposed to help her breathe easy,
smoke clean.
And when she moved on and tried to quit and
was unable to quit, she tried health cigarettes, the Doral
cigarettes made by RJR, the Merit, Cambridge Ultra Lights,
all those cigarettes made by Philip Morris.
So we know those things happened, and that's why 15
we're suing.
have given her a fighting chance.
They should have told the truth.
They should
And I want to remind you, if I could for a
second -- I'm going to turn this board around.
If I can stand here for just a moment, Your Honor.
The peak is where the cigarette -- the word was
The sales went
getting out about cigarettes causing cancer.
They met, they got together, they decided they had to
down.
do something about it, and what they did not do was tell the
truth and give people the choice like it is today.
Instead
they launched this conspiracy, and one of the people they
caught at the top, over there, is when Linda Denton started
to smoke.
And just look at how different that line would be
It would be like things
And I think it's important to remember there's
if the conspiracy hadn't happened.
are today.
two generations, at least two generations:
on this side of that curve, a lot of us here, born on the
other side where people knew or the cigarette companies
weren't allowed to deny and to market phony cigarettes.
that's the first reason.
Ms. Denton, born
So
And as I said, the second reason is because these
cigarette companies meticulously studied nicotine and
addiction, and they used that information to rig the
cigarettes, to make sure that they would get people hooked, 16 25
They set product specifications to make
that they would keep people hooked, that they would make
sure they -- they knew how low they could go in their
nicotine levels.
sure they were designed for addiction.
like chopped-up tobacco just rolled up and sold.
designer drug, made to be the perfect nicotine delivery
device.
And so they weren't
It was a
The third reason that we sued, as I told you, is
because these cigarette companies knew if they wanted to
have long-term addicted customers who would stick with them,
their best shot was with kids because kids' brains are
forming.
Kids have less ability to understand risks.
Children are more susceptible to addiction.
And so they studied very carefully, very
carefully, the smoking behaviors and habits of children, and
then they used that knowledge to design marketing and also
cigarette designs to get those kids, including menthol,
which made it easier to inhale, to get more nicotine in your
lungs.
And the final fourth reason that we're suing is
because the cigarette companies refuse to take any
responsibility, any responsibility at all, for what they
did.
And I want to talk for a minute about choice and
freedom.
Denton 17
I apologize.
I want to talk for a minute about choice and
freedom because we've heard an awful lot about choice and
freedom in this courtroom.
and people should be free to make choices.
companies made a choice.
cancer, and they made a choice to sell them, to sell
cigarettes they knew would kill.
They knew their cigarettes caused
And, of course, choice is fine,
The cigarette
You heard them testify up on the video screen.
They made that choice.
They knew they'd kill one in three out of their customers,
440,000 people a year, and they knew that the cigarettes
Now, they can make
were addictive.
that choice, and nobody is here trying to throw them in jail
for what they did.
Nobody is here trying to put them out of
business for the choices that they made, but we all know
when you make a choice, you have to accept responsibility
for the choices you make.
We learned that as kids.
We've asked you up front, from the first day
And Mr. Denton, Mr. Denton's family, they're
willing to accept responsibility for the choices Linda
Denton made.
Look at her
of this trial, yes, hold her accountable.
The difference is the cigarette
choices and decisions.
companies, they want to do anything other than own up to
what they did, anything other than take responsibility for
the choices they made. 18
Now, I want to talk to you about the verdict form.
But before the verdict form, I want to talk a little bit
about the instructions the Court is going to give you.
The first one I want to talk about is instruction
No. 9, if we could pull -- or put up No. 9.
It talks about the burden of proof.
And it's
important.
It says in this case, it's our responsibility to
prove every essential part of the claims by a preponderance
of the evidence.
It gives
you an explanation for that fancy term, preponderance of the
evidence.
You can't see that highlighting.
That's not the way most of us talk.
A preponderance of the evidence simply means an
amount of evidence that's enough to persuade you the
plaintiff's claim is more likely true than not.
we've been talking about all along, more likely right than
wrong.
more likely right than wrong?
the issues that you have to decide.
Have we shown you that where -- what we're saying is
And that applies to all of
That's what
And it's okay if you have doubts.
You can have
The question is, at
all the doubts you want on both sides.
the end of the day, when you weigh all the evidence you
heard, if you believe that we've shown we're more likely
right than wrong, even just by a little bit, you would
decide that question in our favor.
You may take that down. 19
So if during deliberation someone says, "I'm just
I have doubts about that," remember, doubts are
Have
The question is more likely right than wrong.
not sure.
okay.
we shown you what we needed to show you?
Now, the verdict form, question No. 1 on the
We're going to put it up there so you can see
verdict form.
what it looks like, but the question is, was Linda Denton
addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
You heard -- right.
You heard from Dr. Burns, who
has had a career in the field of understanding smoking,
smoking behavior, cessation attempts, addiction.
a career working in that field.
evidence, and he determined, yes, yes, more likely than not
she was addicted.
In fact, he said way beyond that, he was
certain she was addicted.
And he looked at the
He's spent
You also heard from Dr. Mike Cummings.
He's
another man from a different perspective, but he spent his
life working with people trying to stop smoking, looking at
the way cigarettes are designed to addict and to keep people
addicted, and he said the same thing.
Yes, more likely than
not she was addicted.
He
was certain.
In fact, he went way beyond that.
You heard from the family too.
Linda Denton
smoked one-and-a-half or more packs of cigarettes a day.
That means 30 cigarettes or more a day.
With ten puffs per 20
cigarette, that's 300 puffs on a cigarette a day, 300 doses
of nicotine to her brain a day, every day, for more than 30
years.
She smoked first thing in the morning.
She smoked
She had withdrawal when she
in the middle of the night.
She smoked even when money was tight, and
tried to quit.
she even spent hard-earned money to buy the nicotine patch
when it first came out and to try that to try to quit.
She smoked after her parents died and after her
brother died from lung cancer, and she smoked after she had
been diagnosed with cancer and pumped full of chemotherapy
and radiation.
That's
not smoking just for the taste of it or the fun of it.
That is the picture of addiction.
The cigarette companies want you to believe she
just smoked because she liked it.
death wish and her choice was, "I choose cancer."
no evidence to think that at all.
She apparently had a
There's
She was not a reckless woman.
She wasn't crazy.
She was a married mother with four kids,
She had every -- every reason to
She wasn't wild.
and she loved her family.
want to live, and she did want to live, which is why she
struggled and tried to quit smoking and why, when she wasn't
able to succeed, she went to what she was told were the
safer cigarettes.
Now, the only evidence besides what the family 21
said, what you know about the facts, and what Dr. Burns and
Dr. Cummings said is the paid psychiatrist that the
defendants brought in here to testify to you yesterday.
Now, he has never written anything in this area.
done any research or gotten any grants.
He doesn't work
with the Surgeon General's Office or the National Cancer
Institute.
He's never
And he told you less than 1 percent of his work,
of his clinical work, is spent in treating people solely for
nicotine addiction.
just 60 percent of his work because 40 percent of his work
is spent coming and testifying in cases.
And his clinical work, remember, is
And he is the same man who used to come and tell
juries cigarettes aren't addictive, just like the CEOs of
the cigarette companies did.
Now there's an Engle finding
cigarettes are addicted, so now he has a new definition, and
he wants you to apply a definition which is a mental
disorder.
a mental disorder before you meet his definition of
addiction.
used to say was bad, but now he's adopted it.
You have to be diagnosable by a psychiatrist with
And the definition he's using, by the way, he
There's simply no comparison, no comparison
between the weight and depth and breadth of the experience
and knowledge of Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings versus what
Dr. Kaplan came in here and testified to you to say. 22
So certainly, certainly, it's more likely right
than wrong, when you weigh all the evidence, she was
addicted.
possibly explain how she would smoke in the face of such
tragedy in her own family?
She was addicted to cigarettes.
What else could
The second question on the verdict form -- can you
just slide it up so we can just see one question?
in or whatever.
Zoom it
Did -- was Linda Denton's addiction to cigarettes
Now, that's
containing nicotine a legal cause of her death?
a little complicated, so I want to talk to you for a minute
about instruction No. 11, which explains legal cause.
Mr. Cofer talked about this at the beginning, but I want to
make sure you remember instruction No. 11, which says --
This is the legal cause
At the bottom.
Okay.
instruction.
The number's -- No. 10, perhaps.
What it says is this, ladies and gentlemen --
you'll get a chance to read it and hear it, so we might not
be able to put it up -- addiction is a legal cause of death
if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence
produces or contributes substantially to producing such
death so it can reasonably be said that but for the
addiction, death would not have occurred.
In order to be regarded as a legal cause of death,
addiction need not be the only cause.
What I'm reading is 23
on the page before that.
But in order to be regarded as a
legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause.
Addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it
operates in combination with the act of another, some
natural cause, or some other cause, if the addiction
contributes substantially to producing a death.
You can take it down.
That's all right.
And so the question for you is more likely right
than wrong, did addiction substantially contribute to her
death?
Mr. Cofer gave you.
jury instruction is saying.
And I want to go back to the truck example that
It's important to understand what this
The law recognizes that sometimes multiple things
So you could be in an intersection
cause things to happen.
and be hit on one side by a truck and another side by a car,
and the law recognizes both those things can substantially
contribute.
And,
in fact, if you're jaywalking while you get hit, that can be
a third cause.
together and lead to the death, the outcome, the injury, and
that's why this instruction is written that way, because the
law recognizes that's life.
Both those things can cause your death.
There can be many causes that all work
That's the way it works.
None of -- and so in this case, if you think that
Ms. Denton's parents contributed to her smoking, her
friends, her family; this tolerance of society contributed 24
to her smoking; if you think her choices and decisions and
her failure to succeed contributed, we admit that about her.
Those things are all fine to believe.
They don't change the
question here, which is simply did addiction also play a
role?
And Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns both explained to
you in great detail how it is that addiction causes
someone --
You can take that down.
-- to smoke over and over and over again, because
they have to keep their nicotine receptors full and how
addiction keeps someone from being able to succeed when they
try to quit and how only 5 percent of quit attempts actually
succeed.
before they succeed.
It takes people many, many, many times to try
And what Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings told you is
covered exactly in the Surgeon General's Reports.
Exhibit 237 is the 2010 Surgeon General's Report, which says
specifically:
"Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason
that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this
persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases."
Even -- if you remember, even the Reynolds rep on
Nicotine is a fundamental
But that's
the video admitted part of that.
reason.
what the Surgeon General concluded, and it's also in the
He wouldn't say the fundamental reason. 25
1989 Surgeon General's Report, which is Exhibit 572, which
has two parts.
"Two additional factors make smoking among young
people a preeminent public health concern:
initiation of smoking and nicotine addiction.
factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free
choice."
the age of
These two
So you heard from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns.
You
have the reports of the Surgeon General on this.
cigarette --
And the
You can take that down.
The cigarette companies didn't bring in a single
There was no scientist or
expert to tell you otherwise.
epidemiologist or addiction expert to tell you, "No,
addiction wasn't the cause.
all of her cancer."
argued this definition of cause, which is --
Addiction wasn't the cause at
They just argued this -- this weak --
If you could pull our slide up.
And you heard this in the depositions too, "Now,
They have to
you have to admit addiction causes smoking."
admit that, and they have to admit smoking causes cancer, so
those things they are.
But what they say is, "Well, that --
we can't link the two together.
Addiction causes smoking
and smoking causes cancer, but we don't see how addiction
That's not based on
causes smoking, which causes cancer." 26 25
That's not based on anything.
science.
witness to come in here and tell you that.
There's been no
You can take that down.
And certainly the arguments of counsel are
And believe you me, if there was a scientist
incredibly persuasive, but they're just arguments; they're
not witnesses.
or a doctor or a public health official who would come in
here and tell you that was true, they would have come in
here and told you that.
So when you're weighing the evidence, just
remember the question is more likely right than wrong, did
addiction substantially contribute?
It didn't have to be
the only cause.
And the answer, we think, is way more than this, but
death?
what you have to decide is did we prove it more likely right
than wrong?
Did it substantially contribute to her
And if, during deliberation, someone says, "Well,
I just don't see how addiction caused it because she chose
to smoke.
She could have quit.
harder," remind them we agree.
should be held accounted too, and there's a place on the
verdict form we'll talk about, where you -- you will decide
what percent of fault are Linda Denton's decisions and
choices; what percent of fault are the cigarette companies'
It's a
decisions and choices.
She should have tried
We agree her decisions
That's not a cause question.
Denton 27
question of figuring, out of the many causes, how do you
weigh them among each other?
And when you're thinking about that question,
remember, Ms. Denton already paid the worst possible price
she could pay for her choices and decisions.
and to die knowing it was the cigarettes that she smoked
that killed her, to know that she was leaving behind a
family, kids she wouldn't see grow up and get married and
her grandkids.
a husband she dearly loved.
She had to know that she was leaving behind
She had to die
And when she died, she didn't even know the things
that we have heard and learned in this courtroom about how
the cigarettes were rigged to make it hard for her to quit
and that the healthy cigarettes she thought were going to
protect her from risk, they weren't any safer, and the
cigarette companies knew.
Now, the only other thing I've heard from the
defendants is, over and over again, millions of people quit.
Millions of people have quit.
Millions of people have quit.
How does that help you answer this question on the verdict
form about whether her addiction caused or contributed to
You don't know
her lung cancer?
anything about those millions of people that they talk
about.
percent of the people who try to quit.
We don't know how many of them relapsed, like 95
We don't know how
It doesn't help you. 28
many of them were addicted.
Everyone's brain is
Nicotine has -- some people smoke and never get
Some people smoke a few and don't get addicted.
And it's true, as it was explained by Dr. Cummings
in great detail and also by Dr. Burns, it works differently.
Everybody's body is different.
different.
addicted.
Some people smoke a lot, but it's easy for them to quit.
Everyone is different.
So those millions of people, it's
This is the case of Linda Denton and these
not their case.
It's also not the case of the 400,000
cigarette companies.
people who die every year from smoking or the more than 40
million people today in the United States who smoke, many of
whom want to quit.
And remember too, their own expert found -- he did
So
tell you this -- Linda Denton had a persistent desire to
quit and unsuccessful -- unsuccessful efforts to quit.
the only evidence you've heard is that it was addiction that
substantially contributed to her lung cancer.
In fact, the
only evidence you heard was it was addiction that caused her
lung cancer, that led her to light her cigarettes 30 times a
day every day, to keep her nicotine receptors full, and it
was addiction that kept her from succeeding when she tried
to quit.
More likely right than wrong, the answer to
Question 2 should be yes, it was a substantial contributing 29
factor, a legal cause.
And the last piece of this is whether the smoking
actually caused cancer, because if she had cancer from
something else, then the addiction wouldn't lead to it.
Dr. Burns and then her own treating doctor, Dr. Pitocchi,
came in here, one by video, and told you very clearly,
"Yeah, her cancer was caused by smoking.
whatsoever about that."
No doubt
And
And they explained -- they brought up -- if
someone brings up in deliberations all these questions to
Mr. Denton about Linda's family and what diseases they had
and when they were diagnosed and when they passed away from
those diseases, if you think, "Well, maybe that means she
would have had cancer anyway," remember Dr. Burns testified
there's no evidence whatsoever she had any genetic
predisposition.
And Dr. Pitocchi said the same thing.
Her other family
The explanation is simple.
members were smokers, and smoking is deadly.
people die, and her family just proves it.
One in three
So, again, question No. 2, more likely right than
wrong that addiction caused her disease, yes, it did.
Now, once you make those findings, I need you to
pull out instruction No. 11.
Engle findings, and these are the rules.
those findings, these rules --
Instruction No. 11 are the
Once you make 30
You can zoom out.
These rules apply to the case.
These rules apply
just as if you had sat and deliberated on each and every one
of them.
And if you remember, at the beginning of the
trial, the judge asked, "You may have to apply facts.
may not have heard all of the evidence, but you have to
apply them just as if you made the findings yourself," and
So that's
everybody said, "We can do that, no problem."
Many important decisions have been
where this comes in.
made, and your job now -- those are the rules of the road
for the case.
They apply.
You
So the next question on the verdict form is
Please state, as to each defendant, whether
question No. 3:
the negligence on the part of the defendant was a legal
cause of Ms. Denton's death.
I'm not going to read it to you again, but you'll
The legal cause here, legal
It includes there may be multiple causes, and
hear it in the instruction.
cause, legal cause, is the same in each one of these
questions.
you just have to look at whether or not it was a substantial
contributing factor to her death.
whether more likely right than wrong is it a substantial
contributing factor to her death.
And the question is
So we already know -- 31
If you'll put the Engle findings up again.
-- what you don't have to decide --
No. 7 -- No. -- not No. 7.
No. 6.
-- that all of the Engle defendants were
It's already been decided.
negligent.
They were negligent.
It's not a discussion you need to or should have, whether or
not they were negligent in what they did.
But negligence just means failing to use
reasonable care to avoid harm to others, not needlessly
endangering others.
determined they did it.
So the only question you have is
whether that negligence substantially contributed to her
death, more likely than not.
That's what it means.
It's been
And we know from their documents that before she
picked up her first -- their first cigarettes, her first
cigarettes, R.J. Reynolds was carefully studying the smoking
behavior and patterns of young children.
their research to design and market their cigarettes to
young children, including menthol, making it easier to
breathe.
They were using
And it worked.
They got Linda Denton smoking as a
Does it really matter if she was 13
She was a child.
13-, 14-, 15-year-old.
or 16 when she started?
expert told you that's a time when people's brains are still
forming.
Children are incredibly vulnerable to addiction.
And their own 32
It's in the Surgeon General's Report, and you heard it from
Dr. Cummings, but you even heard it from Dr. Kaplan.
And we also know from their own documents that the
cigarette companies --
You can take that down.
-- that the cigarette companies, long before Linda
Denton was born, knew their cigarettes caused cancer.
They
met to talk about how to deal with it, and they decided to
launch this conspiracy of doubt and denial and lies, and
they worked together hand in hand to spread doubt where
there was no doubt, to make a fake controversy.
And as I said, you can look at the chart where the
line was going and what a huge impact it had, and Linda
Denton got picked up right there at the peak of it.
Dr. Burns explained that these denials and lies were
designed to keep people smoking.
addicted smokers to keep them from stopping, and they never
stopped.
once during Linda Denton's entire life.
They never stopped the denials and lies, never
They were designed for
It worked.
She did just exactly what they wanted
And we also know that at the same time they were
her to do.
denying the hazards, they were worried people would quit
because they were scared about the hazards, and so they
decided to market the illusion of filtration, filter
cigarettes. 33
The very first cigarette Ms. Denton started on was
supposed to help you breathe easy and smoke clean, and it
had a filter.
And she kept smoking filter cigarettes, and
she moved on to the ones that were supposed to be healthier
and better for her, the ones that cigarette companies knew
weren't any healthier or better.
But they made sure that
she never knew, and it worked.
She did just exactly what
they wanted.
And we know too from their own documents -- and
there's been no denial of this; no witness has come in here
to tell you otherwise -- they studied how to make cigarettes
more addictive, how to make sure they enhanced that nicotine
kick with all that pH and ammonia and free nicotine and
stuff.
They worked very hard to understand it, and they
used it to make them get people hooked, to make them easy to
inhale, to make them -- keep people hooked, to make sure it
had at least enough, the minimum, how low can we go
nicotine, to keep people hooked and to make it so it was
hard to quit because they had to keep the exit door closed.
Is it more likely right than wrong that the
negligence that's already been found was the legal cause of
her death?
We
agree one of the factors are her choices and decisions, and
we're going to get to that, where you decide how to divide
Could there be other factors?
Yes.
Sure. 34 25
But certainly their acts, their negligence, more
that up.
likely right than wrong, caused her injury.
And I want to talk about R.J. Reynolds for a
It was her first
minute because Linda Denton smoked Belair.
cigarette, and she also smoked Doral in the '80s, her son
testified, which is another R.J. Reynolds cigarette.
You
might remember those Doral ads we showed you with those
fancy filter things that were showing you how safe and
better those Doral cigarettes were.
When you're thinking about how long she smoked
Belair and how long she smoked Doral, I think it's important
to look at instruction No. 2, which has to do with evidence.
And it says --
Yeah, if we can just go down to the --
-- direct evidence is testimony of one who asserts
actual knowledge of a fact, such as an eyewitness.
Circumstantial evidence is proof of a chain of facts and
circumstances tending to prove or disprove any fact in
dispute.
The law makes no distinction between the weight
you may give to either direct --
Oh, just take it down.
sorry.
I'll just read them.
I'm
The law makes no distinction between the weight
you may give to either direct or to circumstantial evidence.
Denton 35
So there's direct evidence about her smoking Doral
and about her smoking the Belair cigarettes, and
Mr. Denton -- how many times did you see that chart from
Mr. Denton's sworn interrogatory responses that she smoked
Belair from '65 to '67?
smoking.
That's a couple of years of
He met her.
He fell in love with her.
She had been smoking.
They
She was an
talked about her smoking.
experienced smoker.
menthol cigarettes she'd been smoking and was looking for a
change.
She was tired of how much of the
So the person who knows her best, who can tell you
best how long she'd been smoking the Belair, is Bobby
Denton, and you know what he thinks and what he said, and it
got put on the screen a hundred times, a couple of years.
And there's been, by the way, no evidence to the contrary.
Nobody came in here and said, "Oh, no, it was some other
There's
manufacturer's cigarettes that she started with."
absolutely no evidence to weigh to the contrary of what he
has said.
And Dr. Burns was very clear.
Each and every
cigarette that a person smokes contributes to the cancer,
each and every cigarette it takes for the assault on the
lungs.
And it's amazing what a miracle the body is and how
we were created to have all these defenses, the hairs that 36
go across and then the cells that flake away, and you have
to go through all of these to get down in and cause cancer,
and it takes all of the cigarettes to contribute.
So Dr. Burns testified quite clearly all the
And he said something else, especially the
cigarettes, including her first cigarettes, contributed to
her cancer.
Belair, because that contributed, at the very beginning, to
her addiction.
cigarette causes and sustains and increases the addiction in
the nicotine receptors in the brain, and those are
cigarettes she was smoking as a young child.
Every cigarette causes the cancer.
Every
Now, when you get to the fault apportionment,
you'll decide how much do you think it was one person -- the
RJR cigarettes, how much do you think it was Philip Morris
So that is a fair question to ask, and you'll
cigarettes.
be asked that question.
But the only evidence you heard in
this courtroom was, yeah, the RJR cigarettes, Belair and
Doral, contributed substantially to her lung cancer.
And believe me, folks, if there was a witness, a
scientist, a doctor who was going to come in here and tell
you otherwise, you would have heard it.
opportunity, and you didn't.
They had every
And this idea that the first cigarette somehow
didn't cause it, I go back -- I go back to the truck
analogy.
If the truck pulls into the intersection and it 37
hits a car and that car hits the next car, the truck can't
say, "Oh, it's not my fault.
It was this middle car that
hit him."
That's not
what the evidence is that you heard in this case.
That's just not the way it works.
I guess I'll talk about that now.
Just as when
you're considering Linda Denton's fault, if you decide,
adding it all together, Doral and Belair, maybe three years
out of her 30 years, so we think R.J. Reynolds, only 10
percent at fault and Philip Morris is 90 percent at fault,
that's absolutely your determination to make.
And you may also decide those first cigarettes
Those are
meant an awful lot; we think it should be more.
the things that you determine -- you all determine.
percentage of fault doesn't change the question of whether
more likely right than wrong did the defendants' negligence
cause her death.
So the answer here to Question 3, based on
the evidence you've heard in the courtroom, is yes, both
defendants -- as to both defendants, their negligence
substantially contributed to her death.
But the
Now, Question 4, strict liability, here's what you
If you pull out your instruction
don't have to decide.
No. 11, the Engle findings, here's one of the Engle
findings.
these numbers right -- No. 3:
including R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and --
The Engle defendants,
It is Engle finding -- I want to make sure I have 38
If you could pull it up, that's great.
-- Philip Morris USA, herein referred to as the
So that's been
The cigarettes were defective and unreasonably
You don't have to have a debate about that.
Engle defendants, placed cigarettes on the market that were
defective and unreasonably dangerous.
decided.
dangerous.
is a legal product.
unreasonably dangerous?
and now your job is to apply this finding to the facts in
this case.
It
Does that mean it can't be defective or
There was another trial about that,
And, again, Dr. Burns said it was the cigarettes.
Nobody has told
No scientist or doctor or any witness
And, again, the Reynolds counsel has
Dr. Pitocchi said it was the cigarettes.
you anything else.
has said it wasn't.
the same argument, that somehow our cigarettes were too far
removed, but there's been no evidence of that.
There's been
no evidence whatsoever.
did the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes
contribute to her death?
So more likely right than wrong,
The answer's yes.
Now, question No. 5 on the verdict form, please
state, as to each defendant, whether Ms. Denton relied to
her detriment on a concealment or omission of material
information by that defendant concerning the health effects
or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so,
whether such reliance was a legal cause of Ms. Denton's 39
death.
That's a long question.
Let me tell you again
what you don't have to worry about and decide.
The Engle findings, if we could have those again.
Again, it's instruction No. 11, and you'll have a
copy of the instructions when you go back, so it won't be a
memory test.
Instruction No. 11, if you go down to No. 4, yeah,
and 5.
The Engle defendants concealed or omitted material
information not otherwise known or available, knowing that
the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose
a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes, or both.
And No. 5:
The Engle defendants agreed to conceal
or omit information regarding the health effects of
cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that
smokers in the public would rely on this information to
their detriment.
So those things have been decided.
They omitted;
And they did so with the intention that people
they withheld; they concealed information not otherwise
knowable.
would rely on that.
it's more likely right than wrong that Linda Denton fell
into their trap.
So your question here is simply whether
And, again, the legal cause here, whether it's a 40
It is the same exact definition we've
legal cause of her death, means -- it doesn't mean it has to
be the only cause.
talked about several times now.
contributing factor, even if it acted with other causes?
And it can be, and there certainly were other
Is it a substantial
We're not saying the cigarette
The cigarette
influences on Linda Denton.
companies are the only things that she heard and the only
reasons that she made her decisions.
companies knew before she started -- they knew that their
They knew their sales were
cigarettes were dangerous.
dropping, and they knew less people were starting; more
people were quitting.
And they spent fortunes selling a
doubt that they knew wasn't true.
making phony health cigarettes, fortunes to keep her
smoking, and they succeeded.
And they spent fortunes
And it's true she's not here to tell us everything
that went on, but there is both direct and circumstantial
evidence, and there's expert proof that you have heard that
demonstrates that yes, she relied to her detriment on their
concealments and omissions.
started with filters.
low-tar because she was worried.
she wasn't sure how risky they were.
We know she switched -- she
We know she switched to light and
We know she told friends
And there's -- the circumstantial evidence is
They spent millions of dollars to get her to act
strong. 41
this way, and she did just that.
Now they want to escape
responsibility for her doing what they were trying to get
her to do just because she's not here to testify.
And we had two leaders in the field come in here
and explain exactly how this works and exactly how their
efforts were targeted at addicted smokers like Linda Denton.
And they concluded, more likely right than wrong, yes, yes,
they caused her actions.
And there's been no -- again, no
witness from the defense, no one to come in here and explain
to you how that's not so and why that's not so.
And yeah, did she know her parents had died?
She
Yeah, for sure.
Were there warnings on the packs?
did.
But that's why she tried to quit, and that's when the
cigarettes kept her addicted and kept her hooked.
And
that's why she tried light and low-tar cigarettes, which
turns out were just a fake dream, pipe dream.
They knew
they weren't true, but she thought that it would help her.
So when you consider this, just remember the
In the combination of things, was this a
question isn't is it the only thing at all, the one truck
that hit her.
substantial cause of what happened to her?
And the answer,
based on the evidence you've heard -- which is only evidence
showing that it was and no evidence otherwise -- yeah, it
was.
And, again, the best evidence is how much money 42
They didn't spend billions
they poured into their efforts.
of dollars marketing doubt, marketing fake cigarettes
because they didn't think it would work.
She did just
exactly what they wanted her to do, and more likely right
than wrong, yes, the answer to Question 5 is yes.
Question 6 is very similar, whether, as to each
Again, I showed you instruction 11.
defendant, Ms. Denton relied to her detriment on an act
taken in furtherance of the defendant's agreement, which is
the conspiracy.
It's
already been determined -- you already have to apply -- not
only did these defendants engage in these behaviors, not
only did they deny and lie and sell fake health cigarettes,
they worked together, all in lockstep.
They conspired.
Can you show them the Engle finding, please?
It's in instruction 11, and it's the next one
down, which is they agreed to do it, which is they conspired
to do it.
So your only question there is, again, whether or
not their actions more likely than not played a substantial
role in her smoking and her death.
And the answers, from
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns in this case, were absolutely
And it's fine, if in deliberations you think,
they did.
"Well, part of it's her fault."
We
agree, and we ask you to consider that.
up front.
Yes, yes, we agree.
We've told you that
The huge difference here is they won't agree to 43
take any responsibility for it, even though she was their
She did just exactly what their
biggest success story.
internal documents show they were trying to accomplish.
Now, No. 7 is where I've been talking about.
State the percentage of fault, if any -- well, state the
percentage of fault which was a legal cause of Ms. Denton's
death.
Now, important for you to know, on this question the
defendants have the burden.
much fault to put on Linda Denton.
question in here where they have the burden, which is to
show what they've proven to you about her fault.
They have to show to you how
So that's the one
And I go back to the questions I asked you the
Yes, we want you to look at her
first day we all met.
decisions, and when you're weighing this question, look at
how old she was when she made her decisions.
information did she have, and what information did they
withhold from her?
How many people were her decisions
likely to hurt?
she made these decisions?
And what price has she paid?
What
What hold did addiction have over her while
And while you're thinking about those questions,
How sophisticated and knowledgeable were they when
think about the cigarette companies' decisions and their
choices.
they made their choices?
How many people were their decisions likely to hurt?
they know it?
What information did they have?
Did
What hold did profits, wanting a bigger bag 44
of money, have on the decisions they made?
have they paid, if any?
And what price
And Mr. Cofer, he said it.
I'm sure he'll say it
Why did it
He wants you to ask, why did she smoke?
again.
take her so long and so many efforts to be able to quit?
And what did the cigarette companies do to cause her harm?
We agree, fair questions.
They're the very questions you
should be asking.
Why did they design and sell
What they don't agree with are the other side of
Why did the cigarette companies conspire
Why did they
those questions.
to deny and lie to people like Linda Denton?
rig cigarettes to make sure they were addictive and that
they would sustain addiction?
filters and these low-tar and light cigarettes when they
knew they weren't any safer at all?
And why did they work
so hard at getting children, replacement smokers, smoking?
And didn't Linda Denton do just exactly what they wanted her
Are they really coming in here and blaming her and
to do?
her family and taking zero responsibility for a conspiracy
and a plan that worked perfectly for her to do exactly what
they worked so hard for her to do?
And when you consider the fault, her fault versus
their fault, consider especially the vast resources that the
defendants put into making sure she didn't succeed in
quitting and the exit door stayed shut for her. 45 25
And remind them the millions of
Now, if someone says in deliberations she knew the
risks, remind them, yes, that is why she tried to quit, and
that is why, when she couldn't, she went to cigarettes that
she thought were safer.
dollars they spent to keep her from succeeding at quitting.
I would suggest the evidence allows maybe as much
as 10 percent fault on Linda Denton, but, of course, you're
the ones to decide, and you can make that amount higher or
lower, whatever you think the cigarette companies have
proved to you.
The family has asked you to consider her fault, to
They're not shying away from that.
hold her accountable.
But please, please know
They accept that responsibility.
They're counting on you to hold the
they're trusting you.
cigarette companies responsible for their share, only their
fair share.
Now, the next question is No. 8, how much money
And I told you before -- and there's
the verdict should be.
an instruction we'll talk about -- the only thing you can
consider here are the level of harms and losses, nothing
else.
And instruction 19, I think, talks about the
elements of damages, and I want to go down to the next
paragraph.
The second paragraph.
In determining the total amount of damages
Denton 46
sustained by Ms. Denton's survivors -- Robert Denton, Cory
Denton, and Robert Denton, Jr. -- remember, her two
daughters were not minors so there's no recovery for them
here.
That's an outside reason to put
any amount of money on the verdict form.
Can't consider it.
But any such award -- consider elements of damage
for which there is no exact standard for fixing the
Any such award should be fair
compensation to be awarded.
and just in light of the evidence regarding the following
elements.
Now, I'm going to talk about the elements in just
It
a second, but what does this mean, fixing compensation?
means -- it means balancing the scales.
What amount of
money is the right amount of money, in your determination,
for the harms and losses?
And it's important to understand what it doesn't
mean and what you can't factor in, for instance, sympathy.
You can feel -- of course, of course, you can feel sympathy,
but you can't raise the verdict because of sympathy, just
like you can't lower the verdict because you think it might
encourage more lawsuits.
And there are other outside reasons too that
juries have to avoid.
here.
work their 40 hours a day.
I think it's good to give an example
They
Their boss pays them for the 40
Think about somebody who works 40 hours a day. 47 25
Here's the outside part.
The boss pays
The boss
It won't do him any good."
They work a little more overtime.
hours.
them a little more.
can't say, "Well, I'm going to give him less money because I
The
don't think he needs it.
boss can think that, but he can't pay less based on that
reason.
It's an outside reason.
And just like juries, if in deliberations one of
the jurors says, "Well, the family didn't help enough," or,
"We just don't like Bobby Denton," that's an outside reason.
Not allowed to raise or lower the verdict based on what you
think about the family.
Or if someone says they're worried about what
people will think about your verdict, if you give a full and
fair verdict, remind the jurors that's an outside reason.
But also you'll be able to say, "Over the course of this
There
trial, we became experts.
was an awful lot of proof and too many documents," I'm sure,
"but we learned enough to become experts.
And if you'd have
heard everything we heard, you would have made the same
decision that we made."
It was a complicated case.
You already know you have an important duty, which
You also need to know that no one has
is to follow the law.
a right to make you go home having been on a jury that
didn't follow that law.
So if a juror uses an outside
reason in deliberations -- one of you says, "Well, money
Denton 48
can't bring her back.
remember, that's an outside reason.
Let's lower the amount for that" --
So no outside reasons.
In valuing how to -- how to come up with what that
number is, it's important to look at how bad was the harm
and how long was the harm.
So let me give you an example.
If you lost your wife for a couple of days, maybe -- you
know, maybe she was in the hospital for a couple of days,
and you had to take care of the kids, pay the bills, do the
laundry, do the dishes, that's bad.
You know, there'd be
some money to make up for that but not much money, a few
days out of a 30-year or 50-year marriage.
That's very low
on the scale, and that would be the kind of case where I'd
have to ask for a few thousand dollars.
Now move up to the mid of the scale.
Let's say
Maybe your wife is in a coma for
the injury is worse.
several years, and you lose her companionship and her love
and affection for several years.
would take more money to make up for that kind of loss, and
it would be the kind of case where I'd have to ask for a
verdict in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.
That's worse.
Now, it
Now move up to the top of the scale, what we're
What happens when your wife, the love
That's
talking about here.
of your life for 30 years, is taken away forever?
the worst kind of harm somebody can do, and that's the kind
of case where I'd have to ask for a verdict in the millions. 49
And the same is true for her boys.
Losing the
guidance of your mom for a few days would be small.
the guidance of your mom for a few years would be serious
but not -- you know, it would be mid scale.
forever, 36 more years, that's at the very top of the scale.
Losing her
Losing
So let's talk about, again --
If you can pull up the slide that lists these
elements.
What are the elements of damage that you are to
The loss -- and this is in the instruction again.
I've just taken them out and
For Robert Denton, there is the loss
consider?
It's in the instruction.
broken then out here.
of his wife's companionship.
And by the way, the instruction the Court will
protection.
read you says:
In determining the duration of losses, you
may consider the joint life expectancy of the survivor and
of Ms. Denton.
average to live.
But you heard she had 36 more years on
There is the loss of her
So the loss of her companionship, the loss of her
protection, the pain and suffering that he went through
during the seven months while she battled cancer and he
watched her slip away and then the loss of 36 more years
they were meant to have together.
If you go to the next slide.
For Cory Denton, the loss of his mother's 50
companionship, the loss of her instruction, the loss of his
mother's guidance, his pain and suffering for the seven
months while they battled cancer and she died and slipped
away and the pain and suffering of 36 more years of the life
they were meant to have together.
years old when his mother died.
lost more years than he had with her.
Cory Denton was just 18
He
He had 36 more years.
Robert Benjamin Denton was 22 years old.
These
same elements apply to Robert Benjamin Denton:
the loss of
his mother, the loss of instruction, the loss of guidance,
and his pain and suffering.
They didn't give up on living.
And I told you at the beginning, these are good
They did the very
folks.
best they could, but that doesn't change the loss that they
had.
And specifically you've heard about Mr. Denton, four
or five years later, getting remarried.
instruct you that's not something to consider here in
valuing what his loss was.
The judge will
When she was diagnosed with cancer, it was a death
She went through seven terrible months with her
sentence.
family of chemo and radiation and trips back and forth to
She
the hospital.
tried to live for her family, but in seven short months, her
body gave in.
She tried hard to beat back the cancer.
And she left behind her children.
She died at 46 51
with nearly half her life ahead of her, and nothing, nothing
can bring her back, no question.
Nothing can give her kids
the mother that they had, to see them through marriages and
kids and careers.
But you have to know something about what
she was like to understand the loss they had.
She would be
62.
Would you put up the picture of Ms. Denton?
You know -- you know their love story.
They met
They got married and stayed happily
when she was 16.
And if she were here today,
married for the next 30 years.
she would be 62 years old.
Maybe this afternoon, her family
would be getting together for one of her famous home-cooked
meals.
cakes for her grandkids, watching the Olympics with her
family.
She would be enjoying what should have been her
golden years and passing on her family traditions to the
next generation.
She could be baking her special homemade birthday
Now, I told you at the beginning, based on the
overwhelmingly significant loss, I'd have to ask you for an
overwhelmingly significant verdict, considering what
happened to this family and the loss of the sanctity of
life, the loss of the sanctity of family.
likely right than wrong, it should be a verdict of
$15 million, but that's up to you to decide after you weigh
Whether you can do less
all the evidence, what you think.
I believe more 52
or more, obviously it's your decision to make here, what did
we show more likely right than wrong.
But when you place the value -- or consider the
value to place on the harms and losses to this family and
how much it will take to make up for their loss, consider
what the cigarette companies value --
You can take that down.
-- and especially consider what they value when
you get to the next question, punitive damages.
You've heard the evidence, the facts and truths.
You know they spent billions of dollars pushing lies and
these scam health cigarettes.
That FTC report said they
spent $300 million in 1966 alone.
$50 million just for Cambridge in 1981.
had a total of a billion dollars that year on marketing
these cigarettes.
to be true and fortunes exploiting fears of cancer to
increase their sales.
Philip Morris spent
The 1981 FTC report
They spent decades denying what they knew
And the question I'm talking about is No. 9 on the
verdict form, which is whether you find by clear and
convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted
against the defendant under the circumstances of this case.
And this is a higher burden, no question, but the evidence
of what they did and why they did it comes straight from the
cigarette companies' own documents. 53
And let me show you, if I could, the instruction
on punitive damages, which is instruction No. 19.
to you.
And if you'll go down to the bottom part.
There's an awful lot here.
I want to focus, if I can here --
It's on two pages.
The standard for punitive damages, what you're
Can you put the two pages up?
The judge will read it
looking at --
THE COURT:
MS. BARNETT:
THE COURT:
MS. BARNETT:
Why don't you just read it?
Okay.
My copy's over there.
Oh.
It's fine.
No, just leave it up
there.
Was their conduct gross and flagrant?
Did it show
a reckless disregard to human life and the safety and
welfare of the public?
And at the bottom is the most
important number, No. 4 down there, intentional.
acts intentional?
Were their
And there's no question, no dispute at all.
And where was their witness to come and tell you
We know it from their
Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings explained it a great
Everything they did was intentional.
documents.
deal.
otherwise?
and we didn't really mean it, and that's not really what we
did."
"Oh, that was just a few dumb things we said, 54
There is no one like that.
They planned and
intended intentionally to get her hooked -- to get her
started, to get her hooked, to keep her smoking, to
intercept her from quitting, and there's not been a witness
who disputes that at all.
The documents speak for themselves.
The videos
Everything that was
The cigarette companies even
speak for themselves.
congratulate themselves in their documents that their plan
was brilliantly conceived and executed.
done that you've heard about, everything, was done
knowingly, intentionally, for profit.
It was premeditated.
And as sure as I'm standing here, those cigarette
companies knew; they knew that their cigarettes were going
to kill people.
the video screen and said they kill one in three of their
regular customers.
They kill 440,000 people every year.
And they knew they'd kill their customers, and they knew
they'd go right on with business as usual, targeting new
children to replace the ones who died, all in the name of
profit and even though they promised the public back in
the '50s, "If our product's harmful, we'll take it off the
market, and we'll go out of business."
You heard the videos.
They sat up there on
Now, Dr. -- sorry, Mr. Cofer will certainly point
out that if you answer yes here on No. 9, there may be a day
or two more of proof because there are certain types of 55
evidence we're not allowed to show you unless we get to that
phase.
But I want to thank you now --
Here, you can take that off.
I want to thank you now for your attention.
We've all watched it, and
You've worked so hard as a jury.
And we also
we know you take your job very, very seriously.
know you're not the kind of jury that would say, "Well, I'm
just going to mark no because I'd rather go home and not
have to deal with this for a couple more days."
that kind of jury.
You're not
I wish that -- there's two final questions.
Very
They have
quickly throw them up there, Questions 10 and 11.
to do with the fraud and the conspiracy, and you'll be asked
at the end to say whether those things happened before '82
or after '82.
And you know the conspiracy, the lies, the
concealments, they started -- you saw on this chart, and I
wrote it on Mr. Cofer's outline -- started in the '50s, went
all the way through Linda Denton's lifetime.
We showed you
documents and videos from the '50s, the '60s, the '70s,
the '80s, the '90s, all the way through her life.
is -- should be an easy question here.
after, or both before and after?
after.
stopped.
And nobody came and said to you, "Oh, it all
Yeah, it was before and
In 1982 we didn't do any more."
So those are the
So this
Was it before, 114
you think that that was a substantial contributing factor?
Did they really substantially contribute to paying that
bill?
I don't think so.
For all of those reasons, we ask that you find in
favor of Reynolds.
Again, like everyone else, you guys have been a
really great, attentive jury.
I want to thank you.
I also want to remind you that we don't get an
You may be clapping
opportunity to speak with you again.
and cheering about that, but just remember what we said when
you go back to the jury room because it is plaintiff's
burden.
met their burden in this case.
They have the burden of proof, and they have not
Ms. Barnett, whenever you're ready.
Thank you.
Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT:
MS. BARNETT:
THE COURT:
MS. BARNETT:
It's fine.
Briefly.
Yes.
Sorry.
No.
You're fine.
It's fine to defend yourself when
you've done nothing wrong, but when you're wrong, you're
supposed to stand up and accept responsibility.
supposed to sidestep responsibility at the cost of the
people that you harmed.
You're not
Now, these cigarette companies denied 115 25
They denied responsibility for 15 years after her
responsibility back in 1958 when they knew their cigarettes
caused cancer.
They denied responsibility when Linda Denton
died.
death, forcing us to come here and bring this case to you,
and you've heard six days of the cigarette companies denying
that they have any role or any responsibility whatsoever.
And remember, yes, we admit Ms. Denton has
They're the ones who don't remember --
responsibility.
don't admit it whatsoever.
And I have to ask you why.
did Mr. Cofer put that big thing up there with the big
yellow highlighted words about Linda Denton having family
problems, and why does he keep coming before you and talking
about her dropping out of high school?
It's because they
don't want you to think about what the cigarette companies
did.
Why
The time line I put up in front of you has what
The time
Nothing,
They don't
Linda Denton was doing and what they were doing.
line that they put up before you, what's missing?
nothing about what the cigarette companies did.
They don't want you to talk
want you to think about it.
about it.
They haven't shown you that anything that we
proved was wrong or that anything that we showed you was
inaccurate.
And this idea that we just showed you snippets, I
told you at the beginning we had a limited number of hours
Denton 116
We were counting on the cigarette
If there were other documents that showed
to put our case on.
companies.
otherwise, if we left out parts of documents and we were
unfair, counting on them to let you know or bring in a
witness and tell us we were wrong.
like that.
You didn't hear anything
And one thing Mr. Cofer said over and over and
That question is not, not on your
over again is that we have to prove that but for addiction,
she could have quit.
verdict form.
instructions.
contributing factor?
for her death?
she could have quit.
instructions.
That question is not in the Court's
The question is, was addiction a substantial
Was addiction a legal -- a legal cause
Not do we have to prove but for addiction
So you'll see the verdict form and the
You'll be able to figure that out.
They say she could have quit.
In fact, Mr. Cofer
That's
said it's a life accomplishment for someone to quit.
They're selling
where free choice is in this country today.
a product that is a life accomplishment to be able to stop.
She tried more than once.
But Ms. Denton tried.
According to all the witnesses, she tried hard.
And, true, we don't
expert agreed that she tried to quit.
have every specific date and year that she made attempts.
The testimony was several times.
Their
It would be weird and suspicious, frankly, if 117 25
Mr. Denton could get up here and say on June 3rd, 1972, and
on June 5th, 1978.
These witnesses have done the best they
can to tell you.
That time line they keep showing you has
the ones where they remember specific years.
evidence of every quit attempt that she made, and it's not
the testimony of the witnesses.
She tried and tried hard,
and she should be held accountable for her failures in
comparison with other people's choices and decisions.
That's not the
While she was trying, what we know from looking at
the cigarette companies' documents is they were trying too,
everything they knew how to do to keep her from quitting, to
keep the exit door closed, to make sure she was not
successful.
This argument about Belair, it sounds like they're
saying it's okay for kids to smoke cigarettes for a few
years, no harm.
that videotape didn't say that.
cigarettes.
The R.J. Reynolds person who testified on
There's no safe level of
And the characterization of Dr. Burns's testimony,
I trust you to remember what he said about every cigarette
contributing, especially the beginning cigarettes and
especially contributing to addiction.
believe that the proof is there, there's no question, and
their counsel said nothing about the conspiracy.
But even if you don't
And the conspiracy of denials and lies and phony
Denton 118
health cigarettes and the conspiracy of studying addiction
and rigging cigarettes and concealing information about the
addictive nature; information, if you read the Engle
verdict, the Engle findings, that was not otherwise knowable
about health effects and addiction and information that was
intended for people to rely upon.
and parcel of all of that, and they are absolutely,
absolutely responsible for the effects of their conspiracy,
if she never smoked a single cigarette from RJR.
R.J. Reynolds was part
This question about did she rely after 1982, after
1982 is when she was using the light, the low-tar, the
so-called healthy cigarettes, so to say that we didn't give
you any proof of any reliance after '82, I think -- I'm sure
everyone will remember that testimony and that chart we keep
seeing.
Mr. Cofer said actions speak louder than words.
They do.
These defendants spent fortunes to keep people,
addicted people, including and like Linda Denton, smoking.
They
They wanted to open the entrance and close the exit.
wanted to intercept people who were trying to quit.
Why?
For sales.
Now they want to say it didn't work.
We know they
spent fortunes to make their cigarettes addictive, to make
them hard to quit.
To keep the entrance doors open,
For
to close off the exits, and to intercept people.
Why?
Why? 119 25
sales.
Now they want to say it didn't work.
But let me ask you this question:
If nicotine
addiction -- if nicotine isn't the reason why people are
smoking their products over and over and over again, then
why don't they make a nonaddictive cigarette so people could
have a fair, real choice, and they wouldn't have to worry
about changes in their brain driving that choice?
they do that?
Why don't
And finally, Ms. Denton's actions, as I just went
She's not here.
over, speak loud.
witnesses, but you know what she did.
You know what the
evidence is about her efforts to quit and her belief in
these filters and the low-tar and the light cigarettes.
They took our best
Choice, choice, choice is my final point.
We keep
hearing about her choices, and we want you to think about
her choices.
tell the truth and given her a real chance.
Don't forget, they could have made a choice to
And the defense seems to be, "She shouldn't have
Well, that sounds like something a child
They say, "She should have listened to Harry
He said these things on TV in '64."
believed us."
would say.
Reasoner.
That's one
video out of a mountain of evidence we showed you, and in
1964 when Harry Reasoner was on TV, she was 13 years old,
extraordinarily susceptible to marketing and to addiction.
And by the way, I won't show it to you now, but
Denton 120
you remember, there's another part of what Harry Reasoner
said, where he said, "Cigarettes, when you hear these
things, it's like an old friend.
chance and give them a chance and give them another chance."
You want to give them a
And let me ask you this:
If everyone knew -- if
everyone knew and there was no more question, why did the
cigarette companies spend billions of dollars spreading
their message of doubt?
smokers.
They did it for the addicted
They also could have made a choice, the truth
about filters, light cigarettes, and low-tar cigarettes.
Then Ms. Denton would have had a chance to make a real
choice like it is today.
like I said, not to rig their cigarettes for addiction, not
to figure out and measure how much do we have to have to
keep somebody hooked?
They could have made a choice,
They could have -- they could have made that
choice not to turn it into this designer product, what they
called the perfect nicotine delivery device.
But instead
they chose to make it something very hard to quit, and no
witness told you otherwise.
They made them hard to quit.
Now they blame her for failing at trying to quit.
And they could have made the choice -- and this is
They could
my last point -- to wait until she was an adult.
have made the choice not to market, study, and try so hard 121
to get kids addicted.
21, 22, old enough to make a real decision.
They could have waited till she was
Those are the choices you need to think about too,
and thank you again very much for your time.
