CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. WICHMANN: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for paying such close attention for the last two and a half weeks.
I'd like to start out by saying that we just celebrated Mother's Day, which is probably one of the most precious holidays we have in this country.
And remarkably, Reynolds is telling you that Marion Dion put her -- let me make sure I get this right -- round-the-clock, 24-hour job of being a mom, raising her kids and being a
housewife, Reynolds is here telling you that she put all that ahead of what they say was her foremost obligation, which was to quit smoking and quit using their product.
So	what they are telling you is they are blaming this woman, their best customer, for being a mom. That's what Reynolds thinks the case is about.
That tells you a lot about two things.
One, the company that we are talking about, the company that's a defendant in this courtroom, the callous and reckless indifference that this company showed towards millions of American mothers, millions of American customers, including Marion, 20 million during the course of the conspiracy that they cooked up to sell their highly addictive, deadly product that kills 500,000 Americans a year.
And it tells you a lot about their product, how addictive this product is and was and how dangerous this product is and was, so addictive -- and I'm going to review some of the testimony with you in a moment -- so addictive that poor Marion tried so hard to quit that she cried. Her son came here and
told you under oath, my mother said, "I don't know why, there must be something wrong with me, I can't quit. What's wrong with me that I can't quit?"
You heard that from the witness stand. Okay. Yet Reynolds wants to blame her. When Reynolds never admitted, during the 50-year conspiracy, that their product was addictive and deadly. They never provided a single program for their best customer, Marion, who smoked and smoked and smoked some more. They never provided a single program or any help for her or any of their customers that were addicted to cigarettes to quit. They never had a single medical doctor on staff during the conspiracy to help patients who suffer from lung cancer.
To make matters worse, they provided coupons to smokers so that they would smoke more. So that they could buy kitchen appliances. And it wasn't until years after Marion died that they finally admitted what they have done. Yet they want to come in and tell you, it's not R.J. Reynolds' fault. It's all Marion Dion's fault.
Folks, we talked about class membership and what the Plaintiff has to prove to be an Engle class member.
Would you put up the first slide, please.
Well, this gives you an idea of what class membership is not about. It's not about whether addicted smokers can quit, because they can. We saw it in this case.
And it wasn't until the patch came out and Marion went to her doctor and got a prescription and got the nicotine replacement therapy that she was able to quit.
It's not about the fault of either party.
It's not about whether smokers share some responsibility. We'll get to that in a second.
And it's not about reliance on a statement from the tobacco industry.
What class membership is about is this:
You will be getting a verdict form, and here it is. You'll fill it out, folks, it's two pages, and the very first question -- let me make sure I get this right, because I'm not so good with the technology -- is: "Was Marion Dion addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And, if so, was such addiction a
legal cause of her primary lung cancer and death?"
That's Question Number 1. If you check, yes, she's a class member.
Now, the Court read you the instruction, what is our burden of proof.
He's going to put that up right now.
It's the greater weight of the evidence. What does that mean in simple terms? It's like a basketball game, 51 to 50, the team that gets
51	wins. We don't have to prove beyond and to the exclusion of any reasonable doubt, that's over in the criminal courts. We have to prove our case in order to win class membership is by the greater weight of the evidence. And what has the evidence been in this case?
The first witness that we brought you was Dr. Richard Hurt, a former director of the prestigious inpatient nicotine cessation clinic at the Mayo Clinic, written over 300 peer-reviewed articles on smoking and health, treated thousands of addicted patients for nicotine addiction. He's a frequent lecturer around the world on nicotine addiction, including Harvard University. He has testified
before the U.S. Congress, board-certified in internal medicine and in addiction medicine.
He applied what's called a Heaviness of Smoking Index to Marion Dion, just like he did to all of the patients that he treated at the Mayo Clinic, and his result of the two questions she scored six out of six for nicotine addiction. She had high dependence. Everybody said the first thing she did in the morning when she woke up was smoke her cigarettes. Everybody said it was between a pack and a half and two packs a day. She smoked all day long. Some family members said she was a chain smoker. Bob, who was also a smoker. The never smokers weren't sure what a chain smoker was, but they told you that she had a cigarette in her hand all the time. She smoked right before she went into church. She smoked right when she got out of church. She smoked at night. She woke up at night to smoke. She was Reynolds' best customer.
We also brought you Dr. Kathleen Brady. She's a famous neuropsychiatrist, brain specialist, also with a Ph.D. in pharmacology, and, surprisingly, she was the winner of the
prestigious Betty Ford award for the contributions to the treatment of women and addiction. 300 peer-reviewed articles, a Ph.D. and an M.D., and she applied two criteria. She applied the DSM-IV, and the DSM-5, and on the DSM-IV Marion scored 4 out of 7, three is all that is required for addiction. Her opinion, she came and told you this lady was heavily addicted.
Under the DSM-5 she scored 6 out of 11, two were required for addiction. And Dr. Brady told you that this lady was highly addicted.
Now, Reynolds, in addition to saying that Mrs. Dion was too busy being a housewife, couldn't quit their product so it's all her fault, they also said, Well, wait minute, she's strong-willed and she's intelligent, and that's all you need to quit smoking cigarettes, according to Reynolds.
Well, let me read you what Kathleen Brady said. Question -- she was asked that very same question. Her answer was:
"Answer: People can be very strong-willed and intelligent and opinionated in one area and then have complete blind spots about another.
And that's what addiction does to people. It makes you -- you've got a complete blind spot."
She said, she told you:
"Answer: I've treated people with addictions that are some of the most intelligent people I've ever met."
Because you're strong-willed and intelligent it doesn't really have anything to do with your power over addiction. Addiction takes over people's lives.
That's the evidence that you heard. And, you heard from Bob Dion, Marion's favorite child, the only boy in the family, cried on the witness stand and told you, "cigarettes controlled my mother, my mother didn't control the cigarettes." That's nicotine addiction.
Now, the next slide, please.
Dr. Brady gave you a definition of "addiction." And the definition under NIDA, which is the National Institute on Drug Abuse -- and, by the way, I like how Reynolds wants you to believe that the U.S. Surgeon General, the chief health enforcement officer in this country appointed by the president, and in particular the one that was appointed by
Ronald Reagan, it's all a big plot against them.
Remember, "Oh, this doctor testifies against us, this doctor testifies against us, and they all contribute to the Surgeon General's Report so it must be biased and everybody's gaining up on poor R.J. Reynolds.
Well, you heard from Dr. Cummings who told you, they have the right to offer their scientists, too. But guess what, none of them, none of them will contribute to the Surgeon General's Report.
Now, this is the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the U.S. Government, "Drugs, Brain, & Behavior," and it tells you what the definition was, and that's the definition that Dr. Brady used in this case.
And so you have the demonstrative that shows the sales, please.
So what we've seen in terms of evidence of addiction in this case is, you heard from George, you heard from Karen Martin, you heard from Kimberly Widgeon, you heard from Bob Dion, Richard Hurt, Kathleen Brady, the DSM, the Heaviness of Smoking Index, and the Surgeon
General.
All -- she was addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine. Nothing about ill effects. Not a single witness.
So I submit to you that question number 1, there's a ton of evidence. In fact there's -the only evidence is that she was addicted to cigarette -- the nicotine in cigarettes.
Now, the evidence has been that it's not the nicotine that kills you, it's the nicotine that addicts you. It is the smoke, it is the carcinogens in the cigarette smoke that kills you. And that this has been known by the industry since the 1950s. And yet they spent $250 billion over 50 years misleading the American people, creating a campaign of doubt, to cast doubt in the minds of smokers so the smokers would continue to buy their product, their profits would go up, and people will die.
Do you remember this from early on? The consumption chart, hardly any lung cancer down here before Americans started smoking. As Americans started smoking, and the industry started spending $250 billion on all those ads you have back there, and on the TV ads and on
the sports stars and on the movie stars, look at that consumption rate go up, and look at those profits go up. And look at the male lung cancer rate, and look at the women's lung cancer rate.
Would you put up the nicotine and disease, please.
There's no question in this case, you've heard from Dr. Hurt, you've heard from the other doctors, you've seen the records, they will be back there in the jury room. You can go through them. Smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, and there's over 70 carcinogens present in smoke, and 50 percent -- half of all long-term smokers die of a smoking-related disease. It's the only product out there that if you use the product exactly the way you're supposed to use it, it's going to kill you.
And it's not just going to -- it's a horrible, horrible lung cancer death.
Well, guess what? During the entire time that Marion Dion was alive, they never -- they never said, you know, Mrs. Dion, you better stop buying our cigarettes and you better stop sending us these coupons. Because if you keep
smoking these cigarettes that we're selling to you, you're going to die a horrible death of lung cancer. Those little cautions and warnings that are on the pack were put on there, under protest. The government made then do it.
Meanwhile, and you'll see some more evidence of this in a few minutes, all the cigarette company ads and cigarette company marketing campaign was designed to keep addicted smokers like Marion from -- from quitting, to encourage them to continue to smoke. It was a campaign of doubt -- there's no proven link, the jury's still out -- while they knew, they knew Americans were dying. And their profits were going up.
They like to tell you, well, Uncle Herbie -- I think he was called -- Uncle Herbie, years ago, he died, he was a smoker, he died of lung cancer. Remember they were asking poor George this? Yeah. So you all were talking about this. You know, you all must have known back then that Uncle Herbie died of lung -- of -- of heart disease from smoking.
So, gee, you know, the light should have gone
on.
Well, what about the light, ladies and gentlemen, what about the lights in the R.J. Reynolds board room? When not just Marion, but look at all these folks who were dying. How come they didn't say, Well, you know what, there is a proven link and we know there's a proven link, what can we do to stop this epidemic of lung cancer? They never did that until years after Marion died. Yet they want to come in here and tell you, It's all her fault, our best customer, it's all her fault.
In 1988 Ronald Reagan was president. He appointed C. Everett Koop as the U.S. Surgeon General. And what were his findings?
Cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. Nicotine is the drug -- drug in tobacco that causes addiction. That the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine nicotine addiction are similar to these that determine addiction to drugs such as cocaine and heroin.
And what did -- what did R.J. Reynolds do when this report was released in 1988? They attacked the Surgeon General. They said, no,
no. You can't equate -- you can't equate cigarettes to illegal drugs like cocaine and heroin. No. It's wrong. It's false. While they were spending, spending, spending, misleading, misleading, misleading, and misleading, and lying to their own customers. Yet, they want you to find for Marion, who was doing her job as a mom, it's all her fault, because she didn't try to quit harder, sooner.
She didn't go out and get a hypnotist. Well, it's all her fault. She didn't go out and get acupuncture, so it's all her fault. She's too busy, she's too busy grocery shopping, so it's all her fault. That is, three days after Mother's Day, demeaning.
Now, in 2010 let's see what the Surgeon General said. Nicotine is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products.
They want to tell you, Well, she didn't smoke for the nicotine, she smoked for some other reason. And believe you me, they will come up with some other reason that she must have been smoking. Some other reason that she must have been crying to her son Bob and
saying: "I tried, I'm trying, I just can't quit. There's something wrong with me. I just can't quit."
No, couldn't be the nicotine in Reynolds' cigarettes. It had to be some other reason. That relaxed her. She liked it. It was for mild taste. It was for whatever reason, any reason other than the nicotine that they put in their product, yes.
They want you to believe that nature puts nicotine in tobacco. Sure. But you heard about the processing of the modern cigarette from Dr. Hurt. Yeah, guess what, they take all the nicotine out. Then they lay out sheets of tobacco, and they spray it back on again. And you'll see the internal documents, and I'll go through them, that they controlled the levels of nicotine, and they always have.
And during the course of the conspiracy, they could have taken all the nicotine out. Well, guess what? If they did that, nobody would buy cigarettes. Because people smoke, the fundamental reason people smoke is for nicotine. And they knew that.
Can we have the next slide, please?
And, see, all these slides have numbers,
PT numbers. You can write them down. When you go back there, take it out and look through it if you like.
Let me just highlight it.
They knew, secretly and internally, that they needed to have sufficient nicotine to supply the necessary requirements of a smoker. Their chemists and their scientists who weren't looking into cures for cancer were looking into how to -- how to manipulate nicotine. Look at there: We are in the business of selling nicotine, an effective drug in the release of stress mechanisms. That's 1963. They never told Marion that.
Look at there: Tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug. They never told Marion that. Matter of fact, they denied it. The industry is based on the design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosages of nicotine.
And guess what? They knew. They are going to stand up and tell you, Well, she was grown up, an adult, and she made all these free choices, and we're not going to stand in the
way of someone making a free choice.
Well, the evidence in this indicates is, is that for sure when she was 17 she was smoking a pack and a half a day. Seventeen.
You heard from Dr. Hurt. You don't just start smoking a pack and a half of cigarettes one day; you have to build up tolerance. You heard George tell you, she told George she was
	when she started. Guess what? That was
	years or more before the very first little caution, in 1967, was put on the package of cigarettes.
Yet they want to blame this 15, 16, 17-year-old girl who grew up in this culture of smoking, whose mother smoked, whose father smoked, who all her brothers smoked, everybody around her smoked. Dr. Cummings told you, based on the cohort studies, over 50 percent of girls her age, high-school-age girls in America at that time smoked. There were no warnings. There was nobody out there calling and declaring: Full blast! Stop! Stop! No.
And Dr. Brady showed you scientifically, scientifically, through brain studies, what nicotine does to the brain and how it
rearranges the electric -- all the connections and circuitry in the brain. And she showed you why the frontal part of the human brain that's not fully developed when you're an adolescent, if it's bathed with nicotine the way Marion's was, that the studies show that it's way harder for people like that to quit later in life. That's the only science you've heard.
They would like you to believe, no, no, no, just say no. She could have just put it down, and that would have been it. Well, Bob Dion, George Dion, Kimberly, and Karen paint a totally different picture.
Now, they want to tell you nicotine is just a matter of free choice. Well, you go back to the other slide, that's 1980, you can look at that. They are talking right down there, We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person is addicted.
Precisely.
The next one, please.
What they also did, secretly, is they talked about nicotine. Happily for our industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique. It's the sine qua non -- that's the
Latin -- you know, the essence of the tobacco products. And down at the bottom they talk about Brown & Williamson cigarettes, and the judge just gave you the instruction that that's a subsidiary of Reynolds. Reynolds is responsible for Brown & Williamson's conduct. It's not obtained by accident. We regulate fairly precisely the nicotine levels -- any level management might desire.
Now, the next slide, please.
We had our chemical or chemistry testimony from Dr. Hurt, who studied nicotine pH. And the bottom line is that they add ammonia to their product because they know ammonia will increase the speed that nicotine gets to the brain. And that kick to the brain is what smokers desire, what addicted smokers desire. And they were in competition with Marlboro and other products, the other cigarettes were selling more than them, so they manipulated the pH so the cigarettes would get the kick, guess what, in the very Winston cigarettes that Marion smoked.
So they're manipulating not only the nicotine, but they are also manip- -- adding
ammonia to it so that they could sell more cigarettes.
Now, the Engle jury findings.
An answer to yes, that she was addicted, means that we -- that you all follow the findings from the other prior Engle juror -jury. And those findings the Court read to you, and that is that smoking causes lung cancer, nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective. You don't have to go back there and decide. If you find that, yes, to question number 1, that Marion was addicted and her addiction was a legal cause of her lung cancer, you don't have to go back there and dissect a Winston cigarette. No. No.
The law is, if she is a class member, those cigarettes she smoked were defective.
They were unreasonably dangerous and Reynolds was negligent.
Also, also, if she's a class member, if you find yes to question one, they concealed and omitted material information not otherwise known or available to Marion, with the intention that they -- that smokers would rely
on this information.
So when they get up and they tell you, Well, everybody knew. By the way, Reader's Digest, that was given to the Dion household, there are articles in Reader's Digest about the dangers of smoking, so that means not only did George and Marion know, but everybody else in the world must have known.
Well, if that's the case, why didn't R.J. Reynolds, the high executives, also know? Why didn't they own up to what Reader's Digest was putting out there in their magazines?
And by the way, Dr. Cummings went through this with you, there were, I don't know, a thousand Reader's Digest publications over Marion's lifetime and only 1 percent of them had articles about smoking and health.
But you have to believe that the R.J. Reynolds executives weren't reading Reader's Digest either, because evidently they didn't know, because they were denying it and they were creating a campaign of doubt to deny it.
Now, we already talked about the other cigarette companies. We already talked about Brown & Williamson and American Tobacco
Company. When you go back there and you see documents that are Brown & Williamson or American Tobacco Company, or if the lawyer gets up and says, well, Reynolds really didn't do it, Brown & Williamson did it when we weren't -- no.
You'll get the instruction in your package that says, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is responsible in this case for any actions or conduct of -- for any actions or conduct of Brown & Williamson, American Tobacco Company, and Lorillard if they harmed Marion Dion.
Now, you also heard this morning and yesterday, actions speak louder than words.
You know, George was talking to Marion about quitting when she was pregnant, and so George must have known back in the 1950s that smoking cigarettes caused damage to kids, the babies, and so because he knew, she is responsible for everything.
Let's see what the next video shows.
(A video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
MR. CULLMAN: Well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine, I don't
think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed.
We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
NARRATOR: Do you believe that cigarettes are safe? Have they been proved to be safe,
Mr. Cullman?
MR. CULLMAN: I believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. I did read that report, and I concluded from that report that it's true that babies born from women who smoke are smaller, but they are just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke.
(The video clip concluded.)
MR. WICHMANN: Well, then, there you go.
That's the industry spokesman. "Babies born from women who smoke may be smaller, but they are just as healthy as ... babies born [to] women who [don't] smoke."
That's 1971. But they want you to believe that George Dion -- it's all Marion's fault, it's all George's fault in this case, because they must have figured it all out that smoking, pregnant women who smoke may cause fetal damage, back in the '50s. Here we are 20-something years later, and what are they doing, they are denying it.
And what are they saying to American moms? They are saying to American moms that are smokers, Go ahead and keep smoking, because your baby might be smaller, but it's going to be just as healthy as a baby born from someone who doesn't smoke.
But that's an even more sinister public statement than that because they are not just talking to moms, they are talking to all American smokers. The most vulnerable of our population, our babies and kids.
And so they're telling smokers with that message, men, you can go ahead and smoke. The
babies might be smaller, but they are going to be healthy. This shows you the thinking of this industry. They'll put profits and sales over the health of moms and over the health of unborn babies.
Let me just run through this campaign that Dr. Cummings talked to you about. I know you've heard about it for one whole day.
The next slide, please.
Where they went out and they got these industry organizations, they funded them, they got the scientists, they got the lawyers, they called it the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, the Tobacco Institute, the Council for Tobacco Research, and the whole purpose of their campaign is in the bottom slide, the bottom portion of this slide, it's PT1933.
They wanted to provide an answer which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
Why in the world would a company that knew their product was addictive and they knew their product caused lung cancer and death, and they were sitting here watching the lung cancer and death rate rise in this country while they were
making profits, why in the world would they want to give their customers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking? Because they wanted to make money.
So they gave Marion Dion a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking, and she passed. They didn't admit what they had done until years after. But they are going to come to this courtroom and they are going to tell you, George Dion is not entitled to recover any money in this case because his wife knew or she should have known all about this horrible product that we were selling when we continued to sell it to her, we gave her coupons to buy, we never gave her any help to quit.
I think this summarizes pretty much what the companies did over the years.
Can you play the clip, please?
(A video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
NARRATOR: Take the controversy about cigarettes. In the 91st Congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. The record shows that
many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anticigarette claims.
ANNE BROWDER: I'd have to disagree with you in that we don't know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
MR. DWYER: I don't know. Frankly, I think that smoking may be hazardous, it may not be .
NARRATOR: Smoking may be hazardous, it may not be. No one including TV-7 knows for certain.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: I'm saying that the science to date and over $100 million of our industry indicates that there is no causal -NARRATOR: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
MR. HORRIGAN: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
NARRATOR: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
MR. HORRIGAN: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link
established.
MS. DAWSON: I think it's worth pointing out that all the links that have been established between smoking and certain diseases are based on statistics. What that means is the causal relationship has not yet been established.
ANNE BROWDER: The case is still open.
The jury has not come in.
NARRATOR: It may not be harmful. You're not convinced?
ANNE BROWDER: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
NARRATOR: Do cigarettes cause cancer?
MR. MERRYMAN: I don't know if they do or
not.
MR. BANKS: I'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer.
(The video clip concluded.)
MR. WICHMANN: Mr. Walker talked about polls. He said, well, we have polls. We have the Gallup Poll, we have the Roper poll they show over the years. Everybody in America knew we were just telling this big lie, but nobody was believing us.
Well, please write this down. PT3876. If you would put that up, please.
Just take a look at that. That article will tell you all you need to know about the polls, about Gallup, the poll that Mr. Walker's telling you says that everybody knew. What Gallup says about the difference between a knowledge poll and a belief poll, and what Gallup says shows that their campaign of doubt worked because a lot of people heard the message that there might be a relationship between smoking and disease, but what Gallup tells you is that their respondents didn't believe it.
Why wouldn't they believe it? Because of what you just saw, the industry campaign where they had their highest-level people for $250 billion telling the American people the opposite.
Would you put up the 1990 Surgeon General's Report, please.
You'll get the 1990 Surgeon General's Report. And this report deals with data from the late 1980s, which was -- which was pretty close in time to when Marion Dion was quitting
with the patches and quit in the early 1990s and died.
And what the Surgeon General found was regarding respondents talking about whether smoking causes lung cancer, 30 to 40 percent of smokers either did not believe that smoking increases health risks or did not believe that cessation reduces the risks.
These proportions correspond to 15 to
20	million smokers in the United States. So that tells you that their -- that their strategy -- casting doubt, creating doubt so people would continue to smoke -- worked.
Now, 2014, please. This is the 2014 Surgeon General's Report. And last but not least in this group of slides, please, you'll see an FTC report. And you've heard about the FTC report, where the government quantified that the industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day, one day, than the (then) National Clearinghouse On Smoking and Health, the primary government agency working in this area, spent in one year.
That's what $250 billion will get you.
I think in opening statement I gave you
the analogy, and that is you put one nickel in a can, stand over in the corner, you shake it. It's a little distraction when you hear it.
That would be the health message that was coming out over the years, that there might be a relationship between smoking and health.
As opposed to taking a tin can and filling it with quarters and standing right in front of you and shaking it like this (indicating).
That was the industry message that there was no proven link, that there was doubt, that the movie stars, that The Flintstones, that the Beverly Hillbillies, that everybody was smoking, to give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue to smoke a product that they knew would kill them, that the cigarette industry knew would kill them.
Now we're going to talk about what was concealed from Marion.
Would you put up that slide, the material information concealed and omitted from Marion Dion.
I have a list of them here. They manipulated the nicotine. That smoking was not a choice, they knew that. 7 0 carcinogens in
every puff of smoke. By smoking cigarettes, you had a 50 percent chance of dying. Psychological crutches. All of that was concealed from Marion.
One thing, important, that was specific to Marion, that she was never told during her lifetime -Could you put up this slide, please.
-- and that is, is that there's a document, PT4993, a secret document from Reynolds, that shows that when they were heavily marketing the exact brand of cigarettes Marion smoked, the Winston filtered cigarettes, to keep up with the rest of the market, that they knew the hydrocarbon content of the smoke from Winstons was two-and-a-half times more carcinogenic than the smoke from nonfiltered Camel cigarettes. They never disclosed that to her during her lifetime. Never on the package. Never public knowledge.
Now, the next couple of slides have to do with low-tar and they have to do with filtered cigarettes, and, basically, what you heard was the industry position about they never misled anybody into thinking that filtered cigarettes
were safer, never misled anybody into thinking that low-tar cigarettes were safer.
Well, that's not what the government reports have found. The government reports -you'll get this, PT4200 -- Cigarettes are designed for addiction, you may have thought that filtered low-tar or light cigarettes were less dangerous, but research shows these cigarettes are every bit as addictive and no safer than others.
The next one, please.
And this is a Reynolds document, PT2023, and I say a Reynolds document because it was written by a man named Pepples, who worked for Brown & Williamson, they are responsible for Brown & Williamson. What he said is in most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette is getting as much or more nicotine and tar than she would have gotten from a regular cigarette. That was never disclosed to the public health officials. It was never disclosed to Marion Dion while she was alive.
Can we show the next one, please.
And take a look at the Surgeon General's Report, 2010, they talk about how public
officials had little basis to anticipate the degree to which manufactures could design cigarettes to allow smokers to draw more smoke and nicotine than was represented by machine-measured yields of tar and nicotine.
They are going to get up and tell you that there's no proof that they tricked -- that they the machines.
Well, they knew about compensation, that Dr. Hurt and Dr. Cummings told you about, that the smokers, the addicted smokers, would cover the filter holes and inhale deeper to get more nicotine that their brain required.
The industry knew this, the public health officials were fooled, because at one point in time they told smokers that couldn't quit, try filters or try low-tar.
Today, the government prohibits Reynolds from advertising either of those two brands of cigarettes because we know today that the government was wrong back then, and that they were duped, too.
The next slide, please.
There's an FTC report, 1967. 1967. They talked about a widely held belief that filtered
cigarettes are less hazardous to health than regular cigarettes. And they talk about using words like "filter" to -- to give the impression of relative safety, which is what the industry was doing with their ads.
Mr. Walker gave you a great big stack of the ads to go through there and that will be impossible for me to go through every single ad, but let me show you a few, and show you the message that they were sending to smokers -If you would put it up, please.
-- and go see women are in these ads and they'll see right here, and they talk about air filters in the new filter, they talk about filter -- I swear, I'm a low-tar and nicotine cigarette you can really taste.
You see over here in the right-hand corner, best-selling -No, the top right-hand corner, please,
Dan.
-- filter blend here, means better smoking
here.
The top right, you can see the filter blend.
These are the kind of ads -- right? These
are the kind of ads that they were stressing.
Do you have another one, please?
Well, we are going to get onto another topic here. And that other topic is: Youth marketing and marketing to American kids.
And Mr. Walker made a big point of arguing to you that there's no evidence that Reynolds marketed their cigarettes to anybody under the age of 21 or 18, or I don't know what figures he was throwing out, but -- and he also is going to tell you, well, there's no evidence that Marion Dion ever started smoking because of an ad when she was a kid, we don't have anything to do with that. But that's not the point.
Here is the point. The point is, you're going to be asked, once you find "yes" for the class membership question -- I'm going to show you the verdict form in a minute -- towards the end of the verdict form you're going to be asked should Reynolds be liable for punitive damages. Punitive damages are designed to punish a company.
And let me show you what this company was doing over the years and why this company
should be punished for marketing cigarettes to American teenagers.
Here you go. You'll see and these all refer to the records that you're going to get back there -- in the beginning, way before Marion was born, you'll see there's a couple of ads or a couple of Reynolds documents that have to do with their historical marketing to high school kids. And then you'll see 1479, where they talk about pre-smokers, and nonsmokers, and on the bottom you'll see there's that ad second-from-the-left of prom days.
But what's important is the next slide. These are all R.J. Reynolds documents with the PT numbers at the top, and the one in the middle they talk about Camel filter brands.
And they say, the brand must -- and Camel was a brand manufactured by Reynolds. Their own internal secret documents show, Camel filter, the brand must increase its share of penetration among the 14-to-24 age group, which have a new set of more liberal values and which represent tomorrow's cigarette business.
On the next one, which is PT1641, another Reynolds document, in 1960 this young adult
market of 14-to-24 age group represented
21	percent of the population. They represent tomorrow's cigarette business.
MR. MILLARD: Bill, 45.
MR. WICHMANN: Okay. I'm going to wrap this up here.
Can you show the 2012 Surgeon General's Report?
Major conclusions, all have to do with youth and youth marketing and youth smoking. The one on the bottom, the Surgeon General's Report, again, Reynolds wants you just not to believe it, they want you to believe that there's a government conspiracy against R.J. Reynolds, so these reports are not to -don't -- don't believe anything in the Surgeon General's Report. That's basically what they want to tell you.
But look at the bottom, Conclusion: Advertising and promotional activities by tobacco companies have been shown to cause the onset and continuance of smoking among adolescents and young adults.
Well, you know, we have to believe the Surgeon General and people like Dr. Hurt and
people like Dr. Cummings and people like Dr. Brady who dedicated their careers to the health and safety of the American people, dedicated their careers to helping people who are addicted to cigarettes. You take all that, take it all out, I mean, the government doesn't always do good things, but, let me tell you, this is the U.S. Surgeon General talking.
You'll see additional documents and there's one more I'd like to show, that is on replacement smokers. And this is PT3400, it's an R.J. Reynolds document, left-hand corner: Younger adult smokers have been a critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company in the last 50 years.
The lower right-hand corner: Younger adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers, and replacement smokers, folks, are the young people that they can sell cigarettes to when people like Marion Dion die.
That's what's promised through this company. It was and is its thinking, its thinking about -- this is not like Hershey's selling chocolate bars. They are understanding the epidemiology. And they are understanding
that they are selling a product. If their customers use it exactly the way that it's intended, they are going to die. They are looking to the future. What are we going to replace our customer base with? They are calling American kids replacement smokers.
Last but not least, you will receive and you have in your packet a jury instruction, I think it's number 18, and it has to do with punitive damages. And this will tell you the standard. The standard is: They are warranted if you find clear and convincing evidence that the conduct causing injury to Marion is so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. And there are three other elements for you to look at.
So what we are asking you to do, is check -Dan, how do I get some power here? Okay.
Check box number 1, yes. And that is:
Was she addicted to cigarettes and did her smoking cause her death?
Mr. Millard is going to address some of
the other questions.
Question number 2 is going to ask you to -- to apportion the fault. You heard George, George got up here and he told you -- I think that Marion might have been responsible for starting. Again, she was 15 years old when she started. When she started it was 16,
17	years before there was any warnings on the packs. Everybody around here was smoking. But he owned up to it and said maybe she was a little bit responsible for that.
If you feel that way, or if you feel that she didn't try hard enough to quit, okay, this is where you can -- this is where you can apportion the fault. But whether or not she tried to quit or whether or not she ever tried to quit, which she did, which she did, it doesn't have anything to do with question number 1, it has to do with Question Number 2.
So however you apportion the fault, we'll live with it.
But we do not believe Marion Dion can be responsible for the intentional conduct of Reynolds. Intentionally marketing their cigarettes to Americans while Americans died.
In concealing from Americans how dangerous smoking was, and concealing from America. The filters didn't work. Low-tar didn't work.
And that those Winston cigarettes were two-and-a-half times more likely to cause cancer. She's not responsible for their intentional conduct.
The next question would be three: Did she rely on the concealment? Yes.
Four: Did she rely on the conspiracy?
Yes .
Question Number 5 has to do with damages. Mr. Millard is going to address those with you. Very importantly, before I sit down, question number 6: Do you find by clear and convincing evidence -- let me make sure I get this straight here.
-- the punitive damages are warranted against Defendant, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, under the circumstances of this case.
Absolutely yes. The answer would be yes.
Think about product and Mr. Walker said in opening statement, she wasn't a tortured smoker. Well that's not what her son said.
Her son said she was crying. Her son said she
couldn't figure it out. She said, I can't understand, I'm trying, but I just can't quit.
I don't -- it must be something wrong with me, is what she told her son.
Well, we know what was wrong. They were manipulating the nicotine, they were -- they were casting doubt, they were putting ammonia and many other additives in her cigarettes, all of which she had no clue.
And they were also marketing to kids. And these are all reasons why you should answer yes to the last question.
So thank you very much for paying attention. Mr. Millard is going to come up and cover a few more topics with you.



CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. MILLARD: Can I have the red pen? Thanks.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Thanks so much for your patience. We talked early on in voir dire, and at that time we talked about how important your job is. We talked about how much we are going to count on you to pay attention and listen to all the evidence and decide at the end of the case.
And I can tell you, and I probably speak for both sides, we've watched you and we've noticed that you're taking notes, you're paying attention, you're focused, you're following the evidence. We want to thank you for that and we appreciate that very much, okay?
First of all, Bill left this up here, and let me just add a little bit he didn't put on there.
Here is what we think, with regard to the responsibility. Let me step back a little bit. If you look at the first question, it's very important because you're going to hear a lot of things from the other side about this, and you've heard a lot of things in this trial about choice and about health risks and about knowledge and those kinds of things. I want you to notice, that's not a question. You don't have to answer that question. It's not part of this.
First question, first question: Was she addicted? Mr. Wichmann just talked about all the things you've seen all the evidence, I know you've taken notes, I know you've listened to the experts.
Attached to that is what I'm going to talk a little bit more about. And attached to that is: And if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her primary lung cancer and death.
What evidence have you seen in this case about lung cancer and death? Nothing from Reynolds. Zero. Not a witness, not a document, not a shred of evidence.
But what you did hear is you heard from Dr. Kane. He couldn't be here, so we read prior testimony from him. And he talked to you about the medical records. And he went through all the different medical records.
And I want you to look at those when you get back in the jury room to deliberate. They are in evidence. They are all MD001, 2, 3, and 4, I believe. And there is a small set, a composite set, which are the key records that Dr. Kane talked about during his testimony.
Take a look at those. You're going to see a reference over and over and over about a couple of things.
Number 1, Dr. Kane told you when he testified that when she went to the hospital, Dr. Lonstein had her at first, and he -- he did
an investigation is the way they talked about it; it was an investigation. She had some symptomology, were taking a look at her, weren't sure what was going on. They didn't just jump to a conclusion. They investigated, they ran tests, they took x-rays, they took CT scans, they took pathology. They evaluated what was going on.
Dr. Kane said, what happens is that you don't just take one test or another test and make a conclusion. But you use all the investigation, you bring it all together, and he said the person that makes the decision whether it's a primary lung cancer is the treating physician. And he pointed out in the records where those treating physicians did that.
And what was he asked? What did he think? He looked at all the records. He treated her. That's why he was here. You remember we called him to come here. And he gave testimony because he was one of the people, one of the doctors, that was responsible for caring for her. He did that. You heard George, Mr. Dion talk about he treated his mother, so he felt
comfortable having him treat his wife, and he did.
Let me show you real quickly what the opinions were that he gave.
First one, he said he agrees with what the other doctors said -- all the other medical treatment providers. He went through their records, he listed them by names -- the oncologist, the pathologist, the radiologist.
He agrees with what the other doctors are saying with regard to it being primary lung cancer. He agrees, they all said it, he agrees with it.
Number 2, he agrees with what the doctors are saying, that it's the cancer from the lung metastasized -- you remember we talked about that, it spread down to her leg. It started in the lung, primary to the lung. He talked about primary being the site where it initiated, and it spread to the leg.
She has squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. Squamous cell carcinoma of the lung was the cause of her death. These are his opinions.
Marion Dion's primary squamous cell
carcinoma of the lung was caused by her 40-plus years of smoking more than a pack a day. Smoking, addiction would cause her lung cancer and cause her death.
The repeated exposures to the carcinogens in cigarettes she smoked for 40-plus years was the cause of her lung cancer.
He's not aware of any other cause -- any cause of her lung cancer other than her repeated exposure to cigarette smoke for 40-plus years, which more likely than not -just the greater weight of the evidence -- more likely than not, could have caused or did cause her lung cancer.
They looked at other things. He talked about medicine. There's lots of possibilities. There's lots of things people think, he said, sometimes we even chase down that -- that road until we figure out it's a dead end. In this case, all the roads lead to her smoking caused her primary lung cancer, which caused her death.
And then he said lastly, that the repeated exposures to the carcinogens in cigarettes she smoked for 4 0-plus years was the cause of her
lung cancer, which was there -- thereafter the cause of her death.
There's no other evidence to refute that. He treated her. You can review the records. Everybody agreed with him, all the other treaters.
Now, I'm not as fancy as Mr. Wichmann on my exhibits and slides, so you'll have to bear with me a little bit. Here's a little something I put together last night. Here is my scale.
Up just a little bit more.
If you look at evidence, you look at the scale -- we talked about it in voir dire -- the scales of justice. The greater weight is just slightly tilted in our favor.
Well, here is the evidence that we have on the medical aspect of the case. Did the smoking, did the addiction cause her lung cancer and her death? We've got the four oncologists you saw in the record, as Dr. Kane explained to you what they talked about.
Again, I encourage you to look at the records if you have any questions on that.
There's three pathologists that all took a
look at the tissue samples that were collected. Three radiologists took films and issued readings from those films that the doctors relied on. And then Dr. Lonstein, Dr. Bentze, who were two other treaters, Dr. Lonstein saw her at the beginning of the treatment. He was the one who started the evaluation and investigation process.
All of them are in agreement. There is not one record that says that it was not or could have been something else. All the roads were chased down, they went to dead ends, they came to conclusions, they looked at all the records.
And the key to all this is that what Dr. Kane said is that it is the treating physician's responsibility to take all the different doctors' work, plus take a look at the patient. Talk to her. Get to know her.
See what kind of habits or behaviors she has.
In the records you saw the references, she smoked heavily. She smoked for many years.
She smoked many packs a day. Then take all of that and put that all together to make a decision as to what happened.
And after that you started hearing Dr. Kane, who is in agreement with all the others.
So we think that, other than suggesting that there might have been possibilities of other things that could have happened. They certainly were at the beginning. Dr. Kane talked about there were possibilities of other things. They followed those roads, and it lead them nowhere.
When they followed the road that made the most sense, the most probable -- and Dr. Kane's opinions, you'll recall what he says, he says, These opinions are stated within a reasonable degree of medical probability. Not possibilities. They used all those, they chased them down, they ruled them out, they got to probabilities.
The most likely cause of what happened, the greater weight of the evidence shows, her lung cancer was caused by her addiction to smoking and which caused her death.
So, again, Mr. Wichmann talked more about the addiction aspect. The second part of the question goes to whether or not that addiction
caused her lung cancer and death. We suggest that it does.
One other doctor was here, and that was Dr. Richard Hurt. While he talked about addiction, he's also an MD, he said he reviewed the records, and here is what he had to say.
When he was asked, could you give a brief overview of your opinions in a -MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor, to the use of this type of demonstrative.
THE COURT: Approach.
(Sidebar discussion held:)
THE COURT: Can I see it? Thank you.
Okay. Go ahead.
MR. WALKER: Clearly, they put numbers going down the left side of the page, they clearly pulled from the transcript of the trial. The jury either has been or will be instructed that they are to rely on their own memory. In fact, I think it's right underneath the paper that you have there, they are to rely on their own memory about what the witnesses said, so ...
MR. MILLARD: You know, I will just read
it.
THE COURT: Okay. Perfect. Thank you.
(Sidebar concluded.)
THE COURT: Sustained. Go ahead.
MR. MILLARD: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: No problem.
MR. MILLARD: Dr. Hurt was asked if he reviewed the medical records in this case. He came here and talked about addiction. He said, yes, he had. And he talked about what his opinions are with regard to the addiction having a relationship with causing her lung cancer and her death.
And he said it was her nicotine addiction or tobacco dependence -- we use those terms interchangeably -- that lead to her to continue to smoke all of that time and it lead her to the development of lung cancer, which in turn caused her ultimate death.
Addiction, which caused her lung cancer, which caused her death.
One more Doctor who is in agreement with all the other doctors.
I'm not going to go through all the records. I'm not going to throw them all up again. We've talked about them. We've seen
them. Dr. Kane went through them and summarized them and rendered his opinions. In the evidence you will have the other records.
Let's talk about the damage aspect of this case. In voir dire we talked to everybody about damages. We talked to some people who had trouble with it. You can't bring Marion Dion back. So the only thing we have available is to ask you all to make an award of damages. It's money damages. That's all that's available.
Let me assure you that George Dion would give you everything he has to bring her back. The money wouldn't change, he wouldn't care about the money if he could bring her back.
But it can't be done. So what does he want? Justice. Justice. He wants somebody to stand up and say, you know, this is wrong.
This should not have happened. I should not have lost my childhood sweetheart, my high school sweetheart. You heard him talk about it. You heard the kids talk about it.
They were best friends. They grew up together. They met in high school. And we've all known people that when they marry young,
it's not good odds that's going to last. They beat the odds. 42 years from high school.
They raised kids together, they grew up together. She was his best friend. She knew him better than anybody. He relied on her. He depended on her. He was there for her as well.
But no money can bring her back. That's all we have. That's all we have. It's the only way we can see that justice is done for what took place.
You saw in your instructions and we read to you what those elements of damages are, and I just want to go through those a little bit to make sure we are on the same page with that. They are broken down into a couple of different things.
The first thing he is entitled to is to seek recovery for loss of companionship. What did he lose? He lost his best friend of 42 years, his childhood high school sweetheart, his wife, his soulmate, his best friend.
The second thing we talk about is his loss of protection. And sometimes that doesn't make sense in a case like this, but what it's really talking about is the security, the comfort,
that piece where she made him whole, he made her whole. Together they were a single unit. It's important, it's an important part of the case.
And then his mental pain and suffering.
And he talked a little bit about that. And it's hard; how do you describe that?
Well, it's tough, but I can tell you, we saw it. You saw him on the stand. This has been 20 years, he is still feeling this. He still has kids. Now, they are an emotional family, I give you that. Everybody is still feeling this loss. It hasn't gone away.
So his pain and suffering is broken down into a couple of different things. He's entitled to recover the pain and suffering of -- you don't recover from Mrs. Dion's pain, okay, that's gone, we can't recover for that, but he was there with her when this all happened. He felt frustrated. He felt helpless. There was nothing he could do but sit by and watch this happening to her.
And it started with the destruction in her leg. And he talked about it, that the bone would be just eating away, getting brittle,
breaking and fracturing, and the rods they put in it, and they had to replace the whole head of her bone to try to allow her to keep walking.
This was a woman who you heard about, she was a dancer, she was fun-loving, and she was full of life. Full of life. You saw the pictures. They were having fun. Things were good. Nobody expected this to happen. George said it was like a bombshell hit them when they got this news. A bombshell hit them.
Now, they talked about the different health risks, and he explained, he said in the '50s, who knew what that meant? Lung capacity, from a coach. What does that mean? Well, if you can't run as good, maybe.
But he said he never thought it would be a permanent injury. And we all know, you got to step back in time, we talked about that in voir dire too, we have to take off our 2016 glasses and step back into the '50s and think about what was going on back then. Right? It was a different time and it was a different place and people didn't appreciate. And over time things changed. Today it's a different story. We
aren't talking about today. She died 22 years ago.
This is a love story that ended very badly. Very, very badly. He talked about his love for her. He talked about their relationship. He still has a picture. I am reminded I've got to grab that, I just noticed it's still sitting there of her, he still has that. He still loves her. You can't replace, you can't take away what he had.
You remember we saw some of the things that they had together. She was this kind of gal, you know, she was fun and loving and playful.
Here is what George talked about, they are dancing together. That's gone. Marion and he.
Here's the picture that he keeps with him. That's his bride. That's his sweetheart. This is what he wants to remember.
There were some questions, the cross examination of Mr. Dion was you don't want to remember her as this or that. This is what he remembers. This is what he keeps with him.
This is his girl.
The bond was long-lasting, 42 years, until
she was literally ripped away from him, unexpectedly, a bombshell to them.
There was some mention about a subsequent relationship that Mr. Dion is in. You heard the instructions on that, that his continuing to live his life and to move forward is not to be mitigated. Damages should not be mitigated based on that. The fact that he entered into a relationship after her death may not be considered in mitigation. You can't reduce his damages because of that fact.
Why? Because the law understands you can't replace what was lost. He is entitled, he was 59 years old at the time of this death, he is entitled to live on. But the emotion, the loss, his best friend is gone, that has not changed. You saw the emotion. He didn't just say it, but you witnessed it.
He talked to you a little bit about what happened towards the end. He cared for her.
He didn't run away from her when things got bad, he ran to her. He was there with her. He stayed with her. He bathed her, he carried her to the bathroom. He did everything he could to make sure she was safe, secure, and comfortable
in all they could do.
And then at the end, at the end he laid in bed with her and they just talked, you know. They talked about what they -- they knew it was coming to an end. And how hard is that, to lay there and say, I love you, you're my best friend, you know, we raised this family together. We talked about the kids, it came to an end.
She cared about her children, that's what she wanted to do at the end. He made sure she got to do that. It's a love story that ended very, very badly.
You saw him on the stand a little bit. He got a little testy up there, a little angry, okay. I want you to know that we should not hold that against him. Of course he is a little angry. Of course he is upset about what's happened. And part of the reason is he is seeing a lot of this evidence and hearing this, some of it for the very first time. He is going wow, really, wow. Upsetting. It's okay.
All right. Here is the hard part. You all are responsible for figuring out how to
allocate damages. How do we go about it?
What's the number?
We are asking for a number. We told you in voir dire, we are going to ask for a big number. But how do you get there?
That's a tough job. It's your job. I don't know. How do you that? Okay. You have to figure it out among yourselves.
You have to look at the evidence. You have to figure out a way that makes sense to you based on the evidence and the law. We believe the evidence and the law both support the fact that a substantial award is appropriate in this case.
I'm going to talk a little bit about a couple of ways to think about it that might help you, but ultimately the decision is yours. You have to figure it out.
She passed in 1994, it's been 22 years. He's entitled to recover for all that period of time as well as whatever time remains in his future.
And I'll tell you, it's uncomfortable for me to talk about how long he might live in his future, especially with him in the room, but,
you know, I would suggest that he is in good health and he doing well. You've seen him.
You listened to him. Another ten years on top of it. I don't know. You don't know. But look at him, listen to the evidence, and make a decision.
You know, how long is this going to continue to last? So past damage and future damage. How do you figure out how long, appreciate or respect how long 22 years is, how do you put that into perspective?
One of the ways that helps me is I look back in history. If you look back in history 22 years, around 1994, that's when she passed. What was going on in America at that time?
Let's think about things that were happening that far back and see if it triggers an appreciation for the time.
Remember Nancy Kerrigan, the Olympic skater? She got hit by Tonya Harding and attacked by her. That seems like forever.
OJ Simpson was arrested that year. A long time ago. I won't talk any further about that, but it was a long time ago. 1996, all right.
How long has that been? Well, for me it's
easy, because my daughter was born in 1996. She's off to college now. I still remember that little pigtail thing. It's been a long time, a lot has happened. It's been a long time; many, many years.
If we go back just 20 years, 1996, that's when the OJ Simpson trial began, the JonBenet Ramsey, remember all of that was happening in the news? The ValuJet crashed in the Florida Everglades, do you remember that? That's a long time. It seems like forever ago.
Here is the kicker: Presidential election between Bill Clinton and Al Gore. Bob Dole and Jack Kemp. Anyone remember Ross Perot? Long time, many things have happened. 1997, Princes Diana was killed. That seems like forever.
It's a long time. It's appreciating the years that have gone by.
We were going to go through a whole bunch more, but we had -- if we look back just to 2010, the Gulf of Mexico oil spill was happening, that was a big event, it was all over the news. It's a long time, okay?
So how do you go about this? That may help, it may not help. That's one of the ways
I think about it going back in time.
We don't want you to give an award based on sympathy. Mr. Dion doesn't want your sympathy. He gets sympathy every holiday. He got a lot of sympathy on Mother's Day. And we don't want his -- we don't want the sympathy.
I want you to look at the evidence and the law and do something that's just in this case, that's a just award, something fair based on the law and the evidence.
All right. What's the amount? It's very, very hard. And again, I don't know. I can't give you a number, it's your number, but we think that whether it's 2 million or it's 20 million, that it's somewhere in there. It's up to you figure that out. It's up to you to come together as a group and decide what makes sense.
For us, if we were looking at all the evidence and we were looking at the facts of the case and applying the law, we think the law and the facts justify an award of 11 million for 22 years, and what's left of ten years following.
So we think that's fair. It's up to you.
More or less, it's entirely up to you. And we trust you with that decision and we respect the fact that you've been here listening, paying attention and following the evidence and that you will do the right thing.
And just lastly, we want to say, again, we want to thank you. We know this has been a significant sacrifice. We know we've taken you away from your work life, and your family, and the things that you're doing, and we appreciate you very much and respect the fact that you're here and taking this job seriously.
I would ask that you give the same attention to counsel when he gets up to talk to you. Thank you.



REBUTTAL STATEMENT
MR. WICHMANN: I just need to get the boards down here, Judge, so that I can put mine up.
THE COURT: No problem.
MR. WICHMANN: My 15 minutes start -THE COURT: I'll certainly allow you a change of the board.
MR. WICHMANN: Start right now.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. WICHMANN: Okay. Folks, I'm going to be brief. I know it's been a long day. I have 15 minutes and let me start out by saying that Reynolds tells you now that nicotine, while really not so addictive, maybe it's not so mind-altering -Would you play the Koop video, please.
-- but this is the evidence that you saw, this is the science.
(A video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
MR. RATHER: Surgeon General C. Everett Koop has issued two major reports on smoking, one on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine addiction. The tobacco industry disputes both reports as more political than scientific.
SURGEON GENERAL KOOP: We have been told so frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free choice, you start when you want and you quit when you want, but anybody who has ever smoked knows that is not true .
MR. RATHER: What does the record, the long-time record say is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco?
SURGEON GENERAL KOOP: Indications are very clear that the people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting are these who began smoking when they were 14 to 16.
I think the studies all over the word, in every country and culture, the younger you start, the greater the addiction and the more difficult it is to quit.
MR. RATHER: Now, you said that you consider tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin. Isn't that an overstatement?
SURGEON GENERAL KOOP: No, I think the evidence is very clear if you understand what we are talking about. Addiction is a specific, physiologic problem.
And the manner in which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or to heroin. And that even after you have quit, and you think you're clean, that there's a tremendous tendency to relapse. There is no
such thing as a safe cigarette. There's no such thing as a quality death.
(The video clip ended.)
MR. WICHMANN: Now, where is the evidence that Reynolds told, that Reynolds told smokers before Marion Dion died, told them, quit, you need to quit, you need to stop? There is no evidence of that until this courtroom today. Why? Because look at that consumption graph going straight up. They weren't going to tell their customers to quit, because they wanted to keep them addicted and they wanted to sell them more cigarettes.
They came in here and said to you that Marion Dion might not have died of primary lung cancer from smoking, it might have been something to do with her uterus.
Can you put up the death certificate, please?
Only one witness, only one medical witness who actually knew Marion Dion and treated Marion Dion testified, and that was Dr. Robert Kane from Sarasota and Venice. And his partner signed the death certificate, State of Florida death certificate. Cause of death: Lung
cancer, bone metastasis, and hypercalcemia.
Where does it say "possibly uterus"? It doesn't. And he got up and told you, well, we could have called a witness, but we didn't.
Where is the medical witness to support Reynolds' theory that Dr. Kane, Dr. Orman, all the treaters, the list that Mr. Millard gave you, all the local Sarasota and Venice doctors, where is the Reynolds witness to tell you they all committed malpractice, because they treated this lady for lung cancer from smoking when she really had cancer of the uterus?
So please keep your eye on the ball in this case.
They told you the witnesses that we called were biased. Well, Dr. Brady told you under oath, yes, she's getting paid for this and she's donating every cent to a charity, a foundation charity at the Medical University of South Carolina for Research.
Biased? Well, Dr. Cummings, contributor to the U.S. Surgeon General's Report, when they asked him this, this is what he said: "What I have said is I have an acquired bias. If the truth is biased, then I guess I'm biased
because I've learned over my 38 years of doing this work that's what I testify to."
And they told you that Dr. Brady really -really thought that women smoked for some different reason other than nicotine. And they trotted out an article that she co-wrote.
Well, here is what she told you under oath. This was a sentence in the article that the lead author and I disagreed on a great deal. I don't agree with this, 100 percent I don't agree with this.
That wasn't her writing, that was some co-writer on this article that she wrote. She came and told you all about nicotine and how addictive it was.
Now, let's talk about actions. They said, well, she didn't really quit, she didn't try to quit, she didn't have an action, she didn't this, she didn't that.
Well, they conspired and concealed to keep the truth from the American people that their product was addictive and caused death. They lied and they misled. They sent coupons to their customers to get them to smoke more, they marketed filtered and light cigarettes, and
they had no programs to help addicted smokers.
Would you play the We Don't Know video, please.
(A video clip was played and transcribed as follows:)
NARRATOR: Take the controversy about cigarettes. In the 91st Congress, a House committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. The record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims.
ANNE BROWDER: I'd have to disagree with you in that we don't know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking.
MR. DWYER: I don't know. Frankly, I think that smoking may be hazardous it, may not be .
NARRATOR: Smoking may be hazardous, it may not be. No one, including TV-7 knows for certain.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: I'm saying that the science to date and over $100 million of our industry indicates that there is no causal -NARRATOR: Cigarette smoking does not
cause cancer, yes or no?
MR. HORRIGAN: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
NARRATOR: There is no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
MR. HORRIGAN: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
MS. DAWSON: And I think it's worth pointing out that all the links that have been established between smoking and certain diseases have been based on statistics. What that means is that the causal relationship has not yet been established.
ANNE BROWDER: The case is still out. The jury may not come in.
NARRATOR: It may not be harmful, you're not convinced?
ANNE BROWDER: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
NARRATOR: Do cigarettes cause cancer?
MR. MERRYMAN: I don't know if they do or
not.
MR. BANKS: I'm not in a position to give
you a does or does not answer.
(The video clip ended.)
MR. WICHMANN: So after all of that,
Mr. Walker came up here and said to you, Well, Americans didn't believe us. It's kind of like a clothing salesman who you walk into the store and they tell you, Why, that dress looks good on you. No one is going to believe that person.
In other words, they lied, and they lied and misled about a product that caused 20 million dead and 500,000 deaths a year.
Okay. He's comparing that company and that conduct to the Nordstrom salesperson. But he's still telling you: We lied, but it's okay because no one believed us. That's what all his polls claim to show.
Well, here is the evidence, folks. Look at the consumption chart. If people weren't believing their lies during this time period, why in the heck were they still buying cigarettes, and the consumption chart was going straight up and the lung cancer death rate was right behind it.
Now, let's talk about quit attempts. He
said, Oh, Dr. Brady this, Dr. Brady that, there were all kind of things available to her. Bill Wichmann told you that nicotine patches weren't available when they really were.
Well, here is the evidence.
The question was asked of Dr. Brady:
"Question: And is it your opinion that it was the nicotine patch that allowed Marion Dion to quit smoking?
"Answer: Absolutely.
"Question: And the nicotine patch was not available in the 1980s, was it?
"Answer: That's correct.
"Question: And it wasn't available in the '70s, was it?
"Answer: That's correct.
"Question: And it wasn't available in the
' 60s?
"No."
The evidence from Dr. Hurt and Dr. -Dr. Hurt was, the nicotine patches became available to Americans in '91, '92. Shortly after that, Marion Dion went to her doctor and got a prescription because that's the only way you could get that drug at that time, that
nicotine replacement therapy.
But Dr. Hurt told you it was remarkable. She used the patch for 14 months, which was way off, way more than doctors were prescribing in the beginning. And he said, as the director of the Mayo nicotine addiction clinic, that that's the way he would have done it, but years later. And that showed how severely addicted she was. She had to have nicotine regularly for
14	months. And even that wasn't enough, because George told you she would smoke when she had the patch on. And that tells you how addicted she was, how her brain was crying out for nicotine.
They said, Well, she quit -- she only tried two times in two decades, two times in another decade. Here is what Bob Dion told you just yesterday, he was on the stand.
"Question: Mr. Dion, did you ever witness your mom taking any actions to quit?
"Answer: My mother tried to quit smoking, I'd say, all the time. She would, like I said, switch to light cigarettes constantly, trying to quit ... "
MR. WICHMANN: "Constantly."
"Question: Can you estimate for the jury approximately how many times you're aware that she tried to quit?
"Answer: Like I said, I couldn't even count them. Hundreds. Hundreds of times over the course of the time she smoked. I mean, I couldn't [even] count them."
MR. WICHMANN: So he comes up with four in
4	0 years. Keep your eye on the ball, folks.
On the issue of whether she was addicted, Bob told you that on her deathbed she said, I finally figured out why I couldn't quit, and it really wasn't my fault, because I was addicted.
MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor. May I be heard?
THE COURT: Sure, approach.
(Sidebar discussion held:)
THE COURT: Go ahead.
MR. WALKER: I think that the testimony he's referring to was stricken.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. WICHMANN: You believe it was? We probably had testimony, but it wasn't struck.
THE COURT: Well, it was objected to and overruled or it was objected and it is
sustained and it's not supposed to come in.
MR. WICHMANN: I don't know that it was sustained or not.
THE COURT: Okay. Show it to me.
MR. WICHMANN: I'm pretty sure that I have it here. I thought I did but ...
THE COURT: You want to go ahead and look at it first, Mr. Walker? Well, let me see it first.
MR. WALKER: There's a motion to strike to pick it up, then there's no answer.
MR. WICHMANN: There was no ruling from the Court.
THE COURT: There was a ruling on every obj ection.
MR. WALKER: It's up here. There's a motion to strike the record. For some reason that doesn't contain the ruling, but Your Honor would have ruled.
THE COURT: My recollection, you can stay up to the very last line that you have underlined because I think that was the part that I granted the motion to strike on.
MR. WICHMANN: Okay.
THE COURT: Five minutes left.
(Sidebar concluded.)
THE COURT: Go ahead. Granted in part. They told you that Marion knew years ago that she believed that smoking was bad for her and she went ahead and smoked anyway. That's not what Karen Martin said. Karen Martin said the following:
"Answer: And my mother specifically said, there's nothing wrong with it. If there was, they wouldn't be allowed to sell cigarettes."
Karen went on to say:
"Answer: And I -- that was her thing, you know, they -- they wouldn't sell it if there was anything wrong with it."
That was the testimony from Karen Martin about the way -- about what her mother believed, not what information there was out there, because we know that the industry was engaged in a campaign, you saw all the executives talking about how there was no doubt, and there was doubt. And so she did exactly what the industry wanted her to do as one of their best customers: To continue to smoke their product. They sent her coupons and they did absolutely nothing for her, other than
come to court now and blame her for being their best customer.
Thank you very much. Please keep your eye on the ball and follow the verdict form and remember the evidence that came to you from our scientists and from the historical documents and we ask you to return a just verdict.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
