CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. WICHMANN: Thank you, Your Honor. May I proceed.
THE COURT: Absolutely.
MR. WICHMANN: First, let me thank you, on George's behalf, for your verdict that you rendered yesterday.
And let me say that George, for this phase of the trial, we are asking you to render a verdict that is just, but that is reasonable.
And we think to be reasonable, first Reynolds must be punished.
Could you put up the slide?
And they must be punished for what Marion went through. In the first phase of the trial there was -- there's a jury instruction on harm to others, and that's not really appropriate at this stage of the proceeding. At this stage of the proceeding, it's about what Reynolds did to Marion.
And so we think that the punishment award from you needs to be reasonable, but it needs to be substantial so that Reynolds is punished
and they are deterred from ever doing this again.
And we just heard from their corporate representative, who wanted you to believe that the company really doesn't want to sell cigarettes. They really want to go to this other product that is not -- that you don't light, and doesn't burn, and doesn't produce cancer-causing smoke.
But the truth of the matter is, the product that they sell called Snus is less than 3 percent of their sales, and the other e-cigarettes are down there in the single digits too.
The truth is, is that they are doing the same thing now that they did in the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s. They went out and bought Lorillard so that they could get the number-one-selling menthol cigarette in this country, Newport, and that's where they are making all their money.
So they -- they haven't changed. We'd ask you to issue in this penalty phase an award that's just, and we are suggesting to you that it should be the same amount that you awarded
for George in the first phase.
If you want to give more, or if you want to give less, that's within your discretion.
I think that Reynolds would -- would receive that message. If you think that in this phase the penalty should be greater, then most respectfully, George would ask you not to award an amount over, say, two times what you awarded for him for the loss of his wife.
If you don't punish this company, I think that, most respectfully, that would not be fair. They deserve punishment. They deserve the punishment for that. But they deserve reasonable punishment, not something over and above the amount that you awarded in the first phase of this, or a little bit more than that.
And thank you very much for paying, again, such close attention, taking such notes, and doing your duty.
Thank you, very much.



REBUTTAL STATEMENT
MR. WICHMANN: Here we go again. Remember it was two times she only tried to quit in a decade, two times she only tried to quit? I don't know, these numbers that constitute Reynolds quit attempts. Now he is trying to tie this into a thousand dollars a day.
Respectfully, if you don't punish Reynolds with an amount that they are going to appeal, that company is going to appeal, there's not going to be punishment.
And so we think that the amount needs to be at least as much as you awarded in compensatory damages for the loss of Marion, and if you feel that's not enough, we don't want you to go any more than two times that number.
But if there's no significant amount from you in the punitive damages, it's going to fall on deaf ears.
Now, so we need to punish them, and that
punishment needs to be significant enough to deter this kind of conduct from a major American corporation.
Thank you.
