CLOSING STATEMENT
MR. WALKER: Good afternoon.
You know, as you think about whether you
should do more than you've already done in response to the request that you just heard, you should think about what you've already done.
You have awarded $12 million in the first phase of this lawsuit. And while those were for compensatory damages, to a company like Reynolds, that has a real sting. And the sting isn't about -- just about the money and the things that Mr. Wichmann was talking about.
It's that this is a company that hopefully you can see, that certainly today is working very hard with very sincere people, trying to make better, more varied options available to consumers today.
What I can tell you is that the verdict that you have already rendered, where you gave Mr. Dion every dollar that he asked for and then added another 1 million on top of that, is being taken very, very seriously by the company. And the message that's already sent from that verdict is already being heard and felt and received at Reynolds.
The question, as I mentioned earlier, that you have to decide for this phase is whether
there is a need, a justification, a purpose, for an award of more money. And the only valid purposes that you could have for that, according to the judge's instructions, are to punish and to deter.
I don't have anymore fancy boards, I don't have any more PowerPoints to share with you. I just want to talk with you about what you've heard today that you hadn't heard when you awarded that first $12 million. And you should understand as well about that, that although you assigned 25 percent responsibility to Mrs. Dion, the Court has not decided whether that percentage will be applied to reduce the $12 million.
And I can tell you that Mr. Dion wants every penny of that $12 million that you awarded.
So, is there a role for more money now for punishment?
One thing to think about is: Who would you be punishing? The people who engaged in the activities that you all saw and heard about in the first phase of this case, and obviously were very disturbed by, those people are long
gone. Most of them are dead. If there are others who are still alive, they are not at Reynolds and they certainly aren't running Reynolds.
The people who are running Reynolds are well-meaning, well-intended, hard-working scientists, and others, like Dr. Garner, who are genuinely excited about looking for new ways to try to make a different kind of a product, to offer something to consumers that maybe wasn't available before. Even if consumers aren't yet willing to buy those products, and even if the company has to take a loss on some of those products, Reynolds is a company today that is still making them, still spending a lot of money developing them, marketing them, putting them out there for people to hopefully make different choices than have been made so far.
So then you have to ask yourself, Well, is there a role for deterrence here? Will awarding more money to Mr. Dion stop the companies from doing something that you probably think they were doing before, and that you don't want to happen again, in a way that
won't happen if you don't award punitive damages?
What will the punitive damages they are asking for you do? What will they deter?
You heard a lot of evidence in the first phase of this case that the companies knew things, believed things internally, that weren't being shared with the American people. But you saw today that that was 25 years ago, or further back.
R.J. Reynolds of today is disclosing the information it has about cigarettes, ingredients, additives, the constituents of smoke, whether it's cigarettes or any other kind of product, every which way. They are putting it on their website, both in the long form list, where you could click and learn what you want to learn about individual ones. Or, if you smoke Camel or some brand that Reynolds still makes, you can go in and have it limited to just those products.
They are disclosing information to different states that you heard about. They are disclosing information to the Food and Drug Administration, to the Department of Health and
Human Services, and they've been doing that for a long time.
The reality is that nowadays there are so many watchdogs with their eyes on Reynolds and every cigarette company that it would be impossible for Reynolds or any other company to do anything like what you saw in the first phase of this case.
You heard from Dr. Garner that the companies can't even change their product.
They can't even make a public statement about the risks, even if it's a good statement, Hey, we've got a product that our studies internally and externally have showed might actually help people quit smoking or reduce your risks if you want to continue with tobacco products. They didn't say that until they jumped through the FDA's hoops and it's approved.
This is a company that isn't designing products to addict anyone; they are not designing products with a calloused eye to who might be affected by the products they make. They are working on two, three, four different ways of creating products with reduced risks.
Some of them -- they all still have risks,
some have more than others, but they are working on finding ways for people to pick what they want, whatever the risks they want. And they are putting warnings on their packages.
You saw a clip on one of the first days that you heard here in trial about -- I think his name was Robert Heimann. It was a very short clip that was part of a Figlar video where he was saying that the American Tobacco Company didn't agree with the warnings, and they only put them there because they were being forced to do that.
That's not what you heard today. You heard the opposite. You heard of a company saying, You know, even if we aren't forced to warn about our products, we are going to put a warning on there, and we are going to tell the government that these products should be age-restricted and shouldn't get into the hands of children.
Mr. Wichmann told you that what the companies are doing today that you heard about is the same, the same as what was going on during Mrs. Dion's lifetime. And I hope that you will see that that's just not the case.
The very last thing that we talked about is a perfect example of that. When Dr. Hurt was here, when Dr. Cummings was here, you heard about how the public health community would come out with a study, and some representative, either directly from a company or through some organization which doesn't exist anymore, would come right out and criticize those findings.
And yet you heard today that the Reynolds of 2016 disagrees, and you can imply -- you can infer disagrees strongly with what was in the 2010 Surgeon General's Report, and yet they've said not a peep about it to the public.
No one's gone on television, no one went on Face the Nation or 60 Minutes or the local news show to say, Don't listen to the Surgeon General. They did the opposite. They put on their website a link to the very report that contains the conclusions that they disagreed with.
That's what you would expect a responsible company to do, and that responsible company that we believe you heard about is the company who will write a check for any amount of punitive damages if you choose to award them.
You've already awarded $12 million.
You're now being asked to award 12 million more or some amount even beyond that.
It won't punish the right people. It can't deter the companies from doing something that they couldn't possibly do, even if they wanted to. It will just be more money, just more money.
And we're asking you -- I want to show you one thing.
Can I have the ELMO, please?
This isn't something that I prepared, this is a copy of the Court's instructions on the law that were read to you for this phase, and I think you'll be given a copy of when you retire to deliberate.
And I just want to call your attention to a couple of things.
If any damages are going to be assessed for punitive damages, it has to be as punishment and as a deterrent, which I've already talked about.
You may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages.
You've already heard in this case that --
well, you know you've already awarded $12 million. You've heard that the companies in lawsuits like this have already paid about 140, $145 million. You've heard that Reynolds has paid $3 billion to the State of Florida and continues to make those payments. And you've heard that to the other states outside of Florida, the company -- Reynolds specifically -- has paid $58 billion. Reynolds is already being punished and deterred.
We are going to ask you, when you answer the verdict form in this question, then, to exercise your discretion to decline to assess punitive damages.
Mr. Wichmann's arguments aren't really about punishment or deterrence for doing the things that you heard about in this case.
Things like keeping important information to yourself, criticizing the public health community, not trying to make cigarettes safer, not offering an option to people who wanted to smoke.
That's not the basis for the money they are asking you for. The money that they are asking you for is really just for the fact that
Reynolds is still in business.
There's a complaint about the fact that Reynolds still sells cigarettes, cigarettes that they admit on their website can be addictive, are addictive, that cause injuries and can lead to death.
And Mr. Wichmann asked the question, Well, Reynolds could just stop selling cigarettes, couldn't they? They could just exit the cigarette business altogether.
I didn't object to that question, because I thought you might want to hear the answer, but you should know that you can't award punitive damages just because Reynolds still sells cigarettes.
This is another of the instructions that you'll have to take back with you.
Judge Moreland read it to you earlier, but it might become important if one among you thinks that Reynolds should be punished for still making cigarettes that harm people.
The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity protected by federal law. Therefore, I instruct you that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company cannot be held liable merely
for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes.
What would you expect a company who is still selling cigarettes to do? You would expect them to be open, to be transparent, to disclose, to use the money that they make from selling conventional cigarettes towards the development of safer cigarettes, to work on making things available to people who want to quit, and to working with the regulators like the thousand people under the FDA who are receiving, have received a billion dollars to watch and supervise and oversee Reynolds.
That's what you would want a company like that to do, and that's what Reynolds is doing.
It's my job to try to present our case in the best way that I can. In the first phase of this case, we had to do the best that we could to try to put into context some of the things you heard about what was going on a long time ago. But I couldn't you bring you Claude Teague, he's dead. I couldn't walk him in here, put him on the stand and say, Explain yourself. Tell this jury why you wrote some of the things that you wrote and did anyone
listen.
But in this phase of the trial, we were able to bring you a live human being so you could see his demeanor, hear his answers, and decide for yourselves what you think this company is really about.
But it's also my job to suggest to you that if you are going to award punitive damages, don't pick an arbitrary number like $12 million or something else that was thrown out.
If you think that the money I just went over is not enough to deter Reynolds and the regulatory environment is not enough to deter Reynolds and that Reynolds has not yet been punished enough, be thoughtful about what the punishment would be if you choose to come up with one. Let me give you one possibility that's better than pulling a number out of thin air.
We know from your verdict that you concluded as a group that Mrs. Dion was addicted to the cigarettes that she smoked. We know from your verdict, we've gotten the message, as a group that you decided that that
addiction prevented her from quitting smoking early enough to avoid her cancer.
You probably accepted some of the testimony that you heard from Mr. Dion, from their son Robert, about Mrs. Dion and how often they said she was trying to quit.
If you think that some additional punishment should be awarded in the form of punitive damages to Mr. Dion, then consider something like a thousand-dollar fine for every time that you believe Mrs. Dion tried to quit smoking and failed because she was addicted.
You know that when Dr. Brady was here.
She said that the evidence supported that Mrs. Dion was addicted in 1970 going forward, and you heard the testimony of their son Robert, if you believed it, that Mrs. Dion was trying to quit smoking every month.
If you were to award -- or not award -- if you were to fine the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of today for the things that it did back then that you might think prevented Mrs. Dion from quitting smoking once she was addicted, why not fine a thousand dollars for each time, even if it's every month of every
year from 1970 all the way up to when she finally quit in 1993. That wouldn't be arbitrary, it would send a further message to the one we have already received from your initial verdict, and it would be something that would make sense.
I've tried to argue that that's not necessary, but if you are going to do it, that's one possibility that we think is better than just pulling a number out of thin air for another 10, 11, $12 million.
As I said when we started this phase, we are in your hands. We trusted you in the first phase of this case to be fair and listen to both sides, and even though it didn't turn out the way we wanted it to, we are confident that you did that, and I'm confident in asking each of you to do that.
You should all try to agree on your verdict in this phase, but you should know that you don't have to set aside your honest beliefs just because others may disagree with you.
We are in your hands. We are asking you to be just, to be fair to the Reynolds of today who will be responsible for whatever verdict
you come back with.
Thank you, Your Honor.
