MR. KAISER: Thank you.
May it please the Court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the Jury. Good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. KAISER: I echo the Judge's sentiments, and that is, I thank you very much for taking time out of your lives to sit as jurors in this case. I hope what I said earlier, the very first day, to a large group
of people, I hope that rings true, and that is, whoever is selected in this case, and that happens to be you all, I hope you find, after this is all said and done, it was a worthwhile experience. If not, I even give you more of a heartfelt thanks.
Let me briefly tell you what this case is not about. This case is not about whether it took an excessive long time for Ms. Dombey to file her lawsuit.
This case is not about how Ms. Dombey went about hiring her attorneys.
This case is not about whether Daniel Dombey blamed the tobacco companies in any way, form or shape.
In fact, the only thing that you have to concern yourself about is what Judge Tuter read to you, and that is the verdict form, because the verdict form has the issues.
So what I'm going to do in my closing argument is I'm going to go verbatim, in order, from the list, from the verdict form, starting with addiction down to damages, so that you will have an understanding of just what the issues are in this case.
So No. 1, if you could put on the screen the first question that you are going to be asked to consider, and that is, the nature of addiction.
Let me make it easier. We are not very technologically savvy.
No. 1, this is the first question you will be asked to address and answer: Was Daniel Dombey addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of bladder cancer?
So	beginning with addiction, and the testimony, you recall the testimony from Dr. Allen Goldman. He was a Board certified internist and pulmonologist, who has seen for years and years patients with chest diseases.
He has counseled and treated for addiction, nicotine addiction. He has previously run a smoking-cessation clinic. He taught others in the area of nicotine addiction as well.
And as a matter of general, generally speaking, what Dr. Goldman said, No. 1, was that chronic, heavy smokers, people that smoke at least half a pack or a pack a day for a
number of years, one year or more, is a chronic, heavy smoker, at least 90 percent of those people, according to Dr. Goldman, are addicted.
Dr. Goldman was able to testify to a reasonable degree of medical probability to that statement
And Dr. Goldman went further, and he went further because he said if you know specific information about a particular smoker, you could be more certain. You could go beyond
51	percent, which he didn't have to do in this case, but he did.
What he did, as a result of the depositions and the other information he was provided, he was able to learn information about Daniel Dombey.
And so he told you he was able to learn from the facts about the smoking routine, which aided his opinion that Daniel Dombey was addicted
Remember how he talked about it. Daniel Dombey, the first thing he would do in the morning when he woke up was to have a cigarette. Why? Because that is the longest
period of time a smoker is going without a cigarette, and the addicted person needs the nicotine first thing in the morning.
One indicator that Daniel Dombey was addicted.
No. 2: Daniel Dombey would smoke cigarettes throughout the day and night.
No. 3: He talked about quit attempts, because he said that is relevant in deciding whether or not somebody is addicted.
And he said from the records, he gleaned that there were several, at least three quit attempts that were all unsuccessful.
What he said was that for each quit attempt, there were obvious signs of withdrawal symptoms, which is another indicator of addiction.
You heard the testimony of withdrawal symptoms from Alicia Dombey. She concluded that her husband was like a caged lion. He was irritable. He was edgy. It affected his entire personality when he tried to quit, and he was only able to do so for a few days, and with tears streaming down his eyes, would say,
I would if I could. But he was unable to quit.
That, to Dr. Goldman, is a signal of addiction, because he tried to quit, he couldn't quit, and he had the telltale signs of addiction, which were withdrawal symptoms.
You heard evidence in this courtroom from family members that when Daniel Dombey went to a restaurant, he would have to go outside and smoke during the meal.
You heard evidence in this case that when Daniel Dombey went to a movie, and assuming when someone goes to a movie they are there to enjoy the picture, he would have to get up during the movie and go outside and smoke.
These are also indicators, according to Dr. Goldman, of unsuccessful quit attempts, doing something you like to do, going to a restaurant, going to a movie, and interrupting yourself from the meal or the movie itself to go outside and smoke.
Another indicator, according to Dr. Goldman, that Daniel Dombey was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes he smoked.
And finally, and also important to Dr. Goldman, was this fact: When the man was diagnosed with a cancer that was going to kill
him, he still smoked, and was unable to quit.
And called his sister, Sylvia Pearl, at 5 a.m. on occasion, to say, "I can't quit smoking, I should kill myself."
That is an indicator, ladies and gentlemen, according to Dr. Goldman, of addiction.
There was no question, according to Dr. Goldman, in this case, and we have proven by the greater weight of the evidence, is it more likely than not the case that Daniel Dombey was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes?
And the answer is, absolutely and without a doubt, yes.
Now, don't be mislead by this statement that millions and millions of people have quit.
Why do I say that?
Because as Dr. Goldman explained, most people that smoke cigarettes are not chronically addicted, they are not chronic, heavy smokers with addiction.
The people that are able to quit are those who light up a cigarette on one occasion and realize that it's not for them and they don't
want to smoke again. That counts. There's a countless number of those people.
The people that are included in that statement are those that are social smokers, that can smoke any time they wish at a social occasion, and quit and not smoke for another two weeks. Those are the types of people that can quit easily.
The types of people that cannot quit, and as Dr. Goldman said, chronic, heavy smokers, without smoking cessation aids, especially the prescribed medication, the Chantix drug that wasn't available when he was smoking and when he died, those type of people, without the benefit of any smoking-cessation aids, only 5 percent are able to successfully quit.
And the percentage is a little bit higher with the use of smoking-cessation aids.
To say that millions and millions of people have quit is misleading, because it suggests that anybody can quit, and the evidence is contrary to that assertion.
Now, common sense tells you Daniel Dombey was a grown man. Daniel Dombey was his own person. Daniel Dombey was intelligent.
If Daniel Dombey, for a minute, enjoyed smoking cigarettes, then when his family was urging him to quit, when his wife was urging him to quit, Daniel Dombey, an intelligent man, if he really liked smoking, what was stopping him from saying: Children, Alicia, leave me alone, I enjoy smoking, I am not going to quit?
And he didn't do it. And why didn't he do it? Because maybe, just maybe, he didn't enjoy smoking, he enjoyed the nicotine in the smoke. And he needed the nicotine to avoid withdrawal symptoms. That's what he enjoyed, if anything.
And you know what else we know? We know by the testimony of family members, we know by the testimony of family members, and look what they said, that, yes, Alyse, his daughter, said: I don't think he enjoyed it. I think he needed the nicotine. I think he was addicted to it.
That's from a family member who spent a lot of time with their father. She grew up with her father. And it was her opinion that he was addicted, he needed the nicotine.
And what about Sylvia Pearl, his sister?
She was the one who testified that he
would call her at 5:00, after his diagnosis, and wonder, why don't I just kill myself? I can't quit, despite dying from a disease caused by smoking.
And remember what Mr. Sloman did? He asked her a question: Why was Dan such a weakling that he couldn't quit smoking? And Sylvia, without hesitation, said he wasn't a weakling; he was addicted.
That's what the family members who spent time with him said. Not only have you heard that from an expert witness, but you have also heard testimony from regular laypeople, family members who knew their father
And what else?
We also know that -- an indicator that he didn't enjoy the smoking, do you remember one of his daughters, he didn't even like to smoke at a restaurant, so he would sit in a non-smoking section, not for health risks, not for health risks, but he didn't like the smoke.
Remember that testimony?
"When you go with your dad to a restaurant and there was a smoking section and a non-smoking section, he would actually choose
to sit in the non-smoking, right?
"Yeah. He didn't like the other smoke.
"He didn't like the secondhand smoke from the other people at the restaurant, right?
"Correct."
Not a question of health; a question of, he didn't like the smoke. He didn't enjoy smoking. He needed smoking.
And finally, ladies and gentlemen, do you really think, when Daniel Dombey was diagnosed with bladder cancer that was going to kill him, and he knew it was, do you think he's picking up a cigarette and saying, you know what? I'm dying with cancer, but I sure do love these cigarettes?
It is inane and preposterous for me to even be throwing that out to you. The evidence in this case is without question that Daniel Dombey was addicted.
So when you see that first question, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause, the answer is yes.
Why is addiction a legal cause? Because if he's addicted to the cigarettes that cause
his death, he couldn't stop, his addiction fed the disease, because he was not able to stop.
If those cigarettes didn't have nicotine, he would have been able to stop. He wouldn't have been addicted.
That is the legal cause. That is why that first question is yes, without a doubt.
No. 2: Was bladder cancer a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death? And the answer is yes.
Now, remember Dr. Soloway? Dr. Soloway is an incredibly credentialed urologic oncologist.
He was the chief of urology at the University of Miami for 20 years. He was recruited to be the chief.
He sees patients daily. He operates on patients. He has researched for 30 years. He has written 500 articles on urothelial cancer, including bladder cancer. Remember, he testified about that.
He has written textbooks on the subject of bladder cancer. He is incredibly knowledgeable on the subject of bladder cancer, because he has researched, he had written, and he treats patients.
And Dr. Soloway looked at the evidence in this case, which included operative reports, which included pathology reports. And remember his testimony. And if you look, and you will see the evidence, Exhibit 238-C, and you will see the pre-operative diagnosis: Bladder tumor. The post-operative diagnosis: bladder tumor. Bladder tumor, chest pain, and random bladder biopsy.
That is the first exhibit, the operative report.
Remember, there was pathology in this case, Exhibit 238-D.
And what you saw and what Dr. Soloway told you was that the urinary bladder tumor was biopsied. It was a grade 2 papillary, transitional cell carcinoma, which, in layman's terms, means it was a bad cancer. It was an aggressive form of cancer.
And there was no invasion -- there was invasion into the superficial lamina propria.
That means the first layer. No invasion into the muscularis mucosa.
Now, what Dr. Soloway said, remember, was that doesn't exclude the possibility that it
did invade the muscle. In fact, according to Dr. Soloway, it most certainly did, because it ultimately went to the lymph nodes, and that is the best vehicle for it to travel.
You know what else he said? There was the base of the tumor, left distal ureter biopsy, and what did the evidence how? No malignances.
So you heard about this ureter tumor that's not malignant, it's not cancerous.
You know what else he said? It doesn't exclude the possibility that it was. That's the nature of a biopsy.
Just like it doesn't exclude the possibility of invasion into the muscle, it doesn't exclude the possibility that that was cancer in the ureter. But this is the evidence we have.
We also have evidence on another pathology report, and that was the lymph nodes that were tested where the cancer spread. And the lymph nodes, the test of the lymph node showed poorly differentiated and anaphylactic cancer, metastatic cancer.
Dr. Soloway said that is an aggressive form of cancer. It is poorly differentiated
and anaphylactic, and he knows it comes from the urothelial area.
And finally, we have the death certificate, which finds metastatic bladder carcinoma. The Judge has read you the instruction. It just confirms the fact that it was Daniel Dombey and he died on a certain date in 1996.
Take a look at the evidence, and you will see both of the lymph nodes where the cancer spread was an aggressive form of cancer, and the bladder tumor itself was an aggressive form of cancer, graded as Grade II.
And you recall the testimony of Dr.
Soloway on this issue. And Dr. Soloway talked about the biopsies. And remember during his testimony, he said the biopsies from the lymph nodes was very similar to the biopsy from the original bladder cancer, so that if you take them together, the likely cause of the spread to the lymph node was from the urinary bladder. As he said: Most likely.
Then he was asked: Where was the origin of the cancer? Was the origin of the cancer the lymph nodes? We don't know with
100 percent certainty, and we don't have to prove anything with 100 percent certainty.
But he said: To me, the most likely scenario -- let's put it this way. And he gave three possibilities. He said the least likely possibility was the tumor originated in the ureter, the tube leading to the kidneys into the bladder. That was his least likely possibility.
So then he was asked: Let me stop you there. So with that as your opinion, within a reasonable degree of medical possibility what is the most likely origin of the cancer in the lymph node? Remember the biopsies.
Given what we know, to me, I'm more than a 50 percent chance it started in the urinary bladder for all of the reasons I've indicated.
That's our standard of proof, more than 50 percent. 51 is all we have to prove, and he was able to testify to that degree of medical probability.
Now, let's go now to: Within a reasonable degree of medical possibility, was bladder cancer the substantial cause of Mr. Dombey's death in January of 1996? Do you have an
opinion about that?
His answer: Yes. He died of metastatic bladder cancer, and the cause of the bladder cancer that subsequently metastasized to the retroperitoneum, and, therefore, by a weakness, eventually cardiac failure, he died, and the cause of that was cigarette smoking.
That was his opinion.
And finally: In urothelial carcinomas, what percentage of urothelial carcinomas are from the bladder?
And what Dr. Soloway told you was that in 80 percent of the cases of all urothelial cancers, they originate in the bladder.
Take all of those facts together, and the proof is that to a reasonable degree of medical probability, Daniel Dombey's cancer began in the bladder, and from that bladder tumor, it spread to the lymph nodes, as evidenced by the pathology reports and Dr. Soloway's testimony.
Remember the diagram that Dr. Soloway showed you? And this is the area that we are talking about. We are not talking about -- and these tubes I'm pointing to, we are not talking about any ureter mass up here.
We are talking about everything being concentrated right in this bladder area.
So we have the bladder tumor. Remember what he was saying, that the surgeon tried to put a guidewire up through that orifice into the ureter, and he was unable to do it. And he stopped.
What does the inference tell you? If he couldn't get a guidewire out of the bladder, whatever he thought was the ureter cancer was in the bladder, not in the ureter.
And he even said it might have been the bladder tumor that was wrapped around that mass. They just don't know. They were able to biopsy it, and the biopsy was negative.
But the bottom line is, it was all in the bladder. So regardless of the spread, it all originated in the bladder. Whether it was the ureter that he thought was the ureter tumor that was mostly in the bladder, but they couldn't get that guidewire out or the bladder tumor itself.
The bottom line is to a reasonable degree of medical probability, Dr. Soloway said it originated in the bladder. The bladder is from
where the cancer spread to the other areas, to the lymph nodes.
So the answer to question No. 2: Was bladder cancer a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death? The answer is yes, because if we didn't have the bladder cancer, he wouldn't have died. Because that's what killed him.
That's how simple this is, no. 2.
Now, the third question deals with legal cause, and you saw by the jury instructions, there are certain findings that now you have to accept as true once we have proven to you that Daniel Dombey was a class membership.
And so purposes of legal causation, one of the findings that you have to accept as true is that Philip Morris USA and RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.
Don't have to prove it. It's a given.
No. 4, Philip Morris USA and RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company were negligent.
Now, all we have to prove in order to find RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris responsible for their negligence and for their defective product causing the injuries to Daniel Dombey
is legal cause.
And legal cause is framed as such: Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death? And was smoking cigarettes manufactured by RJ Reynolds a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death?
Well, let's take a look at a timeline that I have had prepared here on brand usage according to the evidence.
And you will recall that the earliest memory we have in the United States of Daniel Dombey smoking Camels was offered through his daughter, Naomi.
And his daughter, if you remember, she was born in 1960, and she said: My earliest childhood memory were in the early '60s. And her best recollection is they were Camels, and she remembered the pack, and she identified the package, and she has not doubt, she recalls her father in the early '60s smoking Camels.
She was asked, also: Do you have any personal knowledge of what your father smoked before your first childhood recollection? Do you remember that question?
And her answer was: No, I don't, but my father told me he smoked Camels.
What does that mean? What is the inference you can draw from that? Well, there are several.
No. 1, we know from the medical records in this case, specifically the Kodak records, and you will see that, the Kodak medical records in 1971, he was asked how many cigarettes he smoked a day. Do you remember? That's with the cigars?
And he said 20 plus for 20 years. That puts it in 1951.
I need to back up real quick because I have to add something to the bladder cancer. I forgot something.
Do you remember you heard about risk factors about the bladder cancer? Dr. Soloway testified about risk factors.
No. 1, age, minimal. Fifty-five or older. Minimal.
No. 2, gender. More males get it than females. Minimal.
You also heard kidney stones, and what did Dr. Soloway say to that? Minimal, if anything.
They don't even track patients in the United States that have kidney stones, it is such a minimal reason for developing ureter cancer, which that was his testimony.
But when he was asked to comment on a study, he said, well, this is from Sweden.
This is a Swedish study from 1996.
There has been no replication, there have been no studies in the United States, there have been no other studies to prove that. That is one isolated study in Sweden that had nothing to do with the United States.
So that's called a red herring. That's a non-issue. Because he said he would be basically committing malpractice in the United States, because they don't follow patients with kidney stones because of the minimal risk of getting any type of urothelial cancer with people that have kidney stones.
Now, let's put this last issue to bed:
Cigars. There is no question, you've seen the evidence in this case. You saw the medical records from 1971, where he was asked the number of cigarettes he smoked. He said 20-plus, and next to it is a number of cigars,
and you see the number 6. All right?
Now, do you truly believe that a person is humanly able to smoke two packs or three packs of cigarettes a day, and on top of that, smoke six cigars a day?
For that to be true, there would have to be more than 24 hours in a single day for anybody to be able to do that, because it is just humanly impossible. These weren't little thin cigars. These were large, Cuban-type cigars that everyone testified about.
So, No. 1, just to be able to believe that that was not a mistake on the medical records, you would have to believe that there needs to be more than 24 hours in a day for that to be done.
Secondly, you have heard from Naomi, you have heard from Alyse, you have heard from Bonnie via deposition, you have heard from Alicia Dombey, her husband. Not one of those family members testified that Daniel Dombey smoked six cigars a day. It wasn't even close.
The testimony was consistent. It was once in a blue moon. It was one, maybe two a day, but intermittently. It was a few a week. He
never smoked six cigars.
So if you really are to believe the statement on that medical record, you have to disbelieve Naomi, you have to disbelieve Alyse, you have to disbelieve Bonita, you have to disbelieve Alicia. None of them testified that he smoked six cigars.
And finally, there was not one shred of evidence during this trial that he inhaled those cigars. And the only way that cigars are a risk factor for bladder cancer are in cases where there has been inhalation. Not one witness said anything other than, he did not inhale.
His daughter Alyse said no, he put it in his mouth and quickly exhaled and would blow smoke rings. Not one person said that Daniel Dombey inhaled his cigars.
This, too, is a red herring. It's a non-issue. Because in order to believe that he smoked six cigars would mean that you have to discount four witnesses that testified and increase the day by more than 24 hours. And it's really preposterous to suggest that he smoked six cigars a day.
He didn't inhale, and no one said he did, so there is absolutely a minimal risk factor for Daniel Dombey to have gotten this bladder cancer from cigars.
So those are the risk factors in this case, and as Dr. Soloway told you, the most substantial risk factor was smoking cigarettes.
He smoked a lot of them. You heard anywhere from one pack to three packs a day. That was responsible for his bladder cancer.
Legal cause. As I have said, what is the inference to be drawn from the daughter Naomi's testimony?
The inference is, if you look at the medical records, you know he's smoking cigarettes in 1951. You also know he's smoking cigarettes in 1955, because on the same medical records, when he's beginning his employment with Kodak, he says he smokes a pack a day.
That's 1955.
Now, the fact that according to Naomi, her father said, I smoked Camels before you had a recollection, doesn't mean he smoked Kents, doesn't mean he smoked Winston, doesn't mean he smoked Bull Durhams, doesn't mean he smoked any
other brand than what he told here, and that was Camel.
So the inference in this case, from the medical records, from the daughter Naomi, and from Daniel Dombey himself is that as early as 1951, he was smoking Camel cigarettes and nothing else.
At the time in the '60s, he was smoking Camel cigarettes and nothing else.
By the time he met his wife Alicia, he was smoking Marlboros exclusively. So we know in 1969, he's not smoking Kent, he's not smoking Camels.
But Camels smoking represents a significant time period. By inference, if it's from 1951 all the way up through the late '60s, that's a significant smoking of Camel cigarettes.
And we also know that it is significant that he smoked Marlboros exclusively from 1969 until the time prior to his death in 1996.
The question then becomes: How did each of those brands of cigarettes contribute to his death?
Remember Dr. Soloway's testimony. He
talked about this phenomenon called dose response. Dose response. It means the more carcinogens that are -- can you explain what dose response means and how it applies to the accumulation of carcinogens in the lining of the bladder?
And his answer was simply: A higher dose of carcinogens, the more likely cancer will occur.
How do you get a higher dose of carcinogen? Smoke more cigarettes.
Does each cigarette that a smoker smokes contribute in its own way to the development of bladder cancer?
And Dr. Soloway said: Almost every study shows a strong dose-response relationship between the amount of cigarette smoking and the cause of urothelial carcinoma.
What does dose response mean?
It means that on the question, although they are individual questions, you really have to take them together, because it is the combination of the Camel cigarettes and the Marlboro cigarettes together, where you get the dose response. Because each puff that was
taken by Daniel Dombey when he was smoking Camels contributed to his overall disease, such that by the time he was smoking Marlboro, he had that little much -- less to smoke in order to get his disease. Because all of that significant smoking of Camels was already in the bank. You don't take that away.
So that 10- to 15-year period, where
inferentially we know he was smoking Camels, it all added up. That's a lot of carcinogens in the system. So that when he started smoking Marlboro, he didn't have to smoke that much to get sick, because that is 10 or 15 years in the bank before he even started.
So when you take that in combination, there was no question. 3-A: Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death? That's Marlboros. Yes.
In combination, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company a legal cause of Daniel Dombey's death? Again, in combination. That was his first brand in the United States, followed by the Marlboros. Absolutely. Those two together contributed
significantly and substantially to his development of his bladder cancer and his death.
The answer to both of those questions, then, because of the evidence in this case, is yes, without a doubt.
The next area is reliance. Reliance to the concealment and conspiracy to conceal.
Before we get to that, put that down just for a minute.
What you heard in this case, Daniel Dombey was an intelligent man. Daniel Dombey was well read. We know from the evidence in this case, and it is unchallenged, it is undisputed, it is uncontradicted, he read a lot. He read the New York Times for a long time, even when he was in Florida. He read business magazines. He was a college graduate. He went to Cornell and graduated from Bucknell University in 1955.
He kept up with current events. That is undisputed. He watched television, which that is undisputed. He received news either by television or by reading the newspapers.
Now, we don't for one minute suggest to you that Daniel Dombey didn't receive
information over the media, whether it be newspapers, magazines or television, about the health risks of smoking. We don't deny that.
He absolutely did.
He was an intelligent man. He was exposed not only to that information, but he was exposed to the other information as well.
And see, this is wherein the problem is.
The Defendants in this case only want you to believe that Daniel Dombey would have received the information about the health risks of smoking. That's all they asked Dr. Proctor about, was all of the knowledge about the health risks.
They act as though they don't exist. And they have to act as though they don't exist, because then their arguments will bear fruit.
But you can't have it both ways.
If you are going to suggest that Daniel Dombey must have known the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking for a long time, then you've got to accept the fact that he was responsive and he got the message from the Defendants, because we know they put out a message for a long time.
And we know that the dangers of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking, that was done through the media. And that was done with important events. So that we know from the evidence, from Dr. Proctor, that the scientific epidemiological studies in 1950, remember there were five separate studies, that was newsworthy. That was on television. That was in magazines. That was all over. That was well publicized.
The mouse painting studies in 1953, that was well publicized. That was newsworthy.
That made magazines, that made newspapers, and in all likelihood, the New York Times that Daniel Dombey read. We don't dispute that.
Warnings on the cigarettes. The first caution that went on the cigarettes in 1966, we don't dispute that. It went on the package of every cigarette. That was newsworthy.
The 1964 Surgeon General's Report that came out, cigarettes and lung cancer, there is a causal connection in man. That was an important finding. That was an important event. It was covered on the network news. It was covered on the national news. News
stations. It broke into television and at the time most stations, there were only three of them your house, that was big news. That was the type of information that was covered.
There were public service announcements that were covered on television. But Dr. Proctor told you for every one public service announcement that was run, the tobacco companies, including these Defendants, responded with three of their own advertisements, a 3-to-1 ratio.
So that was the information that was put out about the health risks of smoking. When it was newsworthy, it was there, on television, in newspapers. And I don't for a minute suggest to you that Daniel Dombey wasn't aware of that.
But at the same token, remember the response from the Defendants in this case and the tobacco industry in general. What did they do?
December 14th of 1953, they got together in a hotel room at the Plaza Hotel, and they agreed, it was a concerted activity, it was an agreement for the next 50 years, to do what?
To reassure the public about the safety, the
ability to keep smoking; to reassure the public we are going to get to the bottom of this; no causal connection between smoking and cancer.
And what did they want to do? They wanted to create doubt.
This was a concerted effort. They had the financial wherewithal to be able to do this, and they responded.
So we can see by way of this chart here exactly what their purpose was, from their own internal documents, and you could see, 1968, Hill & Knowlton, that was their public relations firm that they hired -- because, remember, this was not a matter of public safety; it was a matter of the bottom dollar.
It was a matter of public relations. That's why they hired Hill & Knowlton.
And you will see, the most important type of story is that which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking.
1969, Brown & Williamson, which became part of RJ Reynolds: Doubt is our product, since it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the minds of a general public.
The Tobacco Institute, 1972, 20 years after their meeting, acknowledging the fact that their strategy was brilliantly executed and consisted of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it
We know from their own internal memos, all they wanted to do for 50 years was create doubt, and they were able to do it.
So then the question becomes, we know Daniel Dombey, and we don't dispute the fact he was absolutely aware, on the one hand, of the possible effects of smoking and health from his family and from the news he read, and on the other hand, absolutely got the message from the tobacco companies.
The question then becomes: What did he believe? Awareness is one thing; belief is another, and that is most important.
And we have evidence of what he believed. And the evidence in this case shows us exactly what he believes.
Daniel Dombey believed that if you smoke a light cigarette, it was safer for him. How would he know that? Because that's the information the Defendants were putting out
there: Smoke light cigarettes; they're safer than regular.
We know that Daniel Dombey switched from a nonfilter Camel cigarette for a filter cigarette. Why do you think he did that?
They were also, the Defendants, advertising filtered cigarettes, saying that they were safer than nonfilter cigarettes.
What is the inference to draw? If Daniel Dombey tried light cigarettes because he thought they were safer, he switched from a nonfilter to a filter for the same reason, that he thought they were safer, he was buying the message from the tobacco companies, including RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris.
And if you could put up the first one.
This one here.
See, also, their advertising campaign, which was a misleading advertising campaign. And you are going to see in evidence Exhibit 69, the Federal Trade Commission from 1967.
What are they going to tell you?
First of all, the warnings on the packages were basically ignored by everybody. They were totally ineffective in 1966.
And remember, the Surgeon General came out with this strong definitive report in 1964.
The next thing you know, there's not a warning on the package; it's a caution.
And the caution isn't endorsed by the Surgeon General who put out this strong report that was ridiculed by the defendants
And so we get this warning statement that no one looks at. They ignore it.
1967,	so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for Americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising.
You couldn't help but see tobacco advertising if you turned on the television To suggest that Daniel Dombey wasn't influenced to continue smoking or to change brands from a nonfilter to a filter is silly, in light of the amount of exposure their products got.
And as the Hyman, the Robert Hyman deposition, where he was with American Brands, which became part of RJ Reynolds, what did he say? They spent billions of dollars on advertising because they want consumers to
listen to the advertising and buy their product. That's the reason that their product is advertised
And finally, talking about the filters,
Philip Morris acknowledged in 1966 that the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration
Remember, Dr. Proctor testified, filters were advertised as safer, and they were basically a fraud because they didn't work.
You can't filter the smoke, because if you filter the smoke, you've got nothing left.
And the tobacco companies, these Defendants, knew it. That's why it was the illusion of filtration that they thought was important
So we know that Daniel Dombey got the message. And he believed the message from the tobacco companies, and why do I say that? Because it is the testimony that is going to prove it.
So that when Alicia, his wife, was asked, and when you would bring this to his attention, what it was doing to him or the information that was out there, what would he tell you in
response? And the information or the attention was for the warnings and the dangers of smoking. And his response was that justification, again: Nothing has been proven.
Remember that was almost a mantra: They haven't proven anything. It was like his way of saying: Permitting himself to continue.
Remember in 1964, when the Surgeon General's Report was issued, Joseph Cullman and George Weissman from Philip Morris, in 1964, remember: However, at some point reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
Daniel Dombey got the message. And what are the tobacco companies and Defendants doing to addicted smokers? Making sure these addicted smokers get the psychological crutch, so that they won't quit and continue to smoke their product, and smoke a lot of their product and for a long time.
So when it comes to reliance, you have evidence in this record that Daniel Dombey got
the message, whether it be from anti-tobacco or the tobacco companies themselves.
And most importantly, Daniel Dombey believed the message from the tobacco companies and relied on it to his detriment. Instead of stopping smoking and quitting, he tried a light cigarette because they were safer, and he went to filtered cigarettes because, obviously, he thought they were safer, instead of quitting, which ultimately lead to his disease and finally his death.
And that is what it means to be -- that is what it means to be -- to rely on something to your detriment.
After May 5th, 1982, we know the tobacco companies were still getting their message out there in the newspapers, on the television.
For example, you saw Edward Horrigan in 1984 on television on Nightline saying there is no causal connection between cigarettes and cancer. And Mr. Horrigan was with Philip Morris
MR. SLOMAN: RJ Reynolds. RJ Reynolds.
MR. KAISER: RJ Reynolds.
There is no reason to believe that Daniel
Dombey didn't get the message. After all, he's a smart man. He watches television. He reads the newspaper.
There is no reason, if he got the message or if he got the information about the smoke -the dangers of smoking, he also got the information put out by the Defendants, here,
Mr. Horrigan, that there's no causal connection between cigarettes and disease.
And as late as 1994, we showed you the Waxman hearings on television. Very important event, where all of the heads of the major tobacco companies, including Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds, were asked separately: Do you think cigarettes, the nicotine, is addictive?
And each one, under oath, said I don't believe it's addictive. Next, I don't believe it's addictive.
Each one denied that nicotine was addictive, knowing full well it was.
That's the kind of information that was being put out there for Daniel Dombey and everybody else to see as late as 1994.
They were asked a second question about the Waxman committee. Do you think cigarettes
cause cancer?
And each one of those executives from Philip Morris, from RJ Reynolds and from every other major tobacco company: I don't think it causes cancer. I don't believe it causes cancer. Each one of them down the line denied it; that it didn't cause cancer.
So when you are asked the reliance question, and finally, this goes to the concealment itself, because this is evidence of RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris making their statements under oath, as well as RJ Reynolds with Mr. Horrigan on television, and finally the conspiracy, to act in furtherance of the conspiracy, where they all agreed to this 50-year denial and this denialist campaign.
You saw in the '80s, Ann Broder, the spokesman for the Tobacco Institute. She's on television, talking about, we don't accept the fact there is a causal connection between cigarettes and cancer.
That is the information after May 5th of 1982 on which Daniel Dombey likely saw and relied on to his detriment, because he continued smoking up to his diagnosis and
death.
So that when you are asked, did Daniel Dombey reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made by Philip Morris USA and/or RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company after May 5th, 1982, which concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death, the evidence shows you that it was yes for Philip Morris and yes for RJ Reynolds.
And we also know from the Engle findings themselves, Judge Tuter already read to you, we know because of Daniel Dombey being a class member, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds and other tobacco companies and organizations concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the information was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addicted nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company entered into an agreement with other tobacco companies and organizations to conceal or omit information regarding the health
effects of cigarette smoking, or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, with the intention that smokers and members of the public rely to their detriment.
The second question on reliance: Did Daniel Dombey reasonably rely to his detriment on any act taken in furtherance of Philip Morris USA and/or RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company's agreement to conceal or omit the health effects of cigarette or their addictive nature after May 5th 1982, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death? The evidence has proven yes for Philip Morris; yes for RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
The next issue on the verdict form is the matter of comparative responsibility or comparative fault.
I told you in the opening statement that we accept partial responsibility on behalf of Daniel Dombey. We have to accept some partial responsibility because Daniel Dombey smoked, he continued to smoke when he knew cigarettes were bad, despite being addicted, he tried to quit, but the bottom line is, just maybe he didn't try hard enough. That is his fault in this
case.
So I told you in opening statement I was going to prove to you that his fault paled in comparison to the Defendants in this case. And by way of a chart, I'm going to show you.
Now, these are certain questions, and hopefully you could write them down, because the defense attorneys will have a chance to respond, and hopefully they will respond.
Mr. Walker, if you remember, in his opening statement, said that I made some strong accusations in my opening statement about the tobacco companies; that he was, in fact, going to respond to those allegations, to give you the, in the words of Paul Harvey, the rest of the story.
Well, there is no rest of the story now, because you have heard the evidence in this case. You have heard the evidence from Dr. Proctor about the conspiracy, about their agreement. And it is uncontradicted and unchallenged.
So now, these questions are going to be designed to see how they are going to respond to the uncontradicted, uncontroverted evidence.
Mr. Walker, of course, said he certainly will, and we await his response.
Why did the Defendants rely solely on the information about the knowledge of the health risks of smoking without addressing their response to that information?
Remember, with Dr. Proctor on the stand, all they wanted to ask Dr. Proctor was about the information for years and years that smoking was addictive and everyone knew it; that smoking was dangerous and everybody knew it from the turn of the century; that it was in a Florida Health Notes, and it was published in newspapers, and it went on for such a long time, that everybody knew it. And that's all they asked Dr. Proctor about.
We asked Dr. Proctor about their response, and remember, he talked about the white papers and the newsletters and their executives on TV and in the paper, denying the connection between smoking and health. And their distraction science, when they gave millions of dollars to all these universities for favorable research and their advertising campaign to mislead the American public.
So the question is: How are these Defendants going to respond to this?
They can't respond. You know why? Because they have to acknowledge the fact that these white papers existed, and they were designed to create doubt. They will have to acknowledge that, because that's what the unchallenged evidence was in this case.
See what they say in response. Why did you send those white papers out? They can't acknowledge that because it indicates fault on their part, because they wanted to create doubt.
Why won't they acknowledge the newsletters they sent out? It is unchallenged here in this courtroom. You didn't see or hear any evidence contradicting what Dr. Proctor said.
If they acknowledge the newsletter, they have to acknowledge that they were designed to create doubt. They can't do that because that is an admission of comparative fault.
See if they acknowledged their executives going on television and in the newspapers, and what was the quote, they were always similar:
If we find any bad things in cigarettes, we
will take them out. If we find our products are dangerous, we will close. We are working on this problem to address the issue.
They can't acknowledge the executives did that, because if they do, they have to acknowledge that their executives were not being truthful to the American public, because they were designed to create doubt. They can't acknowledge the fact that this distraction science, as Dr. Proctor called it, was going on.
They can't acknowledge it because they will have to acknowledge that this distraction science was geared to create doubt by getting favorable research from universities and colleges in exchange for lots and lots of money.
They can't acknowledge the fact that when they were advertising filtered cigarettes, they knew their filters were a fraud. They can't acknowledge that fact, because they would be admitting comparative fault.
So on question No. 1, see exactly what they say to you. See how they respond to that question. Maybe you would like to write that
down to make sure you see how they respond to it, because this goes to fault. That is no fault of Daniel Dombey, ladies and gentlemen; that is the fault of these Defendants, and they will not acknowledge it.
No. 2. When the Defendants, RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris, knew by the 1950s that cigarettes smoke contained carcinogens and could cause cancer and kill people, why did they choose not to tell the American public?
Now, we know that is unchallenged. That is uncontradicted evidence from Dr. Proctor, and their own internal documents that you have seen, where they knew in the early '50s that their product had carcinogens.
Claude Teague from RJ Reynolds in 1953 wrote and summarized a bunch of studies that had been done in the '30s and '40s from Angel Roffo about the carcinogens in smoke. Philip Morris did the same thing. And they knew it. And all of the other tobacco companies did, too. They made a choice.
This case isn't all about Daniel Dombey's choice. The Defendants made a choice in the early '50s: Do we tell the American public
what we know? Do we tell the Surgeon General what we know? Do we warn people on our packages what we know? And they made a choice. It's either the bottom dollar or public health, and they chose the bottom dollar.
They had every opportunity at that point.
Do they tell Daniel Dombey and other consumers smoking their products that, hey, our stuff is bad, it causes cancer, or at least we know the strong link? They chose not to.
See how they respond to you about that.
Unchallenged testimony. How are they going to do it? Are they going to get up and say, yes, we did not respond? Do you think for a minute they are going to do that? No, they are not. They can't do it because they will have acknowledged fault based on the evidence in this case.
Question No. 3: When the Defendants knew by the 1950s that the nicotine in every one of their cigarettes they sold was an addictive drug, why did they choose not to tell the American public?
Again, the same reason. They can't acknowledge that to you. This is unchallenged
evidence. We have seen their internal documents, and we will take a look at them right now again.
From their own documents, out of their own mouths, RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris knew by the '50s and the '60s that nicotine was designed for one thing: to addict their smokers.
Brown & Williamson in 1963, the Battelle memo that you have seen in evidence: Nicotine is addictive. That is before the Surgeon General's Report came out, and it wasn't until 1988 that the Surgeon General himself said nicotine is addictive. They knew it over 20 years before him and didn't tell anybody. And they say they were so cooperative with the Surgeon General, they got thank yous. They didn't tell him that.
And they didn't tell Daniel Dombey that.
And the question is: Why didn't they, when they knew it? And they can't acknowledge that to you, because they're going to have to come up and say, we didn't do it, even though we knew it in the '50s, we didn't do it, because they would acknowledge fault, and they
can't do it based on the evidence here.
They knew why people began smoking. It was cool. And they also knew what sustained people to continue smoking, and that was the physiological effects. It was the nicotine in their cigarettes. They knew that. They knew that the pharmacological effect was the most important thing on the smoker.
Look at this. Cigarettes would even preempt food in time of scarcity on a smoker's priority list.
They knew all of this stuff and wouldn't tell anybody. That is fault. That is not Daniel Dombey's fault.
Just think, maybe if Daniel Dombey had known this in the '50s, would he have been smoking as long? Maybe he would have made a concerted effort to quit at that time, just maybe he would have been successful, he wouldn't have gotten the disease, and he wouldn't have died.
They wouldn't tell him.
You needed to hear the explanation why.
In a sense, the tobacco industry, according RJ Reynolds, Claude Teague in 1972, may be thought
of as a specialized, highly ritualized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. That's nicotine.
There's more.
Philip Morris, in 1972: The cigarette pack, it's a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine.
You see, these people, these Defendants knew. They weren't selling a cigarette because people enjoyed that nice gray smoke going down their lungs. They didn't sell them cigarettes because the people enjoyed the wonderful taste of that gray smoke going down into their lungs. They didn't sell their cigarettes because people thought, oh, it's so nice, look at the way I'm holding this cigarette.
They sold their product to addict people, and they were going to smoke their products for a long, long time. And they knew it, and they didn't tell it. They didn't tell Daniel Dombey. They didn't tell anybody.
Think of a puff of smoke as the vehicle for nicotine.
Their cigarette was a device geared for one thing: Getting nicotine in the bloodstream
to go to the consumer's brain like that, so they would be addicted and buy more of their product.
Nicotine, 1978, Philip Morris: A powerful pharmacological agent with multiple sites of action is the most important component of cigarette smoke.
That says it all. They know all of this time what nicotine does.
And in 1978, you know what they also know? Very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature, and that nicotine is a poison.
Rewind 20 years earlier. If only they had told the Daniel Dombeys and other smokers in the world and in the United States what they knew then, things might have changed. But they didn't do it.
That is an acknowledgment of fault based on the evidence in this case. They will not be able to come up here and address it because they will have to acknowledge that they are at fault.
No. 4: When the Surgeon General's Report in 1964 came out, and I already touched on
this, why did RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris and all the other tobacco companies ridicule it?
Why did they advocate for a weak caution that wasn't even endorsed by the Surgeon General? Why did they want that?
Remember the Hyman deposition? The Surgeon General was misguided.
Well, are you saying he's wrong?
Dead wrong.
Not just misguided. That was the consensus: He was dead wrong.
But you know what? They knew he was right. They knew he was right before the report came out in 1964, and they didn't tell the American public that.
See how they address that. Write that question down and see what Mr. McCarter or Mr. Walker are going to tell you when they get up here and give you the rest of the story. Because they can't, because they would have to acknowledge, we did ridicule the report; we knew the report was true, but we wanted to create doubt and assure the public that they could continue to smoke our product, because we were in business to make money.
THE COURT:	Two-minute warning on your one hour.
MR. KAISER: Can I extend it?
THE COURT:	Whatever you wish.
MR. KAISER: I'm tying to move quickly.
THE COURT:	It's your time, however you
wish to use it.
MR. KAISER: Why did the Defendants respond to the strong evidence linking cigarettes to cancer, which they already knew, with a campaign designed to create doubt about the health risks and addictive nature of cigarettes for the next 50 years?
Instead of trying to create doubt for 50 years, why not, at the time that they knew this happened, instead of getting all together and hiring a public relations firm, get together and say, we need to tell the public and let them do what they wish, at least we'll tell them, they didn't do it, and they can't acknowledge it here because they will have to admit fault.
Again, that's not Daniel Dombey's fault.
This is the message that he's getting from them to explain perhaps why he's not trying hard
enough to quit.
And now you will see, did the Defendants want Daniel Dombey to believe their message about more research was being needed; that no proof that cigarettes were dangerous; that bad things would be removed from cigarettes if they were found, and they would close their business if it was found their cigarettes were dangerous to health?
When they were putting that message out through their executives, when they were going on the airwaves with their spokesmen, when they were quoted in newspapers about finding these bad things in cigarettes and they would take them out of cigarettes, when they were doing all of this stuff to create doubt, did they want Daniel Dombey to believe all of that information? Of course they did.
And they won't for one minute come up here and dispute that. They can't. Because if they do, they are saying, well, Daniel Dombey should have known we were lying. He shouldn't have relied on that information. He should have known because everyone knows we're lying.
They won't do that, because they have to
acknowledge that they have fault, and they will not do it.
See how they respond to that.
And finally, if Daniel Dombey believed their message, if Daniel Dombey believed their denialist message, how is he blameworthy?
They wanted him to believe the message, and if he did, and we know he did, how could you say, hey, you believed us. The only way you can do that is if these Defendants said, Daniel, one thing you did to us, you trusted us, and you didn't know we were lying.
And they won't acknowledge that because that is evidence of their fault in this case.
And finally, what is Daniel Dombey's fault? What is his fault? We have seen one through seven of their obvious fault in this case.
And Daniel Dombey's fault is he didn't try hard enough to quit. He tried, and it doesn't matter if he was successful or not. But he tried to quit, and he couldn't quit. That's because he was addicted. That's because he bought the message.
You can continue to smoke our cigarettes.
Smoke filters, they're safer. Smoke lights, they're safer. We'll get to the bottom of this and tell you, but for now, everything is fine.
And he took that message hook, line and sinker, and now the tobacco companies want you to say he's all at fault.
Well, I submit to you, based on the evidence in this case, we accept fault, but very little, because all the time he did try and quit, albeit unsuccessfully, the message was from the tobacco companies: There's no need to quit. No, just switch brands. You don't have to quit yet.
And Daniel Dombey didn't. He did what all of these tobacco companies, including these Defendants, told him to do. And that's where we talk about blame.
In my rebuttal part, I will tell you exactly what the evidence shows. But it is far more on RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris than it is on Daniel Dombey, based on the evidence in this case.
Now, I want to talk about damages, and there are two types of damages. There are compensatory damages that go to Mr. Dombey for
her grief, her mental pain and suffering in this case. And this is a matter of you trying to quantify damages, to put an amount on damages.
This is not where you are going to be getting a spreadsheet you will see, this cost X amount of dollars, this costs Y. This is a question where you have to quantify damages.
I'm going to try to make it easier for you to do it.
Never in a million years did Alicia Dombey think that she would be in this position, where one day, Daniel Dombey goes into a doctor, they are going to do some surgery to see what this blockage in the kidney is, thinking it's his kidney stones, because he's had kidney stones before, and in fact, Alicia didn't wait at the hospital because she was told this will take awhile and we'll call you when we're done.
Little did she know that for this procedure to find the kidney stone and where it was, they would open him up, and in a matter of minutes, close him right back up, and call Mrs. Dombey on the phone and say: We have a problem. We found cancer. And your husband is
not going to survive.
That was the last thing that she was thinking of in December of 1995. And it was no choice of her own. She didn't want this in a million years.
So, in a way, you can look at this as she was given a job. Alicia Dombey, in December, was given a job by the tobacco companies. And the job, unfortunately, was to watch her husband wither away and die from smoking their products for a number of years, not being able to quit. That was a job.
Now, this was a job she did not want, she did not apply for, she did not want in a million years. No one would want a job like this in a million years.
So what is the wage that you would pay someone for taking a job like that?
I submit that you could ask a million people on this earth what would be the amount they would take to watch their husband whither away and die, and they would say there's no price, there's no price.
What is the starting point here? There's salaries that people make that are
extraordinary. There are athletes that make just so many millions of dollars and enjoy what they're doing. Lawyers make money. They enjoy what they're doing. All sorts of professions make money and they enjoy what they're doing.
But in this particular instance, Alicia Dombey did not enjoy what she was doing. This was her lot in life that she didn't expect, she didn't plan on. This was a marriage, that 26 years, in an instant, was ended.
And the way I have broken this down is by the time of diagnosis to death, which was 37 days after diagnosis, from the time of death until she met her next husband, and from the marriage until today.
Because I submit to you, the evidence from the daughter in this case, from Alicia Dombey, is that she has suffered, and she continues to suffer. And she will suffer in this case because of the loss of her husband.
And you heard the testimony in this case from the daughters, from Naomi, from Alyse, how their marriage was. She was the rock.
They were happy together for 26 years. Never separated. Married the whole time. Loved each
other.
They did a lot of things together. They socialized together. They entertained together. They had fun together. Everybody said the same thing. There was true love there in that relationship, only to be broken apart in December of 1995, and 37 days later, this person to whom she was married for 26 years is gone.
And I have broken it down into components, and I would like to put this on the screen, and I have broken it down into a high, a mid range and low level based on a wage. And you can do whatever you want with the numbers. But I'm just suggesting, as a matter of record, a starting point in this case for the damages to compensate Alicia Dombey for the loss of her husband, for her mental pain and suffering, and loss of companionship.
All right. Step two. Why don't we try it on the yellow.
The diagnosis of death. If you figure out the high end, it's $750 an hour. There's a lot of people that make a lot more money than that and enjoy what they're doing. 750 an hour,
times 24 hours, times 37 days that she endured her husband withering away to nothing, when she was not able to do anything further for him and had hospice come and help him until his last dying day, you see what that figure amounts to. That's the high end.
At a rate of $500 an hour, the same time period for 37 days, you see the median level.
And finally, on the low end, you see based on the $350 an hour, and that is the amount.
So you've got a high end, a median end and a low end, just based on the diagnosis to death, which encompass a 37-day period of time for the time of injury until Mr. Dombey's death.
The second component of the damages here is from the time of death until he meets her second husband, Mario, in 2001. That is a five-year period.
Whereas the high end was $750, it is now $200 here, because you are going from death to a new relationship, where eventually things are going to get better with time.
But remember the testimony. That first year after the death of her husband, she went
to a hospice group for a year, where they have therapists and other people that were also widows and widowers. It took a year where she did that.
And as Alicia said, all of a sudden she is struck with the fact that she doesn't have a husband anymore. Just in a split second he's gone. She comes home to a vacant house. She had a tough time dealing with this.
So from the top level, you see $200 times
24	hours, 365 days, for the five year. You see the medium range at 150 an hour for the same time period, and you see the low range at $100 an hour.
That is from the time that her husband was taken from her because of the cigarettes he smoked, manufactured by the Defendants, until she met her second husband.
Never in her life did she ever believe that she was going to have to be in a position of meeting a second husband. But she was, by not fault of her own, and she did, fortunately.
So that the next component of the damages is from her relationship with Mario, her husband, that she's now married to, until right
now, because if you look at the mortality tables, you will see that the life expectancy of her husband is approximately two years from now, from the time that he died.
You will see this is based on a much lower rate, at $25 an hour, for 12 years, because that's how long she's been married now. That gives you an amount.
You have the mid level at $20 an hour for the same time period, and the low range of $15 an hour.
You know, just because Ms. Dombey is married to her second husband doesn't mean she still doesn't have the emotional scars from what the death of her husband had done to her.
It doesn't mean that she doesn't grieve for him every day. That doesn't mean that she doesn't think about him every day. It just means that she's able to disguise her grief now.
Sometimes people lose a loved one, and every day for the rest of their life they think about that person. That's just the way it is.
She was married to this man for 26 years and loved this man, and there's no reason to believe that she still doesn't think about him,
despite the fact that she's married and happily married. The fact remains, she never thought she would be in that situation.
So that's just a map that I give you for damages.
And lastly, I will give you the total based on the high range for each of the components, mid range for each of the components, and low range for each of those components. You can see the low range total for everything, the mid range total for everything, and the high range.
As I said, there's still a two-year period I decided not even to put that into the equation right now. You are free to do whatever you want.
So that is just on the compensatory damages.
And Judge Tuter also told you about punitive damages. It is a different standard, by the clear and convincing evidence standard. We contend that we are entitled to seek punitive damages, and we are entitled to punitive damages in this case because of the behavior of the Defendants.
And you have seen in the jury instructions that we have to prove intentional misconduct.
If you put up the board that I just left up with the questions, I'm going to prove to you that we have shown this type of intentional misconduct that warrants punitive damages in this particular case.
And by example, you know, when I said, when they knew in the '50s that cigarette smoke contained carcinogens and they didn't tell anybody, imagine the number of people's lives that would have been saved had they done that?
But countless people died because they failed to tell people about that. We know that injured Mr. Dombey's because he wasn't told.
What you can do with that is realize that goes to the reprehensibility of the conduct.
The damage to other people is the reprehensible conduct in this case that entitles us to punitive damages. And that's how you can look at that.
And you also look at that, that is intentional. That is not negligence. That is intentional conduct in this case, where the tobacco companies, by their own documents, knew
full well the dangers with their product, and they didn't tell anybody, including Daniel Dombey. That is intentional conduct that entitles us to punitive damages.
The same thing with nicotine, ladies and gentlemen. That is intentional conduct that entitles us to punitive damages in this case. Because, again, they didn't tell the American public what they knew. They had an obligation to do so, and they never did that.
So that goes to intentional, willful conduct, not by accident, but by design, because they wanted to addict as many people as they could to their product.
So you can consider the harm to others that did when you consider the reprehensible conduct in this particular case.
The same thing, they wanted Daniel Dombey to believe their message, just like they wanted everybody else smoking their cigarettes to believe their message: We're going to get to the bottom of this. Don't believe for a second that cigarettes are bad because we're going to take out all of the ingredients, if we find out they are bad, knowing full well they couldn't
take out those ingredients, carcinogens.
That is intentional, willful conduct.
That entitles us to punitive damages in this case.
They not only wanted Daniel Dombey to believe that message, they wanted everybody else to believe that message, everybody else. Many, many people were harmed because of that.
Again, the harm to the others is an indication of the reprehensible conduct in this particular case that entitles us to punitive damages.
Finally, Daniel Dombey, if you believe their message, is he blameworthy? Again, they wanted him to believe their message. They wanted him to believe the denialist message for 50 years, just like they wanted everybody to believe it.
That's why, when they got together on December 14th, 1953, they had one goal in mind: Keep their business going, get those stock prices up, at the expense of the health and welfare of the American public at large and Daniel Dombey.
And so when you consider the evidence of
punitive damages, we've shown you by clear and convincing evidence that we are entitled to punitive damages in this case.
So the answer to that last question on the verdict form is yes, when you reach that.
Ladies and gentlemen, my time is up. I thank you for your patience. I will have one more chance to speak to you.
I just ask, when you consider the evidence, and I will be back up to respond to the Defendants in this case, I will ask that you find the Defendants responsible and you award Alicia Dombey compensatory damages and find that she's entitled to punitive damages in this case.
Thank you.



MR. KAISER: In the next hour that I have to talk to you, I promise I won't go over ground that we have -- actually, I have little less than an hour.
You know, when someone makes a promise to you or makes a statement in opening statement, they better come back and fulfill that promise, and in this case, they didn't.
Mr. Walker failed to do that, because on his opening statement, if you recall, it was Mr. Walker who said I made some strong allegations against the tobacco companies, and he was going to respond to those allegations.
And he talked about Paul Harvey, remember?
Invoking the name of Paul Harvey and giving you the rest of the story?
And as they stood here today, both defense counsel, they still failed to do it. So he didn't come through on his promise. You didn't hear the rest of the testimony, because the testimony that you heard, that we brought to you, remains uncontradicted, unrefuted. And that's where we stand.
What is interesting is they get up, the defense attorneys, talk to you, and they still want to ignore their own behavior and act as if they don't exist.
And you know what? Their arguments are very credible if you take that out of the equation. If you believe that they don't exist, just put no on the first question, and we'll be out of here.
But they can't run around that because they did exist. And that's the difficulty they have in this case. They can't ignore their existence over the years.
They can't ignore their response to these negative ads and negative publicity about tobacco and about the health concerns.
And let me respond real quickly to what Mr. Walker said, and that was that Dr. Proctor admitted that some of these polls showed that tobacco companies didn't have a lot of credibility.
Do you remember Dr. Proctor's answer to that question?
First of all, what kind of polls were these? Do you think these were polls taken of addicted smokers that were given a psychological crutch to continue smoking by them, the Defendants in this case?
We don't know. They're just polls. You weren't told that.
What Dr. Proctor said is, that's the reason that the tobacco companies use third parties. That's the reason they use pseudonyms. That's the reason they hid themselves from the information that was being put out there. That's why they did all of this third-person research. That's why they did this distraction research. That's why these colleges and universities did their bidding for them, because they were getting millions of dollars to come to the conclusion based on
research that there's a lot of research that needs to be done.
That's why they published articles favorable to their cause under different names and got caught for it.
So while Mr. Walker wants to tell you one thing about Dr. Proctor's testimony, he ignores what Dr. Proctor's answer was, and that was a lot different than what we heard from Mr. Walker in this courtroom today.
Now, let me start and talk about addiction briefly, in response to Mr. McCarter.
And, again, it is Mr. McCarter's position that he takes based on the evidence in this case that Daniel Dombey enjoyed smoking. Wasn't addicted to smoking. He enjoyed smoking.
And, again, we heard from Dr. Proctor.
And they can get up here and poo-poo
Dr. Proctor's opinions all they want. But you
know what? The guy might not be so bad after
all. Dr. Goldman, I should say. When
Dr. Goldman was testifying, and they make a big
deal out of his opinion that chronic, heavy
smokers, even a half a pack for a year, they
are addicted. Without even hearing evidence of individual cases, they are addicted.
And you know what? They had the chance to do it. They had the chance to come up with any number of studies, if there were any, and say,
Dr. Goldman, what about this study that contradicts your opinion you just gave? This study seems to suggest that it takes a lot more smoking to become addicted.
They didn't do that.
Why don't you think they did that?
Perhaps Dr. Goldman is right. Perhaps his opinion was credible. Otherwise, you can bet your bottom dollar they would have come up with studies to contradict his testimony. They didn't do it. They didn't do it.
He might know what he's talking about. He might know just what he's talking about.
And then when he was talking about the smoker's behavior, he did talk about Daniel Dombey's behavior in this case. That's why he was able to say I could be 90 percent certain,
I could be 90 percent that the man was addicted.
And you know what? They didn't call their
own expert to come in here and refute that testimony.
Why didn't they do that? Do you think perhaps they might not have been able to find someone to refute Dr. Goldman? Otherwise, they would have called someone in here so quick your head would spin. They didn't do it.
We heard them talk about the rest of the story. The only "rest" you heard was when they got up here and said we rest.
They didn't put on anyone to refute any testimony from Dr. Goldman on addiction.
By way of one more chart, I will give you some examples of whether he really enjoyed smoking or he was addicted.
This whole idea that he liked cigarettes for the taste, and that's why he would sometimes, after he changed to a filtered cigarette, he was smoking Marlboros primarily?
He would every now and then smoke a Camel. Do you remember that testimony? And the only reason he would smoke a Camel, they said, is he liked that full flavor taste? Perhaps maybe he liked the buzz of that nicotine off that nonfiltered cigarettes.
You know what? If he really enjoyed the taste of those non-filtered cigarettes, if he really enjoyed the taste of the Camels, why on he earth did he switch? Why did he switch those Camel cigarettes after smoking them for years, if he didn't buy into their advertising and the information they were putting out there that filters are safer?
So it wasn't for the taste. It was for his mistaken belief that they might be safer for him.
Now, the evidence is not that he smoked a pack a day. It might be on his medical records that he smoked a pack a day, but how do you know that those are believable?
In fact, Dr. Goldman testified most people don't tell the truth to their doctors, especially when it comes to smoking.
It's not unusual for a person to lie to his doctor about how much cigarettes he smokes or she smokes, because he knows the doctor is going to say "Don't smoke."
When these people have tried to quit and they can't quit, why are they going to be embarrassed? Why aren't they going to be
honest with their doctor? Because they're going to be told the same thing.
In this particular case, Daniel Dombey, we've heard it, at the insistence of his wife, at the insistence of his kids: Please quit, please quit, please quit, Dad. Please quit.
It's bad for you.
He knew it. He couldn't do it.
Do you think he's going to be honest with his doctors and hear the same thing? Enough is enough already.
But if he enjoyed smoking, hey, I don't care what you all say; I like it. He didn't say it. Never said it.
Now, we do know that witness testimony in this courtroom, Alicia Dombey talked about how he got up from one pack to two packs to three packs a day. Indeed, he was smoking that much, and Alyse, the daughter, she testified: I can't tell you exactly how much he was smoking, but it was at least two packs, maybe more.
So there is record evidence independent of the medical records that show he was smoking a lot more.
Now, look, if we know the man is smart, if
we know he's Ivy League-educated, and we know he's smoking one and a half to three packs a day, with knowledge of the risk, do you really think all of a sudden he became stupid? Or maybe he was addicted?
The answer to that question, based on the evidence, is that is addiction, not enjoyment.
No. 2, and they didn't say a word about this: When a man chooses to go to a restaurant with his family for a good meal, and has to interrupt his meal to go out and smoke a cigarette and come back and join them, do you think that's a matter of enjoyment or is it a matter of addiction? He can't wait until the end of his meal to go home and smoke. That's addiction, not enjoyment. That's the evidence in this case.
What the man decides to go with a friend or his daughter or his family to a movie and see a movie at a theater, it has to be interrupted to go out into the lobby or outside to smoke a cigarette, he can't sit through the entire movie, that's not enjoyment. Otherwise, he would be able to wait and see what he came for. That's the movie.
No, he was addicted, and that's why he had to go out in the lobby or outside to smoke a cigarette. Do you think that is enjoyment or do you think that's addiction? The record evidence says that's addiction.
Look, Mr. McCarter could say all he wants until he's blue in the face, that there were no serious attempts on Mr. Dombey's part to quit.
We know there were. We know there were.
And you know the first quit attempt? Even Alicia Dombey thought, this can't be serious, this man has been smoking so long. But you know when she knew it was serious? She knew it was serious when the man came to her crying, this grown man, this intelligent man, crying, telling her: I can't. I would if I could, but I can't.
Do you think that's enjoyment? Or is that addiction?
Because he admitted to his wife, while crying, he couldn't do it. That's a serious attempt. That's addiction.
Again, urging from his family. Look, he has to recognize, his family cares about him.
They want him around. They don't want him
dead. We know they don't want him dead, because they told us, now that he is dead.
So despite their urges and despite his attempts, he can't do it.
Do you really think that is enjoyment? Of course not, folks. That's addiction.
We saw the medical records. By the way, the reason he got x-rayed all this time is because he had to get annual physicals at Kodak. You've seen those medical records.
It is noted in the records he had a smoker's cough. We know he didn't have any lung problems, fortunately, but we know he had a smoker's cough for a very long time, that he knew was attributed to smoking, and yet he still smoked.
Do you would think this intelligent man would all of a sudden become stupid and decide to smoke for enjoyment? Of course not. He was addicted, this smart man was, and couldn't help his addiction.
And it was being fed by the Defendants.
Keep on smoking. It's all right. We'll get to the bottom of this.
That's addiction.
There were notes in his records about shortness of breath. Again, this is an intelligent, Ivy League-educated man. And despite having shortness of breath and not feeling well, he's smoking cigarettes
Again, did all of a sudden he get stupid?
Or is it maybe he's addicted and didn't have a choice?
Because, after all, we have seen in their own documents: You can't argue choice when there's addiction. Their own documents. The lawyer says: You can't argue choice with addiction.
And that's why they couldn't argue -that's why they couldn't accept that fact, and they had to contest addiction in this case so they could argue choice
Our lawyer, our attorney reminds us, I'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. Or any other case for that matter. We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
You bet your bottom dollar they're going
to contest addiction so they can argue choice here.
So despite having shortness of breath, this intelligent man became stupid and smoked because he liked it. No. That is addiction.
And while the defense attorneys might think that he quit, Mr. Dombey did, because the medical records say so, and he quit after his diagnosis, that's not the testimony you heard.
The testimony from Sylvia Pearl -- and what stake does she have in the outcome of this case? You saw her testify. What did Sylvia Pearl tell you? I would get calls at 5:00 in the morning after his diagnosis, and he's crying, telling me he can't quit and wants to
die,	wants to kill himself
They even asked her, do you think that was because of his diagnosis or is that because of his inability to quit because of his addiction?
And her response was: It was because he couldn't quit.
We know he didn't stop until he was too weak to be able to lift up a cigarette with this cancer. That was his addiction and not enjoyment.
So we can put that to bed. This is not a case of a man who just enjoyed cigarettes so much, he was willing to ignore the pleas of his family. He was willing to ignore health risks. He was willing to ignore the information he knew about. He was willing to ignore his own intelligence, and all of a sudden become stupid. No. That's not the issue. That's not the case. This was an addicted person.
Now, as far as the bladder cancer, let's talk about the evidence. Mr. McCarter, despite the evidence, wants to tell you: We know it couldn't be the bladder cancer. It has to be the ureter cancer, and it traveled to the bladder.
But you know what? That's not the evidence. If we can see the pathology, that's not the evidence in this case. The evidence is right before our eyes.
And before we put that up.
You know, there's a difference -- in the medical profession, when you're dealing with a diagnosis, doctors want to be 100 percent certain. They don't want to tell a patient who has cancer, you know what? I can tell you to a
reasonable degree of medical probability that you are going to die or that you have cancer.
They want to be certain, because they know how to treat things. And they want to be certain of a diagnosis. They want to be a certain of a treatment, because they want to cure people.
So medicine deals a lot different with probabilities and certainties than we do in this courtroom.
So while it might be that Dr. Soloway is telling you, I'm making an educated guess, well, in a sense, he is making an educated guess as a medical professional, because he can't be 100 percent certain.
So it very well might be to him, without a 100 percent certainty in the medical field, that's an educated guess.
In this courtroom, it is not an educated guess. It's all of the testimony we need to prove our case to a greater weight of the evidence. That is to a reasonable degree of medical certainty. Are we more likely right than wrong? That's it. 51 percent. There's a difference in the burden of proof and certainty
and levels of certainty between medicine and law.
And if you look at the evidence, what do we see? First of all, we know that the bladder tumor itself was aggressive because it was a Grade II. There is no dispute about that. It was an aggressive tumor.
We also know that the biopsy of the lymph node showed an aggressive tumor that likely came from the bladder because that, too, was aggressive.
We know these are two aggressive forms of cancer that all originated in the urothelial area. And Dr. Soloway didn't budge, didn't hesitate to say, I could tell you most likely it originated in the bladder, and that's how come we have the spread. And that's with the pathology reports that he has. That is documented. That is evidence.
And you know what else is documented and you know what else we have as evidence? That this ureter tumor was not cancerous.
Now, it certainly can't be a high-grade aggressive tumor if it's not cancerous. It certainly can't invade anything if it's not
cancerous. It certainly can't metastasize if it's not cancerous. It certainly can't metastasize to another area of the body and then become an aggressive tumor if it wasn't cancer in the first place.
That is the evidence we have in this record. That is what we have to go by.
To a reasonable degree of medical probability, we have demonstrated that the cancer more likely than not came from the bladder, spread to the lymph node. It was an aggressive tumor in the bladder. It was an aggressive tumor in the lymph node. And the uretal cancer, the uretal biopsy of the tumor showed no malignancy
Remember, Dr. Soloway said even if it just invaded the superficial layer, it could still metastasize. Remember he said that? It could still metastasize
But this is what we have. This is the evidence.
And you know, the defense attorneys in this case, they like to play around with this idea that we're changing testimony; we are somehow counseling people to change testimony;
we are trying to get Alicia to change testimony; we are trying to get Dr. Soloway to change his testimony.
You know, it just so happens that Dr. Soloway is a medical doctor. Wait a minute. He's a medical doctor who happens to have been an expert witness in two or three case over his 30-year career. He's a first and foremost a well-credentialed, urological oncologist, who maybe spends less than 1 percent of his time over his 30-year career having testified in cases like this.
And so to suggest that this man was influenced in any way to change his testimony, that's serious. That's a serious allegation.
And you know, we have his first deposition. His first deposition is no secret.
If, in fact, he really did drastically change his testimony from one deposition to another, then why didn't you have that first deposition read to you, so that you, as the jurors, can decide for yourselves whether or not he drastically changed his testimony?
That's because he didn't. That's because he didn't.
You could bet your bottom dollar that if he had changed his testimony as drastically as
these Defendants said he did, they would have
been reading that deposition in their case instead of resting. But they didn't do it.
They want to throw around this idea that he's changing his testimony. You know what?
They accused Goldman of doing the same thing.
Dr. Goldman, the testimony you just said, that you just testified about, is something you learned from the attorneys over the lunch hour, isn't it, because that's not what was in the deposition?
He goes: No, my recollection is it is in the deposition.
They got caught. How did they get caught? Because when Dr. Goldman was questioned, here is the exchange:
"QUESTION: You were asked by Mr. McCarter whether it was something you discussed with you after or just recently about your recollection that Naomi, the daughter, deferred to her mother about whether or not her father quit smoking for any length of time? Do you remember that?
"ANSWER: That was my understanding, yes.
"QUESTION: That your understanding from the review of the deposition?
"ANSWER: I thought so.
"QUESTION: Well, let me read to you from Naomi's deposition on page 55."
And we did.
"Earlier, you mentioned that you remembered your father quitting for a few months. Do you remember when that was?"
Her answer: "I really don't know exactly, but I have a suspicion that it might have been that year that I was living in Miami.
"QUESTION: In the '80s?
"ANSWER: Yes, which would have been like '87 maybe, and I think he quit for two or three months. My stepmother probably has a better recollection."
His testimony, as he sat right there was, she said she would defer to her stepmother, and they called him on it, suggesting he changed his testimony, when it was in the deposition all along.
So you make these spurious allegations about changing testimony. You better be quite
certain, because they got caught here.
So when they start talking about Dr.
Soloway changing his testimony, you know very well he didn't change his testimony, or they would have read his deposition.
And what we do know as a matter of evidence, he gave pretty good opinions of certainty in this case about that bladder cancer.
And you've already seen exactly what he said. And I don't need to read it again. Just hold it up right here. This is his level of certainty: Of all urothelial cancers,
80 percent in the bladder.
And remember what else he said? Of all his patients, most of them, a high percentage of them are smokers.
So you know what? In this particular case, if Mr. Dombey hadn't smoked cigarettes, it's very likely that he wouldn't have developed cancer because the rest of the risk factors are minimal. Just because he's a man,
55 years old doesn't mean he was going to get bladder cancer. Just because he was a man doesn't mean he was going to get bladder
cancer.
Let's put this cigar issue to bed for the last time. The cigar issue, they want you to believe that he smoked six cigars a day because it said so in the medical records. They want you to believe that because he wrote six cigars.
Do you know what's interesting? This is 1971. 1971. Doctors start to realize that cigarettes and smoking is bad. If that were really true, that he was smoking six cigars a day in 1971, along with over a pack of cigarettes a day, which, again, is impossible to do, don't you think there would be some note in his medical records that: Man, must quit smoking?
Do you think?
Not one entry of any concern about any doctor that perhaps this guy was smoking too much in 1971.
Well, one reason might be that this was not a big deal because, still, people weren't aware that smoking was bad in the '70s. Or, secondly, maybe he straightened out this problem and it wasn't six cigars a day, maybe
he meant six cigars a months, a week, whatever. But there's no entry in the medical records.
And you know what? People make mistakes in medical records.
It's one thing for the attorney,
Mr. McCarter, to come up here and say, well, we know he quit for five months, we know he quit five days before going to the doctor in '95, we know he's quit because it says that in the medical record.
But you know what? If there's no independent corroboration by testimony on this stand, that means nothing. That means nothing.
Let me give you example of why it means nothing. Here is the 1995 medical record. And in this medical record, we see a family history from Mr. Dombey: Father died of esophageal cancer.
You know what? Didn't we hear throughout this entire trial that his father had lung cancer? Yet this record only has esophageal cancer.
What does that mean? There is no lung cancer, or maybe he didn't say anything about lung cancer. Maybe, just maybe, that's a
mistake in a medical record.
Can you believe it? People make mistakes. That's not a correct medical record, unless we're not going to believe that he had lung cancer.
Look what happened in 1995. And look what else happened, when they're talking about a history somewhere in here: He came to my office. Further history is that of heavy smoking until five days prior the visit when he had stopped.
What about heavy history of smoking but there are intermittent times when he quit for five months and he quit for three months or quit for however long? Not in there. Is that a mistake? Of maybe the medical records really aren't that indicia of the liability. Maybe it's the testimony that you have to rely on.
THE COURT: Mr. Kaiser, you're close to exceeding your time. You need to wrap up here.
MR. KAISER: So when you consider this evidence -- and remember I put my board up of all the questions? And they couldn't respond to one of them. They couldn't get up here and respond to one of them because it would impact
on their own behavior.
They would have no choice but to admit that they lied; that they were deceitful; that they actually created this doubt, and attempted to do so for 50 years. That is why they can't talk about their conduct in this case.
But you can consider their conduct, and you can answer those questions, because they've already been answered for you in this case.
That's why punitive damages are appropriate in this case, and that's why compensatory damages are appropriate in this case.
And one more correction. Punitive damages have nothing to do with what Mrs. Dombey wants. Punitive damages are strictly on their behavior, their bad conduct, and a deterrent effect. That's it.
I will ask, ladies and gentlemen, that you consider the evidence in this case, that you find the Defendants responsible, and that you come up with a damages based on the formula that I suggested for you, because it certainly hasn't been commented on by anybody that it's an improper formula or a non-working formula in this case.
Thank you very much.