                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Good afternoon.  I'm going
     to be brief, the quickest I've been yet.  And
     then when I'm done, the Defense lawyers are
     going to get up and they are going to talk to
     you for a little bit, and then Mr. Paige is
     going to get up and he is going to be even
5231 shorter than I'm about to be.
          You're probably tired of hearing lawyers.
     Thank you for what you've done here.  You're
     probably tired of that.  I hope you understand
     that all of us are sincere when we say that to
     you.  It's hard to talk to people that you
     don't know, that you're not allowed to engage
     with, and you have no idea what they are
     thinking about all kinds of things.  And so we
     just want you to know that everybody
     appreciates what you've done here and it's
     important what you do.
          So this phase of the trial is about
     punitive damages, how much to impose against
     both Defendants.  And how do you go about doing
     that?  How do you do it fairly?  How do you do
     it in a way that's fair to Philip Morris USA,
     Inc., how do you do it in a way that's fair to
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and how do you
     do it in a way that's fair to the Duignan
     family?
          And so the way you do that is you follow
     the law that the judge gives you.  If you
     follow these instructions, you're not going to
     go wrong.
5232 And the instructions tell us something.
     The instructions tell us that the purpose of
     punitive damages, the amount of punitive
     damages, if any, to be assessed is punishment
     and as a deterrent to others.  Not to the
     Defendants, not to deter the Defendants,
     because what they did is already done.  It's a
     deterrence to others.  It's to punish the
     Defendants and it's to deter others from doing
     what they did.
          And you saw and you heard a lot of
     evidence about what these Defendants did, and
     I'm not going to go over that here.
          And I'm not going to try to characterize
     or describe what they did.  I don't have the
     ability to do that.  But you know what they did
     and you know why they did it.
          And so your first verdict spoke as to what
     you thought about that.  And you answered yes
     to the punitive damages questions, and that's
     why we are here now.
          And this purpose of punitive damages, to
     punish the Defendants and to deter others, to
     punish the Defendants for what they did and to
     deter others from doing it too, it's common
5233 sense, and as much as the law uses a lot of
     funny words and lawyers get up and say
     wherefore, heretofore, and all that nonsense,
     the law at its basis, at its most basic element
     is about common sense and good policy.
          And common sense and good policy tells us,
     if people and companies who are guilty of the
     kind of conduct and wrongdoing that gives rise
     to being subject to punitive damages, if they
     don't get punished for what they did, what does
     that do to deter others from doing something
     like they did?  And that's why it's common
     sense and good public policy to have this kind
     of law about what punitive damages are for.
          And it's also important, when you go to
     determine how much you're going to impose in
     punitive damages on these Defendants, it's
     important for you to understand clearly that
     while you are allowed to consider harms to
     other persons who are not parties to this
     lawsuit in determining whether to assess
     punitive damages in this phase of the trial,
     any amount of money that you award as punitive
     damages must be based solely on harms caused to
     Douglas Duignan, Martha Duignan, Kevin Duignan
5234 and Christina Duignan, and based solely on the
     misconduct that caused such harms.
          So the amount that you impose, you were
     allowed to consider the harms to others in
     Phase 1.  In this phase you only consider the
     harm caused to Mr. Duignan and his family.
     Q.   And you know that these Defendants did
what they did for money, and you know that they knew
people would die, and Douglas Duignan was one of
those people.
          He is 42 years old with a 39-year-old wife
and two children.  And when those Defendants,
Reynolds and Philip Morris, engaged in the conduct
that they engaged in, day after day, year after
year, for decades, the punishment that you impose on
them needs to be equal to the harm that they caused
to this family.
          Because what they did, what these
     Defendants did was deliberate.  It was
     deliberate.  And the punishment needs to equal
     the extent of the wrong.  It has to smart, as I
     was taught.  It has to smart.
          And what I mean is, the amount of your
     punishment must be a meaningful amount.  It
     should be respectful of the harms that the
5235 Defendants caused this family.  Because for
     Douglas Duignan it was the ultimate harm.  And
     it wasn't just the ultimate harm, it was what
     he went through in the months leading up to
     that harm.
          The medical records show he was filled
     with intense unyielding pain when he was
     writing on the floor and crying.  A grown man.
     The harms caused to Douglas Duignan and the
     harms caused to his wife Martha and his
     children Kevin and Christina.  He was a human
     being.  He was a human being.
          And they did what they did for money, and
     so that's the currency.  They did what they did
     for money, and that's the punishment for what
     they did.
          They want to say they are different now
     because -- Mr. Ware had Dr. Lipowicz describe
     all those men that worked at Philip Morris back
     in the '50s and '60s and '70s, and they are all
     gone now.  And, you know, corporations, they
     can live forever.  These companies have been
     around a lot longer than anybody that's worked
     there.  They outlive everybody that works
     there.  They keep on going.  The company has
5236 gotten to keep all the money they made doing
     what they did.  Not one dime has gone to the
     Duignan family.
          They talk about their different analogies
     of FDA regulation.  Well, that was imposed on
     them by an Act of Congress.  And they talk
     about what they do with payments to the states.
     They tried to say it was voluntarily.  It was a
     result of being sued.  It was a way to resolve
     those lawsuits with the states.
          And the FDA regulation and the payments to
     the states having nothing to do with the
     Duignan family and the harms caused to them.
     It does nothing to account for that.  Because
     what you do here, which you haven't done yet,
     but what you all are about to do when you go
     back in there to deliberate again, you're
     limited to awarding an amount of money based
     solely on the harms caused to Douglas Duignan.
     And you're the only jury who can do that,
     because the FDA doesn't have anything to do
     with it, and payments to the states don't have
     anything to do with it.  You all are the only
     ones.  You are the jury that is going to decide
     this.
5237 And when you get there -- when you get
     there, the question you're going to be asked,
     there's two -- like two parts of the same
     question.  You're going to be asked, what is
     the total amount of punitive damages, if any,
     which you find by the greater weight of the
     evidence should be assessed against each
     Defendant?
          You have Philip Morris USA and a blank for
     the amount, and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
     and a blank for the amount.
          And they brought a witness here from
     Richmond, Virginia, and he testified to you for
     a couple of hours this morning, and they
     brought a witness from Winston-Salem, North
     Carolina, and he testified for a couple of
     hours today too.
          And that was their evidence to you in this
     phase, those two people from the respective
     companies.  And you didn't hear Douglas
     Duignan's name one time today.
          And one thing that you're supposed to
     decide is what to impose upon them in the form
     of punishment, to punish these Defendants for
     what they did to Douglas Duignan.  When they
5238 brought you evidence today, it was as if
     Douglas Duignan never even existed.  They
     didn't even say his name --
          MR. WARE:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Approach.
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          THE COURT:  Grounds.
          MR. WARE:  Well, my objection is that in
     fact this is criticizing the evidence that we
     put on.  And this goes to the fundamental
     issue --
          THE COURT:  Isn't that his job?
          MR. WARE:  Pardon me?
          THE COURT:  Isn't that his job as an
     advocate?
          MR. WARE:  It's his job to disagree with
     it, it's not his job to say, we should have put
     on different witnesses.
          THE COURT:  Well, I think he is hoisting
     the Defense on their petard of insisting on a
     focus on damages to the Duignan family and
     making the point that -- that the Defense made
     in Phase 1 in regard to the tobacco history
     experts, that they didn't know anything about
     the Duignan family, and the Defense punitives
5239 experts don't know anything about the Duignan
     family.  I think it's fair argument.
     Overruled.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  May I, Your Honor?
          So this phase is focused on Mr. Duignan,
     and they acted like he never even existed.
          And Philip Morris and Reynolds might be
     regulated by the FDA since 2010, and they might
     have agreed to make payments to the states as
     they told you about starting in 1998 or 1999.
          That was all years after Douglas Duignan
     died.  And nothing has changed for the
     Duignans.  Douglas Duignan is dead.  Martha
     Duignan still sleeps alone and she has for 22,
     23 years now.  And she's fortunate enough to
     live with a son who loves her very much and
     provides a home for her.
          But these Defendants, they ought to be
     punished for what they did to Douglas Duignan
     and his family.  Whether they went and put up a
     website or wrote a paper about a cigarette
     you've never heard of, or whether they are
     regulated by the FDA because Congress said they
     needed to be, none of that changes a thing
5240 about what they did to Douglas Duignan and his
     family.
          And the punishment should be meaningful
     and respectful of the harms they caused to this
     family.  $100 million would be too much money;
     $5 million would be too little money.  You
     should impose punitive damages in five times
     the amount that you awarded in Phase 1.
          What we are suggesting to you, be
     meaningful and respectful of the harms caused
     to this family, and based on the law that
     you're given here, is $15 million should be
     imposed against Philip Morris and $15 million
     should be imposed against R.J. Reynolds.
          You should follow the instructions that
     the Court has given you because those are going
     to guide you to your right decision.
          And I want to say one thing about the
     amount of punitive damages that I'm suggesting
     to you.  I mean what I suggested.  I think it's
     the right amount to be meaningful and
     respectful of the harms and it would smart.
          But the amount you impose on each
     Defendant, whether you agree with me or not,
     this is your decision and your decision alone,
5241 but the amount should recognize those harms
     that the Defendants caused this family through
     their intentional and deliberate conduct.
          The amount needs to be meaningful, and
     that's why I suggested what I did.  And I'm
     going to conclude with this.
          They got up this morning and they told you
     they heard you loud and clear in Richmond and
     they heard you loud and clear in Winston-Salem,
     and they need to hear you today too.
          What you do here matters.  Thank you.


                  CLOSING REBUTTAL
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Good afternoon.  So I'm going to be short,
     very short.  I just have a couple of things I
     want to follow up on because I don't really
     have -- I had nothing prepared.  I was writing
     notes while they were talking and threw a lot
     of notes away because they were kind of
     redundant what I was writing.
          But the message that I hear from Philip
     Morris and R.J. Reynolds is that they should be
     not punished now because there are these
     mitigating circumstances.  And if you think
     about what they are saying, they are telling
5276 you that the changes that they've made, that if
     somebody is forced to change by acts of
     Congress where they are required to be
     supervised by our government, you know, our FDA
     probably has better things to do with their
     time than to have to supervise them and make
     sure that they don't go out of bounds and out
     of line.  And if there are lawsuits by
     governments all throughout the country to sue
     them, that's --
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Objection, Your Honor.
          MR. PAIGE:  And states.
          THE COURT:  I need you to come here and
     tell me what your objection is.
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Lawsuits throughout the
     country to keep them in line.
          MR. PAIGE:  You talked about --
          THE COURT:  I think the Defense has talked
     about that, about settlements with the attorney
     generals and other lawsuits.  I think it's fair
     game.  I think it's fair game.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          THE COURT:  Go ahead, Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you.
5277 So forced changes, you know, acts of
     Congress, FDA regulation, lawsuits by different
     states, that's not evidence of change or
     mitigation, all that is is evidence that they
     got caught, that they got caught after 50
     years.
          And if you think about it, they are
     saying, now that we got caught and we are
     forced to change, don't punish us because
     you're going to send the wrong message.
          And I submit to you that doesn't make
     sense because the message that you would send
     if you don't punish them severely would be if
     you lie for long enough, if you conspire long
     enough, that when -- by the time you get
     caught, everybody is gone, everybody is gone,
     and then you get caught.  You say, okay, now
     I'll change because you're forcing me to
     chance.  That's not a good message to send
     anybody.
          You know, Mr. Ware brought up an example
     of a child, if a child was being punished.  If
     a child is being punished, gets caught doing
     something, you know, somebody has a child and
     you want to raise them the right way, and they
5278 get caught stealing something, you tell them to
     put it back, first of all.  But you don't let
     them go and say, I'm not going to punish you.
          You know, you punish the child and you
     make sure he knows not to do it again.  So you
     teach them right from wrong and you make sure,
     if there's any other brothers or sisters in the
     house, that they are deterred and they
     understand a lesson.
          These are grown men who for 50 years went
     without getting caught.  They put profits over
     human lives.  They were forced to change,
     forced to change by acts of Congress and the
     government.
          And they hurt people.  They hurt
     Mr. Duignan as bad as you could hurt somebody.
     And you all found that it was their conspiracy,
     their lies that did that.  And to suggest that
     that's a mitigating circumstance I submit to
     you doesn't make any sense at all.
          And so the message that I think that you
     should send, if you're going to send a message,
     which you should, which is your job of
     punishment, punitive damages, that's the law,
     is to encourage a company who finds out about
5279 bad things to come forward sooner, not 50 years
     later, to encourage other companies who do that
     to fire people.  Don't wait until they retire
     and give them their pensions.  Encourage
     companies to help people and not hurt people.
          And that's not them.  They are far from
     it.  They are as far from it as you can get.
          And so they talked about the road to
     change.  And I submit to you that this is
     really what they are talking about is the road
     to nowhere.  Because nothing's changing but the
     date on the calendar.
          They talk about 3200 plaintiffs in
     Florida.  And the arguments that they made here
     that Mr. Duignan shouldn't be -- his family
     shouldn't receive punitive damages because
     they've been compensated, they will make that
     argument, think to yourself, they will make
     that argument over and over again.  If those
     people get to court and if they win their
     lawsuits and if they get punitive damages.
     There are a lot of ifs there.  So when they
     throw out a number like $45 billion, that would
     be an important message that they probably
     would get.
5280 But this is about Doug Duignan.  And
     again, I respectfully submit to you that the
     number that Jimmy asked for is just and fair
     under the circumstances of this case.
          Thank you.
