                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. WARE:  May it please the Court.
     Members of the jury.
          This is the last time that I will be
     talking with you.  And let me start just by
     saying that if we are talking about being
     respectful of Mr. Duignan, nothing that I have
     intended to do in this courtroom has been
     intended in any way to be disrespectful to
     Mr. Duignan nor his family.  The fact is that
     his death by any standard is a tragic event for
     this family.  But that's a fact that we all
5242 have to face in this process.
          The first phase of this trial was one in
     which you awarded compensatory damages.  And
     you did that by setting a figure which made
     Mrs. Duignan a wealthy woman.  She will be
     provided for, no matter what happens here, for
     the rest of her life.  And your intention was
     to provide fair compensation for the harms to
     her at that time, and you did that.  It was
     meaningful and it was respectful.  And we
     respect that verdict for that reason.
          Much of Phase 1 was devoted to the last 40
     or 50 or 60 years, and this is a different
     phase.  And now we are really here to talk
     about the present, today, what's happening
     today with these companies and what's happening
     or should happen in the future.
          Punitive damages today should be awarded
     to deter others and to punish Philip Morris to
     the extent it needs punishment, not simply
     because it's being asked for by counsel for the
     Plaintiffs.
          The reason we brought Dr. Lipowicz here
     was so that you could hear something about this
     company and the differences in the company and
5243 its culture and its accomplishments and in its
     citizenry, if you will, today as compared with
     decades ago.  And he gave you a picture of how
     the company cooperates with the public health
     community.
          Now, it's certainly true, and I don't want
     to duck the fact that many of the changes that
     were made, just as if I were disciplining my
     children, were coerced in the sense that they
     arose out of contentions.  Some of it out of
     litigation.  Some of it out of new science.
     Some of it out of an awakening within these
     companies that they need to be more
     responsible.
          Maybe corporate America historically has
     been a bit more of the Wild West than it is
     today, and we do expect more from companies
     today.  The only point of the testimony from
     Mr. Lipowicz was, in fact, the public is
     getting that today.
          And that's something we ask you to
     consider because Philip Morris is committed to
     ensuring that the public hears a single
     consistent message about health.
          And the reason that its website is
5244 relevant is not because it's a fancy electronic
     medium, but because it's providing information,
     providing links, providing information so that
     no one can be confused anymore.
          So when we talk about the deterring
     conduct in the future, the conduct of other
     companies, and even the conduct of Philip
     Morris, the importance of the website is and
     the importance of the FDA regulation is that
     cannot occur because of the oversight of
     government and the requirements of that
     oversight.
          The fact is that today, if someone wants
     health information about smoking from Philip
     Morris, they have the opportunity, and the only
     opportunity they have is to get those messages
     directly from the public health community,
     because those are the links, and the company
     makes no statements to the contrary of what has
     been proposed by, said by the public health
     community.
          The passage of the Tobacco Control Act and
     FDA regulation is very important.  You heard
     evidence this morning that the company
     supported that.  That's relevant because the
5245 issue we are talking about this afternoon is
     whether Philip Morris needs some additional
     kick in the butt to perform as a good citizen.
          And this is evidence that the company in
     2009, with the most comprehensive oversight
     probably ever proposed of a private industry in
     the history of the United States, stepped up
     and said, okay, damn it all, we are going to do
     things differently.  We've learned.
          And they supported that legislation and
     they've complied with the legislation and they
     provided talented scientific and other
     resources at the company like Dr. Lipowicz to
     be, as he said, on call and responsive for
     anything that the FDA wants to request of it.
          Today FDA does control virtually
     everything that Philip Morris says, its
     advertising, its manufacturing, you heard about
     the inspections.
          So the bottom line is, whether or not
     Plaintiffs want to focus on it, this is a
     different company today than it was 30 years
     ago.  And so when you have -- when you look at
     the question what else is needed and what kind
     of message are you going to send to other
5246 companies that you hope to deter, you need to
     look at what the company is today and not what
     it was 40 years ago.
          It is a different company.  It has
     different management.  It's relevant that all
     of the people and the institutions from the
     Tobacco Research Council, to CRT [sic], to
     these other entities that may have been
     involved in a conspiracy and were involved in a
     conspiracy years ago, are now gone.  The people
     who wrote these memoranda and were part of that
     are also gone.
          And the evidence will be, I think, as we
     go through this briefly, that at the end of the
     day, you can conclude that Philip Morris is a
     responsible citizen today, and whatever you do
     needs to send a message to other companies that
     if you change, if you improve your corporate
     culture, if you become honest, if you do the
     right thing, then we will not punish you twice.
          You've been asked to pay fair compensation
     for the wrong that you did to the Duignan
     family, and we awarded you money to do that.
     Properly so.  But this is a second step.  This
     is the question whether something additional
5247 ought to be paid in spite of the fact that you
     made a judgment about fair compensation
     yesterday.
          In the first phase, when you awarded
     compensatory damages you made a host of
     judgments.  Certain numbers were asked for.
     And you determined as a group of fair-minded
     people acting in good faith what the
     appropriate compensation was.  But that's done,
     and the question now is whether or not some
     additional punitive, some punishment needs to
     occur.
          Dr. Lipowicz came to you as head of
     product development.  He gave you the headlines
     of what the company is doing today.  That it
     cooperates with public health.  That it's a
     uniform message.  That these institutions are
     gone.
          He has admitted that since 1999, the
     company has said openly that smoking causes
     cancer and other diseases.  That nicotine is
     addictive.  These are all good things, these
     admissions, all good things.  They remove from
     the public eye any debate over the health
     consequences of smoking, and the company should
5248 be credited for that regardless of how it
     happened.
          Maybe it's not virtuous that a lot of this
     came about by virtue of things like lawsuits or
     legislation, but a great deal of this is also
     cooperative and voluntary and goes well beyond
     what was required.
          The fact is that the company conducts
     itself differently, and that's really at the
     heart of the issue here.  Is it just face
     saving or are these real changes in the
     culture?  Are they real changes in the
     interaction with the community?  And the
     evidence is indeed they are real changes.
          The management is different, the
     environment is different.  As I said, all of
     the people are now gone who were involved in
     the issues that concerned you so, and properly
     concerned you.
          So I think what I would ask you to
     consider in evaluating whether or not punitive
     damages are warranted is whether you want to
     punish this company, having already awarded
     $6 million to the Duignan family, or whether
     you want to encourage it.
5249 If the company has taken serious steps to
     be a better corporate citizen, if it has taken
     the kinds of steps that Dr. Lipowicz told you
     about on the stand, if it has been moving in
     the right direction, then isn't the message you
     want to give the same message any of us would
     want to give if we were disciplining a child?
          We would want to give the message that,
     look, if you do the right thing, that's
     different than if you don't.  If you've
     changed, if things are on the right track, then
     don't you want to encourage other companies
     that, yes, you're going to be penalized for the
     harm you've caused, but you're not going to be
     penalized for changing that culture and doing
     right thing as you go forward.
          Let me just briefly talk about the
     comparative fault verdict that you rendered
     yesterday because I want to be sure that we are
     all starting on the same page.
          Because of the way in which you answered
     the questions on the verdict form, and as to
     Philip Morris, particularly Questions 5 and 7,
     there is no reduction in the $6 million you
     awarded to the Duignan family.  And you may
5250 well have intended that.  But I want to be sure
     you know that because that -- that is in itself
     an enormous amount of money, not just to this
     family, but to any family.
          And the thrust of your verdict is even
     though you assigned 33 percent responsibility
     to Mr. Duignan, that has no practical affect as
     a result of your responses to other questions.
          I'm not criticizing that in the least, but
     I want to be sure that you're starting from the
     same point.
          Whether you need to award additional money
     to punish and deter is up to you to decide.
     And it's really for you to decide whether you
     believe it is necessary.  But the focus, as I
     said, needs to be on today and tomorrow.
          The instructions will tell you that it's
     not -- or do tell you that it's not appropriate
     to award any money in punitive damages unless
     the Plaintiff persuades you that in 2015, they
     are necessary for punishment and to deter
     future similar conduct.
          We all know that people can change, and we
     all know that corporations are really, in the
     end, the composition of the people who work
5251 there.  That's all they are.
          Corporations, too, can change, and in this
     case, the evidence is that Philip Morris has in
     fact changed.
          And I want to point out a few things on
     the jury instruction.  If I could have page 3,
     please.
          This jury instruction says that you should
     consider a number of things.  And obviously
     you'll have this available to you.
          But among those things are the nature,
     extent of the harm, of course, each Defendant's
     financial resources, and in paragraph 3, any
     mitigating evidence presented by the
     Defendants.
          The instruction says you should consider
     those things.
          What is mitigation?  It means evidence
     such as I'm talking about.  The evidence of
     changes in these companies.  It says, "You may
     consider in mitigation any changes in
     circumstances in each Defendant's conduct."
          That's at the center of what I'm trying to
     tell you, members of the jury.
          And the instruction goes on to say, "You
5252 may in your discretion decline to assess
     punitive damages."
          You've made the decision to consider them,
     now you have the option of assessing punitive
     damages or no further damages.
          Dr. Lipowicz told you about the changes
     and I've mentioned some of those to you.
          One of the other instructions at page 4,
     as was pointed out to you, says that you can
     only punish Philip Morris for conduct that
     actually harmed Douglas Duignan.
          The law does not permit you to punish for
     some of the harms that were talked about during
     the course of the evidence.  Now, as
     Mr. Gustafson said, the issue is narrower and
     must be focused on the harms or the evidence
     that caused harm to the evidence of what caused
     harm to Mr. Duignan.
          You heard a lot of evidence in this trial
     about harms to other people, and of course,
     that evidence is disturbing, but under the law,
     at this point, the focus has to be on the harms
     to Mr. Duignan.
          You heard evidence today that there are
     3200 Engle cases.  At the numbers that
5253 Mr. Gustafson proposed to you, if those 3200
     lawsuits now pending resulted in the same level
     of damages, we'd be talking about $45 billion
     in proposed punitive damages.  Every one of
     those lawsuits is a case like this, which will
     go before a jury such as this.
          The fact is that in our society,
     cigarettes are legal, though a dangerous
     product, and adults are entitled to make their
     own choices.
          When we look at this case, this is not
     obviously a class action.  You've heard of a
     class action.  This is an individual case.  All
     3200 of those cases are individual cases.  They
     will have their own juries to make the kinds of
     judgments that you have made and will be
     making.
          But you cannot base your verdict on
     whatever level of anger or emotion the evidence
     in this case may have caused you.  You owe it
     to yourselves as good, honest, fair people to
     play within the guidelines that the Court has
     given you, and to make your decision solely
     with respect to the harms caused to
     Mr. Duignan.
5254 So let me talk then about what it is --
     what changes have occurred.  I think it is
     relevant that the people whose names appear on
     those documents are all dead.  That's why I
     asked the question.
          We know those individuals are no longer
     running Philip Morris.  We know that the
     management is entirely different.  And, in
     fact, people like Mr. Lipowicz, Dr. Lipowicz,
     are a generation removed from the generation on
     whom the evidence focused in Phase 1.
          And if you went to Philip Morris today,
     you would likely meet somebody like
     Dr. Lipowicz, born in 1960, before the 1964
     Surgeon General's Report, and since
     Dr. Lipowicz and anyone his age has been alive,
     there have been pack warnings on cigarettes.
     He is from a completely different generation.
     And while Philip Morris may have the same
     corporate name, neither its culture nor its
     people nor its business is the same.
          And again, the question or among the
     questions you should ask yourself is whether or
     not it's appropriate to punish Philip Morris
     today for things done by different employees
5255 decades ago in a different culture.
          And more importantly, what purpose would
     it serve?  That needs to be a central issue for
     your consideration.  Are you trying to give a
     message of encouragement to a company that's
     made the right changes and is a more principled
     company?  Are you trying to say, okay, you must
     pay for the harms that you caused but we're not
     going to punish you for the future, given your
     track record over the last 20 years.
          If -- when and if you award punitive
     damages here, 100 percent of those funds go to
     the family.  None of that money is for public
     resources, none of it's for research, none of
     it is for anything -- none of it is for sick
     smokers.  It's all for the Duignan family.
          And I don't, in saying that, diminish
     their loss.  I do not.  But the fact is, the
     focus here ought to be, as I have said a couple
     of times already, on the future and on the
     conduct of the company in the last 20 years.
          Beginning in 1998 with the Master
     Settlement Agreement as you heard, these
     companies, Philip Morris included, are making
     payments to every state every year.  That
5256 amounts to substantial sums of money.  The
     Attorneys General of every one of those states
     has the right to discipline Philip Morris or to
     intervene should the companies not comply with
     any of the requirements of that Master
     Settlement Agreement.
          So it isn't just that there's FDA
     regulation.  It is that the Master Settlement
     Agreement itself provides 50 sets of eyes on
     the company and its conduct.  The State of
     Florida and every other state.  That too, has
     an important governing impact on Philip Morris
     and its conduct.
          The advertising restrictions that were
     talked about.  No billboards.  No magazines.
     No signage in stadiums.  No sponsorship of
     sporting events, and Philip Morris' own
     voluntary decision to stop advertising in
     magazines at all in 2005.
          Yes, in a way it's a small thing you would
     think, to stop it's advertising.  But it's
     impactful and it probably cost the company lots
     of money.  But they did it because they are on
     a track of doing the right thing in every
     possible way.  And that is an indication of the
5257 direction in which the company has been headed.
          As you heard today, the only advertising
     the company does is at point of sale, in a
     convenience store where the sign is over the
     cigarettes itself.  So there is no need to
     punish the company in order to deter it or
     others from that point of view because those
     changes have been made.  They've been
     implemented.  And the company is doing all it
     can with its program to train retail sellers of
     cigarettes and other products in convenience
     stores and elsewhere how to recognize phony
     IDs, how to be on the lookout for somebody
     standing outside the store for whom -- an
     underage person for whom cigarettes are being
     purchased.
          All of those are little things in and of
     themselves.  But they indicate a direction that
     is critically important as you assess this
     company.
          I can imagine you've had, as a result of
     this evidence, lots of concerns, but as you've
     heard, if that concern was about advertising,
     that's been addressed.  If it's about
     ingredients, that's been address.  Not only are
5258 the secret formulas disclosed to the Food and
     Drug Administration, but the websites
     themselves contain all of the ingredients so
     that the public can read about them if they
     wish to do so.  They can criticize them.  They
     can do whatever they want because this
     information is out there.  That is a big thing.
     That is not traditional in Corporate America.
     Any company that you work for has documents
     which could be described as secret, internal
     memoranda, internal communications.
          MR. PAIGE:  Your Honor, I object.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. WARE:  Sorry, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Counsel, no -- that's the
     Golden Rule.  Is there any motion?
          MR. WARE:  I withdraw it, Your Honor,
     that's my mistake.
          My point is, that the concept of companies
     maintaining their own documents, is not
     particular to tobacco companies.  Every company
     operates that way.  And yet, the tobacco
     companies and Philip Morris have changed that
     and are now making all internal memoranda
     available.  Emails could be inspected by the
5259 FDA if they wanted to do it.
          The level of nicotine is controlled.
     Filtered cigarettes and whether we'll have
     filtered cigarettes is all up to the FDA.  They
     could turn around tomorrow and say, you can't
     sell filtered cigarettes anymore.
          So these are significant major corporate
     changes as are the public statements that the
     company makes.
          With respect to young adults and youth
     smoking, I talked a little bit about that at
     the point of sale and the kinds of -- the ways
     in which the company is trying to address and
     make it more difficult for younger people to
     purchase cigarettes.
          It's important what you learn today about
     the decline in youth smoking.  It's critically
     important that in Florida, 4.3 percent
     according to the Florida health authorities, of
     high school students are smokers.  The lowest
     number in the history of the industry and our
     culture in the United States.  That's a major
     accomplishment.  And as Dr. Lipowicz said, it's
     not the end point for us.  We want to be doing
     better.  But it is in fact major progress.
5260 Let me just take a couple of minutes to
     talk about -- I'm not going to be much longer,
     but let me take a couple of minutes to talk
     about what it would be like for somebody 12 or
     14 years old who came into the world today, as
     Mr. Duignan did so many decades ago, how
     changed would this world be in terms of the
     tobacco industry?
          And so all of which I believe is relevant
     to the question whether it's necessary to
     punish Philip Morris today, given the company
     that it is.
          If we accept that young Doug Duignan began
     smoking at 12 to 14 years old, if that were
     today, he would never have seen a Philip Morris
     advertisement because there aren't any and
     haven't been any.  He would have been born in
     2003 or 2004.  If he walked into a retail
     store, he would have no access to cigarettes.
          To the extent he saw any ads or excuse me
     any packages of cigarettes, all would contain a
     federally mandated warning.  He would never
     have heard a statement from the Tobacco
     Institute or CTR or the Council for Tobacco
     Research or any other tobacco related industry
5261 representatives because they don't exist and
     would not have existed in his lifetime.
          From the day he was born, millions of
     tobacco company documents would have been
     available throughout his lifetime.  He would
     never have heard a single statement from Philip
     Morris that was contrary to any public health
     message because all public health messages are
     directly available on Philip Morris' website
     and it makes no contrary assertions.  And
     during his lifetime Philip Morris would have
     been making annual payments to the states under
     the Master Settlement Agreement.
          In short, he would be growing up in a very
     different era.  We cannot bring him back.  We
     cannot.  As much as everybody in this courtroom
     would like to do that.  But we can recognize
     that the harms that were then obstacles in his
     life are no longer there.  And people like him
     are not subjected to those harms the way he
     was.
          So let me wrap up here by just saying that
     central to your judgments here ought to be the
     message that you will send with a $30 million
     punitive damage award.  If the issue is how do
5262 we encourage companies to become better and
     better corporate citizens, after we have
     already awarded damages to a Plaintiff like --
     Plaintiffs like the Duignan family, and
     compensated them fairly for their loss, what
     kind of message is sent by a significant
     punitive damage award?
          It should be a message of encouragement,
     should it not?  Don't you want to incentivize
     companies to do better and better and better.
     And if they have paid a fair price for the
     harms that they caused, then the issue is, is
     there any reason to do more or shouldn't they
     be told you harmed this man, you must pay for
     that, we've assessed damages to make you pay
     for that, but we are not going to assess
     damages to punish you for anything beyond that
     because of the changes you have made and are
     making and will make.
          If you don't do that, if you award a
     substantial punitive award, what message are
     you sending to others?  Are you deterring
     another company with that who looks at that and
     said, well, I've got lawsuits, and what are the
     incentives then to change and become a great
5263 corporate citizen if those companies are going
     to be punished twice, paying for the harms and
     then again.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor, may
     we approach?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          (Sidebar discussion held:)
          MR. WARE:  I shouldn't have said punished
     twice, sorry.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  This is the fourth time he
     has likened the compensatory damage award to
     punishment.  It is a misstatement of the law.
     It misleads the jury.  It is the fourth time he
     has done it.  And so I object and I ask the
     court to tell the jury, to tell the jury that
     Philip Morris has not been punished.  That the
     compensatory damage award is not a punishment.
          It is a compensatory damages award.  And
     that Philip Morris has not been punished by
     this jury.  They need to be told that by
     someone other than Mr. Ware because Mr. Ware
     has told them four times now that they've
     already punished Philip Morris for -- with the
     verdict they gave down yesterday.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Ware?
5264 WARE:  I definitely misspoke, Your
     Honor.  I'm not going to defend it.  I made an
     error.  And I will correct it.
          THE COURT:  I think it --
          MR. WARE:  I don't believe I did it four
     times.
          THE COURT:  Yeah, you did.  I can go back
     and read it.  But I think the correction should
     come from the court.  The point is that it's a
     pure point of law.  And I don't intend to
     belabor it, I will just say that it -- as a
     matter of law, compensatory damages are not
     punishable nor should they be considered
     punishable.
          MR. WARE:  All right.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          THE COURT:  Members of the jury, I
     instruct you, perhaps remind you, that
     compensatory damages are not punishment and
     should not be considered punishment.
          Go ahead, Mr. Ware.
          MR. WARE:  Thank you, Your Honor.  That
     was my error and I apologize to the court and
     the jury.
          I did not mean to imply that your verdict
5265 yesterday was punishment.  I understand that it
     was not and I've said several times that I
     understand you're compensating the Duignan
     family for the harms caused by Philip Morris
     and co-defendant.
          Bottom line, members of the jury, I urge
     you to consider the message you'll send because
     I think that's the most relevant issue here,
     that the conduct of Philip Morris has changed,
     that the company has moved in a very positive
     direction, the things it are doing has made it
     a stronger and better corporate citizen, and
     while the company may have the same name that
     it did decades ago, it is not the same company.
          If you disagree and if you feel that some
     punitive award is appropriate, notwithstanding
     whatever changes may have been made, let me
     suggest to you that the appropriate damage
     award is not $30 million, but $1 million.  If
     you were to award that, the Duignans would
     leave this courthouse with $7 million.  An
     enormous amount of money for that family.  And
     an amount that they have deserved according to
     your verdict.  That would also send a message
     to Philip Morris that some additional incentive
5266 is warranted.
          But it would not be such a message that
     other companies, whom you want to deter, would
     not understand that if they pay compensatory
     damages, if they pay what you deem to be fair,
     for the injury they caused, they will not be
     punished disproportionately thereafter.
          When we were at the voir dire stage in
     this case --
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor,
     voir dire is not evidence.
          THE COURT:  Overruled until I hear what he
     is going to say.
          MR. WARE:  You were asked whether you
     would respond to the questions truthfully.  And
     you said yes.  And I believed you and everyone
     believed you.  And when I asked you
     subsequently --
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Approach.
          MR. WARE:  I'm not talking about voir
     dire.
          THE COURT:  Well, I think you better
     approach anyway.
          MR. WARE:  All right.
5267 (Sidebar discussion held:) t
          THE COURT:  Finish the statement you were
     going to make to them.  It is, when I asked you
     subsequently?
          MR. WARE:  Can I take a look?
          THE COURT:  Yeah.  Sure.
          MR. WARE:  I was going to ask whether when
     they were instructed to well and truly try the
     case when they were sworn, that was the
     foundation of my question.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I thought you said when
     I asked you or something.
          MR. WARE:  I think I did.
          THE COURT:  Okay.
          MR. WARE:  That's not my intention.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Are you going to
     reassert their duty of fidelity to the oath?
          MR. WARE:  That's all.
          THE COURT:  I think that's -- I think
     that's permissible but I think -- the objection
     I understand upon light of your misspeaking.
          MR. WARE:  Yes.  Thank you, Your Honor.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. WARE:  When you were sworn in this
     case as jurors, when you took your oath as
5268 jurors, the oath says something to the effect
     of it asks you whether you will well and truly
     try this case in accordance with the evidence
     and the law.  Part of that law, is the court's
     instruction which says as follows -- and maybe
     you could put it up at the bottom of the
     page -- I think on page 9.
          It is your duty to talk with one another
     in the jury room and to consider the views of
     all the jurors.  Each of you must decide the
     case for yourself but only after you have
     considered the evidence with the other members
     of the jury.  Feel free to change your mind if
     you're convinced that your position should be
     different.  You should all try to agree but do
     not give up on your honest beliefs because
     others think differently.
          And so in closing, I just ask each of you
     to keep that commitment in mind, to be
     individuals and not be afraid to disagree with
     others in the jury room, if indeed you do
     disagree.  And at end of the day, to do your
     best without prejudice or sympathy, to consider
     the changes in Philip Morris that warrant your
     awarding no further punitive damages or a
5269 number way below $30 million.
          Thank you, members of the jury.


                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Ladies and gentlemen, good
     afternoon.  I know it's been a long day already
     and I'm not going to be up here a long time.  I
     just want to talk to you.  Yesterday you
     decided that R.J.R.'s concealment of the
     dangers of smoking hurt Mr. Duignan, that
     R.J.R.'s concealment of the addictiveness of
     smoking hurt Mr. Duignan and it's important
     that you know that that concealment is gone.
     It doesn't exist today.  That's why we put on
     the evidence that we did.  It happened
     yesterday.  It happened a long time ago is what
     I mean, and it doesn't exist anymore.
          And the reason I told you about the people
     like Claude Teague and Alan Rodgman and folks
     like that at Reynolds who are no longer there,
     the important piece of that is that a company
5270 is just a company.  It's just a name.  It's
     people that do bad things.  It's people that do
     wrong things.  And those people are gone.  They
     don't exist anymore.  They are gone from the
     company.
          And you heard some of the -- I think when
     I stood here this morning, I said the Reynolds
     of the 21st century.  You saw what Reynolds
     says about whether cigarettes cause disease.
     They do.  They cause lung cancer and many other
     diseases.  Nicotine is addictive.  Reynolds
     refers people to the Surgeon General, Reynolds
     tells people to stop smoking if you're
     concerned about your health.  Those are the
     things that Reynolds tells the public today.
     On the website, the links to the Surgeon
     General.
          So what you saw back in the 20th century
     that Reynolds was doing, the talking heads on
     the screen saying there's a controversy, we
     don't know if smoking is dangerous, those days
     are long gone.  They don't exist anymore.  They
     really are ancient and old history.
          You saw where Reynolds now discloses more
     than it has to.  It doesn't have to have that
5271 website.  Every internal company document that
     you saw in this case is on the website that
     anybody can go to and read and see the crazy
     wrong-headed mean things that people said at
     Reynolds years ago.  They are not secret to
     anybody anymore.  That's all open.  That's all
     available.
          You heard evidence of how Reynolds
     discloses their ingredients and additives and
     things in its cigarettes so that smokers can
     know.  That's new.  That didn't happen in the
     world of Douglas Duignan.  That's something
     that's new about Reynolds.
          You heard about Reynolds being regulated
     by the FDA.  And what's important among that,
     among other things, is that Reynolds has rules
     to follow and there's someone watching Reynolds
     and making sure that it follows those rules.
     And that's one of the reasons this is about
     deterrence is one thing, but this -- what
     happened in the time of Douglas Duignan doesn't
     happen again, and that's one sure fire reason
     you can know it's not going to happen again.
          You heard that Reynolds is in the tobacco
     business but it is a lot more than cigarettes.
5272 You heard about the migration strategy of
     giving folks if they want to use tobacco to use
     less risky tobacco.  Dr. Garner told you it
     wasn't safe but he said it was less risky.
     That's a new world for Reynolds that didn't
     exist when Douglas Duignan was here, but it
     exists now.  That's part of the new Reynolds.
          Now, the reason I tell you all that --
          Katie, could you put up the jury
     instruction?
          -- is that we're just here about amounts
     and money.  And you can see the top line where
     it says you will now determine the amount of
     punitive damages, if any, and that if any isn't
     just there for language.  That means you can --
     it's within your authorization to determine
     that punitive damages should be imposed upon
     Reynolds.
          And then it goes on to say, down at the
     bottom, any mitigating evidence presented by
     the Defendants you may consider in mitigation,
     any changes in circumstances or each
     Defendant's conduct which you find relevant to
     determining the amount of punitive damages, if
     any.
5273 And then again it says, you may in your
     discretion decline to assess punitive damages.
          But the point I'm focusing on is you can
     consider these changes.  These changes should
     make a difference and they do make a
     difference.  The evidence you've heard today
     about the 21st century Reynolds is very
     different than what you heard during this
     trial.  There have been real material changes
     in Reynolds.
          Now, as I said, you have the option of not
     awarding any more money in this case.  I would
     suggest to you that -- you compensated the
     Duignan family fully.  One-third of what you
     thought was Mr. Duignan's responsibility but
     that is not going to be reduced for that
     responsibility.
          The family gets the full 6 million and
     it's within your authority to consider that
     being sufficient deterrence and punishment and
     not awarding any further punitive damages on
     Reynolds.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Same objection as before.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  It's a different statement.
5274 THE COURT:  Give me a minute to look at
     this.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  That's a different
     argument, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  You want to approach?
          MR. WILLIAMS:  I'll fix it.
          THE COURT:  You want to approach?  I'll
     show you what the transcript shows?
          I just want to -- again, ladies and
     gentlemen, I'll remind you, compensatory
     damages are not punishment and are not to be
     considered punishment.
          MR. WARE:  If you disagree with me I want
     to suggest something and this is what I thought
     about.
          I thought about yesterday, you determined
     that Philip Morris was 37 percent responsible
     for Douglas Duignan death, Reynolds was
     30 percent responsible.  That's a 7 percent
     difference.  And so what I did, I took the
     6 million that you awarded, because as I said,
     they will get the full amount, and I took that
     7 percent, the difference, and if you were
     going to impose a punitive damages award, I
     would multiply the 6 million times the
5275 7 percent and I came up with 420,000.  And if
     you decide to award additional monies in this
     case, that would be my suggestion to you, the
     amount that you award to the Duignans.
          And lastly, and I'm going to be short, I'm
     winding up, is that I just ask that you be fair
     and reasonable and if you decide to award
     punitive damages that that be the award that I
     suggested on Reynolds.
          Thank you.
