                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Good morning.
          THE PANEL:  Good morning.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  You're likely to be
     thanked by every lawyer that gets up here and
     talks to you today, so I'm the first one and I
     want to say thank you.  You all have been
     tolerant and patient -- tolerant of us and
     patient with us.  It's been a long trial.
     There's been a lot of evidence.  And what you
     do here matters.  You bear witness.
          Douglas Duignan.  The medical records tell
     us that he started smoking when he was 12 years
     old, before the Federal Government ever forced
     one of these Defendant's to put a caution label
     on a pack of cigarettes.
          It was back when these Defendants were
     denying that cigarettes were dangerous.  When
     they were denying that cigarettes caused lung
     cancer.  When they were denying that nicotine
     in cigarettes was addictive.  The very things
     that make up class membership in this case.
          Doug Duignan was a 12-year-old boy when he 4488 got started.  He was the same age that the
     documents from these Defendants show that they
     focused on in their marketing efforts to get
     new replacement smokers.
          He did exactly what they intended that
     he'd do.  And they enjoyed a lifetime of
     profits off of his lungs.  And you know from
     the evidence that the cigarette culture that
     arose in this country in the 20th century was a
     creation of these Defendants.  You know that
     now.  They created the cigarette century in
     America that lead to all of this death.  They
     did that.  They did it on purpose.
          When cigarettes became symbols of
     maturity, rights of passage in boys and girls
     to mature, the Defendants knew that and they
     exploited it.
          And so in Mr. Duignan's birth cohort, boys
     his age, over 50 percent of boys in his birth
     cohort smoked.  It was normal for him to be a
     smoker.  It would have been unusual if he
     didn't start smoking when he was a kid.  And it
     would have been really unusual if he were able
     to just put them down and walk away without any
     trouble.  And you know now why that is. 4489 Nicotine addiction.
          The golden goose that these Defendants
     protected all those years, talking about lung
     cancer over here does it or doesn't it, it's
     not proven, it's not proven, and nobody talked
     about nicotine addiction until Doug Duignan was
     38 years old.  That's the first time the
     Surgeon General came out and said nicotine was
     addictive.  It's not just -- it's not just
     someone's choice or their behavior.  It's an
     addiction.
          Even though these Defendants knew that
     most smokers start as kids, when their brain is
     still developing, and when addiction takes the
     strongest hold, and that addiction leads to
     disease and premature death, these are the
     things they knew, and they knew how to take the
     nicotine out of cigarettes, they knew how to
     grow tobacco without nicotine in it, and they
     not only chose to keep the nicotine in it, they
     engineered cigarettes to maintain addiction.
     And they tried to make it as hard as they could
     make it for people to quit.  Their own
     documents tell us that.
          This case, by its nature, requires us to 4490 go back in time so that you can evaluate the
     very different time that Douglas Duignan grew
     up in.  The time that this Engle class is all
     about.  It's all about those people who grew up
     back then, started smoking back then.
          And then Defendants were happy for him to
     be part of that class back when he was buying
     their cigarettes.  But now that he got sick and
     died, they want to exclude him from that class.
          So he's born in 1950.  That's smack dab in
     the middle of the cigarette century.  When he
     was born, a higher percentage of doctors smoked
     than nondoctors.  Think about that.  Cigarettes
     sponsored cartoons and family shows, patients
     were smoking in the hospital, Super Bowl
     quarterbacks and Major League heros smoked
     cigarettes.  Newscasters smoked on TV.
     Patients smoked in the hospital.  Cigarettes
     were sold in vending machines to anyone who
     could pull the lever.
          And back then, Philip Morris executives
     were telling the public that if cigarettes were
     ever proven to cause human disease, they'd stop
     making them.
          So as the Plaintiff, we have the burden of 4491 proving that Douglas Duignan was a member of
     the Engle class, that he was addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine, and that his
     addiction caused his lung cancer and death.
     That's our burden on class membership.
          And we have to prove these things by the
     greater weight of the evidence, as the Judge
     just read to you, not beyond and to the
     exclusion of all reasonable doubt, like in a
     criminal case.  Not by clear and convincing
     evidence, but by the greater weight of the
     evidence.  So did we tip the scales in our
     favor?
          So the first question on the verdict form
     is going to be:  Did Douglas Duignan have
     primary lung cancer?  Did we tip the scales and
     prove that he probably had lung cancer?  We
     overwhelmingly did that.
          Not only that, it was undisputed,
     unrebutted evidence in this case that the
     cigarettes, the brands of cigarettes that he
     smoked that were manufactured by these
     Defendants were the but for cause of his lung
     cancer.  They brought you nothing to rebut that
     testimony from Dr. Ruckdeschel and Dr. Burns, 4492 nothing.
          Engle class membership, it's specifically
     about -- you got 12 questions on this verdict
     form.  The first three questions are class
     membership.  It's specifically about was he
     addicted and did his addiction cause his death
     from lung cancer.
          And so the first question is:  Did he have
     lung cancer?  And what was the evidence on
     that?  You recall Dr. Ruckdeschel was the first
     live witness we called in this case, an
     international authority on lung cancer.  A
     former CEO of Moffitt, he ran the place for 15
     years and turned it into an internationally
     recognized cancer center.  Very different from
     when he arrived there.  He has written hundreds
     of peer-reviewed articles on lung cancer.  And
     he teaches other physicians how to diagnosis
     and treat it.
          And what did he tell you?  The first thing
     is, a single solitary mass in the lung.  That's
     the presentation of primary lung cancer.  And
     that's what Mr. Duignan had.  A great big
     tennis-ball size mass in his right lung.  Not a
     bunch of different spots, a bunch of different 4493 nodules in the lung, like a shotgun, because
     that would be the presentation of cancer that
     had metastasized to the lung.  What Mr. Duignan
     had was a single solitary mass, that's the
     presentation for primary lung cancer.
          And then he told you about the associated
     hilar lymph nodes, right here in the
     mediastinum.  That's where primary lung cancer
     first spreads to is the hilar lymph nodes.  And
     he had the enlarged hilar lymph nodes that were
     associated with that mass.  It's described on
     the CT scan of his chest that was done on
     September 22nd, 1992.
          And he had brain metastasis.
     Dr. Ruckdeschel explained that brain metastasis
     is common with lung cancer patients.  And he
     also had bone metastasis.  Lung cancer commonly
     spreads to the bone.  And he had it in his left
     hemipelvis and he had it in the skull.
          And once it spreads like that, you
     remember Dr. Ruckdeschel talked about it being
     like ants, these cancer cells are like ants,
     and they can go anywhere in the body.  He
     talked to you about it can go to the thumb, it
     can go to your inguinal lymph node, it can go 4494 into your mesentery, which Mr. Duignan had it
     right by that left hemipelvis where he had the
     bone metastasis.
          And if he couldn't access the lung mass on
     the bronchoscopy because tube couldn't turn the
     corner and reach back there to it, which
     happened here, you do the thing that's the
     easiest and carries the least risk to the
     patient, and that is instead of opening their
     chest and trying to get a piece of the tumor
     that way, or taking a big needle and sticking
     it through the chest wall into the tumor, you
     just go and get a twofer down here at the
     inguinal lymph node.  It's easily accessible
     and it and carries the least risk for the
     patient.  And that's what they did.  They
     determined that he not only had adenocarcinoma,
     but it had spread to that lymph node that's in
     his groin.
          And when they did that, the doctors tell
     us after they did that that it was lung cancer.
     And Dr. Ruckdeschel testified to you there
     wasn't any doubt.
          So September 18, 1992, operative report by
     Dr. Iyer.  Dr. Iyer's the surgeon that does the 4495 procedure.  He cut out the lymph node, he sent
     it to pathology, and he waited for the
     pathologist to tell him about the frozen
     section and what that pathologist thought it
     showed.
          And what does it say?  Frozen section
     report revealed large cell carcinoma,
     metastatic to the lymph nodes with lung
     primary.
          He was told it was a lung primary.
          And then he noted that in the progress
     note after he did this op note.  Left groin
     lymph node, exhibition biopsy performed.  Large
     cell carcinoma consistent with lung primary.
     And withstood procedure well.
          And what's the next day?  Dr. Parikh, the
     neurologist that was evaluating Mr. Duignan for
     the intractable, horrible pain that he
     presented to the hospital with that no one had
     been able to figure out.  And Dr. Parikh tells
     us, the patient probably has cancer of the lung
     with mass to the brain.
          Dr. Rao, the medical oncologist, the
     cancer doctor, he tells us his impression was
     possible lung primary with metastasis is most 4496 probable.  And then he says there, other
     etiologies or causes include large cell
     lymphoma or extragonadal germ cell tumor with
     widespread disease.
          Now, you've heard the testimony not only
     from Dr. Brant, the treating radiation
     oncologist, but also from Dr. Ruckdeschel on
     this issue.  He had a 42-year-old man with a
     great big mass in his lung that can either be
     lung cancer, lymphoma, or an extragonadal germ
     cell tumor.  What can you cure him from,
     because he's got a brain metastasis, bone
     metastasis, and a lymph node with cancer in it.
          And so what are they hoping for, for a
     42-year-old man with a 39-year-old wife and two
     kids?  They are hoping for something they can
     cure.  They can cure lymphoma; they can cure a
     germ cell.  And so they did the special stains
     on that, and unfortunately for Mr. Duignan,
     those stains came back showing that it wasn't
     lymphoma and that it wasn't a germ cell tumor.
     He had lung cancer.  He had widespread
     metastasis, which means he couldn't be cured.
          Dr. Rao has then a progress note where he
     talks about discussing the case with Dr. Shah, 4497 pulmonologist.  And he appreciates
     Dr. Shah's notes and he discussed the case with
     him.  So far metastatic carcinoma appears to be
     the diagnosis, primary is probably the lung.
          And then he refers to the official path
     report, not the frozen section that Dr. Iyer
     got during the biopsy procedure, but the
     permanent sections where they embed the tissue
     in wax and they slice it up and put it on a
     slide, and that takes a couple of days, and
     they are going to do these special stains.  And
     he is talking about that.
          The official path report and serum tumor
     markers are pending.  In the meanwhile, the
     patient is going to be referred for radiation
     therapy for the whole brain.  Referred for
     radiation therapy, Dr. Brant, whose deposition
     we read to you.
          What does Dr. Brant say when he sees
     Mr. Duignan on September 23rd, 1992?
          He thanks Dr. Rao for referring him to
     him, and it's widely metastatic adenocarcinoma
     with brain metastases.  And he says, "It's my
     impression the patient has widely metastatic
     adenocarcinoma, probable lung primary."  And he 4498 also had the symptomatic brain metastases that
     was causing the shrinkage of his left arm and
     his left leg and that pain he was having.
          Now, the Defense wants to show you what
     Dr. Brant wrote in a letter a few months later.
     And Dr. Brant testified under oath that he
     worded that letter that way, because Dr. Rao
     had been looking for these lymphomas and these
     germ cell tumors, and so he put "undetermined
     primary" in that letter because he didn't want
     to offend Dr. Rao because he was new in town
     and Dr. Rao sends him patients.
          What did Dr. Brant say about whether this
     was primary lung cancer or not?  "There isn't
     any doubt.  I see patients every day where the
     bronchoscopy is negative and the people have
     lung cancer.  There's no question in my mind.
     I say probable he had lung cancer."
          He had a big mass in his lung, it
     metastasized.  Everything fits.  Just like
     Dr. Ruckdeschel talked about.
          "I thought he had primary lung cancer,
     metastatic.  It's obvious he had lung cancer.
     It's extremely clear in retrospect that what he
     had was metastatic lung cancer.  It was very 4499 clear that he had lung cancer.  There is no
     doubt.  Arguing this point is ridiculous.  My
     opinion is that the patient had lung cancer and
     died from it."
          What does Dr. Rao's progress note tell us?
     September 26th, brain and bone mets from
     adenocarcinoma of the lung.
          And then after he got in hospice and
     Dr. Roberts is following him at home and making
     notes, terminal lung cancer with mets to the
     bone.  He had lung cancer.
          And then Dr. Roberts, after all the dust
     settles, Dr. Roberts has to certify the
     diagnosis on October the 20th for the hospital
     to know how to bill for the things that were
     done, and he tells you, the principal
     diagnosis, what brought him to the hospital, as
     Dr. Burns explained to you, was the terrible
     intractable pain that he had been having, and
     that was caused by a secondary malignant
     neoplasm of the brain and spinal cord.
          But the secondary diagnoses, the
     underlying reason was malignant neoplasm of the
     bronchus or lung, and then he had secondary
     malignant neoplasm of the bone and bone marrow, 4500 and he had a malignant neoplasm, secondary
     malignant neoplasm of the lymph nodes of the
     inguinal region.  We know that because he had
     that procedure where they took it out and they
     tested it.
          This was -- this was weeks after the dust
     had settled.  And what was the diagnosis at
     that point?  Lung cancer.  Primary lung cancer.
          And when he passed away, Dr. Roberts,
     consistent with all the other medical records
     in the case and the opinions of the treaters,
     says, "Lung cancer due to cigarette smoking."
          Now, the Defendant comes and says, well,
     it could have been colon cancer.  And what do
     we know about that?  There isn't any physician,
     you've got the medical records over there, both
     of us put medical records in evidence.  No one
     is saying he had colon cancer, no one.
     Dr. Chirieac, their own expert, didn't say he
     probably had colon cancer.  He actually said he
     probably had lung cancer.
          And the Defense concedes, they brought an
     expert, Dr. Chirieac, who conceded it may be
     primary lung cancer.  Most of the time when
     somebody goes and they have an unknown primary 4501 and they determine subsequently what the
     primary site is, more often than any other
     cancer, it turns out to be a lung primary.  And
     he agreed with that.  And he is not telling you
     all that this is not a lung primary.
          Then what does he tell us?  He concedes
     that it presented like lung cancer.  "And you
     learned, though, Doctor, and the films show
     multiple spots in the lung, that's more
     suggestive with a cancer that has metastasized
     to the lung, you learned that, right?"  And he
     agreed.
          "And in this case, it's described as a
     large mass."  And he agreed with that.
          And then he had -- he had to be shown his
     testimony.  "Have you ever learned that a
     single solid mass in the lung is more
     consistent with lung primary?"
          And his answer was:  "It's more
     suggestive, yes."  He admitted it presented
     like a lung primary.  But there's more.
          "And if it's primary lung cancer, we know
     the first place it goes is the hilar or the
     mediastinal lymph nodes, correct?"
          The first is hilar.  He agreed, it goes to 4502 mediastinum.  It can also go to the brain
     first.
          Well, classic lung cancer, as he admitted,
     metastasizes to the brain, and the CT showed
     that Mr. Duignan had brain metastasis.  And it
     also spreads to the bone, lung cancer does, and
     the bone scans show that he had two bone
     metastases.  It presented like primary lung
     cancer.  The Defense expert conceded that.
          He also conceded that it's probably lung
     cancer.  "Your opinion is that although it's
     probably lung cancer, it could be something
     else?"  That's what he admitted.  And he said
     the only other organ it could be from that he
     can tell you of is the colon, which nobody said
     it came from.
          But what does the Defense expert tell you
     about the colon?  He concedes that this
     presentation is inconsistent with colon cancer.
     He discontinued both of the medications.
     Remember, there was that reference when he was
     in hospice and he's taking the nonsteroidal
     antiinflammatories, and he had some bleeding,
     and he canceled those medications.  He had no
     more bleeding after that. 4503 Dr. Chirieac agreed with that.
     Stopping Voltaren and the other nonsteroidal
     antiinflammatory isn't going to make colon
     cancer bleeding go away.  He didn't have colon
     cancer causing bleeding.
          And we learned that most cases of liver
     metastasis develop from colon or rectal cancer.
     60 to 70 percent of people with colorectal
     cancer eventually develop a liver tumor.  And
     here we have Mr. Duignan with widespread
     metastasis, but nothing in his liver.  That's
     inconsistent with colon cancer.
          And then we go to the last slide on this.
     He had no liver metastasis from colon cancer,
     and not one doctor who ever saw him diagnosed
     him with colon cancer.  And nobody did it in
     here either.  He didn't have colon cancer.  He
     had lung cancer.
          Now, we are required to prove this, this
     first question:  Did he have primary lung
     cancer?  And we have to prove it by the greater
     weight of the evidence.  And the greater weight
     of the evidence is clear that he probably had
     lung cancer.  Those were the final diagnoses of
     his doctors.  It was the final opinion of 4504 Dr. Brant and Dr. Roberts and Dr. Rao and the
     rest.
          And you have to evaluate the testimony
     that you've heard here.  The Court gave you an
     instruction about believability of witnesses
     and expert witnesses.  You should consider the
     demeanor of the witness while testifying and
     the frankness or lack of frankness of the
     witness.
          As you consider that, and it's not fun, it
     doesn't feel good, but the Defense expert,
     Dr. Chirieac, he had to be impeached with his
     prior testimony ten times when he came here and
     testified to y'all.  That means he went to his
     deposition, he swore to tell the truth, and he
     said what we understood to be the truth of his
     opinions, and then he came here and he told you
     all something different from what he said
     earlier.  And we have to impeach him with it,
     and it's not fun.
          But he had to be impeached on basic
     things.  First, the fact that he has to rely on
     pulmonologists and oncologists to help make
     diagnoses of patients like this, he wouldn't
     admit that here.  He said it was illegal for 4505 them to make these diagnoses.  And then he had
     to admit, yeah, I do have to rely on them.  He
     had to be shown his prior testimony so that he
     would admit that to you here.
          He had to be impeached about admitting
     that Mr. Duignan's treating doctors diagnosed
     him with lung cancer.  He had to be impeached
     about that.
          He had to be impeached about the fact that
     a single solid mass in the lung suggested it's
     a lung primary.  He wouldn't admit that to you
     until we showed him what he said before the
     trial.  And we had to force him to admit that
     it was probably lung cancer.
          We brought you Dr. Ruckdeschel and we
     brought you Dr. Burns, and they weren't
     impeached even one time.
          Dr. Chirieac had to be forced to admit
     what he testified to earlier ten times, and
     it's important to evaluate that and evaluate --
     not whether he's got good training and works at
     a good place, but whether you can believe what
     he says over Dr. Ruckdeschel and Dr. Burns.
     Ask yourself if you can really do that, given
     his demeanor here, his lack of frankness he 4506 showed, and how he had to be shown over and
     over again, you're saying something different
     today than you said.
          So the Plaintiff we would submit clearly
     satisfied our burden of proof that he had
     primary lung cancer.  Dr. Ruckdeschel,
     Dr. Burns, Dr. Parikh, Dr. Brant, Dr. Iyer,
     Dr. Roberts, Dr. Rao, Dr. Shah.  And dependent
     on the version of Dr. Chirieac you believe on
     direct, he said he wasn't sure.  And then on
     cross, he admitted it was probably lung cancer,
     which I showed you.
          It was undisputed, unrebutted testimony
     that Mr. Duignan's history of smoking one to
     two packs a day for 30 years since the age of
     12 was the cause of his lung cancer, the
     Defendants' brands of cigarettes that were
     testified to about here.
          So we would submit that your answer to
     Question Number 1 should be yes.  If you answer
     no, the case is over.  It's over for the
     Duignans.  If you answer yes, you move on to
     Questions 2 and 3, which have to do with
     addiction and legal cause.
          Question Number 2, was he addicted to 4507 cigarettes containing nicotine, he clearly was.
     We'll talk about that in a minute.
          And then was an addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine a legal cause of Douglas
     Duignan's lung cancer and death?
          Now, notice the question there is was his
     addiction a legal cause, not the legal cause.
          Because that's important because the
     question on the verdict form, just like the
     jury instructions that y'all are going to take
     back in the room with you when you deliberate,
     the jury instructions and this question tell
     you that Mr. Duignan's addiction doesn't have
     to be the only cause of his lung cancer and
     death.  His addiction can be one of many causes
     of his death.
          His addiction to nicotine is one of the
     legal causes.  Reynolds' and Philip Morris'
     concealment of the health effects and addictive
     nature of cigarettes is another cause.  Their
     negligence, their defective products.
     Reynolds' and Philip Morris' conspiracy with
     other companies to hide what they knew about
     cigarettes.  Those things make a difference.
     It was unrebutted, undisputed testimony in this 4508 case that addicted smokers receive those
     messages differently than those of us that
     aren't addicted smokers.
          And the Defendants knew that, and that's
     what their whole program was about.
          So the jury instructions recognize that
     these things can work together to contribute
     substantially to Mr. Duignan's death.  The
     addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
     need not be the only cause.  It can operate in
     conjunction with other forces because the law
     recognizes the complexity of the world that we
     live in.
          Very rarely do things like this happen
     based on just one event or one force.  Usually
     it's a number of things that operate together
     that produce an event that takes somebody's
     life like this.  And our law recognizes that.
          So you'll get the legal cause instruction
     that goes with the one I just showed you.
     Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was
     a legal cause of lung cancer in Mr. Duignan if
     it directly and in natural and continuous
     sequence produced or contributes substantially
     to producing lung cancer so that it can be said 4509 that but for the addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine, the lung cancer would not
     have occurred.
          Contributes substantially.  Did the
     addiction play an important role in his
     continued smoking in getting lung cancer?  And
     then but for the addiction, if he wasn't
     addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked one
     or two packs or more a day for 30 years, would
     he have he done that?  If he weren't addicted,
     would he have exposed himself to the dozens of
     carcinogens in cigarette smoke every time he
     took a draw, day after day, hundreds of times a
     day for 30 years.  That's what addiction does.
          Defendants knew that nicotine was what
     kept addicted smokers smoking.
          1963, R.J. Reynolds, was Brown &
     Williamson, but Brown & Williamson is a part of
     Reynolds now.  "Nicotine is addictive.  We are
     then in the business of selling nicotine, an
     addictive drug effective in the release of
     stress mechanism."
          1972, R.J. Reynolds.  "For the typical
     smoker, nicotine satisfaction is a dominant
     desire.  Therefore, in designing any cigarette 4510 product, the dominant specification should be
     nicotine delivery."
          They ain't talking about the taste of a
     Turkish blend, a Camel cigarette, they are
     talking about the reason why people do this
     over and over and over again every day.
          1972, R.J. Reynolds.  "Tobacco products
     contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug
     with a variety of physiological effects.  Our
     industry is based upon design, manufacture and
     sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine."
          Not on taste.  Not on taste.  On nicotine.
          What does Philip Morris tell us?  1977,
     they dehumanize smokers when they study the
     effect of nicotine.  "We provide a product that
     is an essential commodity and habitual act.
     Put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in the
     cage, the rat will push the lever.  Smoking the
     cigarette is the lever press."
          Hard to forget that.  Were these
     Defendants wrong when they said these things in
     their secret confidential company documents?
     You know they weren't.  Ironic twist,
     everything they said to themselves in these
     secret documents that no one saw until the end 4511 of the 20th century, years after Doug Duignan
     died, everything they said to themselves was
     true, and everything that they said to the
     public was a lie.  Everything.
          Was medical science wrong when they found
     changes that take place in addicted smokers'
     brains compared with people that aren't
     addicted?  We know they weren't wrong.  They
     didn't even challenge this.
          The Defendants knew that addiction
     interfered with choice.
          1967, the Federal Trade Commission
     commented on it.  "There's no indication in any
     advertisement that after a person smokes
     cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is no
     longer a matter of choice for him but becomes a
     matter of need."
          Down at the bottom, 1989, Surgeon General
     Report:  "These two factors refute the argument
     that smoking is a matter of free choice.  Most
     smokers start smoking as teenagers and then
     become addicted."
          And while the '67 FTC report, which is in
     evidence, contains all kinds of things -- well,
     that's in evidence, and the 1989 Surgeon 4512 General Report is in evidence.  And they make
     important statements, and they are very
     meaningful, the things that they say, but most
     powerful statement here is the one made by The
     Tobacco Institute, bought and paid for and
     conspired with by these Defendants.
          And what does The Tobacco Institute say?
     "Cigarette smoking is more addictive than using
     heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who
     ever smoke.  We can't defend continued smoking
     as free choice if the person was addicted."
          They knew.  That was 1980.  They knew.
          And the truth of it is borne out in what
     happens in the world out there when addicted
     smokers try to quit.  Because motivated
     smokers, smokers who want to quit,
     68.8 percent, and then smokers who try to quit,
     52.4 percent, only 3 percent of them are
     successful long term.  In any given year,
     3 percent.
          Just like The Tobacco Institute said in
     turn, it's a powerful addiction and it's not a
     free choice once you're addicted.  And the NIDA
     definition that Dr. Burns showed to you about
     addiction talks about that very thing, 4513 addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing
     disease that's characterized by compulsive drug
     seeking and use despite harm and consequences.
          And what did you hear about in this trial
     about Douglas Duignan?  You saw the definition
     of nicotine addiction.  He started when he was
     12 to 14, he developed that addiction before he
     ever went and got incarcerated.  He smoked one
     to two packs a day for 30 years.  He chain
     smoked at times.
          One to two packs a day, 20 cigarettes in a
     pack, about ten draws on a cigarette, according
     to the Defense expert yesterday, that's 200
     doses a day of nicotine, and with that comes
     all those carcinogens.  You smoke for the
     nicotine, but you get the cancer.
          He smoked in bed.  He fell asleep on the
     couch while smoking and burned the furniture,
     destroyed a bed doing that.  Woke up in the
     middle of the night to smoke.  Smoked first
     thing in the morning.  His life revolved around
     avoiding places he couldn't smoke.  He couldn't
     sit through a movie that he paid for without
     going out and smoking.  Tried quitting cold
     turkey numerous times. 4514 Martha testified it was three to four
     times a year for years in the '80s.  Tried a
     special filter that he bought at the store to
     stick his cigarette in, to wean himself off
     cigarettes.  Tried reducing the smoke using
     that wind-up timer, one cigarette an hour.
     Smoked the butts out of the ashtrays when he
     ran out of cigarettes.  Would search for money
     under the couch when he ran out, and he had all
     the withdrawal symptoms that are listed even in
     the Defense manual that they brought you.  He
     had them all, nervous, irritable,
     argumentative, grouchy, frustrated, fidgety, he
     had difficulty concentrating and trouble
     sleeping when he was trying to quit.  He
     switched to light cigarettes because he thought
     they were safer.
          He continued smoking even after being
     diagnosed with cancer.  And then when he was
     dying in hospice, and he's not even responsive
     to people, he is reaching for cigarettes,
     reaching next to his bed where they have always
     been there, where they have always been in his
     pocket.
          It was unrebutted, undisputed testimony in 4515 this case.  And when someone starts smoking
     cigarettes at 12, 13, 14 years old, when they
     develop an addiction in that developing brain,
     you know, our kids grow up like weeds in front
     of us and the last thing that fully develops is
     our brain.
          As a male I can tell you, I'm a different
     person today than I was when I was 22.  And
     that's the way our brain development works, it
     takes longer.  And when these kids, 12, 13, 14
     develop addictions to nicotine, or any other
     addictive drug, it changes the structure of
     their brain.  Undisputed, unrebutted testimony
     that that results in a stronger addiction
     throughout their life.
          And that was Doug Duignan.  So they
     brought you a Dr. Rosman.  And he went through
     the criteria that he uses, that DSM criteria,
     with almost no explanation as to why he said
     Mr. Duignan didn't meet a single criteria in
     the DSM.
          And then you find out the truth.  He's not
     even using the criteria right.  We had to
     impeach him with the American Psychiatric
     Association manual on how to use and grade 4516 people using that criteria.  And when they gave
     examples of it, the examples they gave were
     Doug Duignan.
          But every criteria he just said -- and you
     only need three to be addicted on the DSM
     criteria, and he had all seven.  He had
     tolerance, he had withdrawal, he took the
     substance in larger amounts or over a longer
     period than he initially intended, persistent
     desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or
     control it, a great deal of time is spent in
     activities necessary to obtain or use the
     substance, important social, occupational and
     recreational activities are given up or reduced
     because of substance use.
          And he continued the substance use despite
     knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
     physical or psychological problem.  He smoked
     until he died.  He had lung cancer and he was
     going to die and he continued smoking and it's
     in the medical records.
          That's nicotine addiction.  They brought
     someone that they proposed was an addiction
     expert who did not even attempt to talk with
     you about the mechanics of addiction, the 4517 physiology of addiction, the power of
     addiction, especially in people who start when
     they are kids.  The permanent changes to the
     brain caused by nicotine addiction.  It was --
     it was -- it was unrebutted, undisputed
     evidence in this case that the false statements
     by these Defendants, the lies they told have a
     different affect on addicted smokers than
     non-addicted smokers.
          And then when they tried to cross examine
     Dr. Burns, who writes the textbook chapters on
     nicotine addiction in internal medicine
     textbooks that are used by people training to
     become doctor and once they become doctors it's
     on the shelf.  He wrote those chapters.  He has
     been involved in every Surgeon General's Report
     since 1975.  Unimpeachable, background,
     credibility.  Someone who really knows about
     nicotine addiction, and they cross examined him
     with Dr. Koop's website.  Turns out it wasn't
     written by Dr. Koop.
          Well, what does it say?  Research
     scientists recently found there is something in
     just the smoke from cigarettes separate from
     the nicotine that reduces the MAO inhibitors 4518 that Dr. Burns talked to you all about that.
     Reduces the MAO inhibitors that metabolize
     dopamine, and thus, increases the level of
     dopamine in a smoker's brain.  And it makes
     smoking tobacco even more addictive.
          Douglas Duignan smoked because he was
     addicted to nicotine and it's what made him
     struggle to quit.  One to two packs a day,
     comes out to seven to 14,000 cigarettes in a
     year.  219 to 438,000 cigarettes over his
     lifetime, and the exposures, the doses, day
     after day after day, 2 to 4 million, 2 to
     4 million lifetime doses of nicotine and
     carcinogens.
          So as -- as the Defense expert yesterday,
     it takes about ten minutes or so to smoke a
     cigarette, maybe less.  And if you smoke 20
     cigarettes a day, that's 200 minutes a day
     spent smoking, 400 minutes a day if you smoke
     two packs a day.
          Mr. Paige talked with the Defense expert
     said if you locked him in a room and had him
     smoke all these cigarettes, it would take him
     between 6 and 12 years or 9 and 12 years, if
     you remember that.  Well, what does that mean 4519 on a daily basis?  That's 200 to 400 minutes a
     day smoking, three and a half to six and a half
     hours a day he spent smoking cigarettes.  The
     only thing Douglas Duignan did, more than
     smoke, was work.  And they said that he wasn't
     addicted.
          There was no evidence in this case that
     Doug Duignan was somehow immune to the
     addictive effects of nicotine.  None.  The
     evidence was he craved it.  It was all he
     thought about when he wasn't using it.  And he
     exhibited withdrawal symptoms when he didn't
     get it.
          A grown man that was so desperate for
     nicotine he would smoke the butts out of an
     ashtray if he ran out of cigarettes.
          And what did the Defense addiction expert
     tell you about that?  He would look for some
     unused portions of cigarettes just to have some
     nicotine in his system until he could afford
     it.  That's addiction.  He would smoke dirty
     cigarettes out of a dirty ashtray just to get
     some nicotine in his system until he could
     afford to buy a pack cigarettes.  If you
     replace the word nicotine with cocaine or 4520 heroin or methamphetamine or crack cocaine --
          MR. WARE:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Approach. THE COURT:  State your objection.
          MR. WARE:  My objection is this was
     specifically brought up by the Court, as I
     understand it.  This comparative to cocaine,
     heroin, so forth are drugs.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  RJR objects.  It's
     inflammatory.
          THE COURT REPORTER:  I can't hear you.
          THE COURT:  She can't -- she didn't hear
     you.  Oops, let's see.  I think she's
     missing -- come a little closer if you want to
     say that.
          I'm looking for my notes in the order in
     limine.  You're saying there was an order in
     limine?  Was it a motion in limine?
          MR. MICHAEL:  I'm not sure.  It wasn't a
     specific order in limine, but Your Honor said
     that you don't want references to crack and
     other --
          THE COURT:  That was in the expert
     testimony as far as the term "freebasing."  I 4521 think the point that was being made was the
     relative addictiveness of this substance
     compared to other substances.  I think that's a
     valid point to be made.  I think there is
     evidence about it and I'm going to allow it.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  May I, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  Please.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Thank you.  Please the
     Court.
          So if you took this statement and you
     replace the word nicotine with any other
     addictive drug that's been talked about in
     their own documents, heroin, cocaine, we
     wouldn't even be having this conversation.  He
     was rummaging around in the trash to get
     heroin, he was rummaging around in the trash to
     get some cocaine that he needed to have in his
     system until he could afford to buy it, then we
     wouldn't be talking about whether he was
     addicted or not.
          These nicotine people think a little
     differently about it because you can go buy it
     at the Winn-Dixie or at a gas station or
     whatever.  It's just as addictive as the 4522 others.
          And we know that when he was a teenager he
     was so desperate for nicotine, when he was
     incarcerated he hand rolled and smoked that
     nasty tobacco from the tin that he couldn't
     stand because it was all he could get.  It's
     something that he didn't even like, because it
     was all he could get.
          And it's the repeat, daily repetitive
     dosing to get nicotine, and with that comes 70
     carcinogens every time you draw a hit.  That's
     how nicotine addiction causes lung cancer.
     Addicted smokers don't wake up in the morning
     and forget to light up a cigarette.  It's part
     of what they do, it becomes who they are,
     because of the changes in their brain.
     Addiction is what drives that behavior.
          And the Surgeon General talked about it.
     It's the primary reason for why people smoke.
     "Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason
     that individuals persist in using tobacco
     products, and this persistent tobacco use
     contributes to many diseases described in this
     report."
          What did the Defense addiction expert have 4523 to say about that?  He doesn't agree with it.
     That addiction doesn't make people use the
     thing they are addicted to.  It's an extreme
     position.  How does nicotine addiction cause
     disease?  It causes the repetitive use, and
     this has been described in the schematic on the
     Surgeon General's Report and then Surgeon
     General Koop described this, how nicotine
     addiction causes disease back in 1988.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
           We should also give priority to the one
     addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing
     more than 300,000 Americans each year.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  And Philip Morris USA
     Incorporated and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
     knew about it a long time before
     C. Everett Koop said it in 1988.
          Philip Morris, in 1977, "Without the
     chemical compound, the cigarette market would
     collapse and Philip Morris would collapse and
     we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting
     fees."
          R.J. Reynolds in 1982, "We cannot ever be 4524 comfortable selling a product which most of our
     customers would stop using if they could.  That
     is to say, if the exit gate from our market
     should suddenly open, we could be out of
     business almost overnight."
          Of course their secret documents are
     right.  They are right about nicotine being
     addictive.  They were right about why people
     can't stop.  They were right about causing
     cancer.  Addiction is what caused Doug Duignan
     to smoke until he got sick from it and died of
     lung cancer.  Without nicotine addiction that
     doesn't happen.  Without nicotine addiction he
     quits.  He doesn't fail repeatedly in his quit
     attempts.
          Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, they know
     this to be true.  They always knew it to be
     true, and they know it today.  And they knew it
     years before Doug Duignan died.
          When you get to questions two and three on
     the verdict form, we would ask you to check
     "yes" on both of these.  It's clear that he was
     addicted and it's clear that the nicotine
     addiction is what caused his death from lung
     cancer. 4525 He had primary lung cancer caused by
     repeated daily dosing of carcinogens if his
     quest to keep nicotine in his system.  The
     nicotine that he craved and was addicted to.
          If you check "yes," he's a member of the
     Engle class.  If you check "no" on any of those
     first three questions, this case is over, and
     R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris get to go away
     free.
          A "yes" answer means the Engle findings
     apply.  Smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer,
     adenocarcinoma of the lung, large cell
     carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, squamous cell
     carcinoma, the four different cell types of
     lung cancer.  And certain other smoking-related
     diseases.
          Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
     Reynolds and Philip Morris placed cigarettes on
     the market that were defective and unreasonably
     dangerous.  Reynolds and Philip Morris
     concealed or omitted material information not
     otherwise known or available, knowing that the
     material was false or misleading, or failed to
     disclose a material fact concerning the health
     effects or addictive nature of smoking 4526 cigarettes or both.  And Reynolds and Philip
     Morris agreed with other companies, conspired
     with other companies, and the Council for
     Tobacco Research and The Tobacco Institute to
     conceal or omit information regarding the
     health effects of cigarettes or their addictive
     nature with the intention that smokers in the
     public would rely on this information to their
     detriment.  That was their plan.
          And R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris sold
     or supplied cigarettes that were defective and
     R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris are both
     negligent.
          These findings, once he's a member of the
     Engle class by your verdict, these findings
     apply to this case, to Doug Duignan, to his
     family, to Philip Morris USA Incorporated, to
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, to everybody,
     the court, and the government.  It's binding on
     everyone.
          This is one of those stories that has only
     one side.  They did what they did for money.
     It didn't matter who died, it didn't matter how
     many, so long as they keep their money.  And
     that's where y'all come in because this is a 4527 reckoning.  Your verdict is a reckoning.  By
     your verdict you bear witness to what they did.
          What you do here matters.  Mr. Paige is
     going to address the remainder of the issues.
     Thank you for your patience with me.


                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. PAIGE:  Good morning.  So following up
     on what Jimmy said, again, thank you all for
     being here.  It doesn't seem like that long
     ago, though we've been here a long time, right.
     You've heard a lot of evidence and you guys
     have been attentive and listening and I know
     some of it has been repetitive, but it seems
     like if you think about the timeline, it seems
     like yesterday we were in that big jury room
     downstairs and all those people, and then you
     are the seven who really got the privilege to
     be here and listen to this because now, you
     know, over our lives and how we live everybody
     thinks that they know a lot about smoking and
     health and cigarette industries and I would
     imagine if you all, you know, learned a lot in
     this trial about what happened and why we are
     here and how important these cases are.
          And this case is important.  And we know
     that you all have your own lives and you have
     important things going on in your lives.  You 4532 have your own jobs and families and the fact
     that you've been here paying attention and
     listening is important.
          And, you know, it is a privilege for me to
     be here before you all.  You all don't know me
     and I don't know you and it's an important case
     and what you're going to do is here important.
          And so following up on what Jimmy talked
     about, I'm going to be talking about punitive
     damages is one of the things I'll talk about.
     Punish.  Holding them accountable for their
     lyings, you know, for what they did to people.
     Intentionally for money, for profit, profit
     over human lives and there's a book that many
     of you may know it, but it's everything I know
     -- "Everything I Need to Know I Learned In
     Kindergarten."  Okay.  Be nice to people.
     Don't lie to people.  Don't hurt people.  They
     did everything they shouldn't do.  And when you
     do that, in society, they can say smoking is a
     legal product.  Nobody's going to jail for it.
     This is a civil case.  And in a civil society
     when you do the things they do, you have to be
     held accountable.  And the way to hold them
     accountable -- you know, when Mrs. Duignan 4533 testified they said, you remember the Defense
     witness said -- he started out happy birthday,
     and then he went into all the -- scenes that
     happened in their lives that he overcame.  And
     Douglas Duignan, he did make mistakes and he
     did go to jail for thee years when he was a
     kid.  And you know what, he was -- I told you
     in opening statement you'll meet these people.
     They are nice people.  They are good people.
     He was a good man.
          MR. WARE:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Come on up. MR. WARE:  I object to counsel's
     testifying about the character of the Plaintiff
     and his family in this case and I move for a
     mistrial on that basis.
          THE COURT:  I think that's ridiculous.
     That's denied.
          I want to tell you all that in Florida
     practice, it is considered extremely bad form
     to interrupt a closing argument.  And I don't
     want to consider any marginal kind of
     objections that are made, you know -- if you
     need to make it for the record in your 4534 professional judgment do so, but --
          MR. WARE:  Your Honor, I try to be very
     restrained in this respect.  This is twice.
          MR. MICHAEL:  And in like two hours.
          If I can just state one sentence of the
     grounds.  Your Honor excluded Kevin Duignan's
     felony conviction, and counsel has now just
     argued to the jury that there's been no
     evidence but that this is a good family.  That
     is excluding evidence and using it against us.
          THE COURT:  Let me just read.  It's
     certainly -- certainly off task.
          People -- they are nice people.  They are
     good people.  He was a good man.
          That's fair argument.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  But it's time to get to the
     point.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Your Honor, this all came
     up afterwards when, you know, when
     Mr. Gustafson was finished.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Understood.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  So anyway, I was going 4535 to talk about punishment.  And one of the
     things -- and I'm going to talk about something
     first, but I just want to say that punishment,
     when you decide punishment, you have to
     consider what they did, right?  And one of the
     things that the Judge has instructed you, that
     you will see that you have to consider, is the
     reprehensibility of their actions.  How bad was
     it what they did?  Reprehensibility.  Think
     about it.
          We've talked about these numbers.  And you
     probably get numb to it 500,000 people died a
     year.  30 million people.  And these are just
     numbers.  It's numbing after a while.  But if
     you think about it, if you sit there and think
     about how many people that is every day over 30
     years when 90 percent of them are starting as
     teenagers, there's nothing more reprehensible.
          And so at some point, when I get to the --
     I'm going to talk about punitive damages and
     why you all -- why it's so important that you
     have the power and the responsibility to really
     judge what they did and let them know that.
          In opening statement, I think Mr. Ware
     said that they made a few wrong-headed 4536 statements.  This was not a few wrong-headed
     statements.  This was a massive conspiracy for
     50 years by grown men who were making money and
     they didn't care about other people.  And
     that's -- in a civil society, that's not right.
     That's not right, that's not nice, it's not
     nice to do to other people, and it's wrong.
     And they have to be held accountable.
          Now, so the first thing I want to talk
     about is apportionment of fault.  And I want to
     be clear about this.  Because we did admit in
     our pleadings that Doug Duignan bears partial
     responsibility.  And I want to be clear with
     you all what that means and what we are
     admitting and how that applies in this case
     because there are several claims.
          So there are claims for fraud in this
     case, the conspiracy, the concealment.  And in
     a fraud claim, when somebody does something
     intentionally, on purpose, to hurt other
     people, the law does not -- we don't have to --
     you don't have to apportion fault.  It doesn't
     permit that.  So we are not admitting partial
     responsibility in combination with the fraud.
     If you find for us on the fraud claims, which 4537 are very important, the Court will not under
     Florida law reduce those damages or reduce the
     percentage of fault.
          But for the negligence, the strict
     liability claims, the defective product, for
     their carelessness, we admit in combination
     with what they did, that Doug Duignan does bear
     partial responsibility.  But what he bears
     partial responsibility for I want to -- you
     have to remember, the judge instructed you
     what's negligence.  You know, you're going
     judge his negligence.  What would a reasonable
     person do under similar circumstances, right?
          So we don't judge him on the standards
     today what we -- what people teach their
     children today or how people act today, it's
     back -- we have to go back to 1950.
          And again, if you think in time how long
     ago 1950 was to us today, if you think about
     when Doug Duignan was born, if you go back 50
     years when he was born, you're going back to a
     point in time when there were only 140 cases of
     lung cancer in the world.  Nobody was smoking
     inhalable cigarettes.  They weren't even
     around.  There was no death.  There was no lung 4538 cancer.
          There are reasonable alternatives to
     cigarettes.  There -- when you have
     inhalability and nicotine addiction and youth
     smoking and so on, you have a problem.
          But when Doug Duignan was born in 1950, it
     was a different world.
          So when you compare his fault, you know, I
     just want to be clear, he started as a kid.  He
     was 12 years old.  That was normal back then.
     You know, he became an addict.  He tried to
     quit over time.  And later in life, later in
     life when he failed, when he was trying, we
     admit, and I think I said in opening statement,
     if somebody tries five times, it's natural to
     think they should have tried six times.  If
     they tried ten times, they should try 12 times.
     Whatever it is.  You can never try enough.
          You know what, if he had more time,
     probably he would have succeeded, because we
     know over time 50 percent of people do succeed.
     They do succeed over time that you keep trying.
     And he was so young.  He was so young when he
     got cancer, so young when he died, and he was
     trying. 4539 But when he was born, he was growing up,
     in the world he lived in, you consider his
     negligence, his carelessness.  Everybody was
     smoking.  Doctors were smoking, patients were
     smoking, athletes were smoking.  Famous
     athletes.  You know, this is in 1960.  Len
     Dawson, Super Bowl I.  So when you're judging
     Doug Duignan, his share of responsibility, what
     did he do wrong, when you compare it to their
     negligence, their carelessness, their defective
     product, I submit to you, early on in the
     1960s, in the 1970s, he was doing what
     everybody else was doing.
          Doctors were smoking, teachers were
     smoking, astronauts were smoking.  All the kids
     in the neighborhood were smoking.  More
     doctors -- 50 percent of doctors were smoking.
          He is a kid with an eighth grade
     education.  In fact, he is a kid, when you talk
     about targeting people, he needed to be
     educated.  And you have to go like, what did he
     know?  What did he know?  Did he know more than
     doctors and astronauts?  He was doing what
     everyone was doing.
          So I submit to you, early on, in the '50s, 4540 '60s, the '70s, he wasn't doing anything
     that he -- he was doing what they wanted him to
     do.  He was doing what they wanted him to do.
     He was smoking.
          You know, they had warnings on the
     packages.  Sure they did.  They were mandated
     to put warnings on, caution, it may be
     hazardous, it's not dangerous.  It wasn't until
     1985, not until 1985 that they even warned on
     the pack that smoking causes lung cancer.
          So as Jimmy said in opening, this was the
     culture that they wanted.  You know, they
     wanted people to smoke.  They paid a lot of
     money for it, $250 billion, $250 billion
     creating this culture of people smoking.  You
     know, back then 50 percent of people smoked.
     Now it's 15 percent.  It's going down.  You've
     seen the lines.  And it's going to keep going
     down.
          And that's a good thing, right?  But he
     got caught up in the middle of it.  They were
     spending $10 million every day, every day, to
     create this culture.  $10 million a day, every
     day.  That's what they spent to get people
     smoking.  90 percent of them start as 4541 teenagers.
          And they say, you know, we didn't -- you
     can't prove that he smoked because of an
     advertisement.  And we can't.  You have to use
     your judgment.  Your judgment.  What do you
     think happened?
          They didn't like the stepfather.  The
     brother said that he hit them.  They didn't
     want to be like him.  They weren't trying to be
     like the stepfather.  They just wanted to be
     like everybody else.  Everybody else was
     smoking.  People they looked up to.  Famous
     athletes.  Famous movie stars.  They watched
     the Flintstones, and they smoked.
          So to say that they had nothing to do with
     it, to believe -- and maybe they do believe
     they had nothing to do with it, but it doesn't
     make sense.
          And here are some of the advertisements of
     his time, very different than what we have on
     TV now.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          NARRATOR:  What cigarette do you smoke?
     You'll be interested to know how the doctors of 4542 America answered that question.  Doctors in
     every branch of medicine were asked, what
     cigarette --
          You'll feel better.
          FEMALE SPEAKER:  Did you say I'll feel
     better smoking Philip Morris?
          NARRATOR:  Yes, you'll feel better.
          SINGERS:  Don't miss the fun of smoking,
     don't miss the fun of smoking.
          BARNEY RUBBLE:  Let's take a Winston
     break.
          FRED FLINTSTONE:  That's it.  Winston is
     the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor
     20 times a pack.  Winston's got that filter
     blend.
          BARNEY RUBBLE:  Yeah, Fred.
          UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  Marlboro.  The man
     who knows filters knows that cellulose acetate
     is the modern effective filter for cigarettes.
     This is the unfinished cellulose acetate that
     goes into the filter of just one Marlboro, and
     these finely spun filaments smooth out the
     smoke and round out the taste.
          SINGERS:  A lot to like with a Marlboro.
     Filter, filter, flavor, flavor, pack or box. 4543 (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And he smoked filters, and he
     told his family that he thought they were
     safer.  Why wouldn't he?  Why wouldn't he?  And
     there are some of the advertisements from the
     cigarettes he smoked.  He smoked primarily
     Philip Morris brand.  That was not -- that was
     his main brand, his favorite brand.
          But he smoked these other brands from
     R.J. Reynolds.  He started out smoking
     Tareyton.  That's what his brother testified
     to.  He smoked Camel when he was younger.
     That's an R.J. Reynolds brand.  He smoked Doral
     Lights the last couple of years of his life.
          All these brands, whether they were Philip
     Morris or R.J. Reynolds, they all had these
     filters that were supposed to be safer.
          So when you're comparing, you know, you
     all are learning things now, the Surgeon
     General didn't come out until 2010, and I'm
     going to go over that report and talk about how
     filters and lights aren't safer, but when
     you're comparing his fault, what did he do
     wrong, what did he know, what did he know as a
     12 year old, as a 22 year old, with an eighth 4544 grade education who was trying his best.  He
     was a good father to his kids.  He was smoking
     filters and lights.
          If you compare that fault to their
     defective product and their negligence, I
     submit to you, they bear a big part of
     responsibility, each of them.  You know,
     R.J. Reynolds is three companies.  They are
     R.J. Reynolds, Brown & Williamson, American
     Tobacco, Philip Morris.  And then you have Doug
     Duignan, with an eighth grade education, who is
     doing the best he can.
          And then this is Marlboro.  We know the
     Marlboro story.  You saw the long video, but
     I'm going to play a short one to show how
     normal it was and how people just like Doug
     were switching over to Marlboro.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          NARRATOR:  Television advertising of
     cigarettes ended in the U.S. in 1971, but
     Marlboro made a smooth transition to print and
     outdoor advertising.  This successful
     transition was largely due to the death of the 4545 Marlboro Country idea.
          Over the years, Marlboro smokers have
     recognized the quality of Marlboro and its
     leadership position resulting in continued
     growth.
          In 1955, Marlboro sales in the United
     States were a modest 6 billion.  However,
     within only one year, volume nearly tripled and
     Marlboro sales to smokers took off
     domestically.
          Marlboro is far and away the leader in the
     cigarette industry, and the trend is
     continually upward.  In 1990, Marlboro sold
     more than 344 billion cigarettes worldwide.
     Marlboro is marketed in more than 150 nations
     and territories, making it the most widely
     distributed consumer packaged goods product in
     the world.
          As early as 1954, Philip Morris'
     management recognized the potential of
     marketing a filter cigarette.  In much the same
     manner, line extensions such as Marlboro Lights
     have taken advantage of changing tastes and
     attitudes of smokers to build the brand.
          Marlboro was among the first to introduce 4546 a lights line extension, and this kind of
     aggressive marketing has paid off as Marlboro
     Lights has grown to become a significant part
     of the Marlboro business.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  So can you show the chart?
          So here we have this chart, and you look
     at how the consumption, how the sales were
     increasing.  You know, from 1950 when he was
     born, to the 1960s when he was a teenager,
     through the 1970s.  And it doesn't start to go
     down until about 1982 is when the consumption
     starts going down.  And we'll talk about how it
     could have gone down earlier in 1953.  But in
     1982 is when people really started quitting
     more.
          And, you know, you ask yourself, and you
     can ask me, and it's a fair question, he knew
     at some point, at some point he knew smoking
     was bad, right?  And that's a fair question.
          But what did he know?  How much did he
     know?  Did he know what you all know today?
     Did he know that much back in 1982?  Did he
     have doubt, did he think that filters were
     safer?  Did he think that lights were safer 4547 when he was trying to quit with an egg timer?
     Was he at a disadvantage from what we have
     today?
          But up until 1982, I ask you to ask
     yourself, what did Doug Duignan do wrong that a
     reasonable person back in the '60s and '70s who
     is a teenager and in their 20s wasn't doing as
     well?  And so I submit to you, when you
     apportion fault, and that's why I'm going to
     talk about apportioning fault, and it's just --
     a way that you can look at it is you have to
     look at his smoking over time, right.  Because
     what he was doing as a teenager wasn't the same
     thing as what he was doing when he was 38 and
     40 years old.
          And so I submit to you, for the first 20
     years of his smoking, from about 1962 to 1982,
     when he was a kid, when he was smoking just
     like they wanted him to smoke, when he was
     switching to Marlboro like everybody else, and
     he was doing what the doctors were doing, and
     he was doing what the astronauts were doing, he
     was doing what the athletes were doing, Willie
     Mays, Hank Aaron, Len Dawson, and he was doing
     what all his friends were doing, I submit to 4548 you that they bear the whole responsibility
     during that time period, even though they could
     say, hey, we were required to put this warning
     on the cigarette.  But what did he know?  What
     did he know about carcinogens and nicotine
     being as addictive as cocaine and heroin when
     he was a kid?
          Now, in 1982 when the smoking starts
     coming down, the last third of his smoking
     history, I would submit to you he bears some,
     some -- you know, Jimmy spoke about addiction,
     that it's not a choice, you know, it's not a
     free choice.  It's not like you wake up in the
     morning and say, hey, you know what, I want to
     quit today, and it's that easy.  It's not that
     easy.  You all know that.
          So if it was that easy, he would have
     quit.  His wife wouldn't have caught him in the
     shower smoking.  His kids wouldn't have caught
     him on his hand and knees under the couch
     looking for coins to buy cigarettes.
          So when you compare the fault during his
     last ten years of smoking, when he was trying
     to quit with the egg timer and he was trying to
     quit with the special filters and he was trying 4549 to quit with cold turkey, when you compare that
     to the actions, the defective product, the
     defective product, and the negligence of Philip
     Morris, Brown & Williamson, American Tobacco,
     you compare the actions of an addict versus
     their defective product, did he try hard?  Sure
     he did.  He did.  Could he have tried harder?
     Everybody could try harder.  And he could have
     tried harder, and we admitted that from the
     beginning.
          But his share of the responsibility for
     the last third, I submit to you, should be
     divided equally between Doug Duignan, Philip
     Morris, and R.J. Reynolds.
          And if you do the math, for the first 20
     years, he bears no responsibility, and the last
     10 he bears a third, I would submit to you --
     and there's the brand history.  We know that he
     smoked more Marlboros, but he also smoked all
     those other brands from R.J. Reynolds.  He
     smoked the Tareyton and the Camels when he was
     a kid.  He smoked Winston and Raleigh and
     Viceroy.  And Kevin talked about how in the
     '80s, he was smoking a lot of R.J. Reynolds
     cigarettes.  But I would submit to you that a 4550 fair apportionment of fault would be 60 percent
     on Philip Morris, 30 percent on R.J. Reynolds,
     and 10 percent on Doug Duignan.
          And that is just a mathematical way that I
     figured that out, you all may figure something
     different, and I submit to you that is a way
     that you could look at it.
          Now, from there, there's other questions.
     So that's going to be a question on the verdict
     form that after you -- after you hopefully
     decide that he is a class member, you have to
     apportion fault.  And so that would be the next
     question on the verdict form.
          Once you move past that question on the
     verdict form, we have to talk about the fraud
     claims.  The conspiracy, the concealment,
     punitive damages and compensatory damages.
          And so I want to talk about the
     concealment claims, the conspiracy claims.
     Because these were things that they did on
     purpose.  And they are not to be confused with
     their defective product, they are not to be
     confused with their carelessness.  Because
     these were actions that they did on purpose.
          Because if you will remember, back in 1953 4551 when they had that meeting at The Plaza Hotel,
     and if you think back in time, you know, that
     was such an important event, wasted, it was a
     wasted opportunity, but they could have --
     there was nothing stopping them, there was
     nothing forcing them from doing the right
     thing.  They could have came forward at that
     very moment and gotten together, grown men in a
     room, and said, hey, you know what, we have
     this new product we've been developing, we are
     now marketing, we are making a lot of money.
     We didn't realize it was going to be so deadly
     and addictive.  We have a problem on our hands.
     I think we have to be honest about it and not
     do it.
          Because back then, you know, people
     weren't as tolerant as they are today about
     what, you know, what we know about this
     product.  And they knew that if they wanted to
     keep going, they had to lie about it.  They
     couldn't admit back in 1953 -- if they wanted,
     they could have, but not if they wanted to make
     money -- they couldn't have admitted in 1953,
     our product is deadly, our product is
     addictive.  They would have had a big problem 4552 on their hands, which would have actually saved
     millions of lives.
          And that's the issue of a conspiracy, and
     that's the real problem, because if you think
     about it, they had all these men, grown men in
     a room, all making money, all worried about
     their own families, how much money they are
     going to make.  And it only takes one, one guy
     to have the courage to come forward and say,
     I'm not going to lie.  I'm not going to go
     along with this.
          And you think about all the scientists,
     all the CEOs, all the vice presidents, and not
     one of them, not one of them had the courage to
     come forward and help anybody, not one of them,
     for 50 years, knowing that they were talking
     about the youth marketing, knowing what they
     were doing, knowing they were hurting people,
     innocent people.
          I mean the Engle class, people from the
     '40s and '50s, who are the grandparents of
     today, deserve better.  They deserve the truth.
     It wasn't fair what they did.  You don't do
     that.  You wouldn't do it today.  Nobody would
     do that today in their right mind, be in a room 4553 and say, we are going to lie about something
     that's hurting people.  We are going to lie to
     the government.  We are going to lie to the
     public.  We are going to lie to our kids.  So
     that's what they did.  So they had every
     opportunity.
          You know, they talk about the warnings on
     the packs.  Well, every time they put a warning
     on the pack, they could have helped somebody.
     They could have came forward.  They didn't have
     to dispute those warnings.  They could have
     came forward and admitted the truth for years
     and helped people, and things would have been
     different.
          So here is the Forwarding Memo.  And this
     is what they discussed in their meeting.  And
     they talk about -- they knew.  It's fortunate
     for us that the cigarette -- you know, knowing.
     Think about it.  They're not saying, hey, it's
     unfortunate that people are getting hurt.  They
     are saying it's fortunate.  This is a habit
     people can't break.  Boy, wouldn't it be
     wonderful.
          They're not saying, boy, wouldn't it be
     wonderful if we could help people.  They are 4554 talking about that they can produce a
     cancer-free cigarette because they know what it
     will do to the competition.  It's money for
     them.  And then they decide to link arms and
     walk together and lie.  And they lied to the
     American public, and they did it for 50 years.
          The first thing they did was the Frank
     Statement when they went to all the newspapers
     and they told the public, there's no proof that
     smoking causes cancer.  They knew that was a
     lie.  And they said, we accept, and they should
     accept -- and think about it.  A corporation's
     making a deadly addictive product, right?  And
     they come forward and they say, we accept an
     interest in people's health as a basic
     responsibility paramount to every other
     responsibility in our business.
          Well, that should be what it is, right?
     They are making money.  They are hurting
     people.  They are killing people.  They know
     that's happening.  And they are telling the
     public the opposite.  The opposite.  We accept
     your health as a basic responsibility.  You can
     trust us.  You can trust us.  We are going to
     look into it.  If it's true, we will remove the 4555 dangerous ingredients.
          Don't worry about it.  We haven't found
     anything that's harmful.  We haven't found
     anything that is harmful.  There was no
     Internet, no Google back then, maybe there was
     a Reader's Digest article, but they had the
     Reader's Digest articles, there was nothing
     stopping them from reading the Reader's Digest.
          And then they went forward for decades.
     And they talked about, we accept -- if you look
     at the Frank Statement and you look at what
     they were telling people, it only makes sense
     what they were saying.
          In 1954 they are talking about if any one
     of us believed that the product we were selling
     is harmful, we would go out of business.
     Because that made sense in 1954.  That made
     sense back then.  You know, it wasn't -- they
     didn't have 50 years of lying and, you know,
     all their power and their resources and getting
     things their way.  They didn't have that yet.
          So in 1954 that made sense.  And they
     talked about later how our strategy was
     brilliantly conceived and it was a holding
     strategy.  So they were able to push -- push 4556 their lies back for 50 years, when
     30 million -- 30 million people died and
     90 percent of them started as kids.  And they
     were okay with it, they didn't have a problem
     with it.  Not one of them.  Not one of them had
     a problem.
          1972, James Bowling, vice president of
     Philip Morris, Mr. Ware's client.  If our
     product is harmful, we'd stop making it.
     That's what they were telling the public in the
     '70s, because the public wouldn't stand for it.
     You know, again, it's a legal product, but
     legal doesn't make it right to lie.  Legal
     doesn't make it right to lie to people and hurt
     people on purpose for money.  That's not right.
          In 1976, these two gentlemen gave
     interviews that we read, me and Dr. Proctor.
     And they said "If a company as a whole believed
     that the cigarettes were harmful, we would not
     be in business."
          And then Mr. Bowling, again, said -- is
     that Bowling or --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  Second one is Bowling.
          MR. PAIGE:  "I think I'm a fairly
     reasonable human being.  And I'm not in any way 4557 removed from the other members of society.  I
     certainly wouldn't be in the business if I
     thought it was harming people -- if it was
     harmful.  Harmful to people."
          And that goes back to their promise in the
     Frank Statement in the 1950s.  Telling people,
     we understand, we are making -- we know we are
     making an addictive product.  They knew it was
     deadly and they told the public the opposite.
     They told everybody otherwise.
          And to now come forward, 50 years later,
     when Doug Duignan is just one, he is one of the
     victims.  And that's why this case is so
     important.  Because you got to meet the family
     of one of the victims, a 12-year-old boy who
     was born in a little town, little town, met his
     wife in first grade, in first grade,
     overcame -- they both overcame great
     difficulties in their childhood, and they were
     a happy family.  And when somebody's 13 years
     old and you're going to get them to do
     something bad for themselves, and you're a
     grown up, you better think about what are the
     long-term consequences.  What's going to happen
     to that kid when he grows up?  What am I really 4558 doing to these people, to this family?  You
     know, every kid, you know, we should protect;
     not addict kids.  They should be protected.
     They should be guided, not mislead.
          And that is the tragedy of their business
     model.  Think about it.  They know they can't
     make money and what Jimmy was talking about, as
     you get older, as you get more mature, you
     think of things differently, right?  When
     you're a kid, you might do things you wouldn't
     do when you're an adult.  So they were
     marketing and targeting 25- and 30-year olds
     and 40-year olds.  They wouldn't have a
     business.  They wouldn't be in business.
          If they were acting fairly and honestly
     and on the up and up with people, saying, hey,
     we have a deadly, addictive product, we are
     killing people, we are going to take every
     effort in the world to educate people in the
     public, educate kids.  It's our product, it's
     our responsibility.  We have to make sure no
     kids smoke.  They weren't doing that.  And we
     are only going to go after adults.  They did
     the opposite.  And they knew.  They didn't know
     Doug Duignan personally, but they knew Doug 4559 Duignan, just like every other kid, had a right
     to be left alone and protected and not
     addicted, and they didn't do that.
          And that's why in the '50s, the '60s and
     the '70s, which was very different than today,
     they couldn't get away with saying, hey, our
     product is addictive, it's killing people.
     They were saying, it's not harmful.  If it was,
     we wouldn't be doing this, we wouldn't do this.
     It's not right.
          You know, this is a civil society, this is
     a civil court, and there are civil penalties
     that people need to be punished by so they know
     that their conduct is not tolerated.  Not only
     so they are punished, but that other companies
     know that they have to be deterred.
          You know, one of the reasons for punitive
     damages is -- your responsibility -- is to let
     not only Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds but
     let other companies know, that if you're going
     to lie, that everybody tries to make an honest
     living.  You know, Doug Duignan, he made
     mistakes, you know, he paid for them.  He
     worked hard.  He worked for construction.  He
     worked -- you know, he worked hard to provide 4560 for his family and it's not fair to have other
     people in our society, that's not the right way
     to do things.  And to think that they can just
     lie and hurt people, and so when you punish
     somebody, when you award punitive damages,
     you're letting them know that they are not
     getting a free pass.
          And you're deterring other companies, that
     they know that we better not do this.  And this
     is going to be a better world.  This is going
     to be a better place, because if you do that,
     if you do what they did, you're going to be
     punished like they are.  And we are not going
     to give them a free pass.
          And that's why, you know, you go back to
     when you were in the jury room with all those
     people, and you are all of the seven people
     left, it's so important how much power and
     responsibility that you all really have for
     such an important issue.
          And again, I would submit that each of
     you, when you think about what you had thought
     about smoking and their conduct that you
     learned a lot from Dr. Proctor and Dr. Burns
     during this trial, and their documents. 4561 So internally, you know, there's no secret
     that they knew when they were lying, they knew
     that their product caused cancer.  You know,
     you look at all their documents.  These are all
     in evidence.  Every one of those documents.
     And this is from, you know, 1950s and 1960s
     where they knew that their cigarettes were
     causing cancer and they were killing people.
          And all along these lines -- and these are
     why these are important, because what they
     knew -- if you look at this one line from 1953,
     here, you know, this is from when the truth
     started to come out, and that's when we talked
     about opportunities to save people,
     opportunities to do the right thing.  And if
     you look at the affect that their lies had,
     that that line reversed started going back up
     as did the death rate, the lung cancer rate.
     And that's why we ask you to consider not only
     the harm that they caused this family, but the
     reprehensibility of their conduct and the harm
     that they caused others when you decide whether
     or not punitive damages are warranted.
          This is just -- we'll go through some of
     the documents quickly.  Internally they talk 4562 about doubt, confusion, deceit.  This is when
     they knew.  They knew people were dying.  They
     knew people were getting hurt.  They knew that
     people were believing them.  They took polls.
     They had polls where they knew there were tens
     millions -- millions of American smokers and
     you think about their business model again.
     They are going to target not only kids, but
     they are going to lie to people who are
     addicted, you know, vulnerable people.  You
     know, that's another thing.  You don't take
     advantage of people who are vulnerable.
     Vulnerable.  You try to help them.
          So not only do they try to capitalize on
     kids, but they capitalize on people who are
     addicted.  And they try to provide them with a
     crutch, a rationale to continue smoking because
     they know when somebody who is addicted to
     nicotine, and they try to fail, and they
     don't -- and they try to succeed, and they
     fail, the first thing an addicted smoker will
     do, any addict, will say, it's a different
     drug, say, hey, I like it, I like it, you know,
     it's my choice.  When they provide those type
     of stories for them.  But an addicted smoker, 4563 give them the filter.  The filter.  The light
     cigarettes.
          So, you know, I tried to quit, I didn't
     make it, but they are providing them with these
     rationales and these crutches and they aren't
     playing fair for them.  They are hurting them
     by not helping them, they are actually hurting
     a lot of people.
          And then less-educated people.  You know,
     we have those documents.  I mean, think about
     it.  Internally they talk about, we are going
     to go after kids, and then if we -- once we get
     them addicted, we make sure we give them
     crutches and rationales to continue smoking.
          And then in the '80s, as people are
     quitting and more doctors are quitting, we'll
     start marketing to the less-educated members of
     our society and we'll make sure that we get our
     money however we can.  Because the doctors,
     they are not going to smoke anymore.  The
     astronauts aren't going to smoke anymore.  So
     instead of helping people, educating people,
     their internal documents talk about marketing
     strategies for the future.  This was in 1985.
     Marketing to less-educated people. 4564 Doubt is our product, the most important
     story.  The most important story.  We know what
     the most important story should have been, but
     to them and to now come here and say, Doug
     Duignan should have known, Doug Duignan, his
     brother -- his brother, in 1971, said that he
     liked smoking and the doctor told him to quit
     smoking.  Well, that doesn't even make sense.
          Martha lived with him.  Martha said he
     never went to a doctor.  Okay?  And even -- and
     a doctor's going to tell a 21-year-old kid
     you're going to be dead in five years if you
     don't quit smoking?  That doesn't even make
     sense.  But even if that happened, that's part
     of addiction which, respectfully, Dennis
     couldn't remember when it happened.
          First he thought maybe it happened later,
     then earlier, then he couldn't remember, then
     it was in the '70s, but at the end of the day,
     even if that conversation happened, what does
     that tell you?  It tells you that maybe he was
     an addict.  Maybe he was in doubt.  Maybe he
     was confused.  Maybe he thought filters were
     safer.  Who knows.  But he certainly didn't
     know more than they knew.  He didn't know more 4565 than James Bowling knew.  He didn't know more
     than Mr. Horrigan, the CEO of R.J. Reynolds
     knew.  He had an eighth grade education and he
     was just trying to do the best he could.  He
     was trying -- you know, life is not easy.  And
     everybody tries to do the best they could and
     to be taken advantage and lied to is not a good
     thing.
          This is them on TV.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
           We want to be the detective just as much
     as the Surgeon General and the AMA, and we'll
     cooperate in every way.
          Well, obviously, a filter takes out
     certain tar and nicotine.  I don't think the
     industry admits there are any bad elements.  If
     there are bad elements, through our
     laboratories, through the Surgeon General,
     through the AMA, through acts of God and luck,
     we hope we may find them.  And if we do find
     them, they will be removed.
          We do talk to the question of whether or
     not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not
     believe that cigarettes are hazardous.  We 4566 don't accept that.  Because when, as, and if
     any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified
     as being injurious to human health, we are
     confident that we can eliminate that
     ingredient.
          Do you believe that cigarettes are safe?
     Have they been proven to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
          I believe they have not been proved to be
     unsafe.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  You have to think to yourself,
     that was 1971, '71, you have to think to
     yourself, that's a grown man on TV, knowing
     that he is being watched, knowing that people
     are addicted, knowing that he is assuring them
     that he is going to remove the dangerous
     ingredients.  And why would he do that?  Why
     would somebody do that?
          Is it really all just about money and that
     makes it okay?  That makes it okay, so he can
     make money?  And their companies can make
     money?
          And then they told people that the
     filters, the filters were safer, right?  They
     even said that, that first piece that they knew 4567 internally they are talking about the filters,
     a promotion, it's a -- it's purely a
     merchandising sales promotion.  This is what
     they are saying internally.  You know, we --
     we -- we tell people it's our triple,
     quadruple, quintuple filter, capable of
     removing whatever constitutes of smokes are
     currently suspect while delivering full flavor
     and, incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine.
     And then they go on and talk about other
     documents.
          In most cases, the smoker -- and, see,
     this is the thing, they -- they did cite you a
     report from the World Health Organization that
     said, hey, filters are safe.  Filters are safer
     or lights are safer, or whatever that report
     said.
          And if you put the filter and the light on
     one of those FTC smoking machines, they do
     filter versus a nonfilter, the filter will
     remove something.  But what they are not
     telling the public, what they are not sharing
     with the public health community, what they are
     not sharing with Doug Duignan and his family,
     is that when you smoke filters, because the 4568 nicotine addict needs a certain amount of
     nicotine.  If you think about it, somebody
     smokes a pack a day, and somebody smokes ten
     cigarettes a day, they are getting different
     amounts of nicotine to their brain every day,
     right?
          So there's a certain dosage of nicotine
     that's going to your blood, to your brain, if
     you smoke that much.  If you don't get that
     much, and you're a nicotine addict, and you're
     addicted to nicotine, you don't feel good.  You
     feel nervous, you feel -- you don't feel right
     and then a lot of times when people smoke, they
     say "I need a cigarette," "Oh, that relaxes me,
     that makes me feel better."
          But if you look at the withdrawal
     symptoms, and it's really the withdrawal
     symptoms are anxiety and restlessness.  So for
     somebody to get the nicotine they need, they
     smoke more.  They -- and that's what they say
     internally, the smoker of a filter cigarette
     was getting as much or more tar and nicotine
     she would have gotten from a regular cigarette
     because they are inhaling deeper.  They are
     smoking more -- more puffs.  They are smoking 4569 more cigarettes.  And when you do that, when
     you smoke more, you're getting more
     carcinogens.  And it's making it more -- it's
     not any safer.  It's not any safer.  They talk
     about, internally, an illusion of filtration.
     That's a Philip Morris document.
          And then the last one there, we know that
     a smoker who too often -- all too often a
     smoker who switches to a high-filtration
     cigarette winds up smoking more in order to
     provide himself with the same delivery which he
     had before.
          But Doug Duignan didn't know this.  They
     didn't share this with him, they didn't share
     it with anyone.  They didn't share it with the
     government, they didn't share it with the --
     with the Tobacco Working Group, they didn't
     share that with the Tobacco Working Group, the
     National Cancer Institute.  They didn't share
     it with the Surgeon General, and they kept it a
     secret because they wanted to make more money.
          And, ultimately, years later we find out,
     this is in 2000- -- 2001, this is ten years
     after Doug Duignan died.  And, you know, 4570 Dr. Burns, he worked with the Monograph 13.
     And he worked with the Surgeon General.  And he
     told you they didn't believed the cigarette
     company.  They relied upon the forth- -- the
     truthfulness of the cigarette companies.  They
     thought that it was safer.
          So when we talk about relying on material
     information that was concealed, one of the
     questions for the fraud is:  Did Doug Duignan
     rely on important information that was
     concealed from him?  Did the National Cancer
     Institute and the Surgeon General thought that
     filters and lights were safer, wouldn't it make
     sense that Doug Duignan would also think that
     and that's what he told his family?  And they
     are not safe.  A half a million people dying
     every year does not sound very safe.
     99 percent of the people are smoking filters
     and lights, and they are all dying.  They are
     all dying.  Nobody's -- it wasn't safe for Doug
     Duignan, it wasn't safe for the other 499,900
     people that year as well.
          But in Monograph 13, from The Tobacco
     Institute, they talk about how the
     advertisements reassured people to smoke 4571 filters, but internal documents which they then
     had, because we didn't have them, we didn't get
     those until the late 1990s, 2000 we started
     getting more documents.  And now we look at
     what they knew.  Why -- we look at what they
     concealed, what they lied, how they conspired,
     how it all worked and how they got away with
     it.  And the internal documents show that they
     knew all along that these filters and lights
     were not safer.
          And then in 2010, the Surgeon General also
     wrote a similar thing in the 2010 Surgeon
     General's Report, where they talk about public
     health officials had little basis to anticipate
     the degree to which the manufacturers could
     design cigarettes to allow smokers, like Doug
     Duignan, to draw more smoke and nicotine from
     cigarettes and it was represented by
     machine-measured yield tar and nicotine, that's
     what I was telling you when you measure on a
     machine, they don't compensate, they don't --
     they don't draw harder and it's different.
          But they knew, by looking at the tobacco
     documents, they learned that there was no
     decrease in disease.  More people died. 4572 Everybody was dying.  There was no safety from
     this at all.
          So when you talk about what did Doug
     Duignan know, what did he rely upon, what did
     he believe was it reasonable for him to think
     that filters and lights were going to provide
     him some measure of safety, that's what
     everybody thought back then.
          So the doubt and confusion, it continues
     in the '70s.  We have more documents.  For 20
     years the industry has employed a single
     strategy to defend itself on three major
     fronts, litigation, politics and public
     opinion.  This is 20 years after the Frank
     Statement.  So think about it, what they're
     saying externally 20 years ago, we are going to
     help you, but internally they are talking about
     how this was a brilliantly conceived and
     executed plan that helped them win important
     battles.
          It's been a holding strategy consisting of
     creating doubt about health charge without
     denying it.  That's what they talk about
     internally, that they are creating doubt and
     there's a holding strategy so they can get away 4573 with it, so they can lie to people and get away
     with it.  And we are here today and as we sit
     here and we believe -- people believe -- it
     will be comical to see what will happen; that
     it's all free choice, it's a legal product, and
     it was all on the up and up.  But it was not on
     the up and up, it wasn't by any stretch of the
     imagination.
          The CTR acted as a front and then they
     talk about tobacco money, they are talking
     about researchers who are now getting money
     from them because they are having a hard time
     getting funding elsewhere.  And inside they are
     talking about tobacco money ain't so dirty
     anymore.
          The CTR is the cheapest insurance money
     the industry can buy, and without it, we would
     be dead.  And then we showed you -- I read into
     evidence all the money they spent.  They spent
     a billion dollars.  You know, they talked
     about -- they talked about spending a billion
     dollars to make a nicotine-free cigarette.
     Well, does that make sense?  That they -- that
     they would attract youth to become addicted to
     nicotine, and then, once they are addicted to 4574 nicotine, they are going to sell them a
     cigarette without nicotine.  They could sell a
     nicotine-free cigarette, but not to somebody
     who was addicted.  And we know that 80,
     90 percent of people are addicted.
          So it's nice to come to court and tell
     you, hey, we tried.  Look, we tried, we did our
     best.  We did our best but meanwhile if they
     really want to sell nicotine-free cigarettes,
     because they are really concerned with
     addiction, and they are really concerned with
     the people they are helping, they have many
     options.  They can go back to the old cigarette
     that was not inhalable so you don't get the
     nicotine to the brain, or they can have an
     inhalable cigarette where you inhale it and
     there is no nicotine, or when you have an
     inhalable cigarette and they regulate the
     amount of nicotine and make sure it maintains
     and sustains addiction, and they target youth.
          Obviously, a nicotine-free cigarette is
     not going to be able to compete with that
     market.  They are spending $240 billion
     promoting the nicotine in the cigarettes.  And
     they spent a billion dollars on research and we 4575 know that the CTR and the TIRC, they are part
     of the conspiracy, the Judge read you the
     findings, they were involved with the whole
     agreement.  And so they could say -- it's easy
     to come up here and tell you that they did all
     this good research, but Dr. Proctor explained
     to you that most of that research had nothing
     to do with smoking and health.  It was
     distraction research.
          And then we look at their power.  And you
     have to think about this.  The tobacco
     industry, it's not -- you know, they are not to
     be taken lightly.  They are a very, very
     powerful industry.  And their own documents
     talk about how they got to where they are
     today.  And they -- they, inside their
     documents, they talk about the cigarette
     controversy, the public, those who are present
     and potential supporters.  They talk about
     Congressmen must perceive and understand and
     believe the evidence to sustain the opinion
     that smoking might not be the causal factor.
          Remember we showed you all those letters
     that they were sending that phony research to
     the members of Congress. 4576 then Dr. Gori, who was the head of the
     National Cancer Institute, who was working on
     the Tobacco Working Group, with the tobacco
     company, you heard they are talking about how
     Dr. Gori wanted to get this position.  And he
     went to the tobacco industry and he said, hey,
     can you help me with your friends in Congress.
     And then, finally, their other documents, they
     are talking about all the Congressmen who know
     that.
          So when you talk about their power, their
     resources, their ability to get what they want,
     and you compare it to the youth, the
     uneducated, the less educated, the people who
     are addicted, it wasn't a fair fight for Doug
     Duignan.  He never had a chance.  He didn't
     stand a chance.
          They also talked about how they would try
     to get rid of smoking clinics.  And you think
     about it, you're going to -- you're going to
     blame Doug Duignan for not trying harder.
     Right?  He couldn't try harder.  He was 30 --
     42 years old when he died.  Even their expert
     agreed that most smokers don't begin to really
     try to quit, some people try when they are 4577 younger, they should, I mean, you know, and if
     you've smoked and you quit, thank God.  And --
     and that's the right thing to do.  I don't
     think anybody would argue with that.
          But a lot of smokers don't begin to quit
     until they are in their 30s, their 40s, and
     they need help.  And back in the '70s and '80s,
     when Doug Duignan was trying to quit, when he
     was using the egg timer, when he was using the
     little filter that he bought at the store;
     internally, the tobacco companies were talking
     about the opposite, they were talking about
     eliminating smoking cessation clinics.  They
     didn't want smoking clinics to be covered by
     health insurance.  They didn't want to help
     people.  They didn't want to help people.  And
     now they get up here and blame Doug Duignan
     because all he did was cold turkey and all he
     used was an egg timer.  That's all he had.  And
     now --
          MR. WARE:  Objection, Your Honor.  I think
     we do need to see the Court on this one.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Approach, please. MR. WARE:  Counsel has just said, 4578 referring to the tobacco company, now they come
     to us at the table and get up here and, in
     effect, he's accusing the Defense of doing
     something inappropriate because we are here.
     That's precisely what the Court proscribed
     pretrial.
          THE COURT:  Well, he's been pointing right
     behind Defense table is -- is the screen where
     he's been putting up all the documents and
     saying "they."  Let me look at this.
          He says, and I quote, "Internally, the
     tobacco companies were talking about the
     opposite, they were talking about eliminating
     smoking clinics.  They didn't want smoking
     clinics.  They didn't want to help people.
     They didn't want to help people.  And now they
     get up here and blame Doug Duignan."
          MR. WARE:  That's -- the last -- the last
     sentence is -- they are pointing to us.
          THE COURT:  Yeah, yeah.  This refers to
     counsel where the companies, through counsel.
     What do you want to say?
          MR. SALES:  It is Lawsuit 101 to compare
     and contrast the positions taken in court by a
     party and the statements they make outside of 4579 court before they come to court.
          And it is completely fair, based on this
     record, to contrast the positions that "they,"
     meaning the Defense in the litigation, are
     going to take and we expect to hear.  We know
     we are going to hear it.
          To say that they are going to contend that
     it is 100 percent his fault.  But look at all
     the things they were doing to interfere with
     Mr. Duignan's ability to quit.  That's the
     theme of this argument.  It's totally fair.
          THE COURT:  I think the prescription is
     on -- there's even an instruction on this, a
     jury instruction about you've got a right to
     litigate, you've got a right to defend
     yourself.  I think there's a distinction
     between criticizing somebody for defending
     themselves and criticizing the arguments they
     use in their defense.  They have to -- they
     have to criticize the arguments made in their
     defense, right?
          I don't know how you can -- so the point
     is, if you are condemned for getting up and
     defending yourself, that's one thing.  If you
     are condemned or rebutted for what comes out of 4580 your mouth and you stand to defend yourself,
     that's something else.  It's a little too close
     for comfort, though.
          I'll ask him not to get that close again
     as far as indicating counsel table.  You know,
     you refer to the screen or the tobacco
     companies, you make sure that's the subject of
     your sentence.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          MR. WARE:  Your Honor, our motion -- has
     the court sustained the objection, in effect?
          THE COURT:  No.  No.  I'm overruling the
     objection in effect.
          MR. WARE:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  With a -- with a warning.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  What is next?
          Okay.  So I want to play this video.  This
     is into the '70s and the '80s, and it's
     additional videos, short little clips that you
     all have seen.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          MR. DWYER:  But insofar as the correlation
     between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are 4581 concerned, no one knows.  It may, it may not.
          A British physician has said the cause of
     cancer of the lung is not known.  We have all
     these statistical inferences and forecasts.
     Until the cause is discovered, no one who
     values scientific evidence should assume that
     cigarettes cause cancer of the lung.
          NARRATOR:  Take the controversy about
     cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress, a house
     committee heard testimony from leading experts
     on smoking and health.  The record shows that
     many of the country's most respected doctors
     openly challenge anti-cigarette claims.
          ANNE BROWDER:  I'd have to disagree with
     you in that we don't know what causes the
     ailments that have been attributed to cigarette
     smoking.
          NARRATOR:  Cigarette smoking does not
     cause cancer, yes or no?
          MR. HORRIGAN:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer.  It has not been
     causally established.
          NARRATOR:  Cigarette smoking.  No causal
     relationship between cigarette smoking and
     emphysema? 4582 HORRIGAN:  Despite all of the research
     to date, there has been no causal link
     established.
          ANNE BROWDER:  I think the case is still
     open.  The jury has not come in.
          NARRATOR:  It may not be harmful.  You're
     not convinced.
          ANNE BROWDER:  It may be or it may not be.
     We don't know.
          NARRATOR:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?
          MR. MERRYMAN:  I don't know if they do or
     not.
          MR. BANKS:  I'm not in a position to give
     you a yes or no answer.
          MR. CAMPBELL:  We don't know what causes
     cancer in general right now, so I think that we
     may find out what causes cancer and we may find
     out some relationship which is yet to be
     proven.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And we've taken depositions of
     some of their corporate representatives, and we
     know that they knew that people like Doug would
     be relying upon their lies, and we also know
     from what they said they know that -- we all 4583
     know that it's wrong to do that, but they
     acknowledge that it's wrong to do that.
          Can you play this?  This is Mr. Heimann,
     the former CEO of American Tobacco in 1986.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
     Q.   Throughout your tenure with American, it
was not only American's position, but your position,
that cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is that
accurate?
     A.   True, I take it?
     Q.   Yes.
     A.   Yes, that is so.
     Q.   That's something American Tobacco wanted
the public to believe; is that correct?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   It's a statement that American Tobacco
placed great reliance on.
     A.   We issued that statement, yes.  Certainly
we wanted them to believe it.
     Q.   As far as you're concerned, a person is
justified in relying on that statement?
     A.   Yes.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And Mr. Figlar -- Dr. Figlar, www.phippsreporting.com
(888)811-3408
4584 we took his deposition and we asked him -- we
     had shown him some of those videos that you all
     just saw before by Mr. Heimann and we asked him
     if the last videos, the last one was from the
     '90s and he said '88 or '90 is fine.
          And then I asked him:  "As of -- as late
     as '88 or '89 or '90, The Tobacco Institute was
     saying they still didn't know whether smoking
     causes cancer.  That's what they were telling
     the public, correct?"
          And he said:  "They did not know.  They
     could not make that determination is what they
     said in the video.
          "And they wanted people to believe that?
          "I would say they would."
          And then I asked him:  "If they were lying
     about it, while people were smoking and dying,
     that would be the wrong thing to do?"
          And he said, "It would."
          And that's why we are here, because it's
     obvious.  You don't need Dr. Figlar to tell you
     it's the wrong thing to do.  You have to think
     for yourself, how did we get here.  How did we
     get here when there used to be 140 people in
     the whole world who had lung cancer in 1900, 4585 not so long ago, and now we have 30 million
     Americans who die from smoking-related
     illnesses in the last 50 or -- 50 years or
     60 years.  30 million is the number that you
     all heard of, and how did we get here.
          We know how we got here now because they
     are liars and they targeted children and they
     manipulated the system and they put profits
     over human lives.  And it's not right.
          And that's why they should be punished for
     what they did.  And they -- and it's not okay
     when they stand, you know -- it's not easy, you
     know, Jimmy said this, when I'm having to cross
     examine, you know, expert pathologists from
     Harvard University, you know, but when they
     take an oath and they swear to tell the truth
     in Congress, or their expert swears to tell you
     the truth, they swear to tell you the truth,
     they need to do that.  And when they stood
     before Congress and they lied, that's not okay.
          (A video clip was played and transcribed
     as follows:)
          MR. WYDEN:  Let me begin my questioning on
     the matter of whether or not nicotine is
     addictive.  Let me ask you first, and I'd like 4586 to just go down the row, whether each of you
     believes that nicotine is not addictive.  I
     heard virtually all of you touch on it, and
     just yes or no.
          Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
          MR. CAMPBELL:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive, yes.
          MR. WYDEN:  Mr. Johnston?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  Congressman, cigarettes and
     nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
     definitions of addiction.  There is no
     intoxication.
          MR. WYDEN:  We'll take that as a no.
     Again, time is short.  If you can just -- I
     think each of you believe nicotine is not
     addictive.  We would just like to have this for
     the record.
          MR. TADDEO:  I don't believe that nicotine
     or our products are addictive.
          MR. HORRIGAN:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. TISCH:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          MR. SANDEFUR:  I believe that nicotine is
     not addictive. 4587 DONALD JOHNSTON:  And I, too, believe
     that nicotine is not addictive.
          (The video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And so we know that's a lie.
     We know they were lying.  So when you talk
     about material information that's concealed
     from Doug Duignan, important information that
     he was entitled, that he was entitled to know
     about, he was entitled to know that there was
     never a controversy back in 1953.  They didn't
     have to start this.  There wasn't a
     controversy.  He needed to know.  They should
     have told him there were 70 different
     carcinogens.  Every time he inhaled cigarettes
     into his lungs, he should have known that.
          In the '60s, the '70s, the '80s they
     should have informed him and advised him of
     that.  He should have known that 50 percent of
     all regular smokers are going to grow up and
     die, millions more are going to be sick,
     500,000 Americans every year.  They concealed
     that from him.
          They didn't tell him that they were
     studying and targeting kids and vulnerable
     members of society.  That the nicotine was 4588 highly addictive.  And they were manipulating
     the levels of nicotine, the pH levels to make
     it more inhalable and more addictive and that
     the filters and lights didn't work.  That was
     important information that he was entitled to
     know about.
          He was their customer.  They owed him more
     respect than they showed him, more than they
     showed the government, more than they showed
     the Surgeon General of the United States and
     Congress.  They had to tell people that and
     they didn't and it's not right.
          And to let them, you know -- you know,
     Dr. Rosman -- you know, they may come up and
     say, what does this have to do with Doug
     Duignan.  And I submit to you this has
     everything to do with Doug Duignan.  He was a
     human being.  He was -- he was entitled to be
     treated fairly and honestly and compassionately
     them.  And when Dr. Rosman, he testifies -- not
     only Doug Duignan, he testifies nobody's a
     member of the class.  He said everybody's not a
     member of the class.
          So I submit to you you're going to get
     these questions on the verdict form.  Was the 4589 concealment by Philip Morris of material
     information concerning the health effects of
     the addictive nature a legal cause of Doug
     Duignan?  I submit to you -- of his cancer and
     death -- I submit to you the answer is yes.
          You'll be asked the same question about
     R.J. Reynolds and information that they
     concealed about their cigarettes, their Doral
     Lights, their Tareytons, their Camels, their
     Winston, their Viceroys, all the cigarettes
     that they were selling, they had an obligation
     to tell the truth, to tell the truth, to
     reveal, not to conceal.  To help people, not
     hurt people.
          The next one.
          Was the agreement between Philip Morris
     and R.J. Reynolds and other tobacco companies
     and entities to conceal or omit material
     information regarding the health or addictive
     nature a legal cause of his lung cancer and
     death?  And I submit to you overwhelmingly the
     answer is yes.
          And these questions are all important on
     the verdict form.  Every one of them have legal
     significance and that's what they did and they 4590 hurt people and they hurt Doug Duignan.
          So the next issue -- and I'm moving along,
     trying to speed it up.  The next issue is
     punitive damages.
          And so we talked about it earlier whether
     you are were going to hold them accountable,
     hold them accountable for their conduct because
     compensatory damages go to compensate the
     family for the loss.  There's no greater loss,
     there's no more significant loss than can occur
     than taking somebody's loved one from them.
          But in addition to compensatory damages,
     compensating for them, the family for what they
     did is also an issue of punishment,
     accountability, holding them accountable so
     that they know that this is the worst of the
     worse, that you can't get away with this.
          So you have to ask -- the question is:
     Was there clear and convincing evidence that
     punitive damages are warranted against Philip
     Morris and R.J. Reynolds?  And so this is the
     instruction board and it goes through when
     punitive damages are warranted.
          And I'm not going to go through all the
     evidence with you again, but whether their 4591 conduct was so gross and flagrant as to show a
     reckless disregard of human life, and I submit
     to you there would be no other conduct that
     would be worse, that would show more of a
     reckless disregard for human life than what
     these men did for 50 years in their boardrooms
     and their private meetings and their
     laboratories.
          Whether their conduct showed an entire
     lack of care, that they must have been
     consciously indifferent to the consequences,
     they didn't care.  They didn't care that people
     were dying.  They didn't care that they knew
     that kids, they talked about being replacement
     smokers, knowing the addiction rates and
     knowing what would happen to them, were they
     compassionate about it or were they indifferent
     about it?
          Whether their conduct wantonly and
     recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare
     of the public and whether they showed a
     reckless indifference to the rights of others.
          To be equivalent of intentional violation
     of those rights, and I submit to you you only
     have to find one of them, I submit to you all 4592 four of them are applicable to both of these
     Defendants.
          And all we ask for you all to do is follow
     the law.  And if you follow the law in this
     case, if you take the facts that you all have
     learned about, that you all know about, and you
     follow the law and you ask yourself, is there
     other conduct that would warrant damages over
     and above the conduct that they did, I submit
     to you you cannot find any other conduct worse,
     that I can think of, that would warrant
     punitive damages in our civil society that we
     live in today.
          This is Doug Duignan and those are the
     executives around him.  You know how the
     industry lied.  These are grown men.  We are
     going to talk about the replacement smokers.
     They know 90 percent start before they are age
     18.  They know half of them will die a horrible
     death, like Doug Duignan.  And the Surgeon
     General's Report in 1989 talked about how
     significant this is.
          And they talk about -- this is -- we went
     over this with Dr. Figlar.  The adult rate of
     smoking were to continue at the present level, 4593 impact of smoking -- this is in 1989 -- on
     the future health and welfare of today's
     children would be enormous.  Research has shown
     that one-fourth or more -- it's actually
     one-half -- we know from the evidence --
     one-fourth or more of all regular cigarette
     smokers die of smoking-related diseases.
          If 20 million of the 70 million children
     now living in the United States, that's from
     1989, so people who were kids in 1989, they are
     already foreseeing this, and this is shared
     with the tobacco companies.  They know about
     this report.  70 million children now living in
     the United States smoke cigarettes as adults,
     then at least 5 million of them will die of
     smoking-related diseases.
          This figure should alarm anyone, anyone
     who is concerned with the future health of
     today's children.  Right?  You should, right?
     Those are big numbers.  Those are a lot of
     people.  Those are a lot of kids.  And these
     are 1989 and it took them another 11 years
     before they were forced to admit that their
     smoking was harmful, causes cancer, and
     nicotine was addictive. 4594 So their internal document, I'm just going
     to walk through some of them.  We deliberately
     played down the role of nicotine.  Hence, the
     nonsmoker, talking about kids here --
          Sorry.  Because I'm reading from here and
     there's a screen here.
          Hence, the nonsmoker has little or no
     knowledge of the satisfactions it may offer
     him.  And no desires to try it.  Okay.  So they
     are not going to have a market.  They won't
     have a market if they do the right thing.  At
     least with kids.
          And then if they don't have kids, then
     they really don't have a market.  There are
     40 million smokers, 40 million, 90 percent of
     them start as kids.  Think about it.  If
     10 percent of them started as adults, they
     could have a market of 5 million.  They could
     have 5 million adult smokers who started as
     adults if they wanted to.  That's a lot of
     customers for somebody to have.  But that's not
     enough for them.
          More is never enough.  They always need
     more.  They want 5 million, they want
     40 million, 50 million.  And so they have to 4595 convince these kids, with wholly irrational
     reasons, that they should start smoking in the
     hope -- in the hope -- see, really, a rational
     person says, we need to convince him with
     rational reasons why he should not smoke -- in
     the hope that he never smokes.  In the hope
     that he doesn't smoke.  That's what we teach
     our children.  Right?  That's what we teach
     kids.
          What they are saying, internally their
     secret documents by their executives and their
     scientists, we have to convince them with
     irrational reasons why he should smoke.  In the
     hope that he will find for himself the real
     satisfaction, nicotine addiction.  And that's
     their market.
          And they started with it in the 1920s.
     School days are here, let's go after high
     school and college kids.  In the '50s, we know
     R.J. Reynolds continued with that.  They were
     studying high school students, when Doug
     Duignan was 9 years old.  I'll show you some of
     their documents.
          In the '60s, this is a Philip Morris
     document talking about kids as crops, crops of 4596 prospects.  These are kids, these are human
     beings, they are crops, they are going to
     fertilize them with nicotine so they can become
     an addict.  It will produce a healthy increase
     in the number of new smokers who they know will
     die.
          That's their -- that's their Frank
     Statement when they talk about public health
     paramount to every other aspect of our business
     and they are talking about kids and our society
     that we are supposed to protect as a crop.  So
     they could be healthy new smokers.  They know
     they are going to be unhealthy.  They know they
     are going to die.  It's horrible.  It's not
     right.
          And in the '70s, Philip Morris and
     R.J. Reynolds, they are talking about Marlboros
     and young people, age 14 to 17, 14 to
     24-year-old age group.  You know, that's Doug
     Duignan.  In 1974, he is 24 years old.  He is
     still within their market.  They are still
     going after him.  In the 1980s, they take a
     retrospective look back and they call them
     replacement smokers.  They are looking at
     12-year-old, 13-year-olds.  Doug was 12 years 4597 old.
          And they talk about how younger adults --
     and this is what I'm talking about --
     50 million smokers.  90 percent start as kids.
     They know, they are talking about younger
     adults and we know that means kids, turn away
     from smoking.  The industry must decline, just
     as a population which does not give birth will
     eventually dwindle.
          It's kind of poetic what they are saying,
     but it's the right thing that they should have
     been doing.  They could have done that.  There
     are other ways to make a living without hurting
     people.  There are other things we can do in
     our lives that are good.  And they wouldn't do
     it.  They don't care.  They don't care.
          These are the documents you all saw about
     when they are talking about less-educated
     people.  Less educated, today's trend,
     tomorrow's market.
          These are documents where they talk about
     keeping nicotine levels up.  They are talking
     about nicotine level wasn't obtained by
     accident.  We can regulate fairly precisely the
     nicotine any -- any level we desire. 4598 Marlboro and Kool.  Kool is made by
     R.J. Reynolds.  Marlboro and Kool contain more
     free nicotine than any other comparable brands,
     hence, would be expected to show more
     instantaneous nicotine kick than any other
     brand.
          Well, why, and then the secret of
     Marlboro.  Marlboro is increasing.  Everybody
     is smoking Marlboro.  You get more kicks of
     nicotine with Marlboro.
          And, again, when you talk about the harm
     and the reprehensibility.  This is in the '67
     FTC report, cigarette smoking is without
     question the greatest single public health
     problem this nation has ever faced.  The cost
     to society of smoking cigarettes in human terms
     is staggering.  Is staggering.  That's real.
     That's real.  That's not us saying it.  That's
     not Dr. Proctor saying it.  That's not
     Dr. Burns saying it.  And they -- and they had
     that report.  Dr. Figlar said they were made
     aware of these reports.  They would follow
     these reports.
          They are in an industry where they know
     the harm they are doing.  They know they are 4599 not doing it honestly.  They know they are
     cheating.  They know they are hurting people on
     purpose.  And they do it for money.  Money.
     That's it.  We all know.  There is no other
     reason to do it.  They aren't doing it because
     smokers like the taste.  They're not doing it
     to give people something to help relax
     themselves.  They are doing it for more money.
          Our basic position, the cigarette
     controversy is subject to the charge and may be
     subject to the finding.  And that's the Engle
     findings, right?  They were found to have done
     this.  They were making false and misleading
     statements to promote the sale of cigarettes.
     This was in 1968.  '68.  It was almost
     30-something years, 32 years before they
     finally admitted it, before they admitted it.
     And they knew.  Who ain't for more money?  The
     loss of human -- human lives is staggering.
     Are killing millions of people but who ain't
     for more money.  Who ain't for more money.
          So, in addition to compensatory damages,
     you should consider whether punitive damages
     warrant against each Defendant as punishment
     and as a deterrent to others. 4600 THE COURT:  Keep going.  You got about 15
     minutes or so.
          MR. PAIGE:  That's fine.  You want to take
     a break now?
          THE COURT:  No, no.  I was trying to very
     discreetly signal you, you wanted to know when
     you get close.  You have about 15 minutes to go
     before you get to the point that we are going
     to break.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  What time is it?
          THE COURT:  About five past 12:00.
          MR. PAIGE:  Thank you.
          Okay.  So, you know, punitive damages, you
     know, why is this important?  You know, you
     think about people dying and lives and, you
     know, Martha lost her husband, she was 39 years
     old, a widow.  She's one person.  You know, one
     person.  And, you know, they were kids.  You
     know, they were in their 20s, 19, 20 years old
     they lost their father.  They had a lot of time
     left with their father.  And talk about
     compensatory damages, you know, what's fair for
     them for what they went through.
          But these are real people.  Real lives.
     Real families.  Real -- real individuals.  And 4601 this does have a lot to do with Doug Duignan
     and they should be punished.  They need to know
     that this is not okay.
          There's an instruction on
     reprehensibility.  You should consider the
     harms to persons not a party to the lawsuit to
     determine whether the conduct that harmed the
     Duignans also poses substantial risks of harm
     to the general public and is, accordingly,
     particularly reprehensible.  And I ask you to
     think to yourself what could be worse than what
     they did.
          So you have to find this is different than
     the class membership question.  And class
     membership, it's the greater weight of the
     evidence.  This has to be by clear and
     convincing evidence, that punitive damages are
     warranted.  And I submit to you -- you know,
     it's going to be interesting, and I ask you and
     Mr. Ware and Mr. Williams, respectfully, I have
     a lot of respect for both of those gentlemen,
     and they have a, you know, client to represent,
     I don't begrudge them for that, when they get
     up here to speak, I'm going to ask you to
     listen carefully to what they talk about why -- 4602 why their client did this, why their client put
     profits over human lives.
          And I submit to you this was not just some
     misunderstanding.  This was not a few
     wrong-headed statements.  These were top
     executives, top scientists, they know what they
     were doing.  It was intentional.  It was on
     purpose, for money and for profits over human
     lives.  And I submit that's why punitive
     damages would be warranted against both of the
     Defendants.
          Your Honor, I'm at the point now if you
     want to take a break, if you want, I have maybe
     15 more minutes left or --
          THE COURT:  Well, if you -- I rather you
     get that out before we break for lunch.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Okay.
          THE COURT:  Yeah.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  In a few minutes, right?
          MR. PAIGE:  Yeah.
          So one of the questions I'm going back to,
     in the verdict form, we are going to ask you
     for -- to award compensatory damages.  To
     compensate, to compensate the family for their 4603 loss that they incurred.  And, you know, when
     we are talking about what they incurred and the
     loss that they had, I submit to you that
     there's no more significant loss that somebody
     can have than the loss of a loved one,
     especially so young.
          You know, we aren't talking about, you
     know, an older person and it wouldn't be right
     a lot of smokers in their 60s and 70s, you
     know, it it's not right either, but somebody
     who was 42 years old and has his whole life in
     front of him.  His wife met him in the first
     grade.  He -- he -- you know, she -- Martha,
     you know, after they cross examined her and
     said, you know, happy birthday, and then they
     cross examined her and said, hey, you had a kid
     when you were 15 or 16 years old, and Doug went
     to jail.
          I submit to you that these are people who
     both overcame, you know, difficulties in their
     life.  The best thing she ever did probably was
     have Kevin when she was 15 or 16 years old.  He
     is with her, he takes care of her, and they
     live together and Doug, as soon as they got
     married, you remember that picture, he was 4604 married at a police officer's house by a judge
     and they wrote letters to the prison.
          They were good people.  And I'm not --
     from -- you heard them testify.  You saw the
     family.  You saw the pictures.  He made a
     mistake.  He worked hard.  He loved his family.
     He treated them well.  They loved him.  And
     there was no more significant loss.
          And you have one life and he deserved
     better from these executives from that company.
     And they could have done better.  And they
     should have done better.
          This is their wedding.  They were in love
     with each other, there's no more significant
     loss than Martha could have had.  She loved
     him.  He loved her.  You know, she was a widow
     at age 39 years old.  39.  That's young.
     Never -- went on a couple of dates, she said,
     but wasn't for her.  She and this guy, they
     grew up in a small town.  A small town, played
     baseball together, ran around together.  You
     know, she wrote to him when he was in jail and
     they came out and they got married and that's
     who she loved.  That was -- you know, people go
     through life and you think, hey, that's the 4605 love of my life, but to Martha, that was the
     love of her life.  That was it.  You know, she
     had one love in her life and she loved him.
          And he was a good father to Kevin.  You
     know, that's Kevin, he adopted Kevin, and Kevin
     was his own son.  You know, Kevin Duignan, he
     has his name.  That's his father.  And he was a
     good man.  And he loved his kids and he loved
     his wife.
          You know, you can see in his eyes he was
     smoking a cigarette there, but that's not the
     important thing.  You just look at the way he
     looks at his wife there.  He loved her.  She
     loved him.  She now lived 34 years they were
     supposed -- 34 years is a long time.  That's
     how much time they were supposed to have
     together.  He should -- not only from 1992 they
     should have been living together, they should
     still be together for another ten years, they
     should still be together.
          They took that from them.  They took that.
     This was -- this was his life.  They ruined it.
     You know, they ruined Martha's life.  That was
     her husband.  And he was a good father.  He had
     a great relationship -- a great relationship 4606 with his kids.  You know, a father and a son.
     A father and a son, that's a great bond.  The
     son never forgets and a father never forgets.
     And a father and daughter, you know, that's
     very special.  And both of those kids, you
     know, they loved their father obviously, and
     they still miss him.
          So I wish, you know, this is the part
     where I ask you for what's fair and reasonable
     for what they did.
          Granted, I said in opening, I misspoke, I
     said he never met his grandkid.  He did very
     briefly, then he died.  He never saw his
     grandkid grow up.
          So I thought long and hard, I really have,
     about what's fair for what they've done to this
     man and to Martha and Christina and Kevin, and
     I wish that I could ask you -- they each have
     separate claims, and I want to be clear about
     that.  They each have separate claims, they are
     each entitled under the law to a separate
     claim, and that's the law that you all will
     follow.  And I wish for each of them, for what
     they did, I wish I could say give Martha $100
     million, give Christina $100 million, give 4607 Kevin $100 million, but under the law that
     would be too much.  The law will not support a
     compensatory award like that.
          And I submit to you for Martha, for 34
     years, for being a widow at 39, for suffering
     and missing her husband, still to this day, I
     submit to you that a fair amount would be
     $12 million.  And you can award more if you
     want or you can award less if you want, that's
     just my suggestion.
          Again, I submit to you, you know, that's
     the amount that we think is fair and just under
     the circumstances of this case.  And for each
     of the kids, I would ask you to award each of
     them $4 million.
          And, again, we submit to you that's fair
     and just.  You can award more or less, but
     that's what we would submit, respectfully, that
     you do not go over those amounts.
          And that's it.  That's all I have to say.
          Mr. Ware and then Mr. Williams will each
     have an opportunity to talk to you, and when we
     get done, I have another opportunity to get up,
     I'll make it short, it won't be another two
     hours, maybe 15 minutes, and -- but I do -- you 4608 know, we've been together for three weeks and
     we don't really get to talk, so I wish I knew
     you all better, but I do know that you all take
     this seriously and really consider it and
     consider the harm that they did and what they
     did.
          And on behalf of myself and Robert and
     Jimmy and Bob and David and the family, I
     really thank each and every one of you.  Thank
     you very much.


                  CLOSING REBUTTAL
          MR. PAIGE:  Tired?  Want me to sit down?
     I know -- I only have a certain amount of time.
     And I can respond to everything they said.  In
     fact, the notes I have here are just some notes
     that I made up here.  I have so many other
     notes at my desk that Jimmy is handing me and
     David is handing me, nor do I have the time,
     nor do you all have the patience to listen to
     me to respond to every single thing they said.
     So I will try to respond to some of it, things
     that I think might be interesting, you probably
4767 won't agree that everything I said is
     interesting, but I'll do my best.
          Mr. Williams ended and he said, You know,
     I have thick skin and a lot of what was said,
     and Jimmy objected two times and said, you
     know, Mr. Paige said this out of context, or he
     didn't tell you that, or he only told you this
     and he didn't tell you everything.
          And I've done my best to tell you
     everything, I really have.  And if there's
     something that I didn't tell you that you all
     think was important, I submit to you that it's
     in the evidence.  The evidence is in the --
     you'll have it in the jury room.  You'll have
     the whole documents.  You know, according to
     Mr. Williams, if you listen to him, there's no
     conspiracy, that never happened.  There's no
     youth marketing --
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Your Honor, objection.
     That misstates what I said.
          THE COURT:  I'll -- I'll sustain the
     objection but they heard -- they heard what was
     said, they are right here.
          Just go ahead, Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  He minimized the youth
4768 marketing, I'll go through some of that.  He
     certainly minimized the manipulation of
     nicotine as if that never happened.  He
     minimized the filters as if that was safe.
     It's 500,000 Americans are dying every year.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Objection, once again.
     That's contorting prejudicially what I said.
          THE COURT:  Overrule.  It's -- it's
     argument.  I'll allow it.
          MR. PAIGE:  And so now, we could --
     lawyers can say what they want.  I can say
     anything.  He could say anything, but you have
     the documents.  You have the videos.  You have
     the information to make an intelligent
     decision.  You know now of all -- regardless of
     what Mr. Williams stood up here and said and
     Mr. Ware said, you've seen all their dirty
     little secrets from their little rooms, from
     their little meeting rooms of what they said
     and how they talked about people, how they
     talked about human beings, you know, they made
     a Premier cigarette, you know, give them a
     round of applause, that was in 1989 when they
     were telling people smoking didn't cause cancer
     and nicotine wasn't addictive.
4769 he wants to take credit for that.
     Like they did something good.  That that was
     something good.  They come up with ZONNIC now,
     they have ZONNIC.  You know, they spent 50, 60
     years, decades, attracting kids, charging them
     money, making money off of them, and then they
     say, Hey, if you're sick enough and you want to
     quit, and you don't want to smoke anymore,
     we'll charge you on the way out.  We'll charge
     you on the way in and we'll charge you on the
     way out.
          And that's what they wanted.  That's what
     Mr. Williams wants a round of applause for.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Objection, Your Honor, it's
     going beyond argument.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Paige. THE COURT:  I think you've got tit for tat
     now.  I think no more -- no more personal, or
     I'm going have to call you down.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Let me say this.  A
     couple of things they did say, that I do --
          THE COURT:  You can talk about things that
     are said.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
4770 THE COURT:  Don't talk about what
     Mr. Williams did.
          MR. PAIGE:  I mean, things that they said
     in their closings that I get to address.
          THE COURT:  Yes.  I'll throw you up there,
     but it's about things said, not about who said
     them or their intentions of saying it.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  Can you put the slide up?
          So here is a slide that was shown to you
     by Mr. Williams, and it's true; and, again, all
     we ask and I know that all that you'll do, is
     follow the law, okay?  And the law talks about
     fair compensation and whether punitive damages
     are warranted.
          And there's nothing -- you know, they talk
     about, oh, he said this to inflame you, and let
     me tell you, there's nothing in the jury
     instructions that say that you shouldn't award
     punitive damages because this is where the
     money is not going.  Think about it.
          They -- they talked about the damages we
     asked for.  And Mr. Ware made a comparison to
     the loss of a loved one to a years' salary.
     Remember he talked about that?  $20 million is
4771 a lot of money.  $50,000.  People make $50,000
     in a year.  She lost her husband, they lost
     their father
          MR. WARE:  Your Honor, I object to that.
     He knows I didn't say that.
          THE COURT:  It's argument.  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  And think about it.  They
     spend $10 million a day advertising their
     products, marketing their products, 90 percent
     start as teenagers.
          We've been here how many days?  Fifteen
     days?  And they want to equate their family's
     loss, 34 years, 34 years of losing a
     42-year-old father who they loved to $50,000
     salary?  You know, it's not right.
          And the fact is, if you give the
     Plaintiffs $20 million, and if you were to
     award punitive damages to punish them, to
     punish them, to deter other tobacco companies
     and other companies from doing what they did,
     so it doesn't happen again, and if you punish
     them, what's the worse thing that happens?
          Mrs. Duignan, Mrs. Duignan's going to have
     money and Mrs. Duignan, she's that bad that
     she's going to have money so that they can't
4772 have it?  They are going to do better with it?
     Are they going to give it to the American
     Cancer Society?
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
          MR. PAIGE:  So another thing -- not that
     one.
          So another thing that was discussed was
     that you haven't seen the whole picture.  And I
     submit to you, you've been here for three
     weeks.  The Engle jury, the Engle jury trial
     was much longer and there was a lot more
     evidence, and we try to give you, I guess, it's
     a Reader's Digest version of what happen.
          But when we talk to you about the
     Flintstones, and, again, it was told to you
     that it -- it didn't have anything to do with
     Mr. Duignan.
          First of all, it was a kid's -- it was
     played at night, it was played right after
     Casper the Friendly Ghost, 7:30, and then
     8:30 was the Flintstones.  It's not a secret or
     not a surprise that young kids would be
4780 watching it.  And they know, they know because
     they -- the deposition of Dennis Duignan was
     taken, and Dennis said that they watched that
     show, that they watch the Flintstones.  They
     watched the I Love Lucy, they watched the
     Beverly Hillbillies --
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Facts not in evidence.
          MR. PAIGE:  It's right there.
          THE COURT:  I think -- overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  And so this is part of the
     Dennis Duignan deposition that was read to you
     all.
          So, you know, can we prove to you that
     Doug Duignan saw an advertisement and ran out
     and that's why he started smoking?  We could
     not prove that to you, that would be impossible
     that's why you're allowed to infer from the
     evidence that he lived in a community, he lived
     in a society where we know that the advertising
     was very prevalent and it was on the shows he
     would have to be living in a small town, he
     would have to be living under a rock to miss
     all the advertisements.
          And then the youth marketing, you know,
4781 youth documents are, you know -- I showed
     you a couple of them in my first part of my
     closing.  I can show you many, many more.  They
     are all back in evidence.
          But R.J. Reynolds, who Mr. Williams
     represents, there is no secret in the documents
     that they changed their terminology, that they
     wanted to use term "young adult smokers"
     because they didn't want to get in trouble.
     It's right in this memo, it's in evidence.
          And there are documents after documents
     that talk about inducing pre-smokers,
     nonsmokers become smokers.  If our company is
     to survive or prosper, we must get our share of
     the youth market.  These are R.J. Reynolds
     documents.
          So that's not a surprise to anybody.
     R.J. Reynolds can't pretend they didn't do
     that.  They did that.  That's not a beyond the
     greater weight of the evidence, it's a fact.
     It's a fact of reality.  And to try to ignore
     that is just -- is just not living in a real --
     in the real world.
          More documents.  These are all
     R.J. Reynolds?
4782 PHILIPSON:  All three, yeah.
          MR. PAIGE:  R.J. Reynolds, all talking
     about it.  They are studying Philip Morris,
     they want to know why Philip Morris has all
     these young smokers.  They are looking at
     Philip Morris again, how come Philip Morris is
     getting all the teenagers?
          So that's R.J. Reynolds.
          So when Mr. Williams stands up here and
     says that I didn't read to you the whole
     document, I didn't, I never read to you a whole
     document.  We'd be here for -- we'd be here for
     three months.
          So we read to you the parts that we
     thought were important.  I think the evidence
     is undisputed, they did what they did.  It's
     not right.  He acknowledges it's not right,
     because they did it.  It would be wrong, but
     they did it.
          Medical records.  Mr. Ware went through
     the records with you.  And, you know, he told
     you -- he wrote down and he said things that --
     you know, the records that were shown you by
     Jimmy, Mr. Gustafson.  On his part of the
     closing, he said that they weren't true.  That
4783 we cherrypicked records and that we were
     disingenuous.  Okay.  That's what Mr. Ware
     said, that we were disingenuous for showing you
     the medical records.
          And I submit to you, if anybody was
     disingenuous, that would be wrong, right.  If
     somebody didn't show you all the records,
     whether it was us or them, and they were
     disingenuous with you, that wouldn't be the
     right thing to do.
          And so the medical records, you saw the
     records, you heard from the witnesses.  I could
     go through every record with you again, but I
     want to show you a couple of things.  This is
     what Mr. Ware showed you.
          If you can go back just a slide that
     talked about Dr. Shah, Dr. Iyer and Dr. Rao.
          But if you look at the records --
          Turn the page.
          You know, he talked about, and I don't
     know why we keep talking about the
     bronchoscopy, the tissue, that he didn't get
     tissue, and it's almost like it wasn't a lung
     cancer.  I guess that's their argument that he
     didn't have lung cancer.
4784 But if not getting tissue on a
     bronchoscopy meant somebody didn't have lung
     cancer, then all Dr. Chirieac would be able to
     say is he didn't have lung cancer because it
     wasn't on the bronchoscopy.  But we know that's
     not so.  That happens.  That happens.
          But in the report, in the x-ray report, it
     said 6 -- 6 or 5-centimeter mass, should be
     considered malignant until proven otherwise.
          And I asked their expert, and he tried to
     say it was pneumonia.  I said, is that what
     pneumonia -- is that -- the chest x-ray report
     doesn't say pneumonia.
          And he said, when a doctor writes
     6-centimeter in diameter, the mass should be
     considered malignant, what that really means is
     that it could be pneumonia.
          So you have to think, who is really being
     disingenuous with you?  Who is really not being
     upfront with you when they are talking about
     the lung cancer this man obviously had?
          And a bronchoscopy.  I asked Dr. Chirieac,
     you've had cases where the treating doctors
     thought it was a lung cancer, a bronchoscopy
     was performed, it was negative, they had to get
4785 a pathology from lymph nodes somewhere else in
     the body.  You've seen that.
          And then he goes on to say that he was
     concerned -- if he was concerned with lung
     cancer, he would have done the same thing as
     these doctors.  So why are we still talking
     about the fact that the bronchoscopy was
     negative when their own expert admits, and we
     all -- I mean, it shouldn't even be a disputed
     fact, just like youth marketing shouldn't a
     disputed fact, or manipulating nicotine.
          Dr. Iyer, the surgeon, he talked to the
     pathologist and said lung primary.  Again,
     Dr. Iyer wrote, "Consistent with lung primary."
          Dr. Rao, he said Dr. Rao -- Mr. Ware told
     you after a certain date that Dr. Rao never
     said lung primary.  Well, it's see what he
     really said.  Let's see all the records and see
     what Dr. Rao wrote.
          But here on the 22nd -- it's hard to read.
     Probably just read things going up.
          It says diagnosis -- that's a DX -- is,
     and then it says probably lung cancer.  But if
     you don't know -- if you don't know what he
     means there, we go to his next record.  And
4786 this is on 9/22, they are giving the gentleman
     information from the American Lung Association.
          The next record is on 9/26.  It's signed
     by Dr. Rao.  Brain and bone mets from
     adenocarcinoma of the lung.  That's Dr. Rao.
     Mr. Ware didn't show that when he did his
     closing.
          The next one, he talks about what did
     Dr. Brant and Dr. Roberts say?  And he said
     Dr. Roberts, he made a mistake when he wrote
     the death certificate.
          Let's see what Dr. Brant -- we know these
     are all quotes from his deposition that were
     read to you all.
          The next thing, what Dr. Brant said.  And
     here is Dr. Brant.  Terminal -- I mean
     Dr. Roberts.  This is on October --
          MR. PHILIPSON:  8th, it looks like.
          MR. PAIGE:  October 8th.  Terminal lung
     cancer with mets to the bone.  Terminal lung
     cancer with mets to the bone.  That's his
     primary care doctor who is following him.
          The next one.  And this is the one that
     Dr. Chirieac said that it says "terminally,"
     "terminally cancer."  He said that doesn't say
4787 "terminal lung cancer," it says "terminally
     cancer."  But if you look at the prior -- we'll
     go back again.  If you look at lung, there, you
     look at the next one, lung, obviously, he is
     saying "terminal lung cancer."
          And in the next one, they check him out of
     the hospital.  They say it's lung cancer.  And
     finally they sign the death certificate.  It's
     lung cancer.
          So can we prove with 100 percent certainty
     that this gentleman died of lung cancer?  Can I
     prove it to you beyond any reasonable doubt
     whatsoever?  That's not my standard.  It would
     be impossible.
          In 1992, they didn't have the staining
     that they have today.  But these were doctors
     who were trying to save his life, who were
     doing the best they could with this family.
          You heard from Dr. Ruckdeschel from
     Moffitt Cancer Center.  And even their own
     doctor, he really, his only explanation for
     this glandular adenocarcinoma, he said it's not
     prostate cancer, it's not pancreatic cancer,
     it's not stomach cancer, it's not breast
     cancer, it's not ovarian cancer, obviously.
4788 The only thing left that it could possibly
     be in the whole world, because earlier when
     these doctors were considering, I mean, really,
     if you think about it, what's missing here is
     they thought initially that they weren't
     certain it was lung cancer because they thought
     it could be lymphoma or it could be germ cell.
     And those were ruled out 100 percent.
     100 percent.
          And there's no indication whatsoever that
     this man, who was 42, with no family history of
     colon cancer, with no metastasis to the liver,
     and no diagnosis of symptoms in the liver, with
     no bleeding, except for the -- he came in with
     no bleeding and the bleeding stopped when the
     medication stopped.  There's no explanation,
     other than to exclude him from being in the
     class, there's no reason to deny that this man
     died of lung cancer.
          The Surgeon General Report.  They said
     they cooperated with the Surgeon General.  Here
     is what their documents say.
          If you look in their internal documents,
     in 1961 they are talking about carcinogens are
     found in every class of smoke, filtration.
4789 Present technology does not permit selective
     filtration.
          But when they write to the Surgeon
     General, they are telling the Surgeon
     General -- only two years later, this is Philip
     Morris -- none of the chemical substances have
     been found to be harmful to health, and it's
     possible, of course, to modify the chemical
     compound by the use of filters.
          They were lying to the Surgeon General.
     They weren't cooperating with the Surgeon
     General, and they said that they were.  And
     they misled the government for a long time.
          You know, they said you could stand on a
     rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the
     top of your lungs, and you wouldn't be telling
     anybody anything they didn't already know,
     right?
          But what about their people, their
     scientists, their people, the people who worked
     for their companies, where were they when all
     the shooting on the rooftop was going on?  How
     come they couldn't hear it?  How come they
     couldn't help anyone?  Why were they hiding
     from all the shouting?
4790 then the Surgeon General's Report in
     1987 -- or 1990, they talk about in 1987, 30 to
     40 percent of smokers either did not believe
     that smoking increased their risk of cessation
     or reduced the risk.  This corresponded to 15
     to 20 million smokers.
          So there was a lack of information.  The
     tobacco companies weren't helping.  They
     weren't helping people.
          And go to the next one.
          They talked about Dennis Duignan.  They
     showed you this slide, Mr. Ware showed you this
     slide.  "Do you recall him smoking a Marlboro
     when you were a teenager?
          "No, I don't recall that.  I don't recall
     that."
          Well, you guys don't have a photographic
     memory, but there were other parts of the
     deposition.
          "Do you remember what brand your brother
     Doug smoked when he was a teenager?
          "He smoked Marlboro, to the best of my
     knowledge."
          That's what Dennis said.  That's what
     Dennis talked about.
4791 "I believe I heard you mention Tareyton.
          "Yes.
          "Do you remember him smoking that?
          "Distinctly."
          He smoked Chesterfield, Marlboros and
     Tareyton.  That's what Dennis testified to.
     Okay.  So we know that he smoked the
     R.J. Reynolds brands.
          You know, just because Mr. Williams
     doesn't talk much in this trial, he doesn't
     have to, he has no duty to say anything --
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Your Honor, contrary to the
     ruling.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to -- it was benign.
     It related back to something equally benign
     that you said about being heard from less.  So
     I don't think it's pejorative.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  May I approach?
          THE COURT:  You may. THE COURT:  Go ahead.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  I didn't say anything about
     being heard less.  I never said that.
          MR. PAIGE:  I was just going to say --
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I thought you did.  I
4792 thought you said, you haven't heard as much
     from me because I haven't asked as many
     questions because I followed Mr. Ware.  That's
     what I thought you said.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  No.
          MR. PAIGE:  I don't know if he said it or
     not.  David said he said it.
          But my whole thing was, and I wanted to be
     done with it, I was going to just say that
     doesn't mean he didn't smoke the brands.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Which I never said.
          THE COURT:  Let's just -- let's just --
     I'll just make a bright line.  No name of
     opposing counsel.  No reference to anything --
     you can refer to anything they've said, but
     it's been argued that there's been talk about
     so and so, but nothing -- nothing with a
     pronoun.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.
          THE COURT:  He told you --
          MR. SALES:  Can he use counsel's name?
          THE COURT:  Yes.
          MR. SALES:  In his closing, how many times
     did he say "Mr. Gustafson" or "Mr. Paige" -- I
     understand the Court's ruling.
4793 WILLIAMS:  You're saying something and
     you're not saying it.
          MR. SALES:  He did say --
          THE COURT:  Look, Mr. Sales, he just said
     he's got very little more to do.  And I'm just
     going to make it real simple for him by giving
     him a bright line so we don't come up here 17
     more times.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          THE COURT:  Go ahead, Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  And so I guess the
     point I'm just trying to make is there has been
     testimony from Kevin about what his father
     smoked in the '80s, and Martha that he smoked
     Winston and Camels, and he did smoke their
     brands.
          And regardless, regardless if he smoked
     their brands or not, that doesn't exonerate
     them from the conspiracy claim, because in the
     conspiracy, when you're in a conspiracy, when
     you -- when a person, you know, they -- the
     jury instruction is that they get to be treated
     like a person.  When you want to be treated
     like a person, you have to act like a human
     being, right?
4794 in the movie, the -- there's a movie A
     Few Good Men, everybody has probably seen it.
     There's a part -- not the part you think I'm
     going to say -- there's a part where Dawson
     Downey, they are getting in trouble in the end,
     and the little guy says, it's a -- I forget who
     says it -- but how come I'm in trouble?  Why --
     we didn't do anything.  I didn't do anything.
     We didn't do anything.
          And the other guy says, no, but we didn't
     help.  We didn't help anybody.  We didn't speak
     up and we should have spoken up.  We could have
     been better people.  We could have spoken up
     and helped this man.
          And that's here with R.J. Reynolds.  They
     can't sit here and say, we didn't do anything.
     American Tobacco, Brown & Williamson,
     R.J. Reynolds, Lorillard, they are responsible
     for all their executives.  And none of them,
     none of them ever came forward to help anybody.
     And that's why they are responsible, regardless
     of what he smoked, they are responsible for the
     conspiracy, every bit as responsible as Philip
     Morris is, 100 percent.
          Whatever the next thing is.
4795 Now, here is more of Dennis' testimony.
     You know, you told your brother he'd be dead in
     five years.
          That's what I recall.
          When did this conversation occur?
          I don't know.  Probably in the last 30
     years.  And then he said it was probably in the
     '70s.
          So that's what Dennis Duignan said.
     That's the testimony and that's what it is.
          Go on.
          This is also what Dennis said.
          How many lawyers came to your house from
     the tobacco industry?  Two.
          And when you met them, did you tell them
     that your brother started smoking as a
     teenager?  Yes.
          Did you tell them that everybody was
     smoking back then?  Yes.
          Did you tell them back then.  People
     didn't really understand how dangerous it is
     like we know now, and that's why, when they say
     this case is about Doug Duignan, it's only
     about Doug Duignan, that's the only thing, it's
     not -- Doug Duignan is not the only party here.
4796 That's when they are -- this case is about
     Doug Duignan and it's about a powerful
     industry, an entire industry of very -- you
     know, just a powerful industry.  R.J. Reynolds,
     American Tobacco, Brown & Williamson, Philip
     Morris, and Doug Duignan.  That's what the case
     is about.  It's not about just picking on Doug
     Duignan.
          Dr. Rosman, you know, he found that Doug
     Duignan didn't meet one criteria.  You know,
     you'll have to judge whether you think that
     is -- he was being forthright or disingenuous
     with you all.
          This is another thing where they talked
     about 1971, 1975.  This is from the Defense
     closing where they said all these Surgeon
     General Reports were coming to the conclusion
     that there was fewer lung cancer that would be
     produced by low-tar and filtered cigarettes.
          And Dr. Burns said, yes, that was the
     consensus through the '90s.
          You don't disagree that the public health
     community played a role?
          He said, yes, we did play a role.
          But the truth is, they were being misled,
4797 because this is the Tobacco Working Group.
     That was the group from the National Cancer
     Institute that was looking into filters, trying
     to make a safer cigarette.
          And the tobacco companies had their
     scientific directors in the Tobacco Working
     Group giving them information and cooperating
     with them, so to say, but when you look in
     their internal documents -- go back -- the
     internal documents from the industry said, we
     should take -- this is talking about the
     Tobacco Working Group.
          We should take steps to give the industry
     as much protection as possible, and at the same
     time remain the Tobacco Working Group.
     Dr. Gori should be informed that the scientific
     director does not accept the premise that
     smoking is harmful.
          So that was their cooperation with the
     Tobacco Working Group.  They weren't there to
     help.  They weren't there to help.  They were
     there for protection.
          And then the Surgeon General's Report
     comes out, and I'm not going to read that whole
     thing, but they come out in 2010 and they say
4798 they were misled, they had been misled by the
     tobacco companies all this time.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  That's it.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  That's it.  That's
     everything else.  So we all -- I appreciate
     your time and your patience.  I know it's been
     a long day, and thank you very much.
          THE COURT:  Well, it has indeed been a
     long day, and I'm not going to keep you too
     much longer.  However, there is some business I
     want to complete before I excuse you.
          In fact, really when I excuse you is up to
     you.  It's my intention to give you the very
     brief remaining instructions, and I'm obliged
     to go over the verdict form with you even
     though you've seen that.
          And I'm going to excuse you to meet at
     least to the extent of settling in and choosing
     a foreperson.  If then you -- if it should be
     that all of you want to continue at that point,
     as sometimes happens, if everybody wants to do
     it, I'll let you continue.  I'm getting the
     vibration that that's probably not going to
     happen, in which case you'll pick up with your
     deliberations in the morning.
