                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. WARE:  Good afternoon, members of the
     jury.
          I will copy my colleagues in thanking you
     for being here for as long as you've been here,
     as attentive as you've been and continue to be.
     I know it does take a chunk out of your life
     but as others have said, probably more
     eloquently than I, it is an important system
4631 that we live in, and you're very much a part of
     that system.  And we are grateful for your
     participation in it.
          So let me begin with something I said at
     the -- during the course of the opening, and
     that is that while we can listen to decades of
     history about secret documents and about how
     bad the tobacco companies were and what they
     failed to do, in the end, the case is about
     Doug Duignan.  It's about his conduct.  It's
     about what he could or could not do.  It's
     about his smoking and it's about the era in
     which he lived because that era was an era of
     overwhelming information and it informs the
     extent to which he knew certain things and
     could have made other decisions in his life.
          And I began by showing you or talking
     about control and responsibility.  And I just
     want to remind you of the questions which are
     central in this case on a host of different
     fronts.
          And so whether we are talking about
     addiction or we are talking about his conduct,
     all of these issues bear on the decisions
     you're going to make.  Now, who was in control
4632 of Mr. Duignan's decision to smoke?  Who was in
     control whether he should at least make
     attempts to quit smoking at various times,
     multiple times?
          Was he himself truly motivated to quit
     during the history of his smoking?  Or was that
     really, at the end of the day, a function of
     the fact that Mrs. Duignan was pushing him to
     quit because she knew he had the ability to do
     it, and he wanted to keep peace in the family
     so he would go along for a couple of days and
     then go back to smoking?
          Was Doug Duignan addicted and was that
     addiction such a substantial factor that but
     for his addiction he wouldn't have gotten
     cancer?  Was it the addiction as opposed to
     just smoking that drove him and ultimately
     caused him to have cancer?
          And finally, at the end of the day, did
     Doug Duignan actually rely on anything Philip
     Morris or Reynolds said or did?  We heard a lot
     about conspiracies.  We heard a lot about
     concealment.  We saw endless documents, many of
     them ugly, many of them wrong in the sense that
     the statements in them shouldn't have been
4633 made.
          I'm not here to apologize for any of that
     or rather to defend any of that because I don't
     think that is central to the job we are all
     trying to do in the courtroom and have been
     trying to do for the last three weeks.
          They aren't good statements.  Some of that
     conduct should be apologized for.  But the fact
     is, we are here to talk about Doug Duignan and
     his life and his responsibility and whether he
     had primary lung cancer; not what happened in
     1971 or 1972.
          So let's talk about -- I'm not going to go
     back to the 1600s and a bunch of slides about
     Christopher Columbus and so on.  Let's dwell
     on, for about ten minutes, the era in which
     Mr. Duignan grew up, beginning in 1950 when he
     was born.  What was known and what was
     happening?  What is the atmosphere in which he
     grew up?  What kinds of things was he hearing
     in the neighborhood, not only from his mother
     telling him not to smoke, but presumably from
     neighbors, from friends, from television?
          We heard that he had a television set.
     But what were the messages?  What's the aura of
4634 1950s that informs what he knew, when he
     knew it, and what decisions he might have made.
          And Dr. Proctor gave us a lot of
     information in that respect.  We know that
     there were major scientific accomplishments,
     major scientific studies.  And Dr. Proctor said
     initially that 1950 itself was a year of real
     importance.  And he went on --
          Let's just keep these rolling a little bit
     Brian.
          He went on and said that among other
     things, he identified these two major sets of
     studies; one in England, the Hill and Doll
     studies that you'll remember a little bit
     about, and the other Wynder and Graham.  And
     Wynder and Graham go on and do mouse painting
     and a host of things.
          The more important point is not that there
     are scientific studies out there, but that
     these were publicized and became well-known by
     everybody because in those days, however
     difficult for some of you to remember,
     magazines were relevant.  And the only
     information people had were from sources like
     this, namely -- let's go back to six -- or four
4635 and five.
          The only information people had were from
     sources like this.  LIFE Magazine was a big
     magazine, everybody got it.  And the point here
     is that these scientific studies, while
     scientific, and we don't expect that Doug
     Duignan or perhaps even his mother were reading
     scientific studies, the information was being
     given to the public in another format in
     popular magazines of the day.  Here LIFE
     Magazine on Wynder and Graham and the TIME
     Magazine article that we saw earlier in which
     it's observed that there's a definite
     relationship, a causal relationship between
     lung cancer and smoking.
          And that that association, as you see in
     the bottom there, is, quote, real.  So the
     science was developing in the early 1950s.
          At this point, Mr. Duignan was two years
     old.  Dr. Proctor called these articles
     critically important to the decade and to the
     development about the knowledge and risks of
     lung cancer.
          And then he described the massive
     publicity that kind of surrounded these things.
4636 He identified for us an article called
     Cancer by the Carton.  And he characterized
     that by saying it would be hard -- in effect,
     it would be hard to imagine a more impactful
     argument, meaning it's results were dramatic,
     it was widely disseminated, people knew about
     it.
          And he made the point that it had a direct
     impact on cigarette sales at that time.  So we
     are talking about 1952 when Mr. Duignan was two
     years old.  20 billion cigarettes I presume
     translates into a billion packs of cigarettes
     by which the industry sales dropped just in the
     first two years of that decade.
          Dr. Proctor also described those two years
     as the first modern wave of mass quitting.  So
     one of the things that happened, really for the
     first time in public health history in the
     early 50s, was that lots of people were giving
     up their cigarettes.  Historically, as
     Plaintiffs have pointed out, typically the
     sales were escalating of cigarettes, but in
     this era things began to change.
          In 1954 a lot was said about the Frank
     Statement.  And the Frank Statement to the
4637 Plaintiffs is the centerpiece of this
     conspiracy.  They talk about the December 1953
     meeting at The Plaza Hotel in New York, and
     we've heard vivid explanations or speculations
     about what happened inside that hotel when
     these executives met.  But the upshot was, they
     published something that was intended to be a
     Frank Statement to smokers.
          And for our purposes, really the only
     thing that's important is the affect it had was
     to discourage smokers and to cause more people
     to quit because the very fact that the tobacco
     companies were publishing something about the
     potential harms of cigarettes, even though they
     were denying it, caused people some concern.
     Wait a minute, if Philip Morris and these other
     companies think this is an issue worth worrying
     about, then maybe we ought to worry about it.
          And accordingly, that article, among
     others, caused yet more concern, more people to
     quit, and that wave that Dr. Proctor talked
     about continued to wash across the United
     States and the public at that time.
          By 1957, according to Dr. Burns, there was
     a consensus within the medical community that
4638 cigarette smoking caused lung cancer.  That's
     important because consensus means it's not a
     couple of studies, it's not a couple of
     well-known talented guys in England doing a
     study, it's not a couple of other well-known
     scientists or epidemiologists in the United
     States doing a study, now there's consensus.
          Doug Duignan was seven years old, a long
     way from his first cigarette butt, and yet
     there's consensus in the medical community
     about lung cancer and smoking at that time.
          In 1959, the Surgeon General makes a
     public statement regarding the connection
     between lung cancer and smoking and describes
     lung cancer as a principal or the principal
     cause -- smoking as the principal cause of lung
     cancer by 1959.
          Obviously, Doug Duignan at that point is
     nine years old.
          So again, at the risk of repeating myself,
     this wave continues to build.  In 1962 in
     England, again there's another major study
     which results in connecting the dots again that
     smoking causes lung cancer, at that time widely
     reported in the United States when Doug was at
4639 age of 12.
          Now, the next signature event, we are
     told, in the history of public health in the
     United States, in fact, it was characterized by
     Dr. Proctor and I think by Dr. Burns
     essentially as the most significant event in
     the public health history of the United States
     ever, or certainly up to today, and that was
     the Surgeon General's Report of 1964, which
     came out in January, at which time Doug Duignan
     was 13 years old.
          And it was important because again it made
     these major connections, and again, it caused
     widespread publicity.  I showed you the Tampa
     and St. Petersburg headlines, but the testimony
     was, as you recall, those were all over the
     United States.  You could pick a city, and when
     this report was issued, it was published as a
     major headline that the Surgeon General had
     made these connections.
          So again, these things continue to build.
     And that went on through the 1960s.  In 1966,
     when Doug Duignan was 15 years old, the pack
     warnings went on.  In 1967, of course,
     Mr. Duignan ran into some legal problems, as a
4640 result of which he was not in the public eye.
     He was incarcerated for a three-year period,
     during which we know that he didn't smoke
     conventional cigarettes.  He smoked only Bugler
     roll-your-own cigarettes.
          And I don't know if you caught it in the
     jury instruction, but the Court has instructed
     you and will again that the Defendants in this
     case have no responsibility whatsoever for the
     Bugler cigarettes.  They weren't affiliated
     with the companies, they didn't make them, they
     have no legal responsibility for whatever he
     smoked during that period of time.  And that
     has some significance for reasons I'll talk to
     you about in a moment.
          In 1968, the American Cancer Society made
     some comments.  Dr. Horn, who was the president
     at the time, made some comments about, well,
     how much do people really know?
          I've been talking about magazines coming
     out.  I've been talking about scientific
     studies.  The American Cancer Society, by this
     time in 1968, when Mr. Duignan was 18 years
     old, is saying, look, people have really gotten
     the message.  You can stand on the rooftop and
4641 shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your
     lungs, and you wouldn't be telling people
     anything they didn't know.
          Now, maybe if this was from a tobacco
     company, we wouldn't be paying attention to it,
     but it's not.  It's the American Cancer Society
     making an observation about how effective the
     public message -- public awareness has gotten
     through media and other sources at that time.
          Importantly, we know that Doug Duignan,
     according to Dr. Burns, became addicted to
     Bugler cigarettes, became addicted to smoking
     when he was in prison.  And Mr. Gustafson said
     that occurred before 1967 when he went to
     prison, but there is zero evidence of that,
     that he was addicted prior to the point at
     which he went to prison.
          However, Dr. Burns pinpoints the time at
     which he was addicted as sometime during the
     1967 to '70 period when he was smoking Buglers
     and only Buglers.
          And that again is important because these
     Defendants had nothing to do with that
     addiction.
          I think the evidence with respect to
4642 Marlboros may be that he had tried Marlboros
     prior to 1967, but there is no evidence that he
     was a regular smoker of Marlboros prior to that
     time, and in fact there's evidence to the
     contrary, as I'll show you in a moment.
          Just to wrap up some of the history,
     Dr. Burns himself gave a couple of speeches, he
     gave one in 1975 to the American Lung
     Association, and during those speeches he again
     made the point that you really don't have to
     announce any further, you don't have to shout
     from the rooftops, you don't have to make these
     major public announcements because everybody in
     America at this point, by 1975, when Doug
     Duignan is 25 years old, knew of the link
     between smoking and lung cancer.
          He says a similar thing to this in the
     speech he gives in 1981 where really he uses
     very high numbers.  I think, as he may have
     told us, generally speaking, one would not
     expect a response even higher than 90 percent
     because there's always a percentage of people
     who aren't paying attention to anything no
     matter what it is.
          So his observation that 95 percent of
4643 people are thoroughly aware of the health risks
     of smoking and 90 percent of those realize that
     it could impact their own health is very
     significant.
          So let me talk a little bit about quitting
     and addiction and Douglas Duignan.
          First of all, in this case, to be a legal
     cause of death, Plaintiffs must prove that
     Mr. Duignan was addicted to cigarettes
     containing nicotine and that that addiction was
     sufficiently powerful, that but for the
     addiction, he would have quit and not gotten
     cancer.  That's what Plaintiffs need to prove,
     that if it had not been for the addiction --
          MR. PAIGE:  I'm sorry.  Excuse me.
     Objection.  May I approach, Your Honor?
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
          MR. WARE:  Thank you, sir, very much.
          I don't remember if I -- actually if I
     mentioned this or not, but you know in this
     case, based on Mr. Paige's comments, that the
     Plaintiff has admitted that Mr. Duignan was a
     legal cause of his addiction and death to some
     extent, along with other factors.
          Now, in this case, you'll not be given an
     instruction on what addiction is.  There's been
     a lot of testimony about it.  Dr. Burns used a
     particular template for it.  Dr. Rosman used
     the DSM-IV.  But there is no specific like
     legal criteria that is part of a judge's charge
     with respect to addiction.
          And so as I said at beginning, what this
     comes down to as a practical matter is this
     question of control and responsibility.  What
     control did Mr. Duignan have and what
     responsibility did he have for exercising that
     control.
          We know from the evidence that -- and
     there's really no dispute about this --
4657 Mr. Duignan's started smoking, according to his
     brother, when he was 14 or 15.  It's hard to
     forget the cigarette butt testimonies.  We know
     that's how he started.  We don't have a lot of
     information about how frequently he smoked
     early on, but we do know that neither Reynolds
     nor Philip Morris had anything to do with the
     products that he smoked at that time.
          And we do know that regardless of
     allegations of concealment or conspiracy or
     statements that were made or statements that
     were omitted to be made, none of that could
     have had any influence on Doug Duignan because
     he started smoking for other reasons.
          He certainly did not rely to his detriment
     on anything that Philip Morris or Reynolds was
     saying in the 1950 -- or '60 time frame when he
     began smoking, 1964 when he was 14.  He was not
     relying on tobacco company statements, was not
     a function of some conspiracy.
          It was a function of, as Mrs. Duignan
     said, all the kids did it, including her, and
     they did it not because of statements of any
     tobacco company and not because of any
     conspiracies.
4658 The testimony of Doug Duignan [sic] is
     that early on they didn't really smoke very
     much, mostly because they couldn't afford it.
     And so they weren't out buying packs of
     cigarettes.  He was pilfering what he could
     from the Chesterfield pack of Mr. Lange, and
     occasionally they probably came up with other
     cigarettes.  But in any event, the early
     smoking was pretty modest.
          And Dennis Duignan told us outright that
     he does not recall his brother smoking
     Marlboros, even though he lived with him at
     that time, doesn't recall his brother smoking
     Marlboros at all while he was a teenager.
          There may be some evidence that he tried
     one, but the point is he wasn't a Marlboro
     smoker as a teenager.  That came later.
     There's no doubt from the evidence that after
     1970 at some point, Marlboro became his
     favorite brand.  It's a little fuzzy in terms
     of the evidence how much of which brands he
     smoked, but let's assume since Marlboro was his
     favorite, that he smoked more Marlboros than
     other brands.
          The evidence is that at roughly the age 22
4659 to 24 because it was before Dennis went to
     California, Dennis or Denny had the
     conversation with his brother in which Doug
     Duignan repeated to him that there was a time
     when a doctor told him if he didn't quit he was
     going to die within five years.  And his
     brother says, yes, he remembers that
     conversation, and then he places it in time.
     It would have been sometime before he moved to
     California and we know from other evidence not
     quoted here, that that was 1975 or earlier.  So
     after his incarceration but before 1975 in his
     early 20s.
          That conversation obviously is important
     because it was a very vivid warning.  It was a
     warning by a doctor.  And Plaintiffs seem to be
     trying to raise the question whether the
     conversation ever happened, because
     Mrs. Duignan said she doesn't remember him
     going to doctors.  It's possible that this was
     a physician at the prison.  It's possible that
     he went to a doctor sometime after 1970 and
     before 1975 for just a basic illness.  But in
     any event, his brother testifies very vividly
     about the conversation.
4660 he's later asked by Mr. Paige, and
     this is part of the trial testimony, you know,
     could this have been, as Plaintiffs struggle to
     push this conversation out to a point at which
     Mr. Duignan was sick, and therefore not
     constitute a warning to him earlier on in his
     life, Denny Duignan is asked flat out, is it
     possible that Doug was in his 40s at the time
     of the conversation and he says no.
          Now, you might recall that I got off to a
     stormy relationship with Dr. Burns in cross
     examination and it was over this issue because
     I asked him, isn't it a fact that sometime in
     the age bracket of 22 to 24 he had a
     conversation with his brother, which Denny
     Duignan repeated, about having seen a doctor
     and the doctor having warned him.
          And Dr. Burns said, well, no, there were
     two versions of it.  It could have been in his
     40s.  It could have been in his 20s.  Tried to
     muddy the waters here and make this ambiguous.
     It's not ambiguous.  He had it in his 20s.  We
     know that because his brother moved away.
          In addition, I asked Burns, well, I mean
     you're here giving an opinion about addiction,
4661 you know, what use did you make of this
     conversation?  And he basically said, I ignored
     it.  It wasn't important to me.  Whatever
     conversation occurred between the two boys was
     not important to you in forming your opinion,
     and he says that's right.  It's not important
     to me.
          I mean, if you think about his role here
     as an addiction expert, to just brush aside a
     conversation that was this direct, this stark,
     with a young man, Doug Duignan, in his 20s, is
     surprising.  I mean, his job was to tell us why
     he believes Doug Duignan was addicted.  And yet
     this piece of evidence coming directly from his
     brother who lived with him, who knew him best,
     about whom there was testimony from Kevin that
     they were very close growing up, and Dr. Burns
     brushes this aside as irrelevant because it's
     an inconvenient truth to his addiction
     narrative, his addiction opinion.
          So the question arises by his mid-20s, did
     Doug Duignan get the picture?  Did he
     understand that smoking could cause lung
     cancer, that smoking was dangerous.  And the
     answer is absolutely, how could he not.
4662 Particularly having had that conversation.
          Dr. Burns agreed that he hated -- he,
     Doug, hated everything about prison life.  He
     didn't like Buglers.  And we heard snippets
     that all through his life he was troubled by
     confined spaces, whether movies or crowds or
     whatever.  And some suggestion was made that
     that was fallout from his having been confined
     for those three years.
          So we know he got the message.  We know
     that he knew about the risks of smoking at that
     time.
          Dr. Burns also told us that given the fact
     that he hated Buglers given the fact that he
     hated prison, that was an opportunity for him
     to quit smoking and he didn't do that and
     Dr. Burns was asked if he had quit, in say
     1970, at which point he had been confined, he
     wasn't able to smoke at will, he had to live by
     a set of rules, he was smoking something he
     didn't like, if he had quit instead of starting
     to smoke conventional cigarettes, would that
     have had health impacts for him.  And Dr. Burns
     said, yes.  If he had stopped and not begun
     again, that's absolutely correct.
4663 We heard a lot of testimony from Martha
     with respect to different quit attempts, at
     least in the 1980s.  I think each of the kids
     testified to a couple of attempts.
          Ultimately, you're asked to believe that
     Doug Duignan, an independent construction
     worker all of his life, who if you think about
     it, did a remarkable thing.  He was given a
     seven year prison sentence, according to Martha
     Duignan, but he was paroled in three years.
          And so here is a man who had sufficient
     control over himself and his decisions and what
     he did in an institution that limited his
     movement, his activities, his smoking, his day,
     and we're being told this man who could
     accomplish all that and do it so well that he
     persuaded people to parole him in less than
     half of his sentence, but this man was so
     addicted, he could not do one other thing, and
     that was quit smoking for more than 48 hours.
          I think you're entitled to question
     whether that's even possible given that his
     family has described him as decisive, as a
     man's man, as a guy who was pretty tough, as a
     person who tended to do what he wanted.  Given
4664 that he could cope with prison life with the
     restrictions that are inherent in that, are we
     really to believe that he could not even quit
     on a single occasion over the next 20 years for
     more than 48 hours?  That's why Dr. Rosman
     questioned this testimony, and questioned
     whether this man was addicted to such an extent
     that he could not quit.
          I know there was one quit attempt that was
     described in some detail but only one, and that
     the infamous shower incident in which he
     apparently went into the bathroom, opened the
     window over the tub, blew the smoke out the
     window, but left a cigarette butt on the window
     sill and was later discovered by Martha.
          Other than that, we don't have any real
     detail about any of these quit attempts.  What
     we do know is that Martha continually over
     time -- if we accept her testimony, let's just
     take it all and say yep, that's all true, he
     made these multiple attempts in the 1980s.
     What does that tell you?
          It tells you that her judgment was he was
     not so addicted that he couldn't quit, because
     if he is so addicted that he can't quit, what's
4665 point?  Why badger the guy and why put him
     through multiple attempts to quit?  It was in
     fact her judgment that he could quit that
     caused her to try to get him to stop multiple
     times in the 1980s.
          He just didn't want to do it.  The man had
     few enough pleasures in his life.  He worked
     hard.  He made the decision to smoke.  He told
     his brother that he liked smoking.  And that
     was why he wasn't going to quit.  He simply
     didn't want to do it.
          He had the conversation with his brother
     in which he told him -- again, this is Dennis:
          So your brother Doug told you he likes
     smoking?
          Answer:  Yes.  That's why he wasn't going
     to quit."
          So we have it from a horse's mouth in a
     sense.  We aren't sure when this conversation
     occurred, there was testimony that as of the
     time of his deposition in 2015, he hadn't seen
     his brother for 30 years, but that means 1985,
     Mr. Duignan died in 1992.  So for seven years
     they hadn't seen each other, and I think
     perhaps Kevin testified that in fact on one
4666 occasion they were together and Kevin met his
     uncle, but anyway.
          The upshot is that if Martha Duignan truly
     believed that her husband was so addicted that
     he couldn't quit, she wouldn't have kept
     trying.  And we know from her own testimony
     that she didn't throw ashtrays away.  And she
     really didn't believe that he was going to
     succeed in trying to quit.  It wasn't a
     function of his addiction, it was a function of
     his motivation.
          There was also testimony about the
     conversations between Dennis and Doug in which
     the subject of his addiction came up.  And
     Denny was asked, did your brother ever tell you
     he thought he was addicted to smoking.  And the
     answer was no.  So the only thing you remember
     him saying is, no, he's not going to quit.
     That's all I remember.
          I mean, again, that's significant.  These
     boys grew up together.  They had the same
     father.  They were close as children.  And yet
     at no time in his life, despite the
     conversation about having had a conversation
     with a doctor did Doug Duignan ever say, well,
4667 you know, I'm addicted.  I can't quit.  No, he
     didn't say that.  He said, I don't want to quit
     because I like smoking.
          You're well aware at this point of the
     evidence of many millions of people who have
     quit, and I won't go into any detail on it, but
     I do want to show you the testimony of
     Dr. Burns briefly because he does not dispute
     that most of the 55 or 60 million people who
     have quit would have been addicted by his
     definition.
          Now, maybe he has a little weird
     definition, I don't know.  But we heard from
     other reporters that at least half of those
     people by almost any measure are addicted or
     were addicted, and yet they have quit.
          What makes Doug Duignan different than
     those 30 million, that 50 percent of the 55 or
     60 million people?
          More than half of everyone in the United
     States who has ever smoked and is still alive
     has quit smoking, and that is significant as
     well.
          Dr. Burns is not a specialist in addiction
     medicine.  The only treating -- as he says
4668 here, the only treating physician, the only
     person who sees patients every day, both in the
     prison population and private patients, is
     Dr. Rosman.
          And Dr. Rosman had his own reasons why he
     does not feel that Mr. Duignan was addicted.
     He's not saying that some of these criteria
     aren't established some of the time, but he is
     saying that he doesn't fulfill the criteria of
     the DSM-IV, which is the tool that this
     treating physician uses in his own practice of
     treating patients who are addicted.
          Let me talk briefly about low-tar and
     low-nicotine cigarettes.
          Basically -- I will get back to this in a
     little bit in connection with the verdict form,
     which I want to go over with you, but
     essentially, the evidence in this case is that
     at some point in the '80s, Doug Duignan started
     smoking light cigarettes.  We don't know
     exactly why.  We do know that there's no
     evidence in the case about that having occurred
     because of a conspiracy or because of things
     that Philip Morris or Reynolds did or didn't
     do.  We know that Martha started smoking them
4669 as well.  There's no evidence that that's all
     they smoked.
          So there is no evidence that the reason
     that they began smoking light cigarettes was so
     that they could quit.  All they were really
     doing was substituting light cigarettes for
     regular cigarettes.  It was not a question of
     trying to quit by using light cigarettes.  And
     there's no testimony that that was their
     intention.  Nor is there any testimony
     regarding their having depended on information
     from the tobacco companies that induced them to
     smoke light cigarettes or filtered cigarettes.
          There is a lot of evidence about the
     positions being taken by the public health
     community throughout the 1970s.  And Dr. Burns
     was asked whether or not he disagreed with the
     proposition that the public health community's
     own advocacy of low-tar and light cigarettes
     wasn't responsible for the fact that many
     people switched to lights or a low-tar
     cigarettes.  And he said, "I believe it played
     a role."
          And after that he talked about a number of
     Surgeon General's Reports.  And I asked him
4670 sort of a global question about the Surgeon
     General's Report of 1971 which said that lights
     result in fewer lung cancers, and about 19 --
     the 1975 Surgeon General's Report, the 1975 and
     the 1981.
          And Dr. Burns told us that indeed, despite
     whatever criticisms there might have been of
     light cigarettes and despite some evidence that
     people can compensate using those cigarettes,
     that is, they might smoke more of them, they
     might draw more fully, they might take longer
     inhalations, all of which would be bad things,
     but despite knowing that, the public health
     community continued to advocate that if you're
     not going to quit, yes, use a low-tar filtered
     cigarette.
          And that's what Dr. Burns is saying here,
     that right up until the 1990s, essentially to
     the point at which Mr. Duignan died, that the
     public health community itself was advertising
     or recommending not that people smoke, I mean,
     in every year, of course, they were saying
     that.  The best thing you can do it is quit,
     but if you're not going to quit, then yes,
     switch to low-tar and filtered cigarettes.
4671 That's important because it means that
     this wasn't a result of some conspiracy or
     concealment by the tobacco companies; rather,
     this was a recommendation of the public health
     community itself to use these cigarettes,
     knowing that there are some risks to that
     because people might smoke more of them.
          Let me turn to the medical case because I
     know that that's at the heart of what we are
     doing here.  It's the first question on the
     verdict form.
          Did Doug Duignan have primary lung cancer?
     Now, that is really a central, maybe the
     central issue in the case, and so I want to
     talk about it at some length.
          I think everyone agrees that if Doug
     Duignan did not have primary lung cancer -- and
     just to refresh, that means he did have lung
     cancer of some -- he did have cancer in his
     lung, but not only that, it started in his
     lung.  That's what primary lung cancer is,
     remember.
          It is not enough for Plaintiffs to prove
     that he had cancer if his lung.  They must
     prove that it was primary lung cancer, that
4672 that was the point of origin, and they must
     prove that by the greater weight of the
     evidence.
          Dr. Chirieac's opinions are pretty
     straightforward, and they really come down to
     two opinions.  First, that the medical evidence
     does not show that lung primary was
     established.  It doesn't prove that it wasn't
     established, but it doesn't prove that it was
     established.  In other words, the evidence is
     at a state that one cannot tell whether this
     was lung primary or unknown primary.
          And his second opinion really is that it's
     just as likely or probable that the diagnosis
     here is cancer unknown primary.
          A word about the witnesses you saw.  You
     know from what you've heard that Dr. Proctor
     and Dr. Burns are professional witnesses.  This
     is what they do for a living.
          Dr. Proctor told us that he had a $50,000
     week last week.  He testified in two trials, he
     spent some time in hotel rooms over the
     weekend, and he charges $6,000 a day.  And
     that's what he does when he's not doing other
     things.
4673 But a lot of his life, 60, 70 trials have
     been devoted to tobacco company litigation on
     behalf of Plaintiffs.
          Dr. Burns similarly.  Dr. Burns told us he
     is now retired and that half of his time is
     spent as a professional witness in cases like
     this.  They've each made between three and four
     million dollars doing this.
          Contrast that with Dr. Chirieac.  You've
     got an unpolished man who is a pure scientist
     and physician.  A great pure scientist and
     physician.  A person who did not have a $50,000
     week.  A person who did not spend the last year
     going around to cases in Florida.
          He spent the last year working on a
     signature development of an antibody to detect
     the genetic mutation in women, and then to
     assist in the development of a drug that
     permitted those women not just to identify the
     disease, but instead of having chemotherapy or
     having radiation, to take a pill twice a day
     and not have their hair fall out and not have
     the other side effects.  That's what his life
     is about.
          And you saw that.  He's unvarnished.  His
4674 English isn't perfect.  He fights a little too
     much on cross examination.  It's not his
     living.  He came here as a physician, as a
     pathologist, not as a polished witness all
     packaged up and ready to go on to the next
     case.
          But you got the truth and you got it
     directly from Dr. Chirieac.
          And I want to show you -- a lot of the
     questioning has been along the lines of what
     you saw today from Mr. Gustafson.  You saw a
     ballot with on the left-hand column a handful
     of doctors, six or seven doctors listed, and
     they are all checked off.  They all said
     primary lung cancer or probable primary lung
     cancer.
          Well, that's just not true.  You know,
     what's happening here is Plaintiffs have
     cherrypicked the data.  They have cherrypicked
     the records.  And so if a doctor made three
     different entries, one of which before the
     biopsy information, before the pathology was
     available, possible lung primary, question
     mark, he got a checkmark.
          And so I want to show you why that is
4675 disingenuous and why that isn't what the
     medical records say when read objectively.
          Dr. Chirieac said that he does not
     disagree with any of these physicians, quote,
     treatment decisions.  What does he mean by
     that?  Everybody except the pathologists are
     treating physicians, that is, they are
     participants in the decision of how to treat
     Mr. Duignan.  The pathologists are specialized
     in pathology, looking at a cellular level to
     find out what the primary site of this disease
     is.
          Dr. Chirieac doesn't disagree with the
     judgments made by any of the treaters because
     all of them are trying to find something to do
     to help this poor man.  And so he is saying,
     yeah, I agree that they made their best
     judgments at the time.
          What he disagrees with is the conclusions
     jumped to here that this is lung primary
     because that's not what the records say.
          So let me show you the first of three
     slides.  And what this is is a -- all this does
     is take each physician -- and this is contained
     in an exhibit, 44111, that will be available to
4676 you in the jury room.
          It just takes each physician by name, and
     then within that physician's entries, it
     identifies the multiple entries they made where
     they said something about whether this was lung
     primary or not.
          And if you look at this closely, it's very
     informative.  And so let me start at top with
     Dr. Shah.  Dr. Shah is the pulmonologist.  And
     you will remember that September 17th is the
     date that Mr. Duignan is admitted to the
     hospital.
          And so what are the entries?  There is no
     biopsy at this point, that biopsy hasn't
     happened, right.  And so this is before any
     biopsy.  It's before any scientific data.  The
     only thing that happened on the 17th of
     significance to whether this is lung primary or
     uncertain unknown primary is the x-ray.  And
     the x-ray does show something in his chest
     which is vary loosely described as a mass or
     whatever.
          So what does Dr. Shah say?  On the 17th,
     he says three different things.  And depending
     on which of his notes you look at, he first
4677 says "possible lung cancer."  That would be
     potentially he is saying it's possible this is
     lung primary.
          He then says "primary lung mass," you
     know, with two question marks.  Is this a
     primary lung mass?  Is this primary lung
     cancer?  So he's gone from possible, maybe when
     he just saw the x-ray, we don't really know, to
     I'm not so sure.  So he says "primary lung
     mass," two question marks, "cancer."
          And so his -- the state of where he is on
     the 17th is, I'm not sure it's primary lung
     cancer.  He doesn't get a checkmark at this
     point.  And he specifically says "biopsy
     tomorrow."
          Now, why would he say that?  He would say
     it because he knows it's going to happen, and
     he wants to know what it says, because he is
     dependent on that biopsy to get this right.
     And he's making the statement in this record, I
     don't know if this is primary lung cancer at
     this point.
          Then if we go to the 22nd, let's stick
     with Dr. Shah at the top, 9/22, what's
     significant about that date?  It is that the
4678 biopsy reports, all three of them, what you
     heard described as the lung biopsy itself, the
     bronchial wash and the bronchial brush, those
     results came back the day before on
     September 21.
          And you'll see this in the records.  The
     sequence is he's admitted on the 17th.  On the
     17th he gets an x-ray.  On the 18th there is a
     biopsy.  It takes two days for that biopsy
     report to be officially issued by the
     pathologist.  That happens on the 21st of
     September.  And so here is Dr. Shah after the
     biopsies.
          And at this point he's in even more doubt.
     I don't know what it is, and so I'm going to
     write an accurate record.  And so I'm going to
     say it's adenocarcinoma, because that's been
     confirmed, metastatic to the brain and the
     lymph node, because that's all I know.
          He no longer says anything about lung
     mass, he no longer says possible lung cancer,
     he just doesn't know.  Because now he's seen
     the biopsy reports and he's up in the air.
     They are inconclusive.  He knows it's not
     cancer of the -- so far as the lung is
4679 concerned.  He knows it's adenocarcinoma
     because at this point the lymph node has been
     biopsied.  So that's Dr. Shah.  No checkmark.
          Dr. Iyer is the surgeon who, on the 18th,
     excised the inguinal lymph node.  So remember
     they were on the 17th, they were trying to
     figure out what -- what was going on with this
     man.  And one of the things they did was the
     biopsy of the inguinal lymph node.  They
     removed it and they biopsied it.  And so
     Dr. Iyer, all on the 18th, again, three
     different entries.  He starts out by saying
     possible lung primary from frozen section.
          I don't know if you remember, but the
     testimony was that frozen sections, if you
     will, are quick and dirty biopsy adjacent to
     the operating room at the time of the surgery
     itself.  It's not conclusive.  You always want
     to wait for the final biopsy report, which
     doesn't happen until the 21st, but it's some
     indication and it might have helped in terms of
     diagnosis and treatment.
          And for whatever conclusions he makes he
     says, well, based on this frozen section, it's
     possible this is a lung primary.  Possible
4680 surely doesn't mean, I've concluded that's the
     case.  He is saying it's possible.  It means
     exactly what you think it means.
          Then he has another prime -- frozen
     section, he says lung primary.  Well, that's
     pretty umbi- -- am- -- unambiguous.  He thinks
     it's lung primary.
          But then, in his third note, he changes
     his mind again.  And he says, I don't know, you
     know, it's consistent with lung primary.
     Again, not saying at the end of the day on the
     18th, he's back to "I'm not so sure."  It's
     consistent with lung primary, but I'm not
     really sure.  So I'm taking back my label of
     lung primary.
          Let's go on to Dr. Rao, who is the
     oncologist.  Dr. Rao starts out on the 19th, so
     this is the day after the biopsy, but before
     the results are available on the 19th.  The
     biopsy is on the 18th, but no results until the
     21st.
          He starts out, right from the beginning,
     saying, could be lung cancer or it could be
     metastatic to the lung.  So he's up in the air.
     It could be unknown primary, it could be lung
4681 cancer.  That's where he starts on
     September 19th.
          And after the biopsy, he's really in the
     same position.  He says, possible lung primary.
     Again, I can't conclude it is, I'm not saying
     it's lung primary, it's possible.
          And then on the 22nd there's the record,
     which you'll see, it is -- which is -- I mean,
     the Plaintiffs characterize it as saying
     probably lung cancer.  When you look at it, I'm
     going to assure you, you can't tell whether it
     says "possibly" or "probably."  The
     handwriting, the physician's handwriting, is
     very difficult to discern.
          But it -- it doesn't really matter because
     by the 23rd he now has the biopsy results and
     the final word from Dr. Rao, as he turns this
     patient over to Dr. Brant, as the radiation
     oncologist, is -- it's adenocarcinoma, they
     know that from the inguinal node biopsy, but I
     don't know if it's primary or unknown.
          He is saying, I am -- I am still
     uncertain.  I've gone through from the 20 --
     from the 18th to the 23rd, we've had a biopsy,
     we've had an x-ray, done the inguinal lymph
4682 node, and he's not sure.  He says it could be
     either one.  And he's the oncologist.  He's the
     Burns of this treatment team.
          So the state of his opinion on
     September 23rd is that he cannot tell whether
     it's lung primary or it's unknown primary, and
     that's what he says.  So it's important to look
     at these notes in sequence, not just to
     cherrypick one here and there.
          Let's keep going and see what the other
     physicians say.  Dr. Hughes and Dr. Herbert are
     both pathologists.  The top one, Dr. Hughes, is
     the pathologist.  Again, these are the official
     reports on September 21, and there are two --
     there -- at the top section where Dr. Hughes
     remembers three reports.
          One report is with respect to the lung
     biopsy itself.  And the next two are the
     bronchial brush and the wash.
          And just to refresh, the bronchial brush
     is sort of stick a brush into the bronchus, you
     know, down the windpipe, branch off to the
     right and left, this one goes right, they
     scrape it, if you will, the inside of the
     bronchus, that creates epithelial cells on the
4683 brush, you pull the brush out, you examine
     those microscopically.
          And, as Dr. Chirieac explained, the reason
     you do that is that often, if it's really
     primary lung cancer, it will start eating
     through the bronchus itself; and so that's what
     you're looking for.  You're looking to see are
     any of those cells in the bronchus on the side
     of the tube, if you will, are those cancerous.
     And the answer here from the pathologist is no.
          Now, we know, although I'll show you in a
     few minutes, Dr. Burns fights this.  We know
     that lung tissue was captured in this biopsy.
     When Dr. Burns showed you an illustration of a
     bronchoscope, it was a distant kind of shot of
     a bronchoscope.  It did not show the needle and
     it did not show the ability of the needle,
     which aspirates, you know, sucks in the tissue
     from the biopsy, which can make a U-turn.
          You saw the film from Dr. Chirieac showing
     an actual lung biopsy and you could see that
     the needle actually makes a U-turn to get into
     the mass.  That's its capability.  That you
     weren't shown in the direct case.  You were
     shown just a tube that goes down into the lung
4684 and it was ambiguous what it can do from there.
     That was never illustrated to you.
          In any event, Dr. Hughes has the two other
     reports, all three reports are negative for
     cancer.  So you've got lung tissue actually
     biopsied.  We know it was captured because the
     pathologist says so.  It says, alveolar lung
     tissue.  Hard to mistake what that means.  And
     it is negative for cancer.  So is the wash and
     the brush.  No cancer -- no tum- -- no
     malignant cells seen, no cancer.
          Then we go to Dr. Herbert, also on 9/21.
     Dr. Herbert is the pathologist who did the
     lymph node biopsy.  So two different
     pathologists here.  She did the lymph node
     biopsy and she does conclude that it's
     adenocarcinoma, but she does not describe it as
     even potentially lung cancer.  She says,
     metastatic large cell undifferentiated
     malignancy.
          So despite the biopsy, she's unable to
     determine whether this is unknown primary or
     lung primary.  And so she describes --
     describes it truthfully and objectively.  I can
     tell you that it's metastatic large cell.  I
4685 can tell you that it's undifferentiated, what
     Dr. Chirieac said is an ugly-looking tumor.
     But I can't tell you anymore.  I can also tell
     you it's adenocarcinoma.  That's the type of
     cancer it is.
          Let's then move on to Dr. Schoenfeld, who
     does the CT scans.  This is on 9/22, so this is
     post-biopsies.  And Dr. Schoenfeld, despite the
     fact that he has got the biopsies in hand,
     despite the fact that he is now -- he's already
     got an x-ray, now he does a CT scan of the
     chest, as well as the mesenteric area of the
     body, and he, too, does not say lung cancer or
     lung primary or even possible.  He says,
     suspicious mass, right upper lobe.
          So he just doesn't know what it is.  And
     he's objective about that and that's what he
     says.  I don't know, in effect, suspicious
     mass.
          Then let's look at the last few.
     Dr. Brant is the radiation oncologist.  So
     Dr. Rao turns the patient over to the radiation
     oncologist, because he's very ill.  It's
     evident that he -- that there's no curative
     here, and so the question is, can some
4686 radiation help the man.  And so it's important
     here what he's -- several things are important
     with Dr. Brant.
          First of all, when Dr. Brant gets the
     patient, I'm going to show you the letter in a
     minute, it's described to him as widely
     metastatic adenocarcinoma.  So Dr. Rao does not
     say to him, this is a patient with lung cancer,
     rather he says, widely metastatic
     adenocarcinoma.
          Now, if Dr. Rao, who is referring the
     patient, had thought he had lung cancer, he
     would have said so.  He does not say so.  And
     so -- in any event, in September Brant says,
     probable lung primary.
          Now, there's a reason for that that I'm
     going to show you.  This turns out to be an
     error on his part, because he misses the
     critical piece of information, which I'll show
     you in a minute.
          But then, importantly, in December, Brant
     is writing his last official record in the
     case.  It is not just a letter, it is a
     treatment summary.  He's obligated to write it,
     as a radiation oncologist, he has legal
4687 consequences, and he writes it to Dr. Rao.
          And what does he say?  On the last entry,
     after he's got the file in front of him, he has
     all the biopsies, he has every piece of
     information anybody has from these medical
     records, and he says, uncertain primary, on
     December 2nd.  Uncertain primary.  Exactly what
     Dr. Chirieac said.  And that's Dr. Brant.
          Dr. Roberts -- I'm going to come back to
     Dr. Brant because I want you to look at the
     letter for certain reasons -- but let me finish
     up this.
          Dr. Roberts makes two different entries.
     On the discharge summary, 9/25/1992, he doesn't
     say, lung cancer.  He doesn't -- he doesn't
     label it one way or the other.  He just says,
     cancer patient.  You'll see it in the middle of
     the page in his handwriting.  Now, that's his
     discharge summary.
          When he writes out the death certificate,
     he does say, lung cancer.  And we don't have
     any information about why that's the case.
     Maybe he believed it, maybe he was doing it
     because it's a public record and he had to put
     something down, it's all speculation.  We just
4688 don't know.
          What we do know is nobody else had come to
     that conclusion.  Even Dr. Brant, who, two days
     prior, had described this as unknown or
     uncertain primary.
          And then, finally, we have Dr. Heindel,
     who, likewise, initially before he had any
     pathology on September 18th, he is equally
     objective.  And he says, mass right upper lobe.
     Doesn't pretend to know what the primary site
     is, remember the biopsy is not available,
     biopsies are not available to him or anybody
     else until the 21st, so he doesn't have
     anything like that.
          He is the anesthesiologist who was
     treating the patient.  He was part of the
     treatment team, as Dr. Chirieac said, because
     he was the man who anesthetized him for
     purposes of the inguinal lymph node excision.
     So he knew the patient.
          And if you think about what the
     anesthesiologist's role is, of course it's to
     anesthetize the patient, but we all know that
     there are a lot of critical factors in doing
     that.  A lot of things can go wrong.
4689 so it's important that he understand
     the course of treatment, the medications the
     man's on, what allergies he might have, and a
     host of information so he's certain that when
     he anesthetizes him, he won't do something that
     will cause him a problem or possibly even cause
     his death.
          So the anesthesiologist is not an
     irrelevant little peon that's over here on the
     side and doesn't know anything, he is a
     board-certified specialist and he is trained to
     be careful about what he gives to any patient
     because he can cause death.
          And so he has a background on this
     patient.  He has a lengthy record later, on
     September 25th, in which he, along with
     Dr. Brant, later concludes unknown primary.
     It's in the third line of this handwritten note
     that's really quite long.
          And one of the important things about that
     record is it's obvious that he knows this man,
     that he has a real history on him.  He
     describes it and he says, I've been asked to
     consult, to see whether, if I give him a
     steroid -- an epidural steroid injection,
4690 whether I can help his pain.  And he basically
     says, so I met with him, I actually palpated
     him, I touched him in order to see where he was
     expressing pain.  He had a leg pain that went
     down to his foot.  And so he is very, very
     detailed about his observations of Mr. Duignan
     at this juncture.
          And his ultimate conclusion is in the
     beginning of this report, cancer unknown
     primary.  Now, why would he say that?  He has
     gotten it from somewhere.  Maybe Dr. Rao, maybe
     Roberts, maybe whoever referred him to him.  Or
     he knows because he's looked at the pathology.
          So my basic point, I know I've been windy,
     I've taken a lot of time on this, but my basic
     caution to you is, it's not a ballot, you know,
     it's not a vote, if one of you were sick or one
     of your family members and you're in a hospital
     room and you had --
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor,
     Golden Rule argument.
          MR. WARE:  Fair enough.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Move to strike.
          MR. WARE:  Fine.
4691 In any event --
          THE COURT:  Well, you want an instruction?
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Move to strike the
     comment, the Golden Rule comment.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  Granted.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Thank you.
          MR. WARE:  Thank you for the reminder.
          Let me put it this way.  This notion of
     putting up a ballot, if you will, and checking
     off boxes, is not the way cancer diagnosis is
     done.  You don't want it to be a vote.  Because
     only certain specialists know certain things.
     Even Dr. Burns told us that the role of the
     pathologist is critical.  Because he's the only
     one, or she, are the only ones who actually
     look at the cancer at a cellular level and are
     the only ones who can truly diagnose.
          So it's important that you not have a
     vote, that it not be a ballot.  And so to wrap
     up this portion, my only caution to you is when
     you're in the jury room, is to look at the
     record, but do it by date.  Do it by physician
     and by date, and you'll see that it is not the
     case that most of these sufficient -- these
     physicians vote for lung primary.  That's not
4692 case.
          They are mostly up in the air, they don't
     know for sure, and several of them say unknown
     primary.  And that is exactly what Dr. Chirieac
     said.  He basically said, you can't tell.  And
     so an honest, dispassionate diagnosis from his
     point of view is it could be lung cancer, it
     could be unknown primary.
          The greater weight of the evidence does
     not tell you which one.  And the burden is on
     the Plaintiffs to prove to you that it's lung
     primary.  That's where Dr. Chirieac was.
          Now, let me talk a little bit more about
     Dr. Brant because I told you he made an error.
     First of all -- well, this is the final -- this
     is Dr. Brant's final letter from December 2,
     and I've already told you that his last word on
     this patient was uncertain or unknown primary.
     You know that.  But I want to go to his earlier
     September letter and show you a couple of
     things that I think are important.
          So perhaps -- well, let's talk about
     Dr. Chirieac's view of what these terms
     "probable" and "impression" and so on mean in
     cancer diagnosis.  I think it's slide 43.  And
4693 so let me just say a word about that.
          Dr. Chirieac was asked, when you guys use
     these terms, what do they mean to a trained
     physician?  And he says, well, it's not like
     the legal system where 51 percent is probable.
     These are degrees of uncertainty.  You know.
     And saying it's probable, saying you have an
     impression, saying anything that's tentative,
     other than identifying the primary site is a
     way of making a guess.  I think he means an
     educated guess, it's not pulled out of thin
     air.  And sometimes that's right.
          But the point is, the language of these
     physicians is not the same as the language of
     lawyers.
          We know from Dr. Burns -- we could go to
     44, or, excuse me, Dr. Ruckdeschel, that when
     he looked at Dr. Brant's opinion he described
     it as weak.  And he's talking about the
     September 23rd, 1992 letter in which Dr. Brant
     says probable lung primary.
          He later changes his mind in his letter in
     December to say unknown primary, but initially
     in September, for some reason, he says probable
     lung primary.  And I want to show you why he
4694 did that.
          We know for sure a couple of things.
     First of all, let's go to slide 46.
          Dr. Brant did not receive the lung biopsy
     pathology report, or at least had not received
     it by the time he wrote his letter.  It's
     copied only to Dr. Roberts and Dr. Shah.
     Dr. Brant describes in his letter what he has
     on hand.  And he does not say that he has the
     biopsy report.
          Brian, can we go to Dr. Brant's letter at
     42?
          All right.  This is -- this is a picture
     of Dr. Brant's September 23rd, 1992 letter.
     And it's notable for a couple of things.
          First of all, at the very beginning --
     now, this is coming from Dr. Rao, because he is
     referring the patient to Dr. Brant for
     radiation.  And in the testimony that was read
     to you from Dr. Brant, Dr. Brant says, I never
     went to the hospital.  I saw this man in my
     office.
          And he's ambiguous about -- he doesn't
     remember Mr. Duignan.  He says he's only going
     from the medical records.  He's unclear whether
4695 he saw them -- saw him more than three hours,
     one hour on three different days in that eight
     days he treated him.  He just doesn't know.  He
     has no recollection whatsoever of the man.  He
     testifies that probably he wouldn't recognize
     him.
          But his letter to Dr. Rao -- Dr. Rao
     refers the patient to Dr. Brant.  Dr. Brant
     examines him.  He writes back to Dr. Rao and he
     says, not "I'm referring you a patient with
     lung primary," he says "I'm referring you a
     patient with, quote, widely metastatic
     adenocarcinoma with brain metastases."
          So, again, if we went back to Dr. Rao's
     last entry on the medical records I was showing
     you, this is what Dr. Rao had said.  He had
     backed off any notion of lung primary because
     he didn't know.  And so when he sends the
     patient to Dr. Brant, he's still ambiguous and
     that's why he doesn't say, I'm sending you
     somebody who has lung primary.  That's not what
     he says.
          Now, Dr. Brant, in his letter, describes
     the bronch- -- the bronchoscopy but he
     describes only the pathology report from the
4696 bronchus itself.  He misses and never refers to
     the bronchoscopy report of the lung tissue,
     which, if you think about it, is the most
     critical medical record in the file.  And for
     whatever reason he either doesn't have it or he
     missed it.
          There are three biopsy reports.  He talks
     about no bronchiole lesions.  But he never
     talks about the biopsy of the lung tissue
     itself.  And so he misses the fact that they've
     biopsied the lung tissue and they found no
     cancer.
          And so at the end of his letter, when he
     concedes or when he says "lung primary," he's
     making that statement without ever having seen
     the pathology report that actually biopsied the
     lung.
          Now, by December, presumably that
     information catches up with him, and on
     December 2nd he changes his view and he says it
     is cancer, uncertain primary.
          Now, Plaintiffs says, well, wait a minute
     here, he was -- his deposition was taken, we
     read it in.  And he said some other things and
     he backed off his December 2nd unknown primary
4697 opinion.
          So why would he do that?
[#DELETED RECESS#]
          MR. WARE:  I want to talk to you briefly
     about some of Dr. Ruckdeschel's testimony, and
     then I want to go over the verdict form with
4704 you.
          Let's go to 48, if we can.
          Dr. Ruckdeschel testified, as you can see
     here, that adenocarcinoma, which we know is
     what his cancer was from the inguinal lymph
     node, could have arisen and does arise from
     glandular cells, basically from anyplace in the
     body.
          And Dr. Chirieac testified -- 49,
     please -- that lung cancer -- he described it
     as the final stop for many kinds of cancers,
     that they are -- cancers that are metastatic
     often land ultimately at that last stop, like a
     subway stop or a train stop, they lodge in the
     lung, and that that is a possible process
     that's going on here.
          He also testified, Dr. Chirieac, that
     colorectal cancer or colon cancer can spread to
     the lung.  He is not saying this was
     definitively colon cancer, nor he is saying
     it's not.  Again, his opinion is this could be
     lung primary or it could be unknown primary,
     but the evidence isn't sufficient to tell you
     which.
          There was testimony from Dr. Ruckdeschel,
4705 Plaintiff's expert, with respect to the
     importance of trying to learn the primary site.
     And he says, as you can see here, that
     determining the primary site is a, quote,
     critical function of diagnosis, and that
     therefore, it's important, if possible, to
     understand the site of origin.
          And as he says in the last line, yes, it
     is important, and it's important because it can
     influence the prognosis, it can influence
     treatment or anything else.
          And that's why the hunt for the primary
     site was so aggressive and so meaningful to all
     of the physicians, and it's why you see this
     schizophrenic kind of record in which at one
     point they say, well, it's possible, and then
     in another point in the absence of evidence,
     they say uncertain primary.
          Dr. Ruckdeschel also testified that in
     fact as a medical oncologist, he does not
     typically diagnose.  You don't do pathological
     exams?
          I review the pathology, quote, I don't
     actually officially make the diagnosis.
          This is a point that Dr. Chirieac was
4706 making throughout, that everybody has a
     specialty, everybody's on the team, but
     ultimately the diagnoses of cancers are done by
     the pathologist for all the reasons you know.
          And Dr. Ruckdeschel says quite plainly
     that he is highly dependent on the pathologist,
     as is everybody else worth his salt who is an
     oncologist in an institution of real renown.
          He also told us that unknown primary, it's
     not an outlier, he said 5 to 10 percent of
     cancers in the United States are cancers of
     unknown primary.  It's not common, but it's not
     so rare as to make you question, well, could
     this possibly be unknown primary?
          And he says -- I'm on 55, Brian -- it's
     not common.  I think he put the number at 5 to
     10 percent, and he says, yes.
          And he said particularly earlier in the
     '90s when this was happening, there were more
     cancers of unknown primary because there was
     less ability to chase down the primary site at
     that time, just given the science and the
     technology and the fact that this was a smaller
     hospital.
          And then Dr. Ruckdeschel tells us that on
4707 an annual basis, somewhere between 50- and
     80,000 cancer cases a year are diagnosed
     unknown primary.  So again, it's not rare,
     maybe it's uncommon, but that's a lot of
     people.  And it may well be that Mr. Duignan
     was one of them.
          In the course of giving his opinions,
     Dr. Ruckdeschel did not look at the lung biopsy
     report.  And I want to show you -- this is 59,
     please.
          Now, he was called here to give an opinion
     with respect to what the primary -- whether
     this was primary lung cancer or not, and yet he
     seemed confused about that, and he told us -- I
     said to him in cross examination:  "You've
     given a very, very specific opinion.  Are you
     now saying you're not quite sure where the
     bronchoscope actually captured tissue?"
          "What I'm saying is, I don't know whether
     he actually punctured through the lung through
     the bronchus into the lung tissue or he just
     took a sample of the bronchus."
          That's an astonishing comment from a man
     who is paid to come here and tell us how to
     interpret the pathology.  He is hired as an
4708 expert, and yet he is not quite sure what the
     result of the biopsy was when you can see for
     yourself, have seen and no doubt will see
     again, if you look at Dr. Hughes' report, it's
     unambiguous in saying alveolar lung tissue.
     There's no doubt about it.  As well as
     bronchial tissue.
          And that's because the bronchoscope needle
     has to puncture -- it's in the bronchus.  To
     get into the lung, it's got to go through the
     wall of the -- I'm on the wrong side here.
          It's got to go through the wall of the
     bronchus and into the lung.
          So of course it's going to pick up some
     bronchial tissue on the way through, as it's
     getting lung tissue.
          But the important point is, for whatever
     reasons, Dr. Ruckdeschel arrived at his
     opinions without even knowing whether we had a
     biopsy of lung tissue.
          And then you'll recall some colloquy about
     this drawing from years and years ago, the
     importance he attached to that, whether it's
     round or it's eccentric or whatever it is.
          With that let me turn to the verdict form,
4709 if I may, and then I will wrap up.
          As you know from Plaintiff's counsel, the
     first question on the verdict form is:  Did
     Douglas Duignan have primary lung cancer?
          Putting that another way, the question is,
     have Plaintiffs carried their burden of proof
     to show by the greater weight of the evidence
     that it is lung primary as opposed to uncertain
     primary?
          Because unless they've carried that burden
     of proof, then the Defendants must prevail in
     this case, because everybody agrees that if it
     hasn't been proved to have been lung primary,
     that is, that the cancer started in the lung,
     then the Defendants have to prevail in this
     case.
          Again it's not good enough that you find
     cancer in the lung.  What you must find is that
     the cancer started in the lung.  And the answer
     to Question 1 is no.
          On the basis of the medical records and
     the physicians who gave their opinions from
     September 17th through December, it remains
     uncertain whether or not this was lung primary,
     or on the other hand, uncertain primary,
4710 unknown primary.
          Second question:  Was Douglas Duignan
     addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
          Again, the answer should be no.
          What more did Douglas Duignan have to know
     than he knew in 1973 or '4 about lung cancer
     and the potential dangers of lung cancer?  He
     grew up in an era of unprecedented disclosure
     about these harms.
          And you can say all you want about
     conspiracies behind the scenes and documents
     that were secret and not shown until later, but
     the question is whether Doug Duignan in some
     way was misled by any of that.  Would any of
     this have been important to him and would have
     actually changed his conduct?
          And there's simply no evidence of that.
          This man smoked because as a child other
     people smoked and he started smoking.  He knew
     the risks.  He has gone all through the Bugler
     years.  He began smoking a host of brands.  And
     the very fact that he is smoking seven or eight
     brands shows you that he wanted to smoke.  He
     was going to find something to smoke no matter
     what it was.
4711 His wife continued to try and get him to
     quit.  That means she knew he was not addicted.
     Otherwise why try?  Why get him unhappy?  Why
     have a problem in the house?  The fact is she
     knew he wasn't addicted, and therefore,
     encouraged him repeatedly, according to the
     Plaintiff's testimony, about -- asked him
     repeatedly to try to quit smoking, and yet he
     refused to do it and did not do it.
          So the answer to Question 2 should
     likewise be no.
          He was not addicted, or putting it
     differently, addiction was not a legal cause of
     his lung cancer and death.  Addiction was not
     so strong that but for the addiction, he would
     not have gotten lung cancer.  Rather, he smoked
     because he wanted to and he knew the risks.
          The sole legal cause was -- well, let me
     go to the next question.
          Was an addiction to cigarettes containing
     nicotine a legal cause of his cancer and death?
          And the answer again is no.  The sole
     legal cause was his choice to smoke in this
     case.
          We know that he knew the risks.  It was
4712 unambiguous to him.  He said so.  He talked to
     his brother about it.
          And as I said earlier, here is a man who
     managed to govern his life under the most
     difficult circumstances and to do it so well
     for three years of confinement that he
     persuaded the prison system to let him go
     early.  The idea that he couldn't have quit for
     more than 48 hours is unrealistic and unproven
     here.
          The fourth question with respect to
     percentage of responsibility.
          In a case like this in which the decedent
     had the ability to quit, knew the risks of
     smoking, the responsibility belongs to
     Mr. Duignan.  Mr. Duignan would not have, for
     example, had he had too much to drink one
     night, have gotten up the next morning and
     looked in the mirror and said, I'm 20 percent
     or 10 percent responsible for the fact that I
     had too much to drink.  The liquor manufacturer
     is 90 percent responsible.  I mean, that just
     isn't a view of responsibility.
          Mr. Duignan made his choices, and however
     unfortunate they turned out to be, and they
4713 were unfortunate over time, he had at a very
     young age a very tragic end, whether that's
     genetics or it's whatever it is, but that
     doesn't change the fact that he had control
     over his life repeatedly, he made those
     decisions, and is he responsible for the
     outcome those decisions.
          Questions 5 and 7 on the verdict form deal
     with the question whether there was concealment
     or conspiracy, whether there were things said
     or that should have been said, statements made
     or that should have been made which could have
     changed the outcome here which Mr. Duignan
     would have listened to had they been made, or
     to the extent were any statements made by
     Philip Morris that caused him to smoke and not
     to quit smoking.
          There is no evidence in this case of
     anything like that, and the answer to Questions
     5 and 7 should be no.
          Whether or not there was a conspiracy,
     that conspiracy never touched Douglas Duignan.
     There is no material information as to --
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Can we approach?
4714 THE COURT:  Yes. THE COURT:  State your objection.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  He just misstated the
     record and he just went against the Engle
     findings.  He said whether or not there was
     ever a conspiracy.  A conspiracy is a finding,
     it is a fact, and they cannot find that fact.
          MR. WARE:  I didn't question the fact.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  That's exactly what he
     said.  It's on the transcript.  Whether or not
     there was ever a conspiracy.
          So it needs to be corrected because
     counsel misstated what the law is and what the
     findings are, and they can't do that.
          And so we would ask that the jury be
     corrected or his statement be stricken or he
     gets up and fixes his own statement so he is
     not in a lie.
          MR. WARE:  I'll fix it.  What I meant was
     even if.  I didn't mean --
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  It's not if.  It is.
     Irrespective.
          THE COURT:  Even though there's a
     conspiracy.
4715 GUSTAFSON:  Right.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I'll let you correct it
     and rephrase.  Even though there's a
     conspiracy.  Okay.
          MR. WARE:  All right.  Or irrespective
     of -- all right.  I'll go with "even though."
          THE COURT:  I think "even though" is --
     has a corrective quality.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. WARE:  If you make certain preliminary
     findings in this case, the Engle findings do
     apply.  Even though, assuming those findings
     apply, that there was a conspiracy, that there
     was concealment, none of that impacted Douglas
     Duignan because Douglas Duignan understood the
     risks of smoking, had the information, and
     there is no material information which he could
     have been given which would have changed his
     decisions.  He smoked for the reasons we know,
     not because of the conspiracy or the agreement.
          I want to say just a couple of words about
     damages.
          Essentially, Plaintiff's counsel has asked
     for $20 million in the aggregate for the
     Duignan family.  In the testimony given by
4716 Dr. Proctor, we had some discussion about the
     fact that the average family in Florida makes
     something on the order of $50,000 per year.
     You can do the math.  It would take hundreds of
     years to earn $20 million.  That is an
     astonishing amount of money.  It is well beyond
     anything that would change the lives of this
     family, well beyond.
          And I simply urge you, if you ever get to
     this point, which I think you should not, that
     you bring some proportion to that analysis.
     This is not a lottery, it's a courtroom, and
     it's a trial.  And so I ask you in doing so to,
     as I said, be proportionate in whatever
     response you bring to that question.
          Finally let me talk for a minute about
     punitive damages.  As counsel said, the
     standard by which you judge whether or not
     there are punitive damages is a higher
     standard.  It's not the greater weight of the
     evidence, it's clear and convincing.
          Philip Morris did not do anything in this
     case as regards Mr. Duignan that warrants
     additional punishment.  You've heard the
     testimony from Dr. Proctor that among the
4717 things they were doing even in Mr. Duignan's
     lifetime was developing new products including
     denicotinized cigarettes, cigarettes they could
     bring to the public even at the cost of
     competing with themselves.  This was a company
     intending on improving itself and making
     decisions vastly different from some of the
     decisions that it had made in the past.
          There is no clear and convincing evidence
     that there is a need for punishing the company
     at this point in the company's history.
          With that, members of the jury, I want to
     thank you for your courtesy to me and Philip
     Morris.  And I would like to have been shorter,
     but could not be.  Thank you.


                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Ladies and gentlemen of the
     jury, good afternoon, I'm Jack Williams, as you
     know, and I want to tell you we are getting
     there, because I'm the second-to-last person
     that's going to talk to you this afternoon, and
     I'm not going to be as long as the first two.
          But I want to add my voice to the course
     of lawyers that's thanked you for your service
     here.  Pinellas County called you, you answered
     that call, and you've generously given us your
     time and attention and the sacrifice that you
4719 made, and for that we all thank you.
          I, as you know, Mr. Mayfield and I
     represent R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, but
     certainly you've noticed that throughout the
     trial Mr. Ware and the Philip Morris team has
     spearheaded the defense.  When I ask questions
     I try not to repeat the questions the witnesses
     so I wouldn't tax your time the questions that
     Mr. Ware asked and here I'm not going to do
     that either.  I'm not going to repeat some of
     the things that he told you.
          But I do need to address some of the
     distractions that were paraded in front of you
     during this trial and that you heard this
     morning when Mr. Paige was talking to you.
          And by distractions, I mean information
     that has nothing to do with Dennis Duignan.  I
     mean information that's not going to help you
     answer the questions that you have to answer on
     the verdict form because each one of those
     questions has to do with -- I'm sorry, Douglas
     Duignan, I apologize, I meant Douglas Duignan.
          Each one of the questions on the verdict
     form in this whole case has to do with Douglas
     Duignan and when you -- what I meant by
4720 distractions is information that is unrelated
     to him.
          A lot of what you heard this morning was
     meant to inflame you.  It was information to
     make you mad, and I suggest to you that it was
     to cushion the request for millions of dollars
     being awarded in this case.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor, can
     we approach?
          THE COURT:  You may. THE COURT:  State your objection.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  This violates the order in
     limine about attacking parties for either
     prosecuting the case or defending the case.
     And that's what he just did.  And we aren't
     allowed to do that to them and they aren't
     allowed to do that to us.  And the statements
     that he just made did exactly that.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  That wasn't an attack, it
     was my responding to the request for damages --
          MR. SALES:  Distraction to -- to trick
     them into giving money; that's the argument.
          THE COURT:  No, sir, just one talking
     head.
4721 I think you crossed the line as being a
     comment on the advocacy of the other side.  I
     mean, you can accomplish the same thing, we
     have to depersonalize it away from --
          MR. WILLIAMS:  I'll do that.
          THE COURT:  -- talk about the content of
     the argument and stay away from anything that
     sounds like they are trying to get you to do
     this and this is what they are doing.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  I'll do that.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          MR. WILLIAMS:  May I proceed?
          What I meant, ladies and gentlemen, by
     trying to inflame you, I meant by talking about
     things that had nothing to do with Douglas
     Duignan like youth targeting and youth
     marketing.
          We know that Dennis -- I keep saying
     Dennis, and I apologize for that, I mean
     Douglas.
          We know that Douglas Duignan did not start
     smoking because he was targeted by some tobacco
     company advertisement or he saw movie stars
     smoking or he saw athletes smoking.  But this
     morning how much did you hear about Douglas
4722 Duignan starting smoking because of youth
     targeting?  That was meant to inflame you.
     That was meant to distract you away from the
     real issues involving Douglas Duignan.
          You heard about lies the tobacco companies
     said.  They lied about this, and that's not
     right.  They lied about that, and that's not
     right.  But once again, those lies were not
     tied to Douglas Duignan, and he's the only
     smoker, the only smoker, who's important in
     this case and who this case is about.
          Now, being a juror is a difficult task,
     especially in a case like this where you have
     information raining down on you like the worst
     thunderstorm you've been in.  It's almost like
     you have to separate the wheat from the chaff,
     the wheat being what's important, what's about
     Douglas Duignan, and the shaft being the stuff
     that has nothing to do with Douglas Duignan,
     like I talked about youth targeting for a
     moment ago, because we know he didn't start
     smoking because of youth targeting.
          And so I'm going to go about the evidence
     that you've heard separating that wheat from
     the chaff and talking about that.
4723 Now, I'm going to talk about some chaff
     the Plaintiffs have put before you.  You've
     seen hours of videos that had nothing to do
     with Douglas Duignan.  Live witness have come
     in here and testified about things that had
     nothing to do with Douglas Duignan.
          In fact, one of the Plaintiffs main
     witnesses was Dr. Proctor, you'll remember.  He
     was on that stand for four whole days at $6,000
     a day plus weekends and he didn't even know his
     name.  And he didn't know anything about him.
          You saw irrelevancies this morning, like
     marketing documents from R.J. Reynolds from
     1927 to 1928.  That was long before he was
     born.  It had nothing to do with Douglas
     Duignan.
          You also saw marketing documents when --
     long after he was a minor.  He was born in
     1950.  So he would have been under 18 in 1968.
     And you've seen documents from the '70s and
     '80s and '90 when he was a full-grown man.
     Again, those are irrelevancies, those are
     distractions, and they are meant to distract
     you from the real evidence, which involves
     Douglas Duignan
4724 Now, two weeks ago -- more than two weeks
     ago when I was standing right here giving you
     my opening statement, I told you what I
     expected the evidence in this case to show.
          For example, I told you that Douglas
     Duignan started smoking because of his
     stepfather, and it had nothing to do with
     R.J. Reynolds.
          And as you're about to go deliberate and
     decide this case, that's still true after
     hearing all the of the evidence.
          it's still true that he continued to smoke
     although his doctor told him that he would be
     dead in five years if he didn't quit, in the
     mid 1970s; and that's still true
          And let me just say something.  The
     Plaintiffs tried to diss Dennis Duignan, and
     that's why I probably kept saying his name at
     the first time of my closing argument.  I
     wanted to address that.
          Dennis Duignan was Douglas Duignan's
     brother and they were very close, and you heard
     that statement that he made about what the
     doctor told him.  There's -- and you are the
     judges of the facts and you judge credibility,
4725 Douglas -- Dennis Duignan had no reason to
     make up that story.  There is no motivation for
     him to make up that statement.  There is plenty
     of motivation for Plaintiffs to want to refute
     that statement.
          When you become a juror, you don't leave
     your common sense out there.  You don't walk in
     this courtroom without all your experiences.
     Just use your common sense.
          Mrs. Duignan got on the stand and told you
     that she went to the doctor with him all the
     time, and that she knew everything about him.
     But we found out that there were a lot of
     things that she did not know about her husband,
     and one of the things was this statement that
     he told his brother Dennis Duignan about him
     being told by his doctor to quit, you are going
     to be dead in five years if you don't, and he
     responded by saying, he was going to continue
     smoking.
          So that's one of the things that I told
     you during my opening statement and that's
     still true.  It's still true that Dennis --
     Douglas Duignan was not fooled or mislead by
     any concealment of smoking's dangers or
4726 addictiveness by R.J.R. and it's still true
     that he smoked filtered cigarettes, not because
     of some tobacco company advertisement, but
     because he didn't like getting tobacco if his
     mouth.  I told you that standing right here two
     and a half weeks ago, and that's still true,
     based on the evidence that you've heard.
          It's also still true that he didn't rely
     on R.J. Reynolds or cigarette company
     advertising or statements or ads in making his
     smoking choices.  His wife, who you heard
     testify, told us that he chose his cigarettes
     based on price, availability and flavor.  Those
     things.  All those things are still true no
     matter what other evidence you had -- you heard
     coming from that stand, the things that I
     outlined for you in my opening statement are
     still true.
          And with that in mind, there are a couple
     of specific questions on the verdict form that
     I want to go over with you.
          Mr. Ware talked with you about Questions
     1, 2 and 3, the class membership questions, and
     I'm not going to repeat that.
          If you answer "no" to any one of those
4727 questions, the lawsuit is over.  But if you
     disagree and answer "yes" and move on to
     Question 4 regarding proportioning
     responsibility for the legal cause of Douglas
     Duignan's lung cancer and death, I want to talk
     about why, for R.J. Reynolds, the evidence
     should lead you to determine that it has
     zero percent responsibility for Douglas
     Duignan's addiction and death.
          Now, Mr. Paige suggested that you impose
     30 percent on R.J. Reynolds, but as long as it
     adds up to 100, the form -- and can we put that
     up -- you can proportion responsibility
     wherever the evidence leads you.  And the
     Plaintiff has admitted some fault, so some
     fault has to go to them.  And here is the
     verdict form.
          But as you recall, back on August 21st,
     the last day of jury selection, one of the
     questions that I asked to the whole group was:
     Would anyone have a problem with finding a
     tobacco company not at fault if that's what the
     evidence indicated, regarding a smoker's death?
     None of you raised your hands, and that's one
     of the reasons why you were selected to be fair
4728 and impartial jurors in this case.
          I'm going to review the evidence and if
     you reach question four, I'm going to ask you
     to find R.J. Reynolds zero percent responsible
     for Douglas Duignan's lung cancer and death.
          Now it's important that you know that
     responsibility can only be assigned to actions
     that were a legal cause of Douglas Duignan's
     addiction and death.  And you'll see in your
     instructions that the Judge read to you this
     morning, that in order to be a legal cause of
     Douglas Duignan's addiction and death, the
     action must directly and in natural and
     continuous sequence produce or contributed
     substantially to producing such lung cancer so
     that it can be said that but for -- and that's
     an important but for -- the addiction to
     cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer
     would not have occurred.
          Now, that's a mouthful.  Here is a way to
     think about it a little more simply.
          If he had never smoked an R.J. Reynolds
     cigarette would the result be the same?  And if
     the answer to that question is yes, if the
     result would be the same, if he still would
4729 have become addicted, if he still would have
     developed lung cancer, if he still would have
     died of lung cancer caused by smoking,
     everything -- if everything would be the same,
     if he'd never touched an R.J.R. cigarette, then
     R.J.R. cigarettes were not a legal cause of his
     addiction and death.  And answer to that
     question is yes.  And here is why.  And I'm
     going to talk about addiction first.
          Smoking R.J.R. cigarettes were a minimal
     factor, if at all, in Douglas Duignan becoming
     addicted, and that's based on the Plaintiff's
     expert witness, Dr. Burns.
          Dr. Burns testified that Douglas Duignan
     became addicted in 1970 when he was released
     from the federal reformatory.  And here is what
     Dr. Burns said.
          He was asked these questions and I think
     Mr. Ware showed these, but this is an important
     point.  He was asked:
          "Question:  Is it your view that by 1970,
     based on what you know, Douglas Duignan was in
     fact addicted or that his smoking was
     consistent with addiction?"
          He said:
4730 "Answer:  Yes.  I believe that's a yes.
          "Question:  All right.  And so by that
     time, he came out of federal prison, in 1970,
     it's your view and opinion that he was likely
     addicted at that time?"
          And, again, he said:
          "Answer:  I believe that's correct."
          So we are talking about a period of time
     from approximately 1964, when Douglas Duignan
     started smoking, to 1970.  And we know we can
     cut off the period from 1967 to 1970 because he
     was smoking the Bugler roll-your-own, and the
     Judge has instructed you that neither
     R.J. Reynolds nor Philip Morris is responsible
     for that.
          So, essentially, we are talking about
     three years, from 1964, when he started
     smoking, approximately, to 1967 what was he
     smoking?  We know he started with Chesterfield
     cigarette butts then Chesterfield full
     cigarettes, and R.J. Reynolds is not
     responsible for that, not legally responsible
     for that.
          We know during that time he might have
     smoked some other brands, but those were not
4731 identified.  So R.J. Reynolds is not
     responsible for that.  Remember we are in a
     courtroom and it takes evidence.
          He might have smoked some Marlboro during
     that time, but, again, R.J. Reynolds is not
     responsible for that.
          Now, Mr. Paige brought up Tareyton.
     Tareyton is a brand made by R.J. Reynolds, but
     here is what Dennis told us about how much
     Tareyton they smoked.
          He was asked, and this is when they were
     young:
          "Question:  I believe I heard you mention
     a Tary- -- mention a Tareyton cigarette that
     you remembered that brand when you were growing
     up."
          He said:
          "Answer:  Yes.
          "Question:  Do you remember when that was,
     about what year?"
          He says:
          "Answer:  No, he doesn't have any idea."
          But this is the important piece right
     here:
          "Question:  And was this brand that you
4732 smoked freq- -- was this a brand that you
     smoked frequently?"
          And he said:
          "Answer:  Probably not.
          And the importance of that comes from
     Dr. Burns' testimony.  Again, the Plaintiff's
     nicotine addiction expert.
          Dr. Burns said even for people who become
     addicted quickly, it takes at least a year or
     two of smoking.  It doesn't happen overnight,
     it doesn't happen by just smoking a couple of
     packs of cigarettes.  Here is what Dr. Burns
     said.
          He was asked:
          "Question:  And in this case -- well, I
     don't know whether you can give us an average,
     but, in general, would you agree with me that
     it takes four or five years of smoking, perhaps
     regular smoking, for the average person to
     become addicted?"
          And Dr. Burns' answer:
          "Answer:  I don't believe that's a
     statement that is scientifically validated."
          But then he says:
          "Answer:  Some individuals become addicted
4733 relatively rapidly, within a year or two.  A
     year or two.  Smoking a few packs of Tareyton
     is not going to get you addicted."
          And that's the only evidence there is
     about his smoking, between 1964 and 1970,
     R.J.R. cigarettes.
          So R.J.R. cannot be a legal cause of his
     addiction.  There is no evidence to support
     that.  Now, let me address why R.J.R. is not
     legally responsible for his lung cancer and
     death.
          In a nutshell, we are talking from 1971
     until he died in 1992.  R.J.R. made several
     brands that Douglas Duignan liked.  And he
     smoked those on occasion when he couldn't get
     his main brand.  There were several that are
     named, the Camel, the Raleigh, the Viceroy, the
     Doral.  He smoked those.  But it's important
     for you to remember that R.J.R. nearly making
     cigarettes cannot be a legal cause of his lung
     cancer and death, the Judge told you that.
          R.J.R. merely advertising cigarettes
     cannot be a legal cause of his lung cancer and
     death.  And R.J.R. selling cigarettes cannot be
     a legal cause of his lung cancer and death.
4734 remember that his wife Martha, when
     she was on the stand, admitted that when he
     couldn't get his main brand, when he smoked the
     other brands, he smoked for price, availability
     and flavor.  Because he smoked and liked R.J.R.
     cigarettes because of their price, does not
     make it legally responsible for his lung cancer
     and death.
          Because he smoked and liked and R.J.R.
     cigarettes were available does not make it
     legally responsible for his lung cancer and
     death.
          And because he liked the flavor of some
     R.J.R. cigarettes, he chose them, he liked
     them, does not make R.J.R. legally responsible
     for his lung cancer and death.
          So based on that, ladies and gentlemen, in
     a nutshell, R.J.R. is not legally responsible
     for his addiction, for his lung cancer or his
     death.
          And if you get to Question 4, I would ask
     that you impose zero responsibility on
     R.J. Reynolds.
          I want to talk about the concealment
     question on the verdict form.  It's Question 6
4735 and 7.  And here they are.  I'm not going to
     read them to you again.
          The first one is the concealment question
     as to R.J. Reynolds and the second one is the
     agreement to conceal, the conspiracy question.
     And, essentially, as to both questions,
     Plaintiffs have to prove that important
     information on the dangers or addictiveness of
     smoking that R.J. Reynolds concealed was a
     legal cause of Douglas Duignan's death, and
     that if Douglas Duignan had known that
     important information he would not have died.
     That's what the Plaintiffs have to prove.
          Now, if you get to these questions and we
     hope that you don't, but if you do get to these
     questions, the evidence should dictate that you
     answer no.  And the reason is, no matter how
     many lies that Mr. Paige says that
     R.J. Reynolds told, Douglas Duignan was not
     affected by it.  He was not harmed by them.  He
     knew smoking was deadly.  He was not mislead by
     R.J. Reynolds.  He was not fooled by
     R.J. Reynolds.  You know the evidence already
     about him being told very early by his doctor,
     his smoking career -- he would be dead if he
4736 didn't quit, but it's not just that one doctor
     relation -- warning from the doctor that we are
     relying on here.  He also -- there's other
     evidence that he knew smoking was deadly.
          He called his cigarettes "cancer sticks."
     He called them "coffin nails."  And that's just
     not a saying.  You don't call everything a
     coffin nail or a cancer stick.  Everything that
     you eat or drink or anything like that.  Those
     statements mean something.  They show that you
     know something.  That you know what you're
     doing.
          He was described as a person who could
     make decisions and was strong-willed.  Douglas
     Duignan knew that smoking was deadly.  He was
     not looking to R.J.R. for smoking information.
     He knew it, that it was deadly, he knew it was
     dangerous, but he decided to do it.  And people
     do that on occasion.
          Now, Plaintiffs primarily rely on
     Dr. Proctor to support the concealment claims.
     Dr. Proctor was on the stand for four days.  He
     didn't know his name, but that's not the big
     thing.  The big important thing is he didn't
     know anything about Douglas Duignan.
4737 If he forgot his name or something like,
     that's forgivable.  But what isn't is he didn't
     know what he believed, he didn't know what he
     thought, he didn't know what he said, and there
     is information, there's deposition testimony
     about Douglas Duignan.
          Dr. Proctor didn't study any of it, and he
     could.  So Dr. Proctor knew none of that so not
     much that he said on that witness stand for
     four days can really help you answer the
     questions that you have to answer on that
     verdict form.
          Dr. Proctor showed you a lot of irrelevant
     evidence, like marketing documents before
     Douglas Duignan was born.  Allegations of youth
     marketing or youth targeting long after Douglas
     Duignan was a grown man.  And, in fact, a lot
     of the evidence that the Plaintiff showed you
     this morning and during this case regarding
     their concealment claims were half truths, they
     were mischaracterizations, and they
     cherrypicked misleading language out of the
     documents so you won't get the whole picture.
          I'm going to go back and point out some of
     those because it's important that you get the
4738 whole picture before you start deliberating.
          You saw in part some of the evidence from
     Plaintiffs, but you did not get the whole story
     and during the trial you didn't get the whole
     story until sometimes we got up and got a
     chance to cross examine their witnesses.
          But I want you to have a complete coherent
     picture when you start deciding these important
     issues that you have to decide.
          Now, one of the things that you just saw
     and got part of the story from the Plaintiffs
     was the Flintstones.  They showed you their
     video with the Flintstones video with
     Dr. Proctor and they showed you again today.
          They showed Flinstones advertising Winston
     cigarettes.  And that was intended to shock and
     appall you.  It was only on cross examination
     that you learned that the Flintstones was
     introduced as an adult cartoon.  On -- not on
     Saturday afternoon like it became, but it was
     an evening adult cartoon introduced in 1960.
          You didn't learn that until we got a
     chance to cross examine Dr. Proctor.  It was
     based on the Honeymooners, Jackie Gleason, Art
     Carney, Audrey Meadows, an adult comedy, and
4739 sponsors were, other than R.J. Reynolds and
     Winston, were Miles Lab, Alka-Seltzer, and One
     a Day Vitamins.  It was not kid stuff, it was
     not intended to be, and it wasn't a kid show.
     It was on at 8:30 at night.  And R.J.R.'s
     sponsorship only lasted for one year, 1960.
          For example, more people probably saw that
     video that you saw, the Flintstones, during
     Dr. Proctor's 70 trials than saw it when it was
     actually on back in 1960.  But the question for
     you is, what did that have to do with Douglas
     Duignan?
          That was one of the distractions I was
     talking about a few minutes ago.  Something to
     inflame you, make you mad, and shock you.
     Because R.J.R. only sponsored it one year, in
     1960.  And in this case, remember, it's about
     Douglas Duignan, he was ten years old.  That
     was years before he touched his first
     cigarette.  R.J.R. ended its sponsorship in
     1961 and that was it.  So this has nothing to
     do with Douglas Duignan.
          They showed you a document from a
     marketing plan presentation from when Douglas
     Duignan was in his mid 20s.  This is 1974.  An
4740 R.J.R. document.  And they focused on -- the
     Plaintiffs focused on the 14 to 24 year olds.
     But what they didn't tell you is that when it's
     talking about the 14 to 24 year olds, it's
     talking about tomorrow's cigarette business,
     not today's.
          And I emphasize it's tomorrow's cigarette
     business that's being talked about here, and
     Douglas Duignan is no longer a minor.  He is 24
     when this is being talked about.
          But when the document itself, which you
     didn't see until we got a chance to cross
     examine their witnesses, when it starts talking
     about the marketing plans of R.J.R., it focuses
     on 18 to 24 year olds and 18 to 34 year olds,
     as you see there.
          To show you one piece of the document and
     not show you the rest of it can be misleading
     and give you the wrong impression.  And that's
     what we don't want to do.
          Now, we also showed you some of the ads
     that came out of this campaign, that came out
     of this meeting.  And we wanted you to see the
     ads because they were focusing on the tobacco
     company as targeting youth.  And we wanted you
4741 to see to get your own impressions.
          And we had a little fun with Dr. Proctor
     on this.  The guy -- this is a Winston ad that
     came out of this campaign.  And don't forget
     that Douglas Duignan is already 24 years old.
     But look at these folks.  These are not kids.
     This is not something that is meant or intended
     or reasonably appeals to youth.  The guy in the
     left-hand corner looks like an undertaker.  The
     guy in the far -- on the bottom has gray hair.
     These are not kids.
          But it took cross examination to show you
     this.  We had to show you this.  They just
     showed you the document focusing on youth
     saying youth targeting.  We had to show you the
     actual ads so you could get the whole picture
     and get the whole story.
          We also showed the Salem ads.  And again,
     these aren't kids here.  This is not directed,
     intended for youth, and it wouldn't appeal to
     youth.
          There was also an effort during this trial
     to suggest to you that Drs. Teague and
     Rodgman -- you heard those names when it came
     to R.J.R. documents.  Those were scientists at
4742 R.J.R. in the 1950s and '60s.  And Plaintiffs
     tried to suggest to you that they were light
     years ahead of the scientific community and the
     public about things on nicotine and
     carcinogens, and R.J.R. concealed that
     information.  That's what you were told by the
     Plaintiff and that was implied by certain
     portions of the documents that they showed to
     you.
          For example, they showed you a document
     that Dr. Teague wrote in 1972 indicating that
     nicotine was a sine qua non -- they showed you
     this this morning too, not just with
     Dr. Proctor during the trial -- essential
     element of tobacco.  This was written by
     Dr. Teague in 1972.
          But what they didn't show you and what you
     didn't see until cross examination, you found
     out that the same idea was expressed in
     Reader's Digest in 1950.  Nicotine is the
     essential ingredient in tobacco.
          So they are saying it's in a secret
     document at R.J. Reynolds in 1972, but the same
     information is in the public domain years
     before that.
4743 Another one.  They showed you a document
     from 1959 when Dr. Rodgman notes that eight
     carcinogens in tobacco smoke had been
     identified.  And Mr. Paige asked Dr. Proctor,
     did Reynolds tell folks that?  And his answer
     was no.
          But what they didn't tell you, which we
     had to bring out on cross examination, and
     that's the point of this, is I want you to get
     the whole story, because if you just listen to
     what Mr. Paige said, it's inflammatory and you
     get the wrong impression.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor, he
     is doing it again.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Williams, let's focused on
     the evidence and not who says what.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Yes, Your Honor.
          The Dr. Rodgman article was in 1959.  And
     he says that eight carcinogens were in tobacco
     smoke.  But what you didn't hear until we got a
     chance to talk to you is that the same
     information was reported and published in
     Reader's Digest the very same month.  They both
     happen in November 1959.
          And again, just showing you the Rodgman
4744 document was to make you mad, it was a
     distraction --
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  I think that goes to the
     motive.  So let's stop talking about motives,
     let's start focusing on the evidence.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  I want a curative
     instruction, Your Honor.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Your Honor, I just said it
     was distracting.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  That's the fourth time.
          THE COURT:  I'm going to decline that.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  Ladies and gentlemen,
     again, none of this had anything to do with
     Dennis Duignan -- or I'm sorry, Douglas
     Duignan.  You just saw part of the evidence,
     but it's important that you see the whole
     picture and what information was really
     available at that time.
          You were told just about what the tobacco
     companies did not disclose.  But the second
     piece of that, when you see the same
     information years before in Reader's Digest, it
     means you're not being told that the same
     information is in the public domain --
4745 GUSTAFSON:  Objection, Your Honor.
     He's doing the same thing.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  I haven't said anything
     about them.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. WILLIAMS:  It's in the public domain
     and has been in the public domain for years
     before.
          Now, I want to change subjects a little
     bit.  Mr. Paige this morning said, Mr. Williams
     and Mr. Ware should tell you a little bit about
     their respective companies.  I am going to tell
     you a little bit about R.J. Reynolds and what
     it did.  I want to respond to that.
          I want to talk about things that do matter
     that R.J.R. did.  I want to put this picture
     together because it came out during this trial,
     but it came out during cross examination from
     witnesses who were here for the Plaintiffs
     trying to help the Plaintiffs win, so it came
     out in bits and pieces.  And I want you to get
     the complete story about some of the things
     that R.J. Reynolds did, and I want you to have
     a coherent whole picture when you go back to
     deliberate.
4746 I want to focus on things that were
     actually done, not things that were just
     written on pieces of paper, not words that were
     written on a piece of paper like thoughts and
     ideas that never came to fruition that nobody
     carried through on or anything like that.
          But I want you to know what R.J. Reynolds
     actually did over the years because I think
     it's important that you see that some of the
     things that you see written in documents never
     happened.
          And Dr. Proctor even agreed with that.
     When he was asked, and it came out grudgingly:
     "Well, a straight answer to my question would
     be just, no, you don't have any evidence that
     the ideas that Claude Teague expressed in that
     memo were ever presented to any executive at
     R.J.R, do you?"
          And he said, "Narrowly, I guess that's
     literally true."
          It came out grudgingly, but it's true.  A
     ton of stuff can be written down on paper, but
     what matters is what R.J. Reynolds actually
     did.  And I want to summarize and go through
     some of that with you right now.  And I will be
4747 efficient with it.
          I'm going to start off at the period of
     time right when Douglas Duignan was born, about
     1950, after World War II had ended.
     Dr. Proctor told you that America came out of
     World War II having a supercharged feeling of
     self-confidence.  He talked about how it was a
     period of great technological optimism, how
     there was confidence in the power of
     technology.  And in the cigarette context,
     Dr. Proctor told you that there was a naive
     optimism that whatever was wrong with
     cigarettes could be fixed.
          And so when the epidemiological studies
     and the mouse skin paintings and all that
     information came out saying that something may
     be wrong with cigarettes, even if the companies
     did not think there was a problem, R.J.R. did
     something about it.  It hired personnel, it
     built plants, and it did extensive research on
     cigarettes and cigarette smoke.
          What did they do?  Claude Teague, he was a
     chemist.  They asked him to survey the
     scientific literature from all over the world
     and to find out what the relationship was
4748 between cigarettes and cancer.  And in 1953, he
     produced this report complete with 78 citations
     about the scientific literature that existed at
     that point in time on cigarettes and cancer.
          What else did they do?  A year later, in
     1954, they hired Alan Rodgman, an analytical
     chemist, to find out what in cigarette smoke,
     what components might be causing the problem.
     What was harmful?
          And he explored ways to eliminate the
     harms -- to first find out what they are and
     then to eliminate them.  And here is what
     Dr. Proctor said about that.
          He admitted that cigarette companies had
     spent enormous research, had made enormous
     research efforts in that era, meaning the 1950s
     and '60s, and he also said that they spent a
     lot of money invested in the raft of different
     kinds of research projects both internally and
     externally to find out about cigarettes and
     cigarette smoke.  And that's from the
     Plaintiff's witness.
          For example, one of the things they did --
     there's a set of experiments that's told about
     in one of the documents that's in evidence,
4749 it's called "The Optimum Composition of Tobacco
     Smoke," and this involved a big experiment, 120
     separate experiments, in fact, to find out
     about polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons -- I
     always have trouble saying that -- and it
     involved a half a million cigarettes to be used
     to find out about this carcinogen.
          And according to Dr. Proctor, this
     experiment was carried out, these experiments
     were carried out by Alan Rodgman, and according
     to Dr. Proctor, he was a good chemist, he used
     the best methods of the day to identify
     constituents of cigarette smoke, and he
     identified compounds that had not been
     identified before.
          These are things that Reynolds is doing,
     not just written on paper, but things that it's
     actually doing.
          And you heard that Dr. Rodgman didn't just
     do things, but he published his work.  He gave
     speeches about his work and he furnished a list
     of carcinogens in cigarette smoke to the
     Surgeon General's Committee, and that list
     helped the Surgeon General's Committee develop
     the 1964 report.  And Reynolds was acknowledged
4750 for that in the report.
          Now, according to Dr. Proctor, over time
     Reynolds scientists kept going on to study
     cigarette tobacco smoke and discovered about
     half of the compounds that are identified now
     in tobacco smoke.  So once again, these aren't
     just words on paper, these are things that
     Reynolds is actually doing.
          As we go forward in the 1950s into the
     1960s, you saw a memo from a Mr. Galloway, the
     president of R.J.R., to Dr. Senkus, the head of
     the research and development department, urging
     cooperation with the Federal Government.
          And this is important because this morning
     Mr. Gustafson said what they said internally
     was always the truth.  He said that when he was
     talking to you this morning.
          Well, this is something that was said
     internally.  This is something that tobacco
     companies -- this is one of those internal
     company documents.  This is the president of
     Reynolds telling the research and development
     director that:  In cooperation with others, you
     should push the work concerning tobacco and
     health.  You should prepare a plan to foster
4751 any relationship with the government personnel
     in the quest for a mutual understanding of the
     facts ultimately to gain their cooperation and
     proper research of the subject.  If there is a
     safer cigarette, let's continue and increase
     our efforts in this program.  Please prepare a
     plan to carry it out.
          He told you that everything they said
     internally was the truth.  This is something
     that they were saying internally.
          And R.J.R. did push for a safer cigarette.
     It participated in that Tobacco Working Group
     that you heard about, that was the
     collaboration between the National Cancer
     Institute and the tobacco industry from 1968 to
     1978, to try to develop a less hazardous
     cigarette.  And again, this is something that
     R.J. Reynolds was doing, these aren't just
     words on paper, this is things that it did.
          I want to address briefly the issue of
     filters.  You've heard a lot about filtered
     cigarettes.  The Plaintiffs have spent a long
     time making the claim that tobacco companies
     advertised filters as being safer, knew that
     they weren't, and then in about 2000, the
4752 documents came out and we saw that filters were
     not safe.
          Well, that's not the full story.  That's
     not the whole picture.  Let's talk about what
     actually happened.  And Dr. Proctor admitted
     some of this, but you didn't learn it until
     cross examination.
          He admitted that in the 1950s, '60s, '70s
     and '80s, so 40 basic years, there was
     scientific research, 40 or 50 large scientific
     epidemiological studies performed by respected
     cancer researchers that had nothing to do the
     tobacco industry that concluded that smokers of
     filtered cigarettes have lower rates of lung
     cancer than unfiltered cigarette smokers.  And
     that's 40 years of good science.  That's just
     not one experiment or two experiments, that's
     40 years of good science with that consistent
     result.
          Now, based on that 40 years of good
     science, the public health community urged the
     cigarette makers to manufacture filtered
     cigarettes, and it told smokers to quit, but if
     you don't quit, smoke a filtered cigarette
     instead of an unfiltered cigarette because it
4753 may be a little less hazardous.  That much is
     beyond dispute.
          Then we are told by Drs. Burns and Proctor
     that at the turn of the century, two things
     happened.  The internal company documents were
     released, and some of them said the filters
     don't help.  And then the 40 years of
     epidemiological research and scientific studies
     were reevaluated and reinterpreted, and
     Dr. Burns said they were wrong.
          And that story is supposed to convince you
     that filters were a fraud, that the companies
     always knew it, but that's not the complete
     story, ladies and gentlemen.  You need to hear
     all of it.
          First of all, among those who played a
     role in the re-evaluation of the
     epidemiological studies was Dr. Burns.  And
     Dr. Burns makes millions of dollars testifying
     on behalf of Plaintiffs in cigarette cases, and
     so he is not an unbiased scientist or an
     unbiased medical researcher.  But there's more.
          The government reevaluated those
     epidemiological studies in 2001.  And here time
     is important of when what happened.  2001, the
4754 government reevaluates the epidemiological
     studies saying that filtered cigarettes are
     safer than unfiltered cigarettes.
          But the World Health Organization had
     access to all the tobacco company documents,
     the re-evaluation of the epidemiological
     studies, and it still said the filtered
     cigarettes reduced lung cancer risks over
     unfiltered cigarettes.
          Here is what the World Health Organization
     said in 2003, two years after the government's
     re-evaluation:  "A relative reduction in risk
     has also been observed among long-term smokers
     of filtered cigarettes compared to smokers of
     unfiltered cigarettes."
          And that's after all the tobacco company
     documents that they've talked about that have
     been released, all is open to the public.  The
     World Health Organization said that two years
     after that, that the studies still show that
     filtered cigarettes were a little bit safer.
          And the World Health Organization
     reaffirmed that position in 2012.  Here is what
     it said in 2012:  "It has been recognized that
     the actual quantitative impact of reduced tar
4755 and filter-tipped cigarettes is difficult to
     assess.
          Nevertheless, it was concluded that
     changes in cigarette types since the 1950s have
     probably tended to reduce the risk for lung
     cancer associated with tobacco smoking."
          And once again, you didn't hear that until
     we were able to cross examine the Plaintiff's
     witnesses.  Dr. Proctor admitted that.  That's
     a fact that we brought out and we brought to
     you.  Meaning the Defense.
          So the bottom line is that based on 40
     years of epidemiological studies, the public
     health community encouraged the companies to
     manufacture filtered cigarettes and encouraged
     those who would not quit smoking to smoke them.
     And until this day, the World Health
     Organization says that that's a good thing.
          Now, I want to say a word about nicotine
     manipulation.  Mr. Paige discussed that with
     you this morning.  And during Dr. Proctor's
     examination, he showed you memos from R.J.R.
     scientists, Claude Teague was one of them,
     experimenting with different levels of
     nicotine.  And the allegation was that
4756 experiments were being done with different
     levels of nicotine to hook smokers.
          But it was only on cross examination that
     you learned that this was a public health
     community effort to develop a less hazardous
     cigarette, one with low tar and medium
     nicotine.
          You heard about Dr. Russell, the renowned
     British cancer researcher.  He said, and I
     think Dr. Proctor repeated it, "People smoke
     for nicotine, but they die from tar."
          And the public health community advocated
     a low-tar medium-nicotine cigarette.  A bunch
     of folks in the public health community and
     organizations did that, like Dr. Russell, who
     you saw information about, Dr. Richard Doll,
     the noted epidemiologist, the Tobacco Working
     Group, which I've talked about, Dr. Murray
     Jarvik, the co-inventor of the nicotine patch.
          And in the 1981 Surgeon General's Report,
     it advocated low-tar medium-nicotine cigarettes
     because that might be safer, it might be less
     hazardous, because people would get the
     nicotine but not the tar which contains the
     carcinogens.
4757 you saw R.J.R. internal documents
     where they were following that conversation
     concerning low-tar, medium-nicotine cigarettes.
     This is one of the documents that we had to
     show to you.  But R.J. Reynolds was following
     that conversation.
          So the whole story is that both the public
     health community and R.J. Reynolds and the
     cigarette industry were thinking about and
     discussing adjusting nicotine in cigarettes to
     make a less hazardous cigarette.  And you can
     pejoratively use the term "manipulating," but
     this is the whole story, that the public health
     community was saying, let's see if a
     medium-nicotine cigarette and with low-tar
     might be safer.  You can say "manipulation,"
     but it was adjusting and it was an open debate.
     The cigarette industry and the public health
     community were talking about it.
          I want to talk about a few other things
     that Reynolds did.  You heard some evidence in
     this case about Premier and Eclipse.  Remember,
     that's a cigarette that heats tobacco and
     doesn't burn it, with the theory being it's the
     burning tobacco that creates the carcinogens.
4758 Dr. Proctor told you that R.J.R. spent
     a lot of money on developing Premier, a
     cigarette that heats the tobacco, and it was
     tested, and the results showed that it did in
     fact lower carcinogens, a lot of them.
     90 percent of the polycyclic aromatic
     hydrocarbons were lowered.  Benzene was
     lowered.  Benzopyrene was lowered.
     Acetylcholine was lowered.  Acrolein was
     lowered.  Those are all carcinogens.  And
     tobacco-specific nitrosamines, they were all
     lowered in Premier.
          And Premier was test marketed, and it was
     marketed, advertised, and we told --
     R.J. Reynolds told smokers it's a cleaner
     smoke, and it explained by heating tobacco,
     Premier changes the very composition of
     cigarette smoke, substantially reducing many of
     the controversial compounds found in the smoke
     of tobacco-burning cigarettes.
          But even after this investment, this
     technological breakthrough, Premier didn't do
     well in the market because it didn't taste
     good, it didn't smell good, so it failed.  But
     R.J.R. didn't stop there.  It went back to the
4759 drawing board, went back to the lab, and
     created and developed Eclipse, a better
     tasting, better smelling Premier, and even
     Dr. Proctor grudgingly acknowledged that both
     Premier and Eclipse were less harmful than
     traditional cigarettes.  Here is what he said:
          "Question:  And everything else being
     equal, both Premier and Eclipse were less
     harmful than traditional cigarettes?"
          He said:
          "Answer:  Yeah.  Everything else being
     equal."
          Again that is something that Reynolds is
     doing, it's just not words on paper.
          I want to say a word about tobacco curing.
     You heard about that.  And curing is just
     drying the tobacco.  Dr. Proctor spent some
     time talking about curing tobacco, and we
     learned that the tobacco farmers from whom
     Reynolds buys its tobacco was curing it with
     propane gas and that propane gas was creating a
     carcinogen called nitro- -- tobacco-specific
     nitrosamines.
          And when Reynolds discovered this,
     Dr. Proctor testified that it discovered it, it
4760 shared the information, told other tobacco
     companies, and published its findings, and it
     paid farmers to change their equipment in their
     barns to cure tobacco differently, so that
     tobacco-specific nitrosamines would not be
     created.
          Reynolds also learned that certain
     fertilizers were being used that increase these
     nitrosamines, and, once again, it persuaded
     tobacco farmers to change fertilizer so these
     nitrosamines would not be created.
          Again, things Reynolds is doing, not just
     words on paper.
          Finally, I want to talk about ZONNIC.  You
     heard about ZONNIC during the trial.  ZONNIC is
     a nicotine replacement product by Reynolds.
     It's a nicotine replacement aid to help people
     to stop smoking.
          This morning Mr. Paige said, tobacco
     companies should do something to help people.
     This is something that Reynolds is doing to
     help people.  It's to help people to quit
     smoking.  It's sold in the very same places
     that you find cigarettes being sold, in gas
     stations and convenience stores.  So if a
4761 smoker wants to help him or herself, and use
     nicotine replacement products, they can get
     those products in the same place where they buy
     their cigarettes.
          Now, I want to say a word about the last
     question on the verdict form.  It's the
     punitive damages question.  Both Mr. Paige and
     Mr. Ware talked about it.
          But if you get that far on the verdict
     form, it means that you have fully compensated
     the Duignan family already.  You will already
     award it whatever money you think is fair to
     compensate them for their loss.  Punitive
     damages are simply more money to the Plaintiff.
     They don't go to the American Cancer Society,
     they don't go Stop Smoking Programs, they don't
     go to the state of Florida, it's just more
     money to the Plaintiffs.
          Now, Mr. Paige said something -- punitive
     damages are for two reasons:  To punish for
     past misconduct and to deter future misconduct.
     I believe Mr. Paige told you that.  And when he
     was talking about tobacco companies this
     morning, he said nobody does that anymore.
     Nobody does what the tobacco companies did in
4762 1950.
          So, in fact, Mr. Paige is telling you,
     partially, that there's no need for punitive
     damages in this case because there's no need to
     deter future misconduct.  He said nobody does
     that, nobody would do that today.
          And if nobody would do that today, there's
     no need for punitive damages in this case.  And
     when you look back on the things actually done
     by Reynolds, I suggest to you that there's no
     need for punitive damages based on what it's
     done in the past.  And just this past half an
     hour or so that I've been talking to you, I've
     summarized some of the things that Reynolds
     actually did.
          And it's summarized on this demonstrative
     that I created.  And I'm not going to go back
     over everything, but these are the things that
     I talked about.  I started during the period of
     time that Douglas Duignan was born and carried
     through during has lifetime.  And these all
     things that Reynolds did during that period of
     time.
          But I'm not going to suggest to you that
     R.J. Reynolds has been the perfect company over
4763 past 50 or 60 years because it hasn't.  I'm
     not going to suggest to you that some of its
     representatives haven't said stupid things in
     documents, because they have.  And there's no
     question that R.J.R. should have come out and
     said cigarettes cause lung cancer sooner.  But
     the fact that it was slow did not harm Douglas
     Duignan, and that is important.  I'll say it
     again.  The fact that Reynolds was a little
     slow in admitting causation did not harm
     Douglas Duignan.
          And the reason is that he knew that
     smoking was dangerous, there's some smokers
     that may not have known, but Douglas Duignan is
     not one of those smokers.  He knew and you know
     why he knew.  I'm not going to repeat it about
     the doctor, about the cancer sticks, about the
     general information.  Douglas Duignan knew that
     smoking was dangerous.
          And so did millions of others, frankly,
     because millions of people, as you've heard,
     found out smoking was dangerous and they quit.
     But they were motivated to quit and they, in
     fact, did quit.
          Now, if you reach this question on
4764 punitive damages there are a couple of things
     that I want to say.
          First of all, the Engle findings do not
     establish liability for punitive damages and
     can't be used in -- and you can't use the Engle
     findings in making your determination as to
     whether punitive damages should be imposed or
     the Plaintiffs are entitled to them.
          So to answer Question 12, you can't use
     the Engle findings.
          The Plaintiffs have to establish that by
     evidence, by the clear and convincing standard
     that you've heard about, which is higher than
     the just more likely than not.
          And also, you can only consider conduct by
     R.J. Reynolds that actually caused harm to the
     Duignan family.
          And as I've discuss suggested to you, no
     harm -- no misconduct by R.J. Reynolds has
     caused harm to the Duignan family.
          So based on the evidence in this case, and
     the facts that you know, the facts that you
     know about Douglas Duignan, I would suggest to
     you that if you get to that entitlement, the
     punitive damages question, that you do not
4765 impose punitive damages on R.J.R. and that you
     answer that question "no" based on the evidence
     in this case.
          I'm almost done, ladies and gentlemen.
     This is the last chance that I get to speak
     with you.  Plaintiffs get a rebuttal, they get
     the last word.  Mr. Ware and I do not get a
     chance to respond.
          When they start telling you about all the
     bad things they believe tobacco companies did,
     there are two things I would like you to keep
     in mind.
          The first is what we talked about already,
     the things that R.J. Reynolds actually did, not
     things you just see on paper, but things
     R.J. Reynolds actually did, the things Reynolds
     got right, that's one thing.
          But more importantly, I'd like you to keep
     in mind why we're here.  Why you spent the past
     almost three weeks with us, three weeks of your
     life in this courtroom, and the reason is
     Douglas Duignan.  It is truly all about him.
          And he knew that smoking was deadly but he
     enjoyed it, so he did it, so he smoked anyway,
     and R.J. Reynolds should not be responsible for
4766 that and you should not impose liability on
     Reynolds because of the decisions that Douglas
     Duignan made, decisions that were not affected
     by anything that R.J. Reynolds did wrong, and
     this case I want you to know means a lot to
     R.J. Reynolds, too.
          And you've promised to be fair to it even
     though it's a big company, just like you would
     a person.  And I would hope that you would do
     that.  And, once again, I thank you for your
     service.
