         MR. GORDON:  Yes, Your Honor.  And may it
    please the Court, counsel, Mrs. Dupre.
         Good morning, everybody.  So I know it's not
    easy sitting here listening to lawyers talk away.
    It's frankly hard work.  It's also hard to believe
    that we have been here for only about two weeks,
    or a little over two weeks.  I don't know about
    you but it seems a little bit longer.
         But suffice it to say, I want to join Judge
    Dubensky and Mr. Dupre's counsel in thanking you
    for your service on behalf of myself, on behalf of
    Mr. Kaczynski, the rest of our team, and also
    certainly on behalf of all the hard working women 2317 and men who together make up the R. J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company.
         We get to observe each other during the
    trial.  This is the first occasion I have to talk
    to you.  But we certainly get to observe each
    other, watch for body language and the like.
         And if nothing else, I think we can all agree
    that you have been a very attentive jury.  You
    have taken notes.  You have asked good questions.
    And, frankly, we could not ask for any more than
    that.  You can all go back to your family and your
    co-workers and your friends after this trial and
    feel safe in saying that you served in one of the
    highest forms of service to your community in
    sitting as jurors.  And for all that we're very
    grateful.
         Let me start by just giving you sort of a
    closing road map as to what I am going to cover.
    I'm going to split Reynolds' closing with
    Mr. Kaczynski.  And what I am going to talk to you
    about are the medical and addiction issues.
    Mr. Kaczynski is then going to talk to you about
    the additional questions on the verdict sheet
    that, frankly, we believe you are not going to
    have to reach.  But I'm going to talk to you and 2318 start with the medical and addiction issues.
         Could we have the first slide, Katie?
         And so a lot of my discussion is going to
    focus around the first question on the verdict
    sheet that you have heard about, which is, Was
    Richard W. Dupre a member of the Engle class?
         And what I will discuss and explain is how,
    in our view, when you look at and examine the
    three questions that comprise that question, which
    I'll get to in a second, why it is that Mrs. Dupre
    has failed to satisfy her burden -- and, remember,
    at all times it is her burden of proof, not
    Reynolds', on those questions which make up that
    first question on the verdict sheet, the Engle
    class membership question.
         So let's get right to it.  Could we have the
    next slide?
         Was Richard Dupre a member of the Engle
    class?  And what I will suggest to you is that
    this is far from a simple question, because of the
    three issues that you are going to need to discuss
    and decide that make up the Engle class membership
    question.  And that's because Mrs. Dupre has the
    burden to prove, first, was smoking a legal cause
    of Richard Dupre's coronary heart disease and 2319 death?
         I'm going to spend a little bit of time
    talking about legal cause.  You may have heard us
    during the trial, both Ms. Dupre's counsel and
    Reynolds' counsel, refer to certain legalese or
    legal phrases as lawyer talk, quote, unquote.
    Well, this is one place where lawyer talk really
    does matter, and so I'm going to spend a little
    time talking about what legal cause is.
         The second issue within that Engle class
    membership question is, Was Richard Dupre addicted
    to cigarettes containing nicotine?  And I'll spend
    a little bit of time talking about how, based on
    the evidence you heard, in our view she hasn't
    satisfied her burden of proof on that second
    question.
         And, finally, even if you determine Mr. Dupre
    was addicted, was his addiction to nicotine a
    legal cause -- which, again, I'll explain in a
    second -- of his coronary artery disease and
    death?
         Now, you heard about the so-called Engle
    findings during Mr. Pinder's closing.  And you
    heard about them at the very start of this trial
    before opening statements.  And, remember, 2320 those -- those findings only apply if you
    determine that Mr. Dupre was a member of the Engle
    class.
         What I want to do is remind you about an
    instruction that you received from Judge Dubensky
    at the very start of this trial before opening
    statements about what exactly those Engle findings
    mean and what they don't mean.
         This is what you heard from Judge Dubensky
    before opening statements about the meaning of the
    Engle findings.
         Quote, The prior lawsuit did not determine
    and the findings in that case do not mean that
    Reynolds is liable to anyone, including the
    plaintiff in this case.  The question of whether
    or not Reynolds is liable for Mr. Dupre's coronary
    artery disease and death remains an issue for you
    to decide based on the evidence presented by the
    parties in this case.
         So let me start by explaining a little bit
    about the concept of legal cause that I hit upon a
    moment ago.
         Remember the first question is whether
    Mrs. Dupre has satisfied her burden of proof that
    smoking was a legal cause of Richard Dupre's 2321 coronary artery disease and death, the first issue
    or sub-issue within the Engle class membership
    question.
         You just heard Judge Dubensky before the
    closing arguments began give you certain legal
    instructions on the law, and he explained or gave
    you a legal framework for what legal cause means
    and whether Mr. Dupre's smoking was a substantial
    contributing factor, that is, a legal cause, to
    his coronary heart disease and death.
         Now, let me make something abundantly clear.
    We're not here to dispute that smoking can cause
    coronary heart disease.  Nobody is here to dispute
    that.  The question is whether, in Mr. Dupre's
    case, his smoking was a legal cause of his
    coronary heart disease.
         As you just heard from Judge Dubensky,
    smoking cigarettes is a legal cause of Mr. Dupre's
    coronary heart disease and death if his smoking
    produced or contributed substantially to producing
    his coronary heart disease.  That is, Did his
    smoking directly and in natural and continuous
    sequence contribute substantially so that, but for
    his smoking, Mr. Dupre's coronary heart disease
    and death would not have occurred? 2322 In other words, it is not enough for
    Mrs. Dupre to show that Mr. Dupre's smoking
    contributed to his coronary heart disease.  She
    must prove that but for -- but for his smoking,
    Mr. Dupre would not have developed coronary heart
    disease and died.
         Another way of thinking about the legal cause
    standard, that is, the but for standard, is to ask
    yourself, If you take out Mr. Dupre's smoking,
    would Mr. Dupre have avoided his coronary heart
    disease and death, or would he have still
    developed coronary heart disease and death even if
    he never touched a cigarette?
         So let's get to the evidence.  You heard from
    three doctors in this trial who had reviewed
    different parts of medical records and other
    records pertaining to Mr. Dupre.  Dr. Wilson, the
    medical examiner; plaintiff's expert cardiologist,
    Dr. Jackson; and Reynolds' expert cardiologist,
    Dr. Yount.  I want to start with Dr. Wilson.
         No one will say that Dr. Wilson was anything
    but an extremely qualified medical examiner.  But
    his autopsy report for Mr. Dupre, for reasons I'll
    explain, does little to help us answer the
    question of whether Mr. Dupre's smoking was a 2323 legal cause, a but for cause of Mr. Dupre's
    coronary heart disease, which is the question you
    need to answer.
         And why do I say that?  Sure, you will recall
    that Dr. Wilson made reference to Mr. Dupre's
    smoking in his autopsy report and in his death
    certificate.  But you need to remember all that
    Dr. Wilson admitted he simply did not know,
    including about Mr. Dupre's smoking history and
    his other risk factors at the time that he
    conducted his autopsy.
         What Dr. Wilson didn't know at the time he
    conducted the autopsy is the limitations of his
    information, including that he had no access to
    Mr. Dupre's prior medical records.  He told us
    that he knew nothing about how many years
    Mr. Dupre had been a smoker.  Remember?  Only that
    smoking had been detected in his urine.  He had no
    way to quantify how much Mr. Dupre had smoked over
    the years.  And he acknowledged that he had no
    information concerning any other risk factors
    Mr. Dupre might have had for coronary heart
    disease.
         He also told us that he did not consider any
    family history of atherosclerotic disease 2324 Mr. Dupre may have had.  Dr. Wilson, in other
    words, simply lacked any information at the time
    of Mr. Dupre's autopsy that allows anyone to
    conclude, based on the autopsy report and death
    certificate alone, that Mr. Dupre's smoking was a
    legal cause, a but for cause, of his coronary
    heart disease and death.
         So let me jump to the two expert
    cardiologists you heard.  Again, both extremely
    qualified and well credentialed cardiologists,
    both from extremely established medical
    institutions.  That was Dr. Jackson and Dr. Yount.
         When I read back over their trial testimony,
    what was a bit remarkable to me were the areas or
    the subjects on which they agreed.  And that
    agreement included extending to the family tree
    that you've heard us talk about throughout this
    trial.
         Both agree that this family tree -- and,
    remember, in our opening statement, Mr. Kaczynski
    referred to this family tree as a number of the,
    quote, stubborn facts that you are going to hear
    about in this trial.
         Both agreed based on their review of the
    thousands of pages of sworn deposition testimony 2325 of Mr. Dupre's family, including his brothers and
    sisters, that this tree accurately captured the
    medical history information reflected in that
    deposition testimony.  Both also agreed -- right?
    They reached different inferences and
    interpretations.  I'm not saying they didn't.  But
    both also agreed that when you step back and look
    at this Dupre family tree, you have no choice but
    to reach a number of basic conclusions.
         At least four generations of family members
    with atherosclerosis in the form of either
    strokes, heart attacks, or coronary heart disease,
    along with cholesterol and high blood pressure,
    both men and women.  And, remember, with women
    what's significant is they are statistically less
    likely to develop coronary heart disease, or at
    least less likely to develop it at a younger age.
    The Dupre family tree included more nonsmokers
    than smokers.  And it included family members that
    were both older and younger than Mr. Dupre when
    they learned of their heart disease or other
    atherosclerosis.
         Remember, his older grandparents and parents
    yet at the age of 37, his nephew, Jason Poirrier,
    which we will get to, had a significant blockage 2326 in his main coronary artery for which he had a
    stent implanted.
         More importantly, both Dr. Jackson and
    Dr. Yount agreed that Mr. Dupre's family
    history -- could we bring up the tree, again, for
    a second, Katie?  Thank you.
         -- met the textbook definition -- they may
    have reached different inferences and
    interpretations -- but at least met the textbook
    or technical definition of a family history of
    premature coronary heart disease simply based on
    the fact that Mr. Dupre's sister, Ellen Dalbo,
    needed three stents implanted in different
    coronary arteries at the age of 50 and was also
    diagnosed with high blood pressure and high
    cholesterol.
         Let's move to Dr. Yount.  I want to talk
    about the additional opinions that you heard
    Dr. Yount reach, which adds to the areas of
    agreement between Dr. Jackson and Dr. Yount.  You
    will -- let me first spend a minute on Dr. Yount's
    credentials which were very impressive.
         Remember, he was not only a cardiologist, but
    what's known as an interventional cardiologist.
    He's the guy that spends his time actually going 2327 into blocked arteries, right, in a CATH lab, a
    catheter lab, to fix them with either balloon
    angioplasty or stents.  He teaches cardiology
    fellows at the Touro Infirmary in New Orleans how
    to perform that angioplasty and implant stents.
    He is affiliated with Touro Infirmary in New
    Orleans founded way back in 1852.  And as director
    of Touro's cardiac catheretization lab, the lab
    that they bring either heart attack victims or
    others to unblock arteries, in that capacity he
    reviews every single heart attack patient that
    comes into the doors or the emergency room at
    Touro.
         You will recall Dr. Yount and, frankly,
    Dr. Jackson for that matter, reviewed the basic
    primary risk factors for coronary heart disease:
    age, diabetes, male gender, hypertension, high
    cholesterol, family history, and smoking.  He told
    you some important basic facts about those primary
    risk factors.
         First, it's impossible -- it's simply not
    possible -- for any cardiologist to rank a
    patient's risk factors as more important than any
    others.  He told you that each are truly
    independent risk factors; that is, they act and 2328 they have an impact on coronary heart disease
    independent of each other and that each have been
    considered, based on the epidemiology and other
    studies that have been done over the years, as
    major leading causes of coronary heart disease.
         He then focused on the risk factors that he
    found relevant to Mr. Dupre in particular.  You
    remember we talked about these:  smoking, male
    gender, high blood pressure, high cholesterol and
    family history.  I'm not going to go through all
    these.  I'm going to focus on the ones we spent
    some time on with Dr. Yount, which is high blood
    pressure, high cholesterol, and family history.
         Let's jump to high blood pressure.  What you
    will recall -- can we bring up the records, Katie?
         What you will recall was significant, was not
    the debate about the very few handful of actual
    high blood pressure readings we had in this case,
    whether they were high, whether they were not,
    whether they were fleeting, whether they were
    reliable.  What was significant were the
    observations Dr. Yount made both on the 1992
    cardiology report and then the separate autopsy
    report about certain observations about
    Mr. Dupre's heart in particular. 2329 And you will remember we went through these
    passages.  The 1992 report, the electrocardiogram
    at rest demonstrates borderline criteria for left
    ventricular hypertrophy with normal ST wave
    morphology.  There is an S 4 gallop.  Borderline
    cardiac hypertrophy, 375 grams.  And what you will
    remember is not just Dr. Yount, but Dr. Jackson as
    well, acknowledging that cardiac hypertrophy and
    enlargement of the heart and a thickening of the
    heart muscle -- and Dr. Yount also told us it's
    the case with the S 4 gallop -- that a cause of
    those features, enlarged heart and the S 4 gallop,
    is chronic or long-standing hypertension or high
    blood pressure.
         That brings us to high cholesterol.  I'm sure
    you remember this lab report, and I'm sure you
    remember the testimony about it, including by
    Dr. Yount, and Mr. Dupre's overall and total
    cholesterol on this occasion in 1989 of 292.
         Remember what we learned from Dr. Yount about
    just how significant, even if we don't have that
    broken down into the so-called good cholesterol
    and bad cholesterol, the HDL and LDL, how standing
    alone just how significant that 292 was?  And that
    is that it's almost 50 percent higher than 2330 normal cholesterol range and at least twice the
    risk of coronary heart disease.  And you will
    remember that wasn't just Dr. Yount.  That was an
    excerpt you saw from the website of the American
    Heart Association.
         What Dr. Yount also told you is that
    cholesterol readings, unlike blood pressure
    measurements, aren't transient or fleeting and
    don't have to necessarily be taken multiple times
    to be validated.  He also told you that even if we
    assumed Mr. Dupre had not fasted before his blood
    was drawn for this cholesterol test, that at most
    that would cause a swing in that 292 by no more
    than 20 points.
         Think about Mr. Dupre, however.  And I agree
    with Mr. Pinder.  You don't leave your common
    sense behind when you walk in the courthouse
    doors.  It's a very important element in your jury
    deliberations.
         Think about Mr. Dupre.  Very careful in his
    diet.  You heard about how careful he was what he
    ate and what he avoided, worked out regularly or
    consistently.  The fact that he closely -- so
    closely watched his diet and worked out on such a
    consistent basis suggests that something else, 2331 something innate or genetic was going on unrelated
    to Mr. Dupre's lifestyle to account for that 292.
         Mr. Dupre fits perfectly within the four
    generations of the Dupre family that we saw, a
    pattern that started with his grandparents, that
    moved to his parents, to his brothers and sisters,
    and then way down to his nephew for high
    cholesterol and atherosclerosis.
         As for how it could be -- you remember some
    testimony from Dr. Yount about this -- that
    Mr. Dupre may not have known that he had high
    cholesterol or high blood pressure.  Remember what
    Dr. Yount tells you he sees in his practice,
    which, frankly, again is a matter of common sense
    and life experience?  And, that is, that he sees
    male patients in their forties all the time,
    unfortunately, who because they don't go to a
    doctor perhaps until they have a health blip,
    simply never may know that they've got high
    cholesterol or high blood pressure.  That's why he
    called high blood pressure, for instance -- and
    you have all heard this term I'm sure -- the,
    quote, silent killer.  You don't know you have it
    until a doctor actually puts a blood pressure cuff
    on you and takes your blood pressure measurement. 2332 But again, you don't need Dr. Yount to tell
    you that.  I submit it's a matter of common sense.
         Dr. Yount also told you the same thing about
    family history; that is, he sees patients all the
    time in his practice new patients other patients,
    where when they take a family history in the
    office, before you see the doctor or if the doctor
    is taking a family history, someone may simply not
    know about a particular family history or may have
    forgotten that a particular family member or
    another has a significant history for coronary
    artery disease or some other medical history.
         That brings us to the question as to why no
    doctor had previously diagnosed Mr. Dupre with
    high blood pressure or high cholesterol.  Remember
    that we can basically count in this case the
    number of medical records for Mr. Dupre on one
    hand.  And I'll submit to you if you back out or
    put aside the autopsy report and the death
    certificate, that leaves you with perhaps three
    medical records.  Remember, only one of those
    medical records actually reflected, that we saw in
    this case, care and treatment of Mr. Dupre before
    he passed away.  That leaves us with the 1992
    cardiology visit record, a sum total of one time 2333 in this case that we know and we saw that
    Mr. Dupre saw a doctor for treatment.
         And then you will recall Mr. Dupre was there
    for a specific purpose, which is to find out what
    may have caused the episode where he was found
    short of breath and unresponsive in his sleep, one
    true medical record over the course of Mr. Dupre's
    life in a case in which Mrs. Dupre is asking you
    to award her millions of dollars.
         Dr. Yount had a unique and truly different
    look-back perspective on Mr. Dupre's life that the
    cardiologist in 1992 never had.  Why do I say
    that?  Well, that's because before he took the
    witness stand, you heard that Dr. Yount not only
    had access to each of Mr. Dupre's medical records,
    the autopsy report -- right?  And the death
    certificate, and the military records, but he had
    the benefit of reviewing the thousands of pages of
    sworn deposition testimony in which Mr. Dupre's
    family history is recounted.  Then we come finally
    to the independent risk factor of family history.
         And you will be happy to hear I have one
    board but only one board, and I'm sure you can all
    guess what it is.  Sorry.  Don't worry.  I'm not
    going to go through each family member.  But I do 2334 want to spend some time talking about some of what
    you heard about his family history.
         First, remember what Dr. Yount said on the
    subject of family history based on what he's
    learned and what he sees in his practice.
    Atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease runs in
    families.  In treating his patients Dr. Yount may
    start with first degree relatives -- remember the
    textbook definition -- who have coronary heart
    disease, but then he branches out to determine who
    else has significant atherosclerosis and that in
    his practice he himself treats multiple
    generations of families with atherosclerosis and
    that, in his view, Mr. Dupre's family tree clearly
    showed some genetic component in his family for
    atherosclerosis.
         You don't have to be a cardiologist to reach
    the same conclusion.  All you need is your common
    sense and a focus on the Dupre forest.
         Can we bring up the family tree for just
    another second, Katie?
         Focus on the Dupre forest where all the
    branches and leaves of that tree, and not the
    single leaf or branch of Ellen Dalbo, four
    generations of atherosclerosis, heart disease, 2335 high cholesterol, high blood pressure in both men
    and women, both smokers and nonsmokers, and both
    the very young, Jason Poirrier, and those older
    than Mr. Dupre.  Cigarette smoking can't explain
    the medical histories of the four generations that
    comprise the family tree.
         Now, Mr. Pinder in his closing made a point
    about telling you, Well, look who is still alive.
    Look who lived longer than Richard Dupre.  But
    remember the close calls that this family had
    related to atherosclerosis and coronary heart
    disease.
         Thankfully, Ellen Dalbo at the age of 50
    discovered that she had blockages and got stents
    for them.  Thankfully the same was true of Jason
    Poirrier, who discovered that the widowmaker, his
    main coronary artery, was 90 percent blocked at
    the age of 37.  Close calls in the Dupre family
    due to atherosclerosis.
         So when you consider all the medical evidence
    in this case, the family history, the high blood
    pressure, the high cholesterol, and the limits of
    what Dr. Wilson had at the time of his autopsy
    report, Mrs. Dupre has failed to meet her burden
    to prove that cigarette smoking was a legal cause 2336 of Mr. Dupre's coronary heart disease and death.
         In the language of the legal cause jury
    instruction you heard from Judge Dubensky, she has
    not and cannot show that, but for smoking
    cigarettes, Mr. Dupre would not have developed
    coronary heart disease.  Your answer, in other
    words, to that class membership question, the
    first of the three that comprise the class
    membership question, whether smoking was a legal
    cause of Richard Dupre's coronary heart disease
    and death -- remember, a question on which
    Mrs. Dupre has the burden -- should be no.
         All right.  Let me move to addiction.  Even
    if you find that Mrs. Dupre has met her burden on
    that first issue or sub-issue within the class
    membership question, you still must find that she
    has satisfied our burden of proof on the two
    additional questions that make up the Engle class
    membership inquiry.  Has she proved that Richard
    Dupre was addicted to cigarettes containing
    nicotine?  And, 3, If was he addicted, was that
    addiction to nicotine a legal cause of his
    coronary heart disease and death?
         I'm going to focus on the second of those two
    addiction questions, and, that is, whether 2337 Mr. Dupre was addicted to cigarettes containing
    nicotine.
         That's obviously going to require me to spend
    a few minutes reviewing with you Mr. Dupre's
    smoking history and smoking behavior.  Now, we all
    would agree that we got a full picture of
    Mr. Dupre's personality and character in this
    trial.  But I'll submit to you in a trial where
    Mrs. Dupre has the burden of proof, not Reynolds,
    and in which her lawyers are standing here asking
    you to award her an incredible amount of money,
    what's remarkable to us when we went back and
    reviewed the trial record is how little we
    actually heard about Mr. Dupre's smoking history,
    that is, how little his family could actually
    recall about his smoking.
         Remember, first, that Mrs. Dupre only met
    Mr. Dupre in 1977 when he was already 29 years old
    and she claims had already been smoking for over a
    decade.  Mrs. Dupre had no personal firsthand
    knowledge of his smoking before she met him.
    You'll recall that the one family member for
    Mr. Dupre's generation the plaintiff is relying on
    what you heard from by deposition was Pam Bishop.
    So what did Pam Bishop exactly tell us she knew or 2338 didn't know about Mr. Dupre's smoking?
         Pam Bishop could not say specifically when
    Mr. Dupre had his first cigarette.  She vaguely
    recalled him smoking when he drove the two of them
    home to -- when he drove the two of them to school
    when he was around 16 or 17.  She had no knowledge
    about when Mr. Dupre had his first cigarette of
    the day.  She had no knowledge about when
    Mr. Dupre became a regular daily smoker, no
    knowledge, not even the ability to estimate how
    much he smoked over the years on a daily basis.
    And she had no knowledge, none, about the
    particular cigarette brands that he smoked over
    the years.
         I'll suggest to you that the information, the
    gaps in information and the cloudy memories about
    Mr. Dupre's smoke history and smoking behavior is
    not what you should expect and demand in a jury
    trial in which Mrs. Dupre is claiming that her
    husband was addicted to cigarettes and is
    demanding money.
         What you should expect and demand are details
    about exactly when, why, and how much Mr. Dupre
    smoked, details which are missing here.  You heard
    some of the same gaps in information or vague 2339 memories about Mr. Dupre's smoking history from
    Mrs. Dupre's children and Charles Brown, the one
    friend of Mr. Dupre's you heard from.
         They are not sure when in the morning
    Mr. Dupre would have had his first cigarette, not
    sure how many cigarettes Mr. Dupre smoked during
    the day, no knowledge about the circumstances that
    led Mr. Dupre to pick up his first cigarette, no
    knowledge about Mr. Dupre's smoking routine during
    the day.
         Now, don't get me wrong.  We're not here to
    criticize Mrs. Dupre for not having evidence about
    how many cigarettes Mr. Dupre smoked on a
    particular day or in a particular week 20 or 30
    years ago.  I'm not talking about such minute
    details.  What I am talking about are the
    fundamental gaps and the vague recollections about
    his smoking history that remain at the end of the
    day.  There may be no better example of the
    struggle with which we're left about Mr. Dupre's
    smoking history than the testimony you heard about
    Mr. Dupre's life insurance application.
         If we still don't know -- and we don't --
    whether or not Mr. Dupre quit for over a year, as
    he certified with his signature he did in this 2340 life insurance application -- and Mrs. Dupre tells
    us she didn't know whether he had quit for over a
    year.  Then I'll suggest to you something very
    fundamental is missing in this case about
    Mr. Dupre's smoking history and smoking behavior.
         So let's talk about the evidence you heard on
    addiction and whether Mr. Dupre was addicted to
    nicotine.
         You recall that the very last witness you
    heard from was Dr. Adam Jaffe, Reynolds' addiction
    expert.  Dr. Jaffe has a Ph.D. in clinical
    psychology.  Like psychologists and other clinical
    psychologists, he spends his days diagnosing and
    determining how to treat various mental disorders,
    but we brought him here because his focus
    extending back to the research that he conducted
    in graduate school, has been substance use
    disorders and cigarette smoking in particular.  We
    called Dr. Jaffe because, I'll suggest to you,
    he's truly on the front lines of treating smokers
    who want to overcome an addiction and quit their
    smoking.
         I'm not going to go back through all of
    Dr. Jaffe's credentials and accomplishment, but I
    do want to highlight just a few. 2341 He was director of the psychotherapy and
    addictions treatment center at the Institute for
    Living.  He was an associate research scientist at
    Yale University.  He was project director at Yale
    for a study on coping skills and relapse
    prevention.  And from 1983 to 1984 he actually ran
    smoking cessation clinics in Detroit, Michigan.
         Beyond all that, Dr. Jaffe in his practice
    specializes in substance abuse and smoking
    cessation, to the point where 35 to 50 percent of
    his practice is devoted to diagnosing and treating
    substance use disorders.  He's received over
    $6,000,000 in government grant money to research
    and write about substance abuse issues.  Medical
    doctors refer smokers to him for smoking cessation
    treatment.
         Apart from how critically important the two
    addiction questions are that you'll need to decide
    in this case, you may remember that Dr. Jaffe's
    examination took a while.  He was on the stand a
    while.  What you may have picked up on was one of
    the reasons for that which is just how meticulous
    Dr. Jaffe had been in reviewing all the records
    and deposition testimony in this case.  I'll
    suggest to you that, at least it seemed to me, 2342 there wasn't a medical record or page of
    deposition testimony that Dr. Jaffe hadn't
    carefully reviewed and analyzed and that, perhaps
    more than any other expert witness you heard from,
    he had a remarkable grasp on the case record here.
         Now, you heard some testimony from
    Mrs. Dupre's addiction expert, Dr. Miller, about
    nicotine's effect on the brain, something on which
    a topic on which Dr. Jaffe quickly became the
    voice of reason and put things in perspective.
         You heard from Dr. Jaffe that everyone has
    nicotinic receptors in the brain.  Smokers, quote,
    upregulate, closed quote, and temporarily develop
    more nicotinic receptors than nonsmokers.  But
    then upon stopping smoking, the number of your
    nicotinic receptors return to normal to baseline
    after about three weeks.
         And then you heard a whole discussion about
    dopamine, but then you heard that any pleasurable
    event or activity, whether watching a favorite TV
    show or eating your favorite foods, results in the
    release of dopamine.
         You may remember Dr. Jaffe, on the subject of
    dopamine, brought up this chart in which he
    compared the amount of dopamine generally released 2343 by smoking to other substances and put the release
    of dopamine caused by nicotine in the same general
    range as caffeine, far removed from what occurs in
    the brain from dopamine release when either
    drinking alcohol or taking other substances such
    as cocaine or methamphetamines.
         Dr. Jaffe also told you that there's nothing
    about these brain changes, including the release
    of dopamine, that prevents a smoker like Mr. Dupre
    from understanding, from processing information
    about the risks of smoking and acting on that
    information to try and quit.
         We also heard from Dr. Jaffe some important
    statistics and information about just how many
    smokers have quit smoking and how they have quit.
    We heard that nicotine is not the sole reason that
    people smoke.  We heard -- and this is reflected,
    you may recall, not just in Dr. Jaffe's testimony,
    but in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, the
    DSM, that doctors like him use -- that only about
    50 percent of daily smokers are considered
    addicted.
         We heard that there are currently between 50
    to 60 million -- 50 to 60 million -- ex-smokers in
    the U.S.  You also heard that there are more 2344 former smokers now in the U.S. than current
    smokers.  We learned that more than one people --
    one million people quit each year, the vast
    majority of them, 90 to 95 percent, quit without
    any aides or any medication.  We learned that any
    nicotine withdrawal systems peak within two to
    three days and typically end within two to three
    weeks.  You heard from Dr. Jaffe that withdrawal
    from nicotine differs substantially from
    withdrawal from hard drugs like heroin and
    cocaine, or even from alcohol.  Where those going
    through rehab and suffering withdrawal can suffer
    life-threatening tremors, seizures, and
    hallucinations, none of that applicable to
    withdrawal from nicotine.
         You also heard -- and this is important --
    that the mere number of cigarettes smoked per day
    or the number of years for which someone has
    smoked is not a factor, not part of the diagnosis
    for determining whether someone is addicted.
         As we promised in our opening statement, you
    also heard evidence about how nicotine occurs
    naturally in the tobacco plant and how it's been
    known and understood for smokers since before
    cigarettes were even invented that cigarettes or 2345 tobacco whether you call it a habit, an addiction,
    or dependency, can be hard to quit.
         You remember all the newspaper and magazine
    articles about that, something you are going to
    hear about further from Mr. Kaczynski.
         Now, Dr. Jaffe's opinion was that Mr. Dupre
    was not addicted to nicotine.  And he got us there
    by walking us through the Diagnostic and
    Statistical Manual, the DSM, the fifth edition.
         You recall this is the book, the book
    that Dr. Miller, Mrs. Dupre's addiction expert,
    also used, that medical professionals and other
    addiction specialists, including clinical
    psychologists like Dr. Jaffe, around the world use
    to diagnose mental illness and addiction.
         Remember, Dr. Jaffe told us that the
    different criteria in the DSM -- and I'm not going
    to go through all 11 of these; don't worry --
    shouldn't be used in a cookbook or checklist-type
    fashion, but should be applied with the benefit of
    clinical experience that a psychiatrist or
    clinical psychologist has.
         What you heard from Dr. Jaffe was that even
    before you get to this list of the factors for
    what's known as tobacco use disorder or only in 2346 its more extreme examples, nicotine addiction,
    there's a threshold requirement that has to be met
    here.
         Can we bring that up Katie?
         That is before you even pass go and start
    walking through the factors about whether someone
    has tobacco use disorder or is addicted to
    nicotine.  You have to find that that patient,
    that smoker, satisfies the requirement which is a,
    quote, problematic pattern of tobacco use leading
    to clinically significant impairment or distress
    as manifested by at least two of the following
    occurring within a 12-month period.
         Dr. Jaffe also told us that in addition to
    that threshold requirement, you have to meet a
    patient -- or a smoker has to meet at least six of
    the 11 factors to be considered addicted to
    nicotine, that is, a more severe form of tobacco
    use disorder.
         So let's start with clinically significant
    impairment or distress.  What the Diagnostic and
    Statistical Manual tells us that that test
    requires a showing that a smoker exhibits
    impairment in social, occupational, or other
    important areas of functioning.  You don't need 2347 Dr. Jaffe to tell you what you already should know
    here, which is that there's no evidence, none,
    that Mr. Dupre's smoking caused him any impairment
    or distress in any aspect of his marriage, his
    career, or with his family or friends.
         To the contrary, we got a clear picture of
    Mr. Dupre's personality and character, as I
    mentioned earlier during this trial.  We heard in
    abundance about how hard working he was, that he
    never missed a day of work, what a good husband
    and father he was, that he worked out and
    socialized regularly with his friends and sons at
    the gym and was a successful bodybuilder.
         It should be abundantly clear to you into
    which group Mr. Dupre falls on the statistic that
    50 percent of daily smokers are addicted and 50
    percent are not.
         Let's go back to the DSM.
         Test -- or Requirement No. 2, if you meet the
    threshold requirement, there must be a showing
    that, quote, there is a persistent desire or
    unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control
    tobacco use.
         What are we talking about?  Quit attempts
    that someone made, real, earnest repeat quit 2348 attempts.  Again, common sense answers this
    question.  I'll suggest to you that the evidence
    you heard shows that Mr. Dupre's quit attempts
    were half-hearted at best, and you can count them
    on three fingers.
         One hypnotist session in the late 1970s, one
    session.  No evidence about whether that was five
    minutes, 30 minutes, or 45 minutes.  No evidence
    that he actually quit smoking after that one
    hypnotist session.
         Fast forward over 20 years later.  Evidence
    that apparently he tried the patch for several
    days.
         And then the only other real evidence we
    heard about quit attempts was that he may have
    tried nicotine gum simply because his family saw
    pieces missing from the pack.
         That's it, ladies and gentlemen.  In a case
    in which Mrs. Dupre is claiming her husband was
    addicted to nicotine, those are the three quit
    attempts which you heard about in this trial.
         I believe on one -- on one of Mr. Pinder's
    slides there was a bullet point saying that he
    tried, quote, many times to quit.  I'm still
    waiting to hear about those many times, because 2349 what the record, the evidence shows is fleeting,
    half-hearted, and infrequent, very few attempts to
    quit.
         Mr. Dupre was far from a truly, truly
    tormented smoker who tries everything under the
    sun to quit.  You don't have to be a smoker.  You
    don't have to have tried one cigarette at all in
    your life to determine whether someone is
    motivated to quit or not.  Let me use an everyday
    saying, if you will, and, that is, actions speak
    louder than words.  You heard no evidence, none
    whatsoever, that Mr. Dupre took any of the
    standard, any of the no-brainer steps that you
    would expect a smoker, whether any of you smoked
    or not, that you would expect a smoker to take who
    was truly motivated to quit smoking.
         We heard no evidence, none, that he ever
    threw out his cigarettes.  You heard no evidence,
    none whatsoever, that he threw out his matches or
    lighters.  No evidence, none, he asked any family
    members, including any of his siblings who were
    smokers, or friends for advice on quitting
    smoking.  No evidence, none whatsoever, he even
    tried to gradually reduce the number of cigarettes
    he smoked to try and wean himself off smoking. 2350 Remember what Dr. Jaffe told you about
    motivation?  Again, you don't need a Ph.D. in
    psychology to understand these concepts.  He told
    you about internal motivation and external
    motivation.  What counts is not external
    motivation, what others, family members or friends
    want you to do, but internal motivation.  The
    smoker wants to quit and needs to quit for reasons
    that are important to him.
         We heard from Kevin Dupre, the last witness
    Mrs. Dupre called, that Mrs. Dupre understandably
    as his spouse, tried constantly to get Mr. Dupre
    to quit for health reasons.  But what's
    significant is what Kevin said he could not
    recall, which is he could not recall his father
    ever telling him that he was trying to quit.
         Mr. Dupre could have quit at any time.  He
    lacked the internal motivation to do so.
         All right.  Let's go back to the DSM.
         I'm going to go through these pretty quickly.
    They are 5, 6 and 7 on the DSM checklist.
         Recurrent tobacco use resulting in a failure
    to fulfill major role obligations at work, school,
    or home, for example, interference with work.  You
    heard no evidence about that.  In fact, 2351 evidence you heard was to the contrary.
         Six, continued tobacco use despite having
    persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal
    problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of
    tobacco, for example, arguments with others about
    tobacco use.
         You heard nothing about that.  In fact, you
    heard -- and I'll get to it in a second --
    Mr. Dupre's dismissive standard responses to those
    who tried to get him to quit.
         Seven, important social, occupational, or
    recreational activities are given up or reduced
    because of tobacco use.
         No evidence about that whatsoever.  Instead,
    what you heard was that Mr. Dupre was remarkably,
    ambitious and successful in all aspects of his
    life, earning an associate and college degrees,
    rising through the ranks of the U.S. Postal
    Service, winning bodybuilding competitions, and
    succeeding as a husband and father.
         Finally, you heard from Dr. Jaffe that
    there's no evidence that Mr. Dupre suffered within
    the definition of the DSM any withdrawal.
         Mrs. Dupre said that she recalled that
    Mr. Dupre may have been a little irritable and may 2352 have gotten a little quiet on the few occasions he
    tried to stop smoking, but she didn't recall any
    other personality changes.  And as Dr. Jaffe
    noted, none of that irritability caused any
    distress, another withdrawal requirement in the
    Dupres' lives.
         Mr. Dupre's son, Richard Junior, testified he
    never noticed any behavior or symptom out of the
    ordinary on the few occasions he heard Mr. Dupre
    might have been attempting to quit.
         As for Dr. Miller, Mrs. Dupre's addiction
    expert, with all due respect to his credentials
    and his practice -- because he's very well
    credentialed and very experienced -- I'll suggest
    to you that Dr. Miller twisted himself into a
    pretzel to reach some opinion that Mr. Dupre was
    addicted.  You may recall he even ignored the
    threshold requirement, the threshold test that a
    smoker exhibit clinically significant impairment
    or distress before you even apply the 11 DSM
    factors.  What you may recall is that Dr. Miller
    simply skipped that threshold requirement.  And
    what you also may remember is that he put it in
    smaller type on his version of his DSM slide.
         Dr. Miller and, for that matter, Dr. Burns 2353 may be -- may be able to tell us what smokers do
    in general, but they can't and did not fill in any
    of the missing details about Mr. Dupre's smoking
    behavior and smoking history.  Mr. Dupre was not
    addicted to nicotine either under the DSM or
    simply as a matter of common sense.
         Mrs. Dupre has failed to satisfy her burden
    of proof on the second issue within the Engle
    class membership question.  And, thus, when you
    get to that question, Has plaintiff met her burden
    of proof that Richard Dupre was addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine?  Your answer, for
    all the reasons I just walked through, should be
    no.
         That brings us to No. 3, the third part of
    the Engle class membership analysis.  And that is
    a question that asks, Even if you find that
    Mr. Dupre was addicted, was his addiction to
    nicotine a legal cause -- there's that term
    again -- of his coronary heart disease and death?
         Here, legal cause has the same sort of "but
    for" definition or analysis.  What that means here
    is simple.  Did Mr. Dupre have the ability to quit
    smoking?  Did Mr. Dupre have the ability to quit
    smoking?  If he had that ability, addiction didn't 2354 cause his coronary heart disease and death.
         As we suggested in our opening statement, you
    might simply ask yourself did addiction put
    Mr. Dupre in a position where he was left without
    any choice but to helplessly continue smoking
    until he died?  The evidence about Mr. Dupre and
    his smoking behavior can only lead to one answer
    to that question.  And that is no.
         Dr. Jaffe gave you his expert opinion that
    Mr. Dupre was not addicted, so, therefore, his
    addiction could not have been a legal cause of his
    coronary heart disease and death.  But this
    question really boils down to a very simple one.
    Did Mr. Dupre control his smoking or did it
    control him?
         Remember what you heard from every addiction
    expert that took the stand in this case, both Dr.
    Miller and Dr. Jaffe, and, that is, they agreed
    that addicted smokers can and do quit.  They quit
    in the millions, and they quit every day.  In
    fact, you have heard that tens of millions have.
         What that means is that it is not an
    addiction that leads unstoppably automatically to
    disease, but a smoker's decision not to continue
    smoking. 2355 Now, you heard at points about one of the
    Surgeon Generals that has served the office of the
    Surgeon General, and that's Dr. C. Everett Koop,
    no fan of the tobacco industry.  The man who was
    the Surgeon General when the 1988 report finding
    that nicotine was addictive was issued.  Well,
    Dr. Koop has his own website.  And what Dr. Koop
    says about smoking behavior on the website bears
    reviewing with regard to the subject of addiction
    and whether it was a legal cause of Mr. Dupre's
    coronary artery disease.
         Quote, when you are engaged in internal
    warfare with yourself about whether or not to
    light up a cigarette, you can fortify yourself by
    remembering this important fact.  Ultimately, you
    are the one that has control over your behavior.
    Close quote.
         Dr. Koop in his website, quote, The cigarette
    is not going to light itself and jump into your
    mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain
    induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette.
    No matter how much you have smoked or how much you
    like to smoke, the choice to light up is always
    yours.  Fighting the temptation to smoke is not
    easy.  It is always a hard-won victory, but 2356 rewards are freedom, health, and empowerment.  If
    you prepare well and arm yourself with a variety
    of strategies to combat the cravings, you can win.
         You heard Dr. Burns, certainly another person
    who is no fan of the tobacco industry, admit the
    same thing in his testimony.  He admitted that as
    with any addiction, it's the individual and the
    individual alone who can stop the behavior.  As
    Dr. Burns acknowledged, the responsibility and
    action for smoking cessation, that is, for
    quitting smoking, resides with the smoker.
         There can be no better example of that than
    Mr. Dupre.  That's because even if you find that
    Mr. Dupre was addicted, in between that addiction
    and coronary heart disease was a free thinking,
    very well disciplined -- right? -- intelligent
    human being, namely, Mr. Dupre.  Driven, ambitious
    intelligent.  And it was Mr. Dupre who controlled
    his smoking and chose not to make real earnest
    attempts to quit but to continue smoking.
         Mr. Dupre demonstrated that he had more
    intelligence, ambition, drive, and inner strength
    than, frankly, most of us.  You need no more to
    decide as a matter of common sense that he had the
    ability to control his smoking. 2357 But there is more because, we heard over and
    over again how Mr. Dupre did control his smoking.
    Didn't smoke in church, didn't smoke at the
    movies, didn't smoke at dinner, didn't smoke in
    buildings where it was prohibited, didn't smoke
    while driving his son, didn't smoke on occasion in
    the gym when his sons were there, didn't smoke
    after 1990 in the house he shared with Mrs. Dupre.
    Remember, they went through the house renovation?
    Didn't smoke at his sister's house who prohibited
    smoking.
         Mr. Dupre controlled his smoking; it did not
    control him.
         Remember, as trite as it sounds when I say
    one's actions speak louder than words, not only do
    we have Mr. Dupre's conduct, but remember we also
    have his words.  We know from his stubborn
    dismissive responses to family and friends who
    tried to get him to quit that he continued to
    smoke, not because of any addiction, but because
    he wanted to.
         The sarcastic responses that he gave his own
    children and others who tried to get him to quit,
    quote, leave me alone, stop bothering me,
    Mrs. Dupre got it right and summed it up when she 2358 said that, in her view and in her belief, quote,
    he would quit when he was ready, close quote.
         We're not here to criticize or second guess
    Mr. Dupre's choice to smoke.  To the contrary, we
    should respect his decision and not second guess
    it in this trial.  Mrs. Dupre has failed to
    satisfy her burden of proof that any nicotine
    addiction Mr. Dupre may have had was a legal
    cause, a but for cause, of his coronary heart
    disease and death.
         For that reason, your answer to that third
    question, that third issue that makes up the Engle
    class membership question, should also be no.
         Now, if your answer to the Engle class
    membership question is yes, you will go on to the
    Question 2.  This is the last subject that I am
    going to address before I turn things over to
    Mr. Kaczynski.  And, that is, Was smoking
    cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
    Company a legal cause of Richard W. Dupre's
    coronary heart disease and death.
         The discussion here really needs to be very
    short, because that's answered by all the medical
    evidence that I have walked to -- walked through.
    And I'm not going to review it again as to why 2359 Mrs. Dupre has failed to satisfy her burden of
    proof that Mr. Dupre's smoking was a legal cause,
    a but for cause, of Mr. Dupre's coronary heart
    disease and death.
         For all those reasons, when you get to
    Question 2 on the verdict sheet, I'll suggest to
    you that here, too, Mrs. Dupre has not met her
    burden of proof, not Reynolds, her burden of proof
    and that your answer to this question should also
    be no.
         I want to thank you for your attention this
    morning.  Again, I know it's not easy sitting here
    listening to lawyers review all the evidence with
    you, but we really appreciate your attention.
         I'll turn things over now to my partner,
    Mr. Kaczynski.


         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Mrs. Dupre, counsel, good morning -- or I
    guess it's -- yeah, it just turned into "good
    afternoon."
         I don't think people get tired of being
    thanked, so I want to join everyone you have heard
    from so far this morning and thank you for your 2360 service on this jury.
         You know, I said before back -- way back in
    jury selection we can't -- we can't do this
    without you.  It's absolutely true.  You rose to
    the occasion.  You answered the call of Manatee
    County, and we're within -- we're within distance
    now of wrapping this trial up.  And again, thank
    you for the service, and we truly appreciate it.
         I'm going to talk to you about that part of
    the verdict form that, as Mr. Gordon said, we
    don't think you should get to, the part that deals
    with whether Mr. Dupre relied on anything that
    R.J. Reynolds said or did, the part that deals
    with what you heard about as comparative fault,
    apportioning responsibility between Reynolds and
    Mr. Dupre, and the part that deals with whether
    punitive damages are appropriate in this case.
         Now, we don't think you will get that far
    because of the medical evidence in the case and
    the evidence you just heard summarized about
    whether or not Mr. Dupre was addicted.  But if you
    do get that far, we need to first talk about
    whether Mr. Dupre reasonably relied on anything
    that Reynolds said or did, whether any smoking
    decision he made was based on Reynolds' conduct. 2361 And, of course, there's no evidence of that
    at all, none.
         When you first walked into this courtroom on
    April 14th, you knew nothing about why Mr. Dupre
    picked up his first cigarette, when he picked up
    his first cigarette, why he chose Winston, and you
    still don't.  You have not had a shred of evidence
    that Mr. Dupre relied on anything Reynolds said or
    did.
         Every witness who took the stand, every
    single one said this:  He never talked about the
    Frank Statement; he never talked about any
    statement from Hill & Knowlton; he never talked
    about any statement from TIRC; he never talked
    about any statement from CTR; he never talked
    about any statement from The Tobacco Institute.
         Every single witness who testified said
    Mr. Dupre never said he chose Winston because of
    an ad, never said smoking wasn't harmful.  He
    never said he chose a filter because it was safer,
    and they never said he chose Winston Lights
    because they were safer.
         You know, when you come to a trial and you go
    to prove a case, you have got to introduce proof.
    The last two slides I put up there indicate to you 2362 on this issue, on the issue of whether he relied
    on anything that Reynolds said or did, there is a
    complete absence of proof, because this case is
    about Mr. Dupre and only Mr. Dupre.
         Dr. Burns was here, and Dr. Burns is well
    credentialed.  He showed you a lot of ads, many
    for brands that Mr. Dupre never smoked.  Some ads
    ran before he was born.  You saw a company
    document from 1927.  You saw it again here today
    in closing.  What's up with that?
         And you were told filters were advertised as
    safer.  Well, let's focus on what this case is
    about.  Mr. Dupre, what did he smoke?  He smoked
    Winston.  How was Winston advertised.  You saw it
    this morning.  Winston tastes good like a
    cigarette should, taste, not safety.  And when he
    couldn't find Winston, you heard that he smoked
    Marlboro.  How was Marlboro advertised?  Come to
    where the flavor is, come to Marlboro country.
    Flavor, not safer.  See a pattern?
         And, by the way, why are we even talking
    about advertising?  This is a man who took courses
    in school on business law in consumer behavior, in
    basic marketing.  He got a business degree.
    Everybody who came into this Court talked about 2363 him -- described him as intelligent and successful
    in every aspect of his life.  Is this a man who is
    going to rely on advertising to make his
    decisions?  Clearly not.
         Every time you turn away from the generic
    stuff that Dr. Burns talked about and focus on
    Mr. Dupre, you come up empty.  There's no proof
    there.  Did anything Reynolds say or do cause him
    to doubt the risks of smoking?  If he ever doubted
    them, he never told anybody.
         His sister Pam said smoking was prohibited in
    their home.  She got caught, and she got punished.
    Mrs. Dupre figured out that Mr. Dupre knew when
    she said he started to try to quit smoking in the
    seventies.  His children knew the risks when both
    parents warned him against them and that if his
    daughter Connie was caught, she would be punished.
         But, again, of course he knew the risks.  You
    heard that Mr. Dupre had Reader's Digest and Life
    magazines in the house growing up, read the
    St. Pete Times and Bradenton Herald, watched TV
    news, subscribed to fitness magazines.  This is
    proof.  This is the proof that is germane to that
    issue.
         You heard about the dilution of publicity 2364 about the link between smoking and disease.  The
    articles we showed you, they don't lie and they
    don't die.  You saw them from beginning to when
    Mr. Dupre was barely two years old.  You saw them
    in Reader's Digest, and there's a handful of them
    in the 1950s and beyond.  You saw them in
    newspapers.  You saw them in magazines.  You saw
    them on television.  You saw them -- we saw what
    was taught in schools.  And you saw public service
    announcements.
         And this is only a small piece of it, folks.
    There was a lot more that's in evidence.  And when
    you go back to the jury room, I urge you to look
    at every bit of it.  This is the proof.  This is
    what was out there.
         And when I stand here and say the word got
    out, that the word got out about the risk of
    smoking, it's not just me saying that, and it's
    not just in 2014 either.  You saw Dr. Hammond in
    "See It Now":  People should be warned of the
    dangers, and they are being warned.  What they
    want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is
    their own business.
         Also in the 1950s, you heard from the Surgeon
    General and the head of the National Cancer 2365 Institute.  The public is being informed.  You saw
    a Gallup poll from 1957.  Not only did 77 percent
    of people hear about this American Cancer Society
    report, more smokers heard about it than
    nonsmokers.
         You heard from the America Medical
    Association, no friend of the tobacco industry.
    In 1964, commenting on the warning label, they
    said that it's been well publicized for more than
    10 years; labeling will not alert even the young
    cigarette smoker to any risks of which he's not
    already aware.
         A year later, Florida Health Notes, nearly
    all Floridians have heard about the Surgeon
    General's report.
         Fast forward a few years.  You heard about
    Dr. Daniel Horn, Dr. Burns mentor:  You could
    stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous
    at the top of your lungs, and you would not be
    telling anyone anything they did not already know.
         And then Dr. Horn's mentee, Dr. Burns, in
    1975:  More Americans knew that cigarette smoking
    was dangerous for them than knew the president of
    the United States.  And, again, in 1981:  95
    percent of smokers are thoroughly aware of 2366 health dangers, and 90 percent realize that their
    health could be affected.
         And I should point out to you this is four
    years before Dr. Burns because a regular on the
    witness circuit in cigarette cases.  This is what
    he thought before he became a professional
    witness.  Ninety-five percent of smokers knew.
         And what about Mr. Dupre?  Well, you heard.
    He had a thirst for education.  He was a consumer
    of knowledge.  Would a man like this make his
    smoking decisions based on advertising or public
    statements?  Wouldn't it be based on this
    publicity?  Not Fred Flintstone, not Jed Clampett,
    not the guy with the big hair from the Tobacco
    Institute.  I ask you to use your common sense.
         In his opening statement and again in his
    closing, Mr. Pinder talked about railroad tracks.
    He even had a little picture for you this time.  I
    am glad he did.  The evidence in this case was
    that when they were at the railroad station,
    Reynolds and Mr. Dupre were parallel tracks.  And
    even when they went off in the distance, they
    stayed parallel tracks.  Those tracks never
    crossed.  Don't fall for the optical illusion that
    Dr. Burns tried to create.  There is no evidence 2367 whatsoever that Mr. Dupre reasonably relied on
    anything that Reynolds said or did.  So you should
    check no to Questions 4 or 5 on the verdict form.
         Now, in and of itself, this ought to be the
    end of the issue, but there's one thing more.
    There has been a lot of talk in this case about
    shared responsibility.  You heard it in opening.
    You heard it in closing.  You saw it on the
    verdict form.  And I'm going to have a little bit
    to say about that in a minute.
         But you already heard in Judge Dubensky's
    instruction -- and it will be on the verdict
    form -- that if you check yes to either one of
    those questions, either one, you are guaranteeing
    that Mr. Dupre is zero percent responsible for his
    conduct.
         The verdict form is quite clear about it.  It
    says:  In the event and only in the event that you
    find in favor of plaintiff on her claims, by fraud
    by concealment or conspiracy to commit fraud by
    concealment, the Court will not reduce the total
    amount of damages by any percentage of fault which
    you find is chargeable to the plaintiff.
         That's the language.  So if you think that
    Mr. Dupre should be responsible at all for his 2368 conduct, for his choice to smoke, for his choice
    to continue to smoke, for his choice to continue
    to smoke in the face of warning labels, for not
    seriously trying to quit, if you think he's
    responsible at all for any of that, then you
    cannot check yes to those questions.  Because
    checking yes to those questions has the effect of
    making him zero percent responsible.  If you want
    the rest of the verdict form to count, to matter,
    then this is what you should check on those two
    questions.
         So that brings us -- if we get past that,
    though, the next subject is comparative fault.
    And I kind of prefer the phrase comparative
    responsibility.  It's the part of the verdict form
    where you have to decide by percentage who is
    responsible for Mr. Dupre's decisions, Mr. Dupre
    or somebody else.
         And as Mr. Gordon said, we are not asking you
    to blame him.  We're not asking you to put him at
    fault.  We're asking you to respect the choices he
    made throughout his life.  And we have been up
    front with you from jury selection forward.  Our
    position is that Mr. Dupre and only Mr. Dupre is
    responsible for the choices he made.  Only 2369 Mr. Dupre could choose to begin to smoke.  Only
    Mr. Dupre could choose to continue to smoke.  And
    only Mr. Dupre could choose whether or not to quit
    and then to follow-up on that choice.
         Mr. Gordon talked to you about the
    seriousness of the quit attempts.  I'm not going
    to go there.  But, you know, the plaintiff's trial
    team here from opening statements on or from jury
    selection on talked about shared responsibility.
    The only problem is that the team's emphasis on
    shared responsibility is not shared with the
    plaintiff.  It's not shared by the plaintiff.
         You heard Mrs. Dupre on the witness stand.
    She does not hold her husband responsible for his
    first cigarette, because he was a kid and kids do
    silly things.  She doesn't hold him responsible
    for his smoking as an adult, because she believes
    he was addicted.  We were up front with you about
    that, about our position.  Others were not.  But
    you've got to ask yourself, If Mr. Dupre wasn't
    responsible for his own smoking behavior, who was?
    Who?
         You know, you heard Pam Bishop talk about
    Mr. Dupre beginning to smoke roughly 1963 or 1964,
    somewhere in that time frame.  Well, what was 2370 happening in 1963 and 1964?  Well, for one thing,
    this book came out, the report of the Surgeon
    General's committee, January 11th, 1964.  That
    night, there were stories on every major network.
    Next year, Florida Health Notes said, Everybody
    has heard -- every Floridian has heard the report.
    Then the warning labels.  You saw it was taught in
    schools.  You saw it was reported in newspapers.
    You saw it was reported in magazines.  And you saw
    the public service announcements.  In the face of
    all this, Mr. Dupre decided to smoke, and he
    decided to continue to smoke.
         Is his situation any different from the 50 or
    60 million Americans who quit smoking?  All of
    them had that dopamine release you heard about.
    All of them had increased nicotine receptors.  And
    about half of them, according to statistics, were
    addicted.  Was he somehow different from the tens
    of millions of Americans who quit over the years?
    Well, yeah, you could make out a case that he was,
    that he was.  He was highly educated.  He was more
    disciplined.  He was more ambitious.  And he was
    more driven.  Everybody told you that.  But he
    chose to continue to smoke.  Mr. Dupre and nobody
    else is responsible for that. 2371 And whether you call -- you take 10 percent,
    25 percent, he's a hundred percent responsible for
    the decisions he's made.  And we're asking you to
    respect the decisions he made, respect his choices
    when you fill out the verdict form.
         If you do get to the point where you choose
    to award damages, we're asking you to be
    reasonable, to reasonably compensate Mrs. Dupre
    and her children for the loss.  You heard from
    Mrs. Dupre she runs her own business.  You saw the
    children.  They're well adjusted.  No one is going
    to suggest -- nobody would ever suggest that you
    could replace a spouse or a parent.  But if you
    get this far in this case, if you get this far
    down the verdict form in the face of everything
    you have seen, I suggest to you that the award is
    not be the big numbers that Mr. Pinder was writing
    up there, but would be more akin to a recovery on
    an insurance policy than a windfall.
         Now, if you get to the very end of the
    verdict form, if you get to the question of
    whether punitive damages are appropriate -- and,
    first, let's just be absolutely clear about what
    punitive damages are.  They are quite simply more
    money for Mrs. Dupre.  They don't go to 2372 American Cancer Society.  They don't go to
    stop-smoking programs.  They don't go to the State
    of Florida.  They go to Mrs. Dupre.
         The plaintiffs have to prove entitlement by a
    higher level of proof -- you heard that from the
    Court -- clear and convincing evidence.  And you
    have the jury instructions.  You can refer to them
    in your deliberation room.
         What did they show you to warrant punitive
    damages?  Well, a lot of what they showed you had
    absolutely nothing to do with Mr. Dupre and was
    simply designed to get you mad, to get you mad to
    award punitive damages.  A lot of what you said --
    saw and heard also just wasn't so.  Remember in
    opening statement I asked you to keep an open mind
    until all the evidence was in?  And I think maybe
    you saw a reason for that.  Because although
    documents don't lie, documents don't die,
    sometimes they fib.  I'll give a couple of
    examples.
         They showed you the Flintstones, right?  And
    you were probably appalled.  They showed you
    without a witness, nobody to cross examine.  This
    is from the party with the burden of proof.  No
    witness.  And you had to wait until our case to 2373 find out a few things.
         For example, you had to find -- wait until
    our case to find out that Flintstones were an
    adult cartoon based on the Honeymooners.  Fred was
    Ralph Kramden; Barney was Ed Norton.  It debuted
    on prime time, not a Saturday morning TV show.
    And the other sponsor was Alka Seltzer an antacid,
    obviously an adult product.
         They showed you Jed Clampett from the Beverly
    Hillbillies, again, without a witness, nobody to
    cross-examine.  This was from the party with the
    burden of proof.  You had to wait until our case
    to learn that Reynolds discontinued advertising on
    the Beverly Hillbillies when they found out that a
    significant portion of the viewership was under
    the age of 21.
         You read a document about a meeting in 1953
    at the Plaza Hotel.  No witness, the side with the
    burden of proof, nobody to cross-examine.  You had
    to wait until our case to learn that the meeting
    was reported in the New York Times.  You had to
    wait until our case to learn that the companies
    informed the assistant Attorney General of the
    United States about the meeting.
         And you had to wait until our case to 2374 learn -- look at this, the following.  Mr. Pinder
    just stood up here this morning and said when the
    Frank Statement went out it was a lie.  Really?
    Let's see what this document, this plaintiff's
    exhibit says.
         The industry is strongly convinced that
    there's no sound scientific basis for the charges
    they have made.  They point out, basically, that
    the National Cancer Institute has refuted the
    tie-up between smoking and he cancer.  And guess
    what?  You also learned in our case that the
    director of the National Cancer Institute said
    that any connection between heavy smoking and lung
    cancer had not been definitely established to our
    satisfaction.
         Some lie.  The document says they believed
    it.  They relied on the National Cancer Institute.
    And there's the National Cancer Institute taking
    that position.
         And you learned in our case that all the way
    up to the Surgeon General's report, the cigarette
    industry had some company in demanding stronger
    proof.  For example, stronger proof was demanded
    by Dr. John Heller, who we just heard; from Dr.
    Charles Mayo of the Mayo Clinic, Dr. John Briggs, 2375 who is the president the American College of Chest
    Physicians; and Dr. Lewis Robbins who was with the
    public health service.
         You read documents about Reynolds'
    experimenting with different levels of nicotine.
    Again, no witness from the party with the burden
    of proof, but I did cross-examine Dr. Burns about
    it.  And you learned that Reynolds was being
    encouraged to conduct this research by a whole
    bunch of folks, Mr. Michael Russell in Britain,
    Dr. Sir Richard Doll, knighted by the Queen for
    his cancer research, by the National Cancer
    Institute and in the 1981 Surgeon General's
    report.
         And then when we got to our case, you also
    learned -- and you learned in an internal Reynolds
    company document, I was accused -- we were accused
    of running away from them.  In this document you
    learned that low tar medium nicotine cigarettes
    were advocated by Dr. Murray Jarvik, co-inventor
    of the nicotine patch, Dr. Stanley Schachter of
    Columbia and Consumer Reports.
         And you learned that the goal was not to
    addict smokers but to develop a less hazardous
    cigarette by maintaining or even raising the level 2376 of nicotine in cigarettes.  And some of the
    testimony you heard turned out not to be so.
         When Dr. Burns was on the stand, Mr. Finch
    went through it decade by decade.  What was the
    question?  Did Reynolds do everything to take
    carcinogens out of cigarette smoke.  And as to
    every decade, Dr. Burns said no.
         Well, again, we showed you some documents
    that don't lie and documents that don't die.  Take
    a look at this.  You saw in our case -- we didn't
    run away from this.  You saw all the various ways
    in the 1950s that Reynolds had tried to get
    carcinogens out of tobacco smoke.  120
    experiments, half a million cigarettes tested.
    You saw this speech in 1969 from Dr. Rodgman
    describing the testing that Reynolds did to find
    out what was in cigarette smoke.  You saw
    Reynolds' submission to the Surgeon General's
    committee in 1963.  You saw Ames testing for
    mutagenicity for cancer-causing propensities over
    a five-year period from the 1970s into the 1980s.
    You saw cooperation with the National Cancer
    Institute until the Cancer Institute pulled the
    plug in 1977.
         And here is one of those documents that are 2377 written when nobody else is looking that you heard
    about, one of these company documents we're
    supposed to be running away from, the president of
    the company to the chief scientist asking for
    cooperation with the government in smoking and
    health.  And if there's a safer cigarette, let's
    continue and increase our efforts in the program.
    Please prepare a plan and carry it out.
         You saw the results of the mouse-skin
    painting testing, of the design changes that were
    developed with the Tobacco Working Group.  You saw
    the minutes of a meeting in 1976 with the Tobacco
    Working Group.  The National Cancer Institute
    suggested raising the level of nicotine.  You
    heard calls from a whole variety of people asking
    for this research.  Dr. Doll, Russell, Jarvik,
    Schachter, all the way down to Consumer Reports.
         And you saw the memo, the internal document
    we're not running away from where R.J. Reynolds
    followed the calls of these folks for a low tar,
    medium-nicotine cigarette.
         You saw Dr. Senkus and Rodgman thanked for
    their work on the Tobacco Working Group.  You saw
    that additives were tested for safety and were
    found to be safe.  And you have heard that 2378 additives have been disclosed to the federal
    government since 1984 and that Reynolds offered to
    disclose them to the federal government as far
    back as 1964.
         You heard that the industry funded research
    by the American Medical Association.  You heard
    that Reynolds hosted a conference and then
    published a book about its nicotine research.  You
    heard about how --
         THE COURT:  You have got five minutes,
    Mr. Kaczynski.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Excuse me, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  About five minutes.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Thank you.
         You heard about Premier in the 1980s, the
    so-called new cigarette that heated rather than
    burned tobacco, Premier.  You saw the report, the
    700-page report -- it's in evidence; you can look
    at it -- of the blue ribbon commission that
    examined the testing conducted on Premier.  Did
    Reynolds get the carcinogens out of cigarette
    smoke?  If you want to take a look, take a look at
    this.  You bet they did.  Take a look at
    benzo[a]pyrene on the left second from the bottom,
    a carcinogen, 99.1 percent gone.  Look at 2379 tobacco-specific nitrosamines in the right column?
    91.6, 97.1, 90.0.  Did Reynolds take the
    carcinogens out of tobacco smoke in Premier?  They
    sure did.  And what happened?  Well, you heard
    that too.  The U.S. government, our tax dollars at
    work, didn't wait to be confused by the facts.
    The Office of Smoking and Health declared a war on
    Premier.  Their words, not mine.  Initiate a war
    against new tobacco products.
         Dr. Michael Russell in Britain, who Dr. Burns
    said was a giant in the field of nicotine
    research, he wrote to Reynolds as you saw, that
    the reaction of the U.S. government to Premier was
    political and irrational, and he urged Reynolds
    not to give up, and they didn't.
         Eclipse.  And you saw the report, the blue
    ribbon commission on Eclipse.  The testing
    achieved similar results to Premier.  Eclipse is
    on the market today.
         This work that we've shown you here took
    place over 50 years, and it's memorialized in
    documents that don't lie and documents that don't
    die.
         It's a record of achievement that does not
    warrant punishment.  You saw -- does this warrant 2380 deterrence?  You saw the Reynolds website.  On the
    Reynolds website Reynolds acknowledges that
    smoking causes disease and says there is no safe
    tobacco product; it only reduces the risk.  It
    advises smokers concerned to quite, directs people
    to the Surgeon General, listing ingredients, and
    tells minors not to smoke.
         And when this trial is over, you can go to
    the different website, the document website, which
    is here, and you can search litigation-involved
    documents from the files of R.J. Reynolds.
         The need for deterrence?  Not by clear and
    convincing evidence.  So when you get to this
    question on the verdict form, we're going to ask
    you to check no.
         This is the last chance anybody from the
    defense counsel's table gets to talk to you.  I
    anticipate Mr. Finch will have a rebuttal.  I have
    no earthly idea what he's going to say, but we are
    not going to have an opportunity to respond.  So
    what I would ask is one of you to be my advocate
    in the jury.
         MR. PINDER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  As phrased, sustained.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  But when you go back in 2381 jury room and you've heard the -- and when you've
    heard the arguments in rebuttal, think about how
    we would have responded.
         Apart from that, ladies and gentlemen,
    whatever the verdict, we thank you for your time,
    and we thank you for your incredible attention.
    And when you get done here, you can go back and
    tell your folks and friends and family, at work
    that you helped make the system work, because you
    truly did.  Thank you.
         Thank you, Your Honor.