MR. WALKER: Thank you, Judge.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I'm going to do something that maybe I should have tried harder to do earlier in the case, and that is to be brief.
I want you to know, as the person who from the very beginning said to you that we were going to take the position that Reynolds should have no liability and no damages, that your verdict, which essentially found for the plaintiff on every claim
that they had, sent a very loud and a very clear message to me, to the people at Reynolds, and to Dr. Gentry. And you should know that.
I understand that there were good reasons why there would be an attempt to try to demonize Dr. Gentry. But he was right here on the stand. You got to look him in the eye. He's not some evil genius in a laboratory. He's a guy working in a company that makes controversial products.
He and the other people in the research and development department where he works are doing the best that they can today to do right by their customers and to do right by their products.
Throughout most of this trial, I had a very difficult job to do. I had to try to respond in evidence and in argument to some pretty amazing documents that you saw and some very serious allegations about what Reynolds was doing in the 1950s, the 1960s, the 1970s, and the '80s. And that's a tough job. But what I'm glad that I was finally able to do today was to introduce you a little bit to the company that is R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company today.
And I hope that you were able to see from the demonstratives that we had, the ones that we
showed you, and through Dr. Gentry's testimony that the company that is Reynolds today is not the same company that engaged in the conduct that caused you to check yes on the punitive damages question. It's not the same company when it comes to the people involved. Dr. Teague is gone.
Dr. Johnston -- you saw a couple of clips from him in Congress -- he's gone. Dr. Rodgman is gone.
All of those people that you saw, some of them from other companies who were sitting back in those videos with that smug look on their face, those people are all gone.
What remains today is a company in Winston-Salem with just 4,000 employees of people who are trying to do the right thing. When they do research, when they uncover new things, they don't stick them in a drawer or write memos to each other about how they shouldn't tell people. They publish it in peer-reviewed journals. They come out with books. They give presentations in front of the Federal Trade Commission or the Federal Drug -- or the Food and Drug Administration or other government entities. They do the things that we know from your verdict that you think and we think corporations should be
doing.
It doesn't change your verdict from Phase I. Whatever verdict you reach in this case will not change your verdict in Phase I. But the question that you have to answer on the verdict form is what is the amount of damages that you're going to impose against the company that's going to write the check today. And that company, not the company from the fifties or the sixties, is the one that's asking you to be fair and to be just.
That's the company that has a website where they say to the whole world the things that by your verdict you've told them they should have been saying before. That's the company that lists all of their ingredients online by brand, by brand family, and by specific brands, where anyone can go on and find out not just what's in the cigarettes but how much of it is in the cigarettes. That's the company that spent hundreds of millions of dollars chasing a safer cigarette.
Now, Mr. Trentalange is right. The Eclipse cigarettes, the Premier cigarette that we showed you that the company spent so much money working on, there is not a person right now who will tell
you that those are safe cigarettes. Dr. Gentry didn't say that, because his view is there is no such thing as a safe cigarette.
The reason we brought you that testimony is so that you could see, comparing the company today to the company before, that this is a good company that's trying to make safer cigarettes.
It's a scientifically, technologically challenging task, but what you expect a company to do that's responsible, that should not be punished, is to try, to throw time at the problem, to throw money at the problem. And Reynolds has done all of those things. And you're entitled to take that into consideration in making your determination.
Can I have the ELMO, please?
I'm not going to try to persuade you of my points with a bunch of boards or PowerPoint slides. I just want to refer you to things that you're going to see in the jury instructions.
You've heard them, but you're going to get a copy.
The first thing is, you are to decide the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment and as a deterrent to others. This amount would be in addition to the compensatory
damages you have previously awarded.
I have highlighted that, because I wanted to remind you that the biggest part of your work you've already done. You've decided all of the difficult questions about medical causation, about what types of injuries Ms. Loyd had. You've decided the difficult -- maybe you didn't think they were difficult, but you've decided the questions about what the companies did and how that affected Ms. Loyd. And you settled, all six of you settled on just the right amount, not too much and not too little, that you believe was fair compensation and full compensation to Mr. Loyd and to the estate of Jacqueline Loyd for the damages that the Reynolds of old caused. Any damages that you award now are over and above and in addition to the full compensation that you've already decided.
In this paragraph, I have highlighted where the Judge's instruction is, that while you were permitted to consider harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in determining whether to award punitive damages, you are not to do so in determining the amount of punitive damages to award.
That's one of the reasons why, I guess it was yesterday, when you heard closing arguments, you were able to hear arguments about the number of people who were affected by the fact that cigarette smoking is permitted in this country. You've heard that evidence, but that's not what you're here to decide today.
On the next page, the Judge's instructions are, You may impose punitive damages only -- I'm sorry -- against Reynolds only for the conduct shown by clear and convincing evidence to have caused Jacqueline Loyd's smoking-related injury, not based on any conclusion that Reynolds is an unsavory business.
I know from your verdict and from the evidence that you saw to get to that verdict that you've been given a lot of reasons in this trial to think that Reynolds and other tobacco companies are in an unsavory line of work. No question about it. Some of you may have already formed that opinion. Maybe you haven't.
The bottom line for this phase, however, is that this is not an opportunity for you to punish Reynolds for being in the cigarette business. For better or for worse, our country allows companies
like Reynolds to sell a product that is inherently risky, that cannot be made safe by any known technology that we have. Nevertheless, the product is sold and some people, maybe not Ms. Loyd, maybe Ms. Loyd didn't know the risks, but there are many people today who did know the risks, who know what's on the side of the package, and who decide to buy that risky product.
You shouldn't punish Reynolds just for existing as a cigarette company.
It goes on. The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity protected by federal law. Therefore, you may not impose punitive damages to punish Reynolds for simply manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes.
And that's essentially the same point that I just made.
And then of course, Mr. Trentalange read you, You may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages at all.
But back to the question about punishment and deterrence. You're entitled to consider and you're supposed to consider whether the Reynolds of today that's going to write that check needs to be deterred and how much deterrence do they need.
We're not in the fifties anymore and we're not in the sixties. And Reynolds, as a cigarette company, occupies, lives in a time when a company can live -- the people who are running Reynolds live in a time where everything that they do is scrutinized, watched, publicized, criticized and called to their attention if they do something wrong.
The FDA is regulating the cigarette companies. And you saw all -- we had two slides worth of regulations where they have to disclose to the government on a regular basis everything they put in cigarettes, everything about nicotine that relates to their cigarettes, everything that they're doing with those cigarettes. It would be impossible in today's environment for a company to get -- at least a cigarette company -- to get away with the kind of concealment or conspiracy that you talked about in your verdict. It's just not something that requires deterrence in this day and age.
And even if there were companies out there who would try, the evidence that you heard in this phase of the trial is that the people who are running Reynolds right now aren't trying to
conceal anything. They're not trying to mislead anyone. It's all about transparency. They have opened up the books. All the internal documents that you saw in this trial, and more, you can just go online and pull those up, and there is as many more as you want to spend time reading. All of the company's positions are online like an open book.
That kind of transparency, that kind of frankness with the public health community is what separates the Reynolds from today from the Reynolds from the past. And you can take that into consideration in determining whether Reynolds needs to be deterred, and, if so, with how much money.
So you already know that you don't have to come up with a figure on the verdict form, so I'm not going to -- I'm not going to argue one way or the other for that. But what I do want to suggest to you is that if you are going to come up with an amount of money to punish Reynolds or to deter Reynolds, whatever in your judgment you think needs to happen at this stage, I would ask that you not do that by picking a number out of thin air. It would be easy to just pick a number on
the verdict form and decide you're going to multiply that number by two or three or five or six or seven. But you're not -- but if you did that, you wouldn't really be giving the attention in this phase that you-all paid over the month that you were here for the first phase.
What I would suggest is that you think about something along the following lines. We had a slide in the first phase of this trial. I showed you yesterday where we did the math, and we figured out exactly how many days Ms. Loyd was a cigarette smoker. We started all the way back in 1951 when she was 16 years old, and we carried that all the way up to 1993 when we know she quit smoking. And that 43 or 42 years, whatever it is, we multiplied that times the number of days in that period, and we showed you that she was a smoker for 15,609 days.
That's a lot of days smoking, obviously, and I know that played a part in your verdict.
We know from the evidence that Ms. Loyd was about a pack-a-day smoker. So one way of not picking a number out of thin air would be to figure out exactly how much money Ms. Loyd spent or how much money the tobacco companies received
from her for those cigarettes over those 40 years.
Cigarettes today -- if you pick the number of $5 -- probably when she started, cigarettes cost a lot less than $5 a pack, and maybe today they cost a lot more, depending on what brand you buy and where you buy it. But if you were to give $5 for every single pack that she smoked on every single one of those days from 1951 to 1993, those 15,000 days, your award would be $80,000.
Now, I'm rounding up to get to that point.
Some of you might think that $80,000 on top of the full compensation that you've already awarded to Ms. Loyd isn't good enough. And there is a principle in the law by which a jury sitting in the position that you're in can take a number like that, that bears some relation to the facts of the case, and you can double it or triple it according to how you feel about this case. You may think that $80,000 doesn't capture how you felt about Reynolds, of the past conduct in this case. And if so, maybe you will double that number.
There is a concept in the law called treble damages, where when someone has really done something wrong, you can triple it. And that
would be almost -- that would be about $250,000. And again, I'm rounding up.
Any of those numbers -- because obviously we're in your hands when it comes to what you do in this phase of the trial -- any of those numbers would essentially be saying to Reynolds of today, you need to give all that money back. You made this money from Ms. Loyd and ultimately that caused her injuries, and we're going to take it all back. And if you did that, that would send a message, on top of this verdict form where you checked every question for the plaintiff, that would send a powerful message to the people at Reynolds about how you felt about this case.
So the bottom line, because I said I would be brief, is the Reynolds of the past, the people you saw in those videos, Teague, Rodgman, Horrigan, Johnston, Cullman -- remember the Philip Morris guy who made that comment, all those crazy comments? None of those people are at Reynolds. None of those people have been at Reynolds for years.
Dr. Cummings said that the conspiracy, the 50-year coverup ended in 2000. And for the last 12 or 13 years, Reynolds has been the company that
you heard about today from Dr. Gentry. You're entitled to consider that. You should consider that. That's the company. Those are the people that are relying on you to be fair in this phase as you were in the last phase.
Thank you.
