MR. TRENTALANGE: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon. In many ways this is like running a race. You run a marathon, and a marathon is 26 miles, 385 yards. And the 385 yards tacked on the end are what make it important, make it a marathon. Because if you just run the 26 miles and you don't finish, you haven't run a marathon. It's all about finishing.
So we're here to ask you to finish the job that you started and have partially completed in this case. And to finish that job and to do complete justice, you need to award punitive damages in an amount sufficient to send a message to R.J. Reynolds. Because they really haven't gotten the message.
You heard the testimony from Dr. Gentry in this case. You heard his testimony today, the second day of the fifth week, after hearing four weeks of excuses about R.J. Reynolds' conduct.
You heard four weeks of excuses, but they saved the best for last in terms of somebody to come in and really give you excuses.
You found there was concealment on the part of R.J. Reynolds of known health risks. And folks, they're still concealing it. They're attempting to conceal in the courtroom -- they being R.J. Reynolds -MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. TRENTALANGE: R.J. Reynolds.
MR. WALKER: Your Honor -MR. TRENTALANGE: R.J. Reynolds.
MR. WALKER: Objection. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. TRENTALANGE: Can I get the ELMO, please?
The 2010 Surgeon General's report. Just -they took it, it's framed. They passed a cigarette around to you, that thing, about how they have changed. Okay?
This is the 2010 Surgeon General's report,
How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and
Behavorial Basis for Smoking and Attributable Disease. It's in evidence. It's PT03895.
More recently, tobacco companies have developed several other novel cigarette-like products that deliver nicotine to the consumer, specifically Eclipse. R.J. Reynolds. Both human and machine testing data indicate that these products provide no clear benefit to users over conventional cigarettes. A report commissioned by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Public Health, found that intensive machine smoking of Eclipse delivered levels of key lung and cancer-causing intoxicants similar to or higher than those from two commercial cigarette brands.
So that's how they've changed.
We can turn that off.
Those devices cause cancer at or above the same levels as their cigarettes. That's their reform. Okay?
Now, they told you about accepting a message or having a message. Let me tell you, folks, they got the message up in Winston-Salem. The message was there is a jury down in Tampa that's on to us.
Get down there and see if you can do something
about it. That's the message that they got.
I counted the number of times that the witness, Dr. Gentry, said "in general" in response to questions. Generally. We're here on this case. Why is he in general? Why doesn't he know this case? You need to teach him about this case and about their responsibility for the harm -I keep saying "they." I'm talking about R.J. Reynolds. I'm used to there being two defendants in the case for most of the trial.
But R.J. Reynolds needs to be responsible for the harm that R.J. Reynolds did to Jacqueline Loyd in this case. They still don't get it, folks.
You're going to need to finish that 385 yards and send them the message. Not get down there and see what we can do about it, but you need to change. You need to change for real, and you need to change for good.
And by the way, you know, you're still the same companies. It's R.J. Reynolds. It's the same corporate entity that's responsible for everything that it did in the past.
You know, if you get punished, you probably, you know, if you're a kid and you get grounded for two weeks -- okay? -- or a month, you're probably
sorry after a day. You're really sorry after, you know, two days. But you got -- you have to do the whole time. You know, it's like any other principle. The punishment is there, and you need to accept the entire punishment.
And the punishment needs to fit the wrong in this case. And it just doesn't mean I'm sorry, because if that's all it means, then you take I'm sorry and you turn it into I'm sorry I got caught.
And what you heard from that witness on behalf of R.J. Reynolds was I'm sorry we got caught, not I'm sorry. Because you saw from the Surgeon General's report that their solution or their attempted solution is actually worse than the problem they're trying to solve. Okay?
The way that you say you're sorry is that you, first of all, admit responsibility not in some qualified way. Yes, we accept -- yes, we got the message generally. Generally, no. Yes, we got the message and we're willing to make it right. Okay?
Think about a kid who goes with firecrackers and blows up a bunch of mailboxes. Okay? The first thing you do is he's got to pay to replace the mailboxes. Right? But if you're that kid's
parent, it's a lot more than that. There is punishment to make sure not just that the lesson is learned but that it stays learned. Okay?
Because R.J. Reynolds is going to continue to exist into the future, and we need to make sure, you need to make sure that the lessons learned in this courtroom stay learned.
Even the testimony from this witness indicates that there is this wordsmanship that's going on. They say that they have learned,
R.J. Reynolds says it's learned from the public health authority and that it accepts the findings of the public health authority, the public health community, the Surgeon General.
The Surgeon General came out with a report in 1988 that said that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine and heroin. Okay? But nine years later, the gentleman that you heard from testified in a deposition that it was not addictive.
He said it was that -- it was his personal opinion. Think about that for a second. Okay? Personal opinion about what your favorite color is, is one thing. But the personal opinion of a Ph.D. in analytical chemistry about the substance that is in his company's product, how can
divorce that, his personal opinion? The personal opinion of a chemist on an issue of chemistry, that's sophistry. Okay?
That's what they're doing. That's what that's about. And that's what they will continue to do unless you stop them.
So you're going to get this Phase II verdict form. And you have it in front of you. It's a lot simpler than the Phase I verdict form.
What is the total amount of punitive damages, if any, which you find by the greater weight of the evidence should be assessed by R.J. Reynolds -- should be assessed against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company? If you will elect not to assess punitive damages, you should enter zero as the amount of damages.
Folks, it would dishonor the evidence in this case for you to assess a zero. So I'm going to skip over that line. And I think by your verdict you already acknowledged that.
The total amount of punitive damages in this case needs to bear a rational relationship to the damages that you assessed, the compensatory damages, because the damages in this case are for what R.J. Reynolds did to Jacqueline Loyd.
And what did they do to Jacqueline Loyd?
There is a line from a Clint Eastwood movie.
It's Unforgiven. Clint Eastwood is a gunslinger.
He kills people in that movie. And he has a change of heart, but then he goes back. And he's talking to a young would-be gunslinger. And he says, It's a hell of a thing killing a man. You take away everything he has and everything he will ever have.
Folks, they're responsible. R.J. Reynolds is responsible for the death of a human being because of years of fraud and concealment. It doesn't get any worse than that. Okay? So your damages that you assess in this phase have to recognize the severity of the conduct and have to recognize the harm that was done to Jacqueline Loyd. They took away everything she had. R.J. Reynolds took away everything she had and everything she would ever have.
So having said that, again, I will tell you, nobody, nobody on our side of the fence, and I would suspect nobody on their side of the fence, wants a runaway jury. So your damages, while they have to send a clear, unmistakable message, don't get out of control. A reasonable number.
Now, by the way, I make a suggestion. You're the jury. Obviously, you can do whatever your collective wisdom says that you should do. But my suggestion is that you look at the number you assessed, $3,000,000, $3.1 million, and you award five times that to send a message to R.J. Reynolds. That's $15,500,000. Okay? That's the salary of about seven and a half of the witnesses that you heard. Okay? That sends a clear message. Okay?
Whatever you do, that's my suggestion. You can raise it if you want to, you can lower it if you want to, but, please don't award more than eight times, because we would have a significant problem upholding that on appeal. Okay?
So use your judgment -MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor, as to that comment.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. TRENTALANGE: My suggestion to you is do not exceed eight times compensatory damages. My suggestion is five times, which is $15,000,000.
If somebody says to you -- remember, this is the greater weight of the evidence standard again.
You had question 13, which was clear and
convincing evidence. We're back to greater weight on this question. So the amount of damages that you're going to award in this case are driven by the greater weight of the evidence, more likely than not.
Again, if you're back there deliberating and somebody says, I'm just not sure that's the right amount of money, remind them that they don't have to be sure. It's okay not to be sure as long as it's more likely than not the correct amount of money. If somebody says, I have my doubts about that; that's a lot of money for one person, remember, you're not allowed to take into consideration things like that. It's just the evidence. Okay? It's the amount of money necessary to punish and deter the defendant for their wrongful conduct.
So think about things that are important.
Think about what it's going to take to make sure,
A, that they get the message, and B, that they remember the message in this case. Remember, the gravity and harms in this case are as bad as it gets.
And remember, money is the only thing we have to change the conduct. You can't put a
corporation in jail. You can't ground a corporation. The only thing we have to send this message is money.
I'm going to get back up in a little while and talk to you again. I made an effort to make it short, because I think brevity in this situation is warranted. This is a punitive damages case. You recognized that with your initial verdict. This is a major corporation that needs to be sent a very important message. And you are the ones, under the law, you're the only ones that can send a message.
So as I said to you earlier, do the right thing.



MR. TRENTALANGE: How much time do I have?
THE CLERK: Eighteen minutes.
MR. TRENTALANGE: I won't be that long.
May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. TRENTALANGE: If you award $80,000 for punitive damages, you're going to be sending a message to Winston-Salem, and the message is we got some dumb folks down in Florida. You saw what they did. You saw how long they did it. Really, a refund for causing somebody's death? A refund?
Is that -- that's picking a number out of the air and then trying to substantiate it by reference to something that bears no relationship. You're supposed to look at the harm caused to Jacqueline Loyd and Ellis Loyd and the severity of the conduct that caused that harm.
The cost of a cigarette? What if they gave it to her free? What if they gave her the cigarettes? Then there would be no punitives? It makes zero sense. And it would be pulling a number out of the air.
Folks, you saw what they did. And let me just remind you. That website and all their changes, do you think they did that on their own? Do you think that was their idea? They were dragged kicking and screaming, biting and scratching to reveal those documents. And now we have a website? Yeah, we have them on a website. But how did it get there?
The history is that those documents were kept secret. The company of the fifties was the company of the fifties in 1950. And they were denying it in 1950, they were denying it in 1960, '70, '80, and so on and forth.
The man that you saw on the "Face The Nation" said, If we ever find anything that's harmful in cigarette smoke, we'll take it out. I'm confident we can take it out.
Okay? At the time he said that, they already knew that there was harmful stuff in cigarettes. Now they come today and they say, We can't --
there is no such thing as a safe cigarette.
They don't get the message.
And Mr. Walker is an excellent lawyer, but you have to listen carefully to what he says.
He's still calling things that have found to be factually true. He's got boards. Remember the boards, truth No. 1, truth No. 2? They refused --R.J. Reynolds refuses to acknowledge the acts. He said there -MR. WALKER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. TRENTALANGE: -- were some pretty bad allegations.
MR. WALKER: Pretrial motion.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. TRENTALANGE: Allegations shmallegations. You found them to be factually true in this case.
The Engle findings were findings of fact that you decided applied in this case. Okay? They're still calling them allegations. R.J. Reynolds still does not get the message. You have to deliver the message.
R.J. Reynolds has never admitted marketing to children. R.J. Reynolds has never admitted that millions of people have died from smoking.
R.J. Reynolds has never admitted that it conspired
to hide the hazards of smoking. R.J. Reynolds has never admitted that cigarettes produced today are as dangerous as any ever smoked. R.J. Reynolds has never admitted to having manipulated the chemistry of cigarettes to create and sustain addiction. R.J. Reynolds has never admitted that filters are fraudulent.
Okay, folks. This is not somebody that has, you know, had a conversion on the road to Damascus. This is somebody that when you pull back the curtain hasn't changed. The only way they're going to change, the only way that R.J. Reynolds is going to change is if you change them.
And the number that I suggested, I told you lower it if you think it's too high, raise it if you think it's too low, but under no circumstances send a message to Winston-Salem that what they did is okay. And that's what you would be doing if you failed to award an adequate amount of damages in this case.
There was a southern politician a long time ago that was running in a race, and he called his opponent a homo sapiens. He said, He's a homo sapiens, and I challenge him to deny it.
Of course, he couldn't deny it. But it was misconstrued.
Mr. Walker is doing similar a thing when he talks about full compensation. Yes, in the compensatory damages case, you awarded compensatory damages, full compensation. Well, compensation is not what this is about. This is the punitives phase. You haven't awarded any punitive damages. Okay?
It's like taking an X-ray to diagnose a cold.
His x-ray didn't show a cold. Yeah, because an X-ray doesn't show a cold.
Compensatory damages don't punish. In fact, if I were to have asked you to punish them in your award for compensatory damages, there would have been an objection, and it would have been properly sustained, because that's not the function of compensatory damages. Compensatory damages are to fix what can be fixed, put back what can be put back, and make up for what can't be fixed or put back.
Punitive damages are to punish them for what they did wrong. And even if they change, they still need to be punished for what they did wrong. Okay? And then to deter them from doing it again.
Mr. Walker showed you this jury instruction. Thank goodness it's still up there. Can we turn the ELMO on again real quick?
You are to decide the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment and as a deterrence to others. This amount would be in addition to the compensatory damages you have already awarded.
Okay. It's a different function.
You are permitted to consider harm suffered by others not parties to this lawsuit in determining whether to award punitive damages. You are not to do so in determining the amount of punitive damages. The amount of punitive damages must be based solely on harm suffered by Jacqueline Loyd -- who lost everything she had and everything she had ever had -- and Ellis Loyd, who lost his wife of 15 years.
Okay?
You may impose punitive damages against Reynolds only for the conduct shown by clear and convincing evidence to have caused Jacqueline Loyd's smoking-related injury, not based on any conclusion that Reynolds is in an unsavory business.
You already made that decision based on clear and convincing evidence. The standard in this case about the amount at this phase is based on the greater weight of the evidence. Don't let that reference to clear and convincing get you sidetracked. You've already made that decision.
So the question is, What is the amount? The amount needs to be significant enough to send a message to R.J. Reynolds. And the message needs to be that they need to take this seriously. They need to take it very seriously and change for real and for good. And they need to -- you know, they need to pay. They need to pay their punishment.
They need to do their sentence, so to speak, for what they have already done. And being sorry isn't good enough. You've got to learn your lesson.
There is a saying that judgment comes from experience and experience comes from bad judgment.
They exercised terribly bad judgment and much worse over the course of decades. They can't be allowed to just come in here and, you know, give an apology and walk scot free.
Justice is hard. There is a sword there in that statue. Okay? The sword is there for a
reason. Because sometimes being just means using that sword. Take that sword and use it.
