MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I hope you all had a wonderful lunch.
I want to start the same way I did opening, just by thanking all of you and expressing gratitude for all of your hard work in this case. You have all shown up on time everyday. You've been payin attention, even from over there. I can see that you've all been paying close attention and taking notes.
And just on behalf of Mr. Kelly and Ms. Patterson and myself and my client, R.J. Reynolds, I just want to thank all of you for your service.
And, in particular, I want to thank you for honoring your commitment at the beginning of this case, to keep an open mind to the evidence and to reserve judgment in this case until you've heard both sides of the story.
And it was a little hard, that you might imagine, for me to be sitting over there and listening to Mr. Wilner's presentation and not being able to pop up out of my seat right then and tell you what I thought about what he was saying, but
I'll be able to do that now.
The first thing I want to reiterate from opening, something we talked about right at the start of this case, is that this case is only about Mr. Frailey, no other smoker, only about Mr.
Frailey.
It's not about any of the smokers on that consumption chart that Mr. Wilner has been showing you all through the trial, it's not about people who maybe watch the TV show Justice or the Flintstones or the Beverly Hillbillies, it's not about people who smoked Winston cigarettes or Camel cigarettes Chesterfield or Viceroy or Old Gold or any of the other brands that you've been seeing a lot of advertisements about in this case. It's only about Mr. Frailey, the cigarettes that he smoked, the choices that he made, and his illness.
And it's also not about anybody who had lung cancer. Even today in Mr. Wilner's presentation, he had two or three slides up there about lung cancer.
This case isn't about lung cancer, it's not about billboards in Maine or speeches that were given in other states or anything like that, it's only about Mr. Frailey, and it's about Mrs. Frailey's requests from you for an award of
money damages in this case.
I was over there watching my clock, and I noticed that before Mr. Wilner was even on his fee for ten minutes, he had told you that he would like you to award 3 or 4 million dollars in this case, and I'm going to give you all the reasons why we think you shouldn't do that.
We also need to talk just briefly about what this case is not about. We talked about this a little bit in opening.
You shouldn't decide this case based on sympathy. There will be an instruction from the Judge about that. We all feel sympathy for another's loss, but this is a court of law and the case has to be decided on the evidence and the law that you will get from the Judge.
It's not about whether cigarette smoking should be legal. Mr. Wilner made a comment at one point about how every cigarette add that comes out is endorsing the sale of cigarettes.
Well, this case isn't about the sale of cigarettes.
It's not about whether cigarettes can be sold or advertised or whether people can buy them or whether they should be banned.
In our society, those are difficult decisions
that have already been made by society, and it's legal to sell cigarettes, it's legal to make them, and it's legal for adults to buy them, and that's not going to be an issue you will have to decide am you should be grateful for that.
This case is not about whether smoking can cause disease. I admitted from the very beginning, even in voir dire, that cigarettes can and do cause very serious illnesses.
And you saw in the Judge's findings a list of a host of different diseases that are, in fact, caused by cigarette smoking. You won't hear me say anything to the contrary.
But this case is not about whether smoking can cause disease, it's only about whether cigarette smoking, in fact, was a legal cause of Mr. Frailey's cancer, and we're going to talk a lot about that.
And lastly, this case is not about whether cigarette smoking can be addictive. Cigarette smoking is addictive. That may have surprised you the first time I said it, but I bet it doesn't surprise you to hear me say that now, because we'v been up front about that all along.
The only question you have to decide is whethei Mr. Frailey was addicted to cigarette smoking, and
whether addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Frailey' illness.
Now, before I delve into really deep the substantive issues that you'll have to answer on the verdict form, I want to spend some time talking to you about something I think is really important, an it's something that's going to affect how you decide this case, for every other question you decide in this case, and that is the issue of credibility.
Credibility just means believability. Who do you believe?
You've seen witnesses take the stand from both sides now, and you're going to have to decide who got the facts right and who got the facts wrong, anc the only way that you can do that is to decide credibility.
Sometimes it's hard for us to sit in judgment of others and to come to the conclusion that maybe someone wasn't being truthful or that maybe someone's testimony isn't believable, but part of your job as jurors is to do exactly that.
You've all undertaken an obligation to take everything that you know from this trial, that you've seen, and to apply that to figure out who cai you believe, who can you trust on the critical
issues in this case, and you have a jury instruction about that. It's the same instruction that Judge Bowden mentioned you got at the beginning of the case.
I'm not going to read the whole thing because you have it in your copy, but I did want to call your attention to a few parts of it, and those are that: In considering the believability of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying.
What does that mean? Let me give you an example.
If you noticed that Dr. Kyriakoudes answered questions very differently from Mr. Wilner on direct than he did when I was asking him questions on cross-examination, you can take that into account in deciding how believable his testimony was.
The interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case.
What would an example of that be?
Dr. Feingold. Here's a guy who came in and told yoi that for 30 years he's been working with Mr. Wilner and other plaintiffs' lawyers. That over that 30 years, he's made over $30 million testifying in cases like these and others. And he's averaging
$2 million a year, and in his best years he's made as much as $3.5 million testifying.
And you're entitled to think about how that kind of money affects a paid witness's testimony.
Next is the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all the evidence and your own common sense.
One example of that that I'm going to talk to you a little bit more about in a few moments was Mrs. Frailey's testimony from the witness stand about that photo. We spent a lot of time about thal photo, and I'm going to try to help you understand why we think that what you saw about that photo i important.
But you'll be entitled to consider whether her testimony was reasonable that she gave at deposition.
Finished the deposition, went home. For no apparent reason, laid out all the photos that she had had in her possession for all of those years. Saw something in that photo that I suspect none of you saw, and then picked up the phone and called Mr. Wilner's office and directed them -- this is what she said -- directed them to dismiss Philip Morris out of the lawsuit.
And you're just going to have to think about whether you think that is reasonable.
You'll also have to consider Dr. Feingold's testimony when he said he went down to Mr. Wilner' office, saw the same photo. And he told you from the witness stand over there that that photo was potent evidence of Mr. Frailey's cigarette history.
And then the last item there is your common sense. Sometimes the most important parts come at the end.
Your common sense is going to be something you have to use to decide whether, for example,
Dr. Kyriakoudes' testimony makes sense.
All three of the witnesses changed their testimony about the Merit cigarettes, but Dr. Kyriakoudes was the only one to come in and tel you that he didn't really see anything different.
It's not that he saw this photo that everybody else saw, he just read the depositions and came to a completely different conclusion, and you'll have to decide what your common sense tells you about that.
So there's really going to be two major, major credibility issues that you're going to have to think about in this case, and I just want to spend a
little bit of time talking about them.
The first is Mrs. Frailey's Veteran's Administration claim from 1994. That's the claim that she filed shortly after Mr. Frailey passed away, where she blamed the Navy for Mr. Frailey's passing and not cigarettes.
And she said right from the witness stand right over there under oath that Mr. Frailey -- this was her explanation. That Mr. Frailey, on his death bed after a distinguished career in the Navy, somehow told her that what he wanted her to do was to file a claim that she knew was false. That doesn't make any sense at all, and it just wasn't a credible story.
And she told you -- we went through her report. We went through all the parts of the report while she was sitting on the witness stand where she told you all of the parts of the report that she swore to in this document, and that she said at the end that she personally believed what she was writing, and then she told you in this lawsuit that it wasn't true.
She said: I sincerely believe his cancer was service related. He believed it, and I believed it.
She didn't have to write that. But you're
going to have to decide what you take away from a witness who tells you that she filed a claim that she believed was false and wrote in her own handwriting that she sincerely believed that what she wrote then, what she now says is untrue, was true.
This is the same witness who took the stand here and gave a lot of testimony that we'll talk more about and asked you to believe that what she said in this courtroom was true, because she believed that also.
Second big, big issue on credibility is the photos, the Merit smoking history.
Before we got to meet all of you, before this case came to trial, Philip Morris was a defendant in this lawsuit. And at that time all of the witnesses that you heard from in this case were deposed.
It wasn't an interview the way it's been described by Mr. Wilner, it was a deposition. And deposition is a lot like what goes on right here in this courtroom. There's a court reporter, like we have here, who's doing her best to take down everything that I say, same thing happens in a deposition.
The witnesses -- there's lawyers here to look
out for the interest of the witnesses, to object if something is being done that shouldn't be.
The same thing happens in a deposition.
And Mrs. Frailey, Dr. Feingold, and Dr. Kyriakoudes all testified in their depositions when Philip Morris was in the case that Mr. Fraile switched to the cigarettes made by Philip Morris, the Merits cigarettes in the late 1970s. They all had the same story, because they had all seen the same information.
All three of them had a chance after their deposition to see the transcript and actually see the written record of what they had said, to review it and to submit changes if they saw that somethin; there was in error, but none of them did. They stood by their deposition testimony until -- until on the second day of trial. The same day that I me all of you and that you met me, they dismissed Philip Morris.
And the minute Philip Morris was dismissed oi of this, all three of those witnesses' sworn testimony changed. All three of them one-by-one took the stand and testified that Mrs. Frailey's deposition testimony about it being in the 1970s, that was wrong, that was a mistake.
Mrs. Frailey took the stand and told you that she spread all the photos out on her carpet, pulled out her magnifying glass, changed her mind, and called Mr. Wilner's office, and she said that happened months before this trial started.
But then from the witness stand she said no, no, it was actually in the 1980s.
As I mentioned, Dr. Feingold came in. He said that he saw the same photo, changed his mind. He didn't have a magnifying glass. I think he just somehow in Mr. Wilner's office, he was able to draw that conclusion from the photo. And then Dr. Kyriakoudes came in and said the same thing.
So what did the change in testimony mean? The change in testimony meant that the Philip Morris smoking went down ten years, and that the Reynolds the American Tobacco Company smoking went up t( years.
So as soon as Philip Morris is out of the case, all of the witnesses are saying that the Philip Morris smoking was just a little tiny piece of the full picture, where before they said it was 15 to 20 years.
Now, there are a lot of issues in these cases that we have to call in experts for. We brought in
Dr. Washington, Dr. Hayes. They brought the witnesses that they wanted to talk to you about, technical issues like the kind that were described in the instructions you got from the Judge.
But this issue about the photo isn't technical at all. We were the ones who asked for that photo to be shown to you all. We weren't running away from that. The plaintiffs didn't let me see it.
We asked for that to be published to you so you could each decide for yourselves, not based on some expertise that you get from going to school, just based on your own eyesight, your own common sens your own judgment.
And we even gave you a magnifying glass to look through, just like Mrs. Frailey said she did sitting on her carpet, and just like she was looking at when she was on the witness stand.
And we let each of you decide for yourselves whether you saw something in that photo that was or wasn't there. When I asked her about it, she agreed with me that there weren't enough letters. Tareyton is eight letters, she could only see seven. She couldn't see a "T" there. She couldn't see the red ribbons going down the side of the package.
And after the "R" in whatever package that was
that was in Mr. Frailey's pocket, there was an "L," not an "E."
Now, why am I going on about this? Because it goes to her credibility. What makes these witnesses come in and take such a position about a photo that you obviously cannot tell is Tareyton cigarettes?
Why would she come in here and change her story that way? And what does that tell you about whether you can believe anything else that she said?
Why would Dr. Feingold come in and say that that photo was potent evidence?
Why would Dr. Kyriakoudes come in and change the testimony that way?
It shows that these are not credible witnesses.
They were all singing the same tune when Philip Morris was in the case. When Philip Morris was out of the case, they all changed their tune, but we're still on the same sheet of music.
Now, if you were wondering why we spent so muc time on the photo, believability was one big part of it, but there's another reason. And the other reason is that there's going to be a line on the verdict form where if you get this far, you will have to decide the percentage of responsibility that
should be assigned to Philip Morris for the cigarettes that they made.
Now, you're going to find out in my argument that I don't think you should even get to this question at all, because we believe the evidence shows that Mr. Frailey's cancer was not caused by cigarette smoking at all. Not by smoking America Tobacco cigarettes, not by smoking Philip Morris cigarettes, not by smoking any cigarettes. That his cigarette smoking was not the cause of his injury, and he would have gotten his cancer regardless of the smoking.
But if you get this far, this is the reason why there would be a change in the testimony about the Merit cigarettes. Because Mrs. Frailey and Mr. Wilner both know that if you believe that Mr. Frailey only smoked Merit cigarettes for a few years, you might put a smaller number on this line And they know that if you stuck with, or if they stuck with their original testimony from this case about the Merit being in the 1970s instead of being in the late 1980s, you might put a bigger number o this line.
And that's the second reason why that testimon was so important, particularly under Dr. Feingold's
view that adenocarcinoma of the esophagus develop very quickly. He said six months to a year.
Well, what cigarette was Mr. Frailey smoking six months to a year before his diagnosis? It wasn't Tareyton, it was Merit. Merit is made by Philip Morris.
Dr. Feingold also, and I'm -- under his theory, he says that the rise in adenocarcinoma of the esophagus was a result of a design change in cigarette products that occurred sometime in the 1970s.
Well, what was Mr. Frailey smoking from the 1970s or '80s on? It was Philip Morris, not the American Tobacco product.
If you accept their testimony that the Tareyton cigarette products were smoked from the '40s until sometime in the '70s, or even the early '80s if that's the story now, the majority of that smoking was before cigarettes had the design that Dr. Feingold says is what led to the rise in adenomacarcinomas of the esophagus.
Now, when we first started this case in opening, I asked you to focus on three issues. I want to pull them up now.
These are the three issues that I said would be
the most important issues in this whole case, and I said they would be the first three issues that you would have to grapple with at the end of the case, which is where we are now.
The first is whether cigarette smoking caused Mr. Frailey's illness. Whether Mr. Frailey was addicted to cigarettes. And whether addiction was legal cause of Mr. Frailey's illness.
And on the verdict form that you saw, you're going to see these exact same three same issues pop up all in the first question right where I said it would be.
The first question is: Was Julius Frailey addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? That was the second issue on my earlier slide.
And, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his cancer? That was the third issue.
And finally, the question of whether cigarette smoking caused Mr. Frailey's esophageal adenocarcinoma. That's the medical issue, and that's the first issue, and it's the most important issue of these three. That's the one that I'm going to want to talk with you about first, but before I do I just want to remind you that the plaintiff has
the burden of proof on all three of these issues.
It's one question, but it's three issues. And if the plaintiffs haven't proved to you each and every part of this question: Addiction. Addiction as a legal cause. And smoking as a cause of esophageal adenocarcinoma. If they haven't proved to you all three of those, then you should check no on the first question.
And once you check no on the first question, your job is finished.
So let's talk about the first issue, which is medical causation. This was the issue that you heard principally from Dr. Feingold about, and also Dr. Washington and quite a bit from Mr. Wilner as well.
Now, you might have been surprised at how muc of the science we actually don't disagree about. I just want to cover with you where we don't disagree and where we do disagree to try to help you in your deliberations.
First of all, there's no dispute that Mr.
Frailey did not have lung cancer. I said that before. You may still hear more about lung cancer when Mr. Wilner stands up again, but this case is not about lung cancer.
There's no dispute that there are two types of esophogeal cancer. There's the squamous cell cance that occurs high in the throat area that is strongly associated with cigarette smoking. And then there is adenocarcinoma, which isn't in the throat area, it's down by the stomach. That's the one that Mr. Frailey had, and there's no dispute about any of that that I just said.
There's not been any dispute in this case that cigarette rates have been going down for at least 30 or 40 years. But that rates of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus have been going up. I don't know wh I'm gesturing. I have that.
You can see very clearly better than my arms that cigarette consumption is going down, adenocarcinoma in white males, which is what we're talking about, the red line, is going in exactly the opposite direction. No dispute about that.
There's no dispute in this case that Mr.
Frailey's esophogeal cancer was caused by Barrett's esophagus, because all adenocarcinomas of the esophagus are caused by Barrett's esophagus.
And Dr. Feingold agreed with Dr. Washington that Barrett's esophagus, at least in this case, was caused by GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease,
which I'll just say GERD.
Dr. Washington talked with you about how important it was not just that Mr. Frailey had GERI but that he had a 38-, nearly 40-year history of reflux disease issues, gastrointestinal issues, heartburn, hiatal hernia.
There's a reference to asthma, duodenal ulcers. There's also references to Maalox and Tums and Gelusil and all the different medications that he was taking for his reflux disease for decades.
And the one thing that's clear that really hasn't been disputed is that Mr. Frailey was taking anything that he could get his hands on for his GERD.
So where is the difference? There's really only one thing principally that divides the experts, and that's the question of whether cigarette smoking was a substantial contributing cause of Mr.
Frailey's cancer, and that's where I want to spend my time with you talking about the medical issues.
On that score, you have Dr. Washington, a gastrointestinal pathologist, who specializes and has spent the better part of her career studying and researching and dealing with exact disease that Mr. Frailey had. She says no, cigarette smoking wa
not a substantial cause of Mr. Frailey's cancer.
Then on the other hand you have Dr. Feingold, the lung doctor. He says that cigarette smoking wa a substantial contributing cause.
Now we have to take a step back and look again at credibility. In lay terms, consider the source.
You have to figure out who is more likely to be right between these two witnesses who testified. And the first thing I'm going to say before we move away from this slide, and I think -- I don't have the ability to ask you and have you tell me, but I suspect that everyone in this courtroom would agre that Dr. Washington is the most qualified expert we've heard from in this entire trial, and I want to talk about her qualifications.
She got her degree in chemistry. She got a Ph.D. in physical chemistry, and then became a doctor in 1986. Her medical specialty is gastrointestinal pathology, the exact type of illness that we've been talking about in this case, whereas Dr. Feingold is a lung doctor.
Her board certification is in anatomic and clinical pathology, and her clinical practice is not about lung diseases, it's about diagnosing
gastrointestinal cancers, including esophageal cancer. She diagnoses Barrett's esophagus. She serves on the esophageal tumor board. Her cancer research over the last 25 years -- Dr. Feingold doesn't have any -- she's been researching Barrett's esophagus, and GI cancers including esophogeal cancer.
She has over 200 -- 200 peer-reviewed publications on topics like the exact thing that you all are going to have to make a decision about in this case: Esophageal adenocarcinoma and other GI issues like Barrett's esophagus, including Barrett's-related adenocarcinoma. That's what we're all here talking about, if we're here talking about Mr. Frailey.
Dr. Feingold has no peer-reviewed publications. His only publications are things like the book he wrote with Mr. Wilner, and other types of publications that are intended for lawyers.
Dr. Washington sits on the chair of the cancer committee for the College of American Pathologists. She's on the esophogeal and gastric cancerous panel for the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, an the National Cancer Institute's Review Panel for Research Grants.
That means, as she describes it, she's one of the people that sets the standards for how you diagnose this type of illness, and she reviews other people's proposals for research work, and this is really important.
Her litigation work, it's only 10 percent of her income. She's not somebody who is traveling all around the country participating in workshops that are put on by plaintiffs' attorneys to figure out how to win cases. Only 10 percent of her income comes from doing what she was doing here.
Dr. Feingold picks up the other 90 percent.
It's like a mirror image. Ninety percent of Dr. Feingold's income comes from litigation, and we've already talked about the $30 million figure he gave us in this trial.
So who is more qualified to give you their opinion about whether cigarette smoking was a substantial cause of esophogeal cancer? Esophogeal cancer in Barrett's esophagus? Esophageal adenocarcinoma? Esophageal and gastric cancers? i has to be Dr. Washington, no one else.
Now, think about, just really think about why Mr. Wilner would bring you in a lung doctor.
And Dr. Feingold's explanation was well, the
esophagus is kind of behind the lung, so you're really kind of in the same neighborhood, and every once in a while I have to consult on a case where there's an esophageal issue and a lung issue.
But what he's really saying would be the equivalent of going to an eye doctor for an earache. The eye doctor has been to medical school, just like the dentist, but only one of them actually knows what they're talking about, and in this case it's Dr. Washington.
Now, I want to pause just very briefly to address Mr. Wilner's repeated references to the Surgeon General's Report, because some of you mig' have thought the way he goes on about it that the Surgeon General's Report is like a law that's pronounced from up high; that once the Surgeon General says something, it's the law and everybody must agree with it.
Of course we know that Dr. Feingold disagreed vehemently, strongly with the Surgeon General for about six to eight years after the 1988 report.
That was the time when Dr. Feingold was saying tha the Surgeon General -- the Surgeon General Reports that Mr. Wilner says were solid gold, he said the Surgeon General was dead wrong in 1988.
But I'm not here to denigrate the Surgeon General, or the Surgeon General's reports, and none of our witnesses did that either.
Dr. Hayes didn't say that the Surgeon General Report was useless, neither did Dr. Washington. What they said is that the Surgeon General's Report does provide some useful information, and that those documents are put out as part of a policy objective to get people to stop smoking, and there's nothing wrong with that kind of a goal.
Mr. Wilner suggested that you look and spend some time going through the Surgeon General's reports.
And he attacked our witnesses by saying they were wrong about the Surgeon General Reports being partly about policy.
Well, here's what you find in the 1989 Surgeon General's Report. This one is in evidence. To maintain our momentum toward a smoke-free society we must focus on our efforts on preventing smoking initiation and encouraging smoking cessations among high-risk populations.
Increased public information activities, smoking prevention, and cessation programs, and policies that encourage nonsmoking behavior should
be pursued.
In 2010, that was another one of the reports Mr. Wilner was waving around. We have outlined level of state investment and comprehensive tobacc control and prevention efforts that, if implemented, would result in an estimated 5 million fewer smokei over the next five years.
None of this is critical of the Surgeon General Reports, but it does bring up the fact that those reports are not strictly about science. There's an agenda behind those reports that is to help people, encourage people to adopt policies that discourage cigarette smoking.
It's not about denigrating those reports. It's about putting them into their proper context.
And if you really think about it, how many times have you gone to your doctor with a medical problem, and your doctor said hold on a second, I'vi got a Surgeon General's Report in my office. Wait right here. I'm going to go look and see what the Surgeon General says about your diagnosis, and the I'll come back.
People like Dr. Washington don't rely on the Surgeon General's Report, because she's been in tha industry, she's been looking at gastrointestinal
cancers for 25 years.
Now, I want to talk to you about why Dr. Washington's opinion is the one you should accept. We already talked about her qualifications.
I want to talk with you about why her opinion is the only one that makes sense under the legal standards, under the legal standards that you have to apply.
You've been given -THE COURT: Excuse me. I have a call from th chief justice that appears to be an emergency. Give me a few minutes.
MR. WALKER: Yes, Your Honor.
(Whereupon, there was a recess from 1:34 p.m. to 1:38 p.m.)
THE BAILIFF: Court is back in session.
THE COURT: Forgive me, Mr. Walker. I hate t interrupt arguments, but everything is fine, so proceed.
MR. WALKER: I completely understand.
Thank you, Judge.
THE COURT: You lost your rhythm, didn't you? That's why I said I'm sorry.
MR. WALKER: That's all right. I guess we'll find out in a second if I lost my rhythm.
I think we were talking about medical causation
and esophageal adenocarcinoma, and Dr. Washington opinion that cigarette smoking was not a substantial, contributing cause, and we were just about to take a look at the legal instructions that you have received and will receive from the Judge on
that very question.
This is the jury instruction you heard, read, you saw it on paper you heard a little bit about it from Mr. Wilner, and you'll see -- I won't read the whole thing again, but you will see that the critical issue in both paragraphs is whether or not the smoking -- the cigarette smoking contributed substantially to producing the injury. Here it's listed as death, but the first question is esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Same thing down here. It's true that you -that smoking need not be the only cause, but it does to be a legal cause still have to contribute substantially to producing the outcome.
And the instruction tells you what contributed substantially means.
Smoking R.J. Reynolds containing nicotine is a legal cause of Julius Frailey's death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing Mr. Frailey's
death so that it can reasonably be said that but for that smoking, his death would not have occurred.
In other words, for legal cause you have to be able to take out the smoking, take that out of the equation for Mr. Frailey to have avoided his cancer without the smoking.
If Mr. Frailey still would have gotten esophageal adenocarcinoma even without the smokin then smoking is not a legal cause because it does not contribute substantially to the cancer.
And Dr. Washington addressed this issue specifically. She testified -- the expert testified that Mr. Frailey would have gotten esophageal adenocarcinoma regardless of the cigarette smoking, because of his 40-year history of GERD and his Barrett's esophagus.
Now, we're going to take a look at relative risks in just a moment. That was something Mr. Wilner talked about a lot.
And on cross you all may have noticed that Mr. Wilner and Dr. Washington had a long exchange It must have been an hour, hour and a half about a lot of different things. But at the end of it the relative risk for cigarette smoking was still two, maybe three. Two or three was the relative risk of
cigarette smoking for esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Now, Mr. Wilner says that in order to make sense of that number, you have to multiply. You have to take the two or the three and multiply that times whatever his other risk factors were. But Mr. Wilner is the only person who has ever said that in this trial.
His own witness Dr. Feingold, who we don't think is qualified to talk about this, even Dr. Feingold testified in this trial that he's not sure of the association is multiplicative or additive the way Dr. Washington said.
Mr. Wilner made a big deal about not bringing witnesses who didn't make statements without research.
Well, Dr. Feingold said I don't know of such research in terms of esophageal adenocarcinoma, EA adenocarcinoma of the esophagus, and smoking, and Barrett's.
He doesn't know of any research that says you take the number two or three and multiply it times the other risks, and he didn't come here to tell you that either. He said he's not sure about that.
Well, what did the expert in this area have to say about it?
She told you, first of all, that when you're talking about esophageal adenocarcinoma there's all sorts of risk factors. Most of these risk factors apply to Mr. Frailey, because he was a textbook example of the type of person who gets this rare disease.
The only one that doesn't apply is obesity, and I'm not going to talk about that.
But Mr. Frailey had Barrett's esophagus from long-standing GERD. So his risk from Barrett's esophagus goes all the way up to 125. His risk from GERD goes all the way up to 45. His risk just from being a male, seven to eight. From being white, all the way up to four. We'll skip that one.
And here's where smoking is, the same place when Mr. Wilner started his cross as it was when he finished his cross. Two.
So then the question becomes how do you decide when you have all of these risk factors, how do you decide whether the smoking, the two, was a substantial contributing cause of Mr. Frailey's esophageal adenocarcinoma?
Let's have the next slide, please.
Well, Dr. Washington showed you. She explaine it. She gave you two possibilities, the first one
is for just plain ol' Barrett's esophagus and GERD. That's if you don't have evidence of 40 years of gastroesophageal and gastrointestinal problems.
But if you do have long-standing GERD, the wa Mr. Frailey did, this is the chart that applies.
You get 125 relative risk just from this. The same eight and four and two that we saw on the last chart. When you add that up, Mr. Frailey's relative risk was 139.
So what you have to decide is whether the potential contribution of smoking, if there even is one of two, is a substantial contributor to a total relative risk of 139. That's additive. That's what Dr. Washington, the expert, explained is how you apply this data.
Mr. Wilner said that Dr. Washington was not able to give a coherent explanation of relative risk, and I guess by that he meant that the drawing that he made here with the boxes and the arrows an the five and the ten and the fifteen and the -- the arrows going in all the different directions, that that makes more sense than Dr. Washington's explanation of this issue, the expert, and you'll have to decide that for yourself.
But I do want to give you an example that I
think will help you think about this question of whether a relative risk of two is a substantial contributor when the full relative risk for Mr.
Frailey was 139.
Imagine if you -- you and a friend go out to a nice restaurant for dinner, you know, someplace where you can really eat well. You order wine, you have a good time. And when the bill comes back th person you -- you pick up the check. You pay the full bill, and you pay the tip. And because you're all good people, you make a good tip.
So the bill with the food and the tip comes to $137.
Right when you stand up to leave your friend who ate with you opens up his wallet and pulls out two crisp $1 bills and leaves them on the table.
Who, among us, would say that that $2 tip that was left by your friend was a substantial contribution to the cost of the meal? Nobody would say that.
Let me give you another example.
My wife is throwing a party. It's a kids' party. I have four daughters, and two of them are twins -- and this part is actually true -- their birthday is today. This is, like, not quite --
their birthday is today, and my wife is going to bake cupcakes for all of the kids that are going to
be invited over.
So we'll call it, I don't know, three-dozen children come over with their parents, and my wife has to make enough cupcakes for everybody. So she spends all day in the kitchen and bakes 137 cupcakes for all these kids who are coming over to the party. I'm not there because I'm here.
So at the end of the party after all the kids and all the parents have had their fill of the 137 cupcakes, I show up after trial and I'm carrying, you know, what I'm carrying. I picked up two cupcakes on the way home. They're not any better or different or more tasty than any of the other cupcakes, but I only have two of them.
And I show up at the party and I bring in my two cupcakes after everybody has had all they want, and then I start bragging about my contribution to this party because I brought two cupcakes.
Now, what do you suppose my wife's reaction would be? You don't know her. What do you suppos anyone's reaction would be to the person who shows up afterwards with two cupcakes? Would anybody s< that the two that I brought and added to the 137 is
substantial?
This is what's meant by common sense.
In the same way that those two cupcakes did no substantially contribute to that party, in the same way that that $2 tip did not contribute to the $137 meal that you paid for, not your friend.
The relative risk of two from Mr. Frailey's cigarette smoking was not a substantial contributin cause of his cancer.
And that means that for that reason alone -can I have the next slide?
For that reason alone, just based on the last part of this question and Dr. Washington's qualifications, opinions, and common sense, the answer to this question has got to be no.
Now, there's at least two other parts to that question that I'm going to talk about, because they're also important. And the next two now I'm going to talk a little bit together at first, and that's whether Mr. Frailey was addicted to cigarettes and whether addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Frailey's illness, no one else's.
Now, when we talked at the outset I explained that we use the term addiction all the time. People say they're addicted to TV shows like Bachelorette
or Dancing with the Stars, or cake or ice cream or Diet Pepsi. All sorts of things that we all say that we're addicted to, and there's nothing wrong with that. We all know what we mean when we say that.
But in this trial, as I mentioned you would, you've heard from experts about what addiction really means.
We brought you Dr. Hayes, a Ph.D. neuropsychologist who talked with you at length about addiction, what it means, what it does, what it does, what it does not do to you.
And she explained that the critical thing that the experts look for is clinically significant impairment or distress. And she told you what she meant by that, because none of us here are neuropsychologists like she is.
She told us that when it comes to smokers, if you're trying to figure out whether they're addicted, what you're looking for are signs of what she called the tormented smoker, all right? This is a person who has made up their mind to quit smokin has tried over and over again to quit smoking, is struggling with it, and can't seem to pull it off.
Not the person who likes smoking and doesn't try,
the tormented smoker is the person who really, really wants to quit, is sincere about it, motivated about it, committed to doing it, and is still struggling. That's a person who wants to quit smoking and their actions show it. That is not Mr. Frailey.
And this is what you would expect to see in a tormented smoker. This is what people do when they're ready to quit smoking. They throw out their ashtrays. They throw away their cigarettes, they try different types of cessation aids, not just one, but anything they can get their hands on. They try cessation programs, not just the first one that comes along, any one they can find that might actually help them quit smoking. They seek assistance from others. They announce their intention to quit smoking. They make a plan to quit smoking. They set a quit date. And this one may seem obvious, but they actually stop smoking, even if it's just for a time.
If you say that you're trying to quit smoking but you never actually stop smoking, even just for a time, then you have not shown a motivated, committ quit attempt.
Well, that's not Mr. Frailey. Mr. Frailey was
never a tormented smoker. He didn't do -- he was not somebody who is struggling for years and tryin everything he could get his hands on to quit smoking.
So I want to get back to Dr. Hayes. Once again, just like every other issue, a lot of it comes down to credibility.
So we brought Dr. Hayes, the neuropsychologisl The plaintiff brought Dr. Feingold, the lung doctor.
Dr. Hayes told you that in order for her to reach an opinion about addiction and the other issue, she has to look at all the information, the whole picture, and that sometimes she finds that smokers are addicted. She's even testified to it in one of the other cases she participated in.
Not Dr. Feingold. Dr. Feingold thinks that everyone is addicted. He doesn't need to know ver many facts about you at all.
From Dr. Feingold's point of view, if he knows how many cigarettes you smoked and for how long that's all he needs, he's finished.
We talked a little bit about the Fagerstrom test. This is a test where you answer a series of questions and you get a score. Well, the interesting thing about the Fagerstrom test is it's
not possible to take the test and come out with a score that says you're not dependent. The minute you take the test, you're going to be shown to be dependent. You could get a zero on the Fagerstrom test, and the best you come away with is very low dependence.
I could take any one of you on this jury who has never smoked -- some of you have smoked, but some of you haven't. I could administer the Fagerstrom test that one of you has never smoked, and the conclusion of that test would be that you are dependent on nicotine.
Now, it sounds silly, but that's because this test was never intended to be used to figure out who is and who is not addictive. You have to decide first whether the person is addicted, and then you can use a test like the Fagerstrom test.
Well, in Dr. Hayes' opinion, Mr. Frailey was not addicted.
So one question becomes what makes smokers d what they do? Why do smokers smoke? Is it addiction? Is it nicotine? What is it?
Well, addiction doesn't answer most of the questions about people's smoking behavior. Addiction doesn't make you start. Addiction doesn'
make you continue after a lot of people struggle with that first cigarette, they cough and they get sick. Nicotine doesn't make you have want to have a second cigarette. Nicotine doesn't determine what it is -- doesn't determine for a person whether they try to quit smoking. Nicotine doesn't do that.
Nicotine doesn't explain why some people do everything they can to quit smoking, try as hard as they possibly can, while other people don't do anything.
And nicotine and addiction don't explain why millions and millions of Americans have quit smoking.
Now, when Dr. Feingold was on the stand, all he wanted to talk about was addiction as a brain disease. He walked you through nicotine receptors and the nucleus -- I'm going to get this wrong --accumbens, the ventral tegmental area of the brain, the amygdala, the hippocampus. Everything from Dr. Feingold was about addiction as a brain disease.
But when I asked him, he agreed with me that the 55 to 60 million people who quit smoking have those same ventral tegmental areas, the same nucleus accumbens, the same amygdala hippocampus nicotin receptors, the whole nine yards.
That should indicate to you those brain changes, which we can't see or measure, don't control human behavior. They don't tell you what you need to know about a smoker's actual behavior.
So then Mr. Wilner shows, and you're probably going to hear about it again after I sit down, the 2010 Surgeon General's Report that says that nicotine is the fundamental reason that smokers persist in tobacco use. Well, we know that nicotine was not the fundamental reason that Mr. Frailey smoked, and we know that in at least two ways.
First when he started smoking, he was using a type of rabbit tobacco that doesn't have any nicotine. So nicotine doesn't explain his early smoking.
And then if we want to jump all the way to the other end, depending on which version you believe, Mr. Frailey tried the nicotine patch in the 1990s.
A nicotine patch -- now it's time for me to be Mr. obvious. A nicotine patch gives you nicotine without cigarettes, without smoking.
So if you wear a nicotine patch and you're smoking, you're not smoking because your body nee nicotine, because it's already getting it from the nicotine patch. That's why it's called a nicotine
replacement therapy.
But in Mr. Frailey's case, even with the nicotine patch, even when he was already getting nicotine from another source, he still smoked. He didn't even put them down.
That wasn't because of the nicotine in the cigarettes, it's because in his heart of hearts Mr. Frailey wanted to keep smoking.
Now, we've been talking about nicotine. I just want to make a few quick points about it. These ar the points that came up in opening, and Dr. Feingol largely agreed with me on these, because he wasn't really here to talk about anything other than addiction as a brain disease on this topic. He wasn't really here to talk about choice.
But even Dr. Feingold agreed with me that nicotine does not turn smokers into robots. That nicotine does not decide for smokers whether to try to quit, yea or nay. And that nicotine does not decide for smokers how to quit.
So, since we can't just say that Mr. Frailey's smoking behavior was all about nicotine or all abou decision, we have to look at what his actual choices were and figure out what they mean.
Can I have the next slide?
These are the choices that Mr. Frailey actually made. There's nothing on here about his brain or receptors or anything like this. These are just things that you can actually observe about Mr. Frailey.
He chose to start smoking. He chose to continue smoking. He chose to smoke for decades without trying to -- without even trying to quit.
Remember Dr. Hayes said he smoked for 25 year before anyone reported an attempt to quit?
He chose what brands to smoke. He chose when to switch brands. He chose where he would smoke, least up until he married Mrs. Frailey, and then his choices were somewhat limited by her.
And then he chose not to follow any method to help him quit, and we're going to talk more about that in just a second.
And ultimately, ultimately, Mr. Frailey chose not to quit.
Now, there's nothing unusual about these choices. Smokers make these kind of choices every day. Today in 2010 there are people who want to smoke. They don't smoke because they're addicted, they smoke because they haven't made up their mind to quit.
And these choices belonged to Mr. Frailey. The American Tobacco Company didn't make these choice for Mr. Frailey. Neither did Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds. Mrs. Frailey didn't make most of these choices for Mr. Frailey, he made those choices.
And that brings us back to something that we talked about at the outset of this case that you heard a lot about with Dr. Hayes, and that's why it matters whether Mr. Frailey had a sincere desire to quit smoking.
What are we talking about? Why am I talking about whether he actually wanted to quit?
Well, she explained that motivation is the single biggest factor when it comes to quitting smoking. Motivation, dedication, commitment. For a lot of people you have to try to quit smoking more than once. You've got to want to quit for yourself.
If you just want to quit because somebody else is on you about it, it's not going to happen. It can't be someone else's choice, it has to be your choice.
And the reality is that sometimes people smoke because they're just not ready to do what it takes to quit. And no matter who you are, no matter how successful you are or how strong-willed you are, how weak you are, how weak-willed you are, regardless of
all of that, if you haven't made the decision to quit smoking, if you haven't committed to quitting smoking, and if you haven't -- aren't motivated to quit smoking, you're not going to quit. It doesn't mean you're addicted or you're not addicted. It just means you're not ready to quit smoking, and that describes Mr. Frailey.
So we have to talk about Mr. Frailey a little bit more. Even Dr. Feingold begrudgingly agreed with me that you have to look at what people actually do. And the place to start on that score is with Mrs. Frailey.
Mrs. Frailey said she doesn't remember Mr. Frailey ever saying that he wanted to quit smoking. Think about that for a moment.
Mrs. Frailey has come to court in this lawsuit, and she's asking you to award money damages becau she says that Mr. Frailey was addicted and that his addiction, not choice, that addition is what led to his illness.
But then when you ask her the question did Mr. Frailey ever tell you he wanted to quit smoking? The answer is no, I don't remember that.
In 22 and a half years of marriage, Mr. Frailey never told his wife that he wanted to quit smoking.
And we know the first 25 years there's no evidence he tried to quit smoking or told anybody that he wanted to quit smoking.
We also have this record from 1968. This is where Mr. Frailey's Navy doctor actually prescribed to him to stop smoking, and he didn't try.
Now, I want to go back to another one of the Judge's instructions in this case. You'll see this in the packet that you have.
Plaintiff has admitted that Mr. Frailey's acts relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to stop smoking were a partial cause of his esophageal adenocarcinoma cancer and death, in combination with their allegations about Reynolds.
What does that mean? Why would the plaintiff admit Mr. Frailey's acts relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to stop smoking?
Let's look at what the evidence was about Mr. Frailey, the duration, duration, and frequency of Mr. Frailey's efforts to stop smoking. You only heard about two or three different occasions when h supposedly tried to quit smoking.
He smoked for about 50 years. You heard about two or three examples of him trying to quit smoking That would be the frequency. Three times in
50 years.
So what does that mean? That means that even if we're using the new timeline that we've gotten from the plaintiffs witnesses, Mr. Frailey made no attempt to quit smoking in the 1940s, no attempt t( quit smoking in the 1950s, we're still at zero, maybe one attempt in the 1960s if you believe Michael Frailey.
The plaintiffs didn't bring you -- they didn't bring in Michael Frailey so you could actually loo] at him and decide if he's credible, that's one.
No attempt to quit smoking in the 1970s. We'ri still at one.
There is a description of an unsuccessful attempt in the late 1980s, where plaintiff says that Mr. Frailey switched to Merit cigarettes. He didn'1 stop smoking, but I'll go ahead and call that two.
And one unsuccessful attempt in the 1990s. This is under their new timeline about the patch. He didn't stop smoking, but I'm going to go ahead and call that three anyway.
The frequency and duration of Mr. Frailey's quit attempts, I've got three. And then when I asked Dr. Hayes about that, she was able to sum u] how many days that would be. That would be the
duration. The answer was 12. Three attempts,
12 days, 51 years.
Let's figure out what that really means. What is 51 years of cigarette smoking? It's 18,615 days. And out of the 18,615 days, there were 12 days wher Mr. Frailey was actually stopped smoking, had actually stopped smoking if you, you know, if you're generous in the quit attempts. What does that really mean?
It means that for 99.94 percent of the time,
Mr. Frailey wasn't trying to quit smoking.
99.94 percent of the time, Mr. Frailey was not even trying to quit.
I don't say that as a criticism, I say it because it's powerful evidence of what Mr. Frailey really wanted to do. He didn't really want to quit, he wanted to smoke.
In fact, I'll probably be the only person, the only lawyer that you hear from who's actually defending Mr. Frailey's choices. I'm not blaming him, I'm not criticizing him. My argument is that we have the right to make these choices. That Mr. Frailey exercised that right to make those choices. But when you make those choices, your family can't come to court and ask for money becaus
of them.
So let's talk about the two or three attempts.
You know that one of them is SmokEnders, and I won'1 get into whether the SmokEnders was in the '70s or '80s. You heard a lot of testimony about that. But we know the person who most want Mr. Frailey to quit wasn't Mr. Frailey, it was Mrs. Frailey. She was against his smoking from day one, and everybody knew it. So she made the arrangements for Mr. Frailey to go to SmokEnders, and like a good husband Mr. Frailey went.
Now, I want to point out SmokEnders was not the only smoking cessation clinic that came to town.
You know that from Dr. Michele's testimony. He showed you a sampling of newspaper articles throughout this period.
This particular slide is just from the '60s.
This isn't SmokEnders. This is other types of things. There are different ads for ways to quit smoking: Antismoking Group Conducting a Session, Sixth Smoking Clinic Begins Here Today, How to Brea the Cigarette Habit, Ex-Smokers Offer Tips on How to Kick the Habit or Cut Down.
SmokEnders wasn't his only option. If he wanted to quit smoking, the help was there for him
to find.
Sometimes we think that because some types of smoking cessation aids like pharmaceutical products weren't available until later, that nobody knew how to quit smoking in the '50s or '60s.
Mr. Frailey had all the information he needed if he wanted to to get help quitting smoking, but he didn't go to any of these. And it's not -- and the reason -- part of the reason is in this 1960s time period, he wasn't married to Mrs. Frailey yet. He was still married to the first Mrs. Frailey, and she didn't have a problem with his smoking. They both smoked.
It's only after Mr. Frailey married Mrs. Frailey that her desire for him to quit smoking got him out to a SmokEnders meeting.
Now, we know that SmokEnders was a multi-wee program. Dr. Hayes told us that, I think Dr. Feingold did, too. And the way the program was set up, you didn't go to two meetings and go home. You went to the first meeting, they explained everything to you.
And the other program was you would switch fro the product you were smoking that you liked to another product that you didn't like, to another
product that you don't like, to another product that you don't like.
This would be like if you -- if you're watching TV or something, and you wanted to stop, you wante to cut back on your TV, you wouldn't watch the show you liked, you would start watching the shows you can't stand. And by the end of a certain amount of time you're not watching TV anymore.
And you have to set a cut-off date for when you were going to finally quit smoking. That was part of SmokEnders. Well, Mr. Frailey didn't complete that program. He didn't follow the steps, he didn't stick to the plan, because he didn't really want to smoke.
He went to the meeting because Mrs. Frailey wanted him to go to the meeting. And when he cam( out, she wasn't in the meeting, she didn't know what was said.
When he came out he said the people at SmokEnders told him to do the very thing that he wanted to do. They told me to keep smoking. But they said I should smoke Merit.
We believe, and Dr. Hayes testified, that that is evidence that Mr. Frailey really didn't want to quit smoking, he wanted to keep smoking, and that's
why he said and did what he did. After all,
Dr. Hayes said it was SmokEnders, not smoke switchers.
We talked about the nicotine patch. Either it was in the 1980s before the patch was out or it was in the '90s. If it was in the '90s, he wasn't smoking for nicotine, he was getting nicotine from the patch. But he never put the cigarettes down.
Not a committed quit attempt.
It's not just me saying that. Even Dr. Feingold, even plaintiffs $30 million hired gun had to admit that Mr. Frailey never made a serious quit attempt. I bet some of you might have been surprised to hear their paid witness say that Mr. Frailey and his 50 years of smoking never made < serious quit attempt. That's their witness, not ours, although ours said the same thing.
And then once last story to talk about.
Remember how Mrs. Frailey said that one time she h; a conversation with Mr. Frailey where he said it was easier to smoke? And when he said that, what came right after that was him reaching into his pocket and pulling out a pack of cigarettes.
Now, what's important about that? A person who's trying to quit smoking is walking around with
a pack of cigarettes in their pocket. Do you walk around with cigarettes in your pocket when you wai to be able to smoke, or do you walk around with a package of cigarettes in your pocket when you're nc really interested in quitting?
So if we go back to the question on the verdict form, same question where we checked no before because of the medical issues, now we're even looking at a different part of the question. Was Julius Frailey addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? We believe the answer should be no.
But even if you think, even if you think that Mr. Frailey was addicted to cigarette smoking, there's still another part of that question that you have to grapple with, and that's whether cigarette smoking, because of such addiction, was a legal cause of cancer.
We believe the answer to that has to be no, because his cigarette smoking didn't cause his esophageal adenocarcinoma. But addiction did not cause Mr. Frailey's smoking if he wasn't controlled by it. This is an issue that Dr. Feingold barely talked about, because he only wanted to talk about whether or not Mr. Frailey was addicted.
When I asked him on cross whether that meant
that smoking was not a matter of free choice, he agreed with me that smoking was very much a mattei of choice. I asked him twice and twice he agreed.
But, as Dr. Feingold describes it, people are just animals, and we're nothing but a collection of the chemicals in our brains. Dr. Feingold has even reduced the emotion of love to a series of chemical reactions in our brains. But we couldn't disagree with that more strongly.
Human choice and decision making is what separates human beings from animals and machines. It's the reason that we acknowledge and teach personal responsibility to our children, and the reason we demand it from adults, because we're not animals, we're not machine, and people don't make our decisions for us, we make them. And when we d we bear responsibility for the choices and decisions that we make.
What do we know about Mr. Frailey's choices other than what we've already looked at? We know that he told other people that he enjoyed smoking. I'm not here to second guess that, and you shouldn't either. Because at the end of the day, it doesn't matter whether Mr. Frailey's choices were good ones or bad ones, it only matters that they were his
choices.
So, on the question of whether Mr. Frailey lost control of his smoking because of an addiction, once again, we have to look at his actual behavior.
When he was married to his first wife, they both smoked and he smoked wherever he wanted ti He smoked inside, outside, in the car, outside of the car, around her, by himself. Wherever he chosi to smoke is where he smoked.
Then he met and married Mrs. Frailey, and she had a different rule. He had a different program he had to get with pretty quickly, and that was he was not to smoke in the house or in the car or around her. And he didn't have any trouble following thos rules.
He never -- there was no testimony from anyoni that Mr. Frailey at any time failed to honor his wife's wishes. That's control over your smoking.
If he wasn't in control of his smoking, he would no have been able to follow the rules that Mrs. Frailey set for him. And he stopped, really, on a dime. He had been smoking wherever he wanted to. Married Mrs. Frailey, change in behavior, no problems.
Now, one last thing that I want to mention on
this topic before we move on to some of the other questions, and that is that when you think about whether addiction was controlling Mr. Frailey's behavior, whether he was like this machine or some animal controlled by a series of impulses in his brain, or whether he was making real life human decisions, you have to look at his whole life. You have to look at his personality.
Who was this guy? Was this a guy who, you know, is a follower? Is he somebody that does whatever other people tell him to do and can't accomplish anything, can't set goals for himself?
No.
He rose up from the ranks in the military. The military is a place where control and discipline are demanded and rewarded. We saw that Mr. Frailey h: that discipline.
We saw from one of the records -- remember Dr. Hayes showed you how Mr. Frailey wanted to become a limited duty officer? And he tried one year and he didn't get it. He came back the next year, tried again, didn't get it again. Tried a third time, he didn't get it. Tried a fourth time and didn't get it. Tried a fifth time and didn't get it. And the sixth time, the sixth time that
Mr. Frailey came back, he got it.
That's what Mr. Frailey did when he was serious about something, and it shows what kind of a man he was. When he wanted something, he went after it doggedly and he got it, but he did not do that with cigarette smoking.
And you also heard evidence about how he brought that same kind of mentality to his business after he retired from the Navy. His success in business came from sincere desire and motivation an commitment.
And even if you're strong-willed, you still have to have all of those things to quit smoking.
So, the bottom line is regardless of what you think about whether Mr. Frailey was addicted, the answer to the middle part of this question, whether he smoked because of addiction has to be no.
And I've now talked about all three of the issues that come up right in that first question.
Did cigarette smoking cause -- was it a substantial contributor to Mr. Frailey's illness?
No.
Was Mr. Frailey addicted? No.
And whether addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Frailey illness? The answer is still no.
Now, I could stop there because as I said these are the most important issues that you'll confront right at the beginning of the case, and if you answer no to that first question, your work is done
But there are other questions on the verdict form, and I wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't review the evidence with you on those other questions. Because even if you check yes to the first question, it doesn't mean that damages can be awarded to Mrs. Frailey.
There are other issues in the case, and each of those other issues requires you to look at Mr. Frailey's circumstances, and the question of legal cause.
Now, I want to talk briefly about the findings, because you heard and may hear more about the findings.
These are the findings that are in the instructions that were made in another case, in another case not involving Mr. Frailey. This is going to be the Judge's instruction on this -- or one of them.
Notwithstanding the above findings which are binding on you and the Court, the liability of R.J. Reynolds to the plaintiff must still be proved in
accordance with the instructions.
That just means that there's still more for you to do. The findings don't mention Mr. Frailey. You're the only jury to hear the evidence about Mr. Frailey, his cancer, whether his cancer was caused by smoking and his smoking behavior.
Can I have the next one?
Now, this is a slide that you knew I was going to talk about at some point. I showed it in opening. I showed it in examination with the witnesses.
This is going to be the key question that you have to answer for all of the plaintiffs evidence about Reynolds' conduct or the conduct of other companies that aren't even defendants here.
I spent most of my time talking about Mr. Frailey, and you knew I was going to do that. Mr. Wilner spent a lot of his time not talking abou Mr. Frailey, and I suspect that will continue even after I sit down.
That's why Mr. Frailey -- Mrs. Frailey brought a lung doctor to talk to you about esophageal cancer, because the way they try the case is not really about Mr. Frailey.
That's why the plaintiffs historian that they
brought didn't look at anything in the end. Didn't look at any of the school books where Mr. Frailey grew up. Didn't look at the papers. Didn't look at magazines. Didn't focus on any one of the magazines or newspapers that Mr. Frailey actually read.
The first time you heard about the information that was in the papers and school books and magazines that Mr. Frailey actually would have been exposed to was when it was in the defense case and Dr. Michele talked about it.
And Dr. Kyriakoudes, the plaintiffs historian, told you that he makes the same presentation in every case. It doesn't matter who the smoker is, doesn't matter who the plaintiff is, doesn't even matter who the defendants are. Same presentation in every case.
So on this question when Mr. Wilner is showing you drafts of speeches that were given in places where Mr. Frailey didn't go, billboards in Maine, advertisements for Winston and Camel, documents fro other companies, not the American Tobacco Company this is the question you should be asking yourself: What does this have though do with Mr. Frailey? You're not going to be able to answer that question from anything you heard from the plaintiff.
Now, can I have the next slide?
You were shown a lot of documents from before and after 1953, but the instruction is that the plaintiff has no claim for conspiracy to conceal the information regarding smoking and health or addiction before 1953.
I want to say a word about documents because you have seen, and are going to see a lot more documents.
Dr. Feingold said that he had 9 million documents that he could choose from for this case that are available out there on the internet, and I think there was a reference to a treasure trove of documents that Dr. Feingold had to pull from. Then he said he has thousands of documents just right there in his own office. And with all of that, he didn't bring a single company document that even mentioned the word Tareyton. And Tareyton is the only cigarette product that Mr. Frailey smoked that Reynolds is responsible for.
Then he showed two or three documents from the American Tobacco Company. That, at least, was the right company. But on top of that, he showed you documents from Philip Morris, documents from Brown Williamson, documents from the British American
Tobacco Company in England. What do those document have to do with Mr. Frailey? Let's take a look at who some of these companies really are.
This is a representation of who these companies were when Mr. Frailey was smoking. R.J. Reynolds was a separate company from all the rest. The American Tobacco Company, separate company from all the rest. Philip Morris was separate. And the British American Tobacco Company was the parent of only one company, and it was Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
Mr. Frailey never smoked a product made by the Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation, and he was never a regular smoker of any product made by R.J. Reynolds.
So why is Mr. Wilner showing you document after document after document in a case against Reynolds from Philip Morris, the British American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williams? Why?
One of his last slides was the document about bags of money.
You saw that Mr. Wilner -- that was when he started banging on the podium, and you probably are going to see that document again. That is a British American Tobacco Company document. British America
Tobacco Company is still in existence, and they're over in England. They have nothing to do with Reynolds, they have nothing to do with the American Tobacco Company that existed when Mr. Frailey was smoking.
Why would he be showing you a document about
bags of money that has nothing to do with Mr. Frailey? Because he knows that you'll respond to that document the way anyone would. You might get angry about it, you might wonder what's going through the mind of the person that wrote it, and you don't want to see a document like that ever again. But that document has nothing to do with Mr. Frailey, it has nothing to do with Reynolds, it has nothing to do with the American Tobacco Compai that made the products that Mr. Frailey smoked.
Then he showed you other documents that had different versions. Remember, there was one he started to read from, then realized that the document that was on the Power Point didn't have the part he wanted you to see, and he had to swap them out.
Then he showed you a bunch of documents that were funneled through a tobacco lawyer who's now doing time in the federal pen.
There was one document he showed you that had markings on it, and neither Dr. Feingold nor Mr. Wilner could tell you where those markings came from, and that was when he said -- I wrote it down: God knows where it came from.
These are the documents you're being shown in this case.
Now, the main thing to understand about the documents when you pull from 9 million documents ar you choose what to bring in, you've got a lot you can choose from. You can pick documents that make anybody or any company look good, you can pick documents that make a company look bad. And you c: do the same thing with anyone. If there was a way to catalog anything that any of us has ever said or that someone has suggested to us over our entire lifetime, you had a lawyer go back and try to pull the very worst parts of it, you can make anybody look bad.
And on that point there's someone and something that I want to talk about, and it's Michael Jordan.
Now, you all have probably heard more about Michael Jordan in this case than you ever thought you would in a case about smoking. So why am I going back to Michael Jordan? Because Michael
Jordan, I hope you would agree, is one of the biggest basketball players ever to play the game.
He was a member of the Dream Team, Olympic team he's in the Hall of Fame, he's one six championships in eight years. The man was awesome when it came basketball, no doubt about it.
Imagine what would happen if someone like Mr. Wilner went back into Michael Jordan's career and put together a hit list of every shot Michael Jordan missed, every time that he lost control of the basketball in the game, every time he passed the ball and somebody stole it, every time that he went up to dunk the ball and the ball popped off the back of the rim, what would you think about Michael Jordan? You would think this guy couldn't play basketball at all.
And that's the problem when you have one side cherry picking from a long history of a company, that you can put together a false and misleading representation of that company.
All right. Now I want to turn to some of the other questions on the verdict form in the time that I have left.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. WALKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Well, we're now up to the part of the verdict form that I hope you don't even get to. But I do want to talk to you about that part of the verdict form and at least give you our position on those other questions that you'll see on the verdict form.
So these are questions two and three. Both of them have Mr. Frailey's name in them and both of them require legal cause. I don't think you should get here, because we don't -- for all of the reasons that I've talked about.
But with respect to these two questions, I just want to remind you of Dr. Feingold's testimony that there really wasn't anything particular about the design of the Tareyton cigarettes that Mr. Frailey smoked that was different from any other cigarettes that were on the market that was a cause of his cancer.
So even under Mr. -- under Dr. Feingold's theory, there wasn't anything about the design of cigarettes that was negligent or defective that caused his cancer. They were just cigarettes, like all cigarettes on the market at the time.
So we believe the answer to both of these questions should be no.
The next two questions both relate to concealment. The first one is -- it's a long question. I won't read it, but you can see it's about fraudulent concealment, number four.
Number five is about conspiracy to fraudulently conceal.
I just want to boil this issue down to what I think is really the essence, and that's the question of whether or not Mr. Frailey should have been told something by the companies that would have made : difference to him. When it references a legal cause
of Julius Frailey's death in both of those questions, the bottom line is: Is there something that the companies should have said to Mr. Frailey that would have made a difference to him and woulc have avoided his cancer and his death?
And I want to tell you why I think the answer to both of these questions has to be no.
First, Mrs. Frailey took the stand and told you -- she didn't even quarrel with me with this -that Mr. Frailey knew the health risks of cigarette smoking. She didn't fight with that -- about that at all.
She said -- in fact, I think she was a little offended by my question, because she looked at me and said, He knew the risks. She was very strong or that.
You've heard testimony by others that Mr. Frailey called cigarettes coffin nails, not coughing, like you're coughing, but coffin, like a casket. He called cigarettes cancer sticks. He pointed out the cigarette warnings to his son, Michael.
And then we brought in Dr. Michel, the historian, who showed you all of the different ways that the information about the health risks and
addictive nature of cigarettes was there for
Mr. Frailey, even before the warnings went on the
packages.
Remember, instead of having Dr. Michel on the stand for two or three days, we just did a short streamlined presentation, where Dr. Michel talked about all of the different ways that the information was being made available about the health risks of cigarette smoking, in all of these different ways that are described here.
So I just want to remind you of some of the evidence that Dr. Michel brought, so that you can understand the context from Mrs. Frailey's testimony that Mr. Frailey knew the risks.
May I have that next one?
This is an example of one of the schoolbooks that you saw. And, remember, we actually -- Dr. Michel actually brought the schoolbooks and you ha a chance to hold it in your hand and look at what it actually said, in the way that Mr. Frailey might have.
We showed you how the health risks of cigarette smoking were covered in magazines, and in newspapers, in the places where Mr. Frailey lived.
So, for example, Stars & Stripes. The next one
is from Jacksonville. We showed you newspaper articles. This is all before the warning labels went on the packages.
All of the public information that was available to Mr. Frailey, not just in Jacksonville, but also in Charleston and Key West and Virginia, all the different places where Mr. Frailey had been stationed.
Then we showed you the information about the role of anti-smoking campaigns right here in Jacksonville.
Cancer Crusaders Coming Here, that's from the Florida Times-Union in '67.
Nationwide Drive to Stop Smoking is Launched Here, that's right here in Jacksonville where Mr. Frailey was located, and this is years before the warning labels went on the package.
We showed you the medical record where Mr. Frailey's Navy doctor talked to him about the risks and told him to stop smoking.
And then we showed you, of course, the warning labels that went on the packs, starting in 1966 through 1970, and then 1985, that were on every pac of cigarettes that Mr. Frailey smoked.
Now, with all this information, even before the
warning labels and then with the warning labels, what do we know about how Mr. Frailey responded tc that information? Did the warnings go on the pack, and Mr. Frailey said, I gotta stop smoking right now? I'm going to do everything I can do to quit smoking? He didn't do that.
That information that was on the cigarette package did not change Mr. Frailey's mind about cigarette smoking and neither did the information in his schoolbooks, in the magazines and in his newspapers.
And then, lastly, we showed you what the public health community was saying about awareness, again, before the warning labels went on the packages.
Surgeon General Burney: Our position is that we have informed the public, through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and TV.
And then Dr. Heller from the National Cancer Institute: Newspapers, radio, TV, and other media -- precisely what we looked at -- have done an excellent job covering this problem, and a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public.
So the question is: Is there anything that the companies would have said that would have made a
difference to Mr. Frailey, given what we know he knew about from Mrs. Frailey, given what we know h saw from the warning labels, and given the information that we know was available to him in all of the sources that were described by Dr. Heller?
When you consider all of that, the conclusion that we hope you will come to is that Mr. Frailey's decisions are just like the decisions that people make today, when -- when no one would say people don't know the risks.
A lot of people who smoke know the risks and still want to smoke, and that was Mr. Frailey.
Nothing that a cigarette company would have said during the time that he smoked would have made a difference to Mr. Frailey. And that means that you should answer those questions, questions four and five, the answer should be no.
But Mr. Wilner's going to talk to you a lot about the cigarette culture, so I do want to say a word about that.
Dr. Kyriakoudes talked a lot about this cigarette culture. And it was almost like Dr. Kyriakoudes thought that I had taken the position that there weren't a lot of people smoking in the '50s. Or it was almost like he thought that we were
taking the position that it was never normal or acceptable to smoke. But I never said anything like that.
The real problem with Dr. Kyriakoudes' testimony is that he wants you to believe that the cigarette industry is what was driving public opinion, that the companies that made these products were somehow overwhelming the airwaves with thei message and that people were buying it.
But, on cross-examination, we got to some of the actual facts that show that's just not true.
First of all, we saw, during Dr. Michel's testimony, that, at least in 1966, which is when this document is from, only 7.2 percent of the total television advertising was made up of cigarette advertising.
Now, we saw that document at a point where you might have been thinking, from some of the charts that Dr. Kyriakoudes had, Holy Cow, the cigarette companies are constantly advertising on TV. They'r dominating the airwaves. 7.2 percent, that's the fact.
Then you saw Dr. Michel's analysis of the Florida Times-Union. Dr. Kyriakoudes wasn't in a position to give this testimony, because he never
looked at the Florida Times-Union. But Dr. Michel actually did an analysis where he pulled advertisements in the Florida Times-Union from three different decades. And he came up with this analysis that shows 27 tobacco ads and 3,284 non-tobacco ads. That ought to tell you something about the true level of cigarette advertising in newspapers at that time.
Dr. Kyriakoudes also admitted that there are millions and millions of people who saw the same advertising that Mr. Frailey, they would have you believe, saw and never -- never picked up a cigarette, never became smokers.
And, lastly -- this one's really important -you saw evidence that the public did not look to tobacco companies for information about the smoking risks.
We showed you poll after poll after poll where the tobacco companies got three percent, five percent, three percent and then four percent, finally, in 1980, in answer to all of these questions about who is a reliable source of information.
With all the press releases you saw and, you know, Joseph Coleman on TV, and they're making this
argument that the companies were the dominant voic on this, and that people were listening.
People weren't listening. They knew -- they knew that the tobacco companies were people that they were not going to look to for reliable information about this. And, in fact, they looked to the same organizations that people would look to today: The American Cancer Society, independent research laboratories, medical schools.
People weren't walking around waiting for -listening to the tobacco companies talk about their own products. That evidence about the cigarette culture just -- just did not bear out.
Now I want to mention advertising. First of all, there was this argument that Mr. Frailey was somehow influenced by Tareyton ads. But if you actually look at the Tareyton ads, they don't say anything about removal of harmful chemicals.
Remember, Dr. Kyriakoudes said, This advertising campaign was about filtering out harmful chemicals. Not a single one of them said anything about harmful chemicals.
This one even talks about others removing --Tareyton improves. It talks about how filters are used to filter water to improve the taste of water.
How filters are used to improve the taste of bourbon. That was one -- that was something that came up in a number of the ads.
And then, finally, in the Tareyton ads themselves, how the filter -- if you believe the ad -- improves the taste of the tobacco in the cigarette.
Only a paid expert could see a slogan like, I'd rather fight than switch, and think that that message is somehow about health or safety.
And there was nothing in any of the Tareyton ads that said to Mr. Frailey, or anyone else, forget everything you've ever heard from your doctor, from the Surgeon General's Reports, from the warnings oi the packages, from your schoolbooks, from the magazines, from the parents, from what you've been telling your own kids, forget all of that, cigarettes are safe because the ad says they taste good.
There was some discussion about a submarine filter ad, but not a single witness came here who could say that Mr. Frailey ever saw that ad, or could say when he saw that ad or how long he had been smoking Tareyton by the time that ad came oui
In fact there was only one fact witness who
testified at all in this case. It was Mrs. Frailey.
And she didn't even meet Mr. Frailey until 1971.
So everything that you've heard from Mr. Wilner about what Mr. Frailey was smoking before 1971, or right when he went into the military, there's not a single witness who's come, who they brought, who could actually talk about what they saw for Mr. Frailey during that time period, because Mrs. Frailey did not know him.
And the same is true, even for the time period after she met him.
How many witnesses said, well, I changed my mind about the Merit smoking, because Debbie said this in her deposition, or, Sherry said something else in her deposition?
Why didn't they bring you Debbie or Sherry? Debbie's right here in the courtroom. She's been here for the last week. They could have brought her to the stand and asked her to tell you directly what she saw or what she knew about Mr. Frailey, but the didn't do that. They only wanted you to hear from Mrs. Frailey and their two paid experts.
Now, I couldn't believe I saw this again in Mr. Wilner's closing, but there's another reason why they're asking you to look at ads. They said that
when Mr. Frailey was looking at the textbooks, in Indiana in the '30s and '40s, and being taught about how nicotine was a narcotic, how cigarette smoking shortens life, and how it can be a cause of cancer, their response to that was, well, after Mr. Frailey left school, he would have seen ads with sports figures in them. And the example they showed you was a 1933 ad from The New York Times.
So the story from that ad, apparently, is that Mr. Frailey goes to school. His teachers are teaching him about all these risks. He's being told to be suspicious of cigarette advertising.
And then, in 1933, when Mr. Frailey was seven years old, he leaves the school, stops by a store someplace, picks up a New York Times, and then starts reading The New York Times. It doesn't make any sense at all.
And at the end of the day, the testimony of the one fact witness who came to testify, who actually knew Mr. Frailey, shows that he wasn't being driven by this advertising the way they want you to believe.
That's why we keep talking about the cigarette consumption chart. Because if you actually look at the testimony of the people who knew Mr. Frailey, il
brings you back to Mrs. Frailey. And Mrs. Frailey said that Mr. Frailey wasn't paying attention to ads. She said, If there was one part of the newspaper that Mr. Frailey didn't pay attention to, it was the parts about ads.
And then she said, Well, if he did look at ads, it might be because he saw an ad for Sears or some kind of tool product that he wanted to buy. Not advertisements for cigarettes. She said he wasn't paying attention to that and he wasn't buying cigarettes based on ads.
Now, I can say the same thing I said about the first question, if you answer no to the four questions that we just looked at, your job will be done. And, hopefully, you won't even answer those questions.
But the verdict form goes on, so I'm going to go on, briefly, about the rest of the verdict form.
The next question that comes up is about comparative fault. That was the slide that we already looked at earlier that had a line for Reynolds, a line for Philip Morris, and a line for Julius Frailey. And if you get to that question, there are just three things I think you should -you should think about in assigning percentage of
fault.
First, you should remember that it's legal to sell cigarettes. So there shouldn't be any assignment of responsibility merely because a company sold cigarettes.
Second, I would ask you to think about who mad< the choices that Mr. Frailey made. Who was responsible for the 99.94 percent of the time that Mr. Frailey wasn't even trying to quit smoking?
We would submit that it's not Reynolds, it's not Philip Morris, and it's not any company that is part of Reynolds.
And, lastly, consider Dr. Feingold's testimony, and the cigarettes that Mr. Frailey was smoking in the six months to a year before his adenocarcinoma developed. We don't think the adenocarcinoma was caused at all by cigarette smoking, certainly not substantially.
But if you believe Dr. Feingold that it was, it's the Merit cigarettes he was smoking at the end, not the Tareyton.
Now, that takes us to damages. And I'm going to be honest with you, I'm not going to spend a lot of time talking about damages.
The first day that I met all of you I told you
that our position was going to be that Reynolds is not responsible for Mr. Frailey's cancer. And you all told me that you wouldn't be offended by that.
And I think you all know enough about me by now to know that I don't think any damages should be awarded in this case.
We stipulated that the medical bills that Mr. Frailey -- that were -- you know, that the medical bills for Mr. Frailey were $157,000. But the truth is, you shouldn't award any damages.
I don't know where Mr. Wilner got the $533,000 figure. I'm not sure where that came from. And I'm not sure I understand how he came up with -- I guess it was $3.4 million.
But I can say this about that. If you come to court and you're asking for money damages, the way Mrs. Frailey is -- she's asking for close to four million dollars -- you ought to be able to show that cigarette smoking was the substantial legal cause of the smoker's injuries.
You ought to be able to show that you didn't blame somebody, other than the companies, before foi Mr. Frailey's injuries and death. We know that she blamed the Navy.
You ought to be able to show that Mr. Frailey
wanted to quit smoking and tried over and over and over again and couldn't do it.
You ought to be able to show that Mr. Frailey didn't know the risks.
And they can't do that.
And, above all, you ought to tell the truth.
The last thing I want to talk briefly about is punitive damages, because you heard from Mr. Wilne that they're seeking punitive damages. And he kind of made it sound like the question about punitive damages is really just an option. It's just a box that you check to hear more about this.
Well, that's not right at all. And the instructions that you receive are going to make it clear that it's not just some option that you can check if you want to hear more about this.
Punitive damages can only be awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of Mr. Frailey's illness and death. Even this question is about Mr. Frailey and whether something that Reynolds did was a legal cause of his illness.
Punitive damages can only be awarded to Mrs. Frailey.
And punitive damages, by their very nature, are damages that would be in addition to any damages
that fully compensate Mrs. Frailey. So that means that, when Mr. Wilner tells you that he wants you to award punitive damages, it's not about compensating Mrs. Frailey. It's about getting more money damages on top of what would compensate Mrs. Frailey.
And then, lastly, punitive damages isn't some optional thing that you can take lightly. It's the one question on the verdict form where you're required to make that decision by clear and convincing evidence. That is the highest standard that we have in civil law. It's not simply an option that you check because you want to hear more.
You have to meet all of these requirements, and you have to meet them by clear and convincing evidence. That is the burden on the Plaintiff in this case.
So what is the evidence about whether Reynolds engaged in reprehensible conduct that mattered to Mr. Frailey?
Well, you heard a lot about mainstream science. You heard this idea that the companies were somehow divorced from mainstream science and were outliers and that that was the reason that Reynolds should be punished.
Well, first of all, it's not uncommon for
scientists to disagree. Reasonable minds can disagree about science. And Reynolds and the American Tobacco Company were not the only peopl who had some doubts, in that early period, about what the science showed.
In fact, I walked through with Dr. Feingold all of the different people that he said were outliers, people that he accused of having an unreasonable opinion about the science.
Reynolds is at the top.
But also Dr. Greene from Yale.
Dr. Berkson from the Mayo Clinic.
The Dr. Mayo from the Mayo Clinic.
Dr. Heller of the National Cancer Institute.
The American Medical Association President.
The American College of Chest Physicians.
Dr. Hueper of the National Institutes of Health.
Why should Reynolds be punished because it had a view, during this time period, that was similar to the view of these other people? Why is that punishable conduct? It's not.
Now, you might be wondering why I put the Surgeon General on the bottom there. I did that because Dr. Feingold and Mr. Wilner want you to
think that anyone who disagrees, at any point in time, with the Surgeon General should be punished for it.
But Dr. Feingold disagreed with the Surgeon General's conclusion about the addictiveness of cigarettes in 1988, and he disagreed in 1989 and 1990 and 1991 and 1992 and 1993 and 1994.
Dr. Feingold's position, during all of those years, wasn't just that the Surgeon General was wrong about addiction. It was that the Surgeon General was dead wrong about that.
Now, this may be the one time that I'm saying this. I'm not trying to criticize Dr. Feingold.
There was nothing wrong with Dr. Feingold having a difference in opinion with what was written in the Surgeon General's Report. But there was nothing wrong with Reynolds' position in having that opinion during those years either.
And a company should not be punished for the stupid or silly things that some of its employees might have said over the years. I bet each and every one of you, at some point in your lives, has worked with somebody who has incredibly poor judgment and has said or done something that you know is not representative of the company's policy
or the company's positions.
You cannot and should not punish a company for the things that a lawyer picks out in documents from a few people over the years.
The other thing to keep in mind is all of the things that you heard about what Reynolds, or other companies in the industry, were doing that should be encouraged, not punished.
For example, you'll see about how the industry funded published peer-reviewed articles; work that was cited in the Surgeon General's Reports; published the Green Monster -- nobody ever wanted call it the Green Monster, but I can't remember the long name -- funded scientists from prestigious institutions, including people who would go on to win the Nobel prize; co-funded research with public health organizations, like the American Cancer Society and the National Cancer Institute.
This is not punishable conduct. This is what we expect companies to be doing.
And just -- I can't go through every allegation that Mr. Wilner's going to throw at you, but I just want to call your attention to two more, just very quickly.
He talked a lot about the 1953 meeting at the
Plaza Hotel. But we showed you, on cross-examination, where the companies told the Department of Justice about that meeting. It wasn't some big secret that nobody knew about.
Then he showed you a document about benzopyr as a potential carcinogen in cigarette smoke from either 1957 or 1959.
Well, then we showed you a Reader's Digest article, a public article, that pointed to that same chemical, benzopyrene, as potential cause of cancer in cigarette smoke.
Based on everything that we've discussed, we believe that your answer to that question about punitive damages should be no, if you even get there.
Now, I just want to wrap up now. I'm sure you all have heard enough from me. But since this will be my last time to actually talk with you, and Mr. Wilner will have another -- another chance to respond, and I won't get to come back after he talks, I just want to tell you that I've done the best that I know how to respond to Mr. Wilner's arguments and the arguments that I think he'll make. But if I missed something, if there's something that he talks about that I didn't talk about, I know that
you won't misunderstand my silence on that topic as agreement.
I know that you know enough about me, and the way that we've put on this case, that you'll be thinking, What would Mr. Walker have said about tha point that Mr. Wilner just made?
And I just ask that you continue to ask what Mr. Wilner's arguments have to do with Mr. Frailey, that you continue to focus on the credibility issues, the qualifications issues, and continue to use your common sense.
And don't let Mr. Wilner or the Plaintiffs turn Mr. Frailey into somebody he wasn't. He's a guy who knew the risks, was accomplished in life, succeeded in anything he put his mind to.
And the reason he didn't quit smoking isn't because of some dragon in his brain. He didn't quit smoking, because he didn't want to quit smoking. He never really tried, truthfully, never really tried, never really committed to it, was never really motivated to do it, and that's why he didn't quit.
Not because of anything anybody else did or said or didn't say.
And for that, and all of the reasons that I've talked about, we're asking you to enter a defense
verdict in this case.
And I just -- I just want to express my appreciation and the appreciation of my entire team once again, before I sit down. Really, you've been model jurors. A lot of jurors zone out. You know, it's easy. Even listening to myself, I know that it's easy to zone out at times. You all never really did that. And because of that, I know you're going to reach the right verdict in this case.
Thank you.
