                 CLOSING STATEMENT
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Good afternoon.
          THE PANEL:  Good afternoon.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  Frank Gafney, medical
     records say that he started smoking when he was
     14 years old in 1950.  As you know, this
     photograph was taken when he was 15 years old.
          Tobacco company documents that are in
     evidence that you have seen and heard about in
     this case tell you that they intended to sell
     their addictive product to children.  They knew
     if you get a teenager addicted, that if you get
     them addicted to nicotine as a child, you get a
     lifetime of profits, and that's exactly what
     they intended and it's exactly what they got in
     Frank Gafney.
          He was a teenager, and like all the others
     that were being marketed to, they enjoyed
5599 nearly 50 years of profits off his lungs.
          And as you all know, and as you saw in
     this trial, peer pressure is real.  Whether
     it's your brother, your friends, the priests
     where you go to school, the movies, radio,
     television, athletes, peer pressure gets to
     you.  And the defendants, they knew that.  And
     they exploited it in their search for
     replacement smokers, children.
          You add a little marketing, you add a
     little nicotine, just the right amount, because
     they control that in their product design and,
     lo and behold, 70 percent of the people, Frank
     Gafney's generation, his age cohort, as
     Dr. Burns called it, 70 percent of them smoked.
     It would have been odd if Frank Gafney didn't
     smoke.
          And it would have been really unusual
     given the design of these products, these
     cigarettes, that if he were able to just put
     them down and walk away without any difficulty.
     That would have been really, really unusual.
          And you know now, you know now why that
     is.  They engineered cigarettes to be addictive
     through technology, through additives, through
5600 design changes, they engineered cigarettes to
     be hard to give up.
          And they spent the next few decades
     perfecting ways to make cigarettes as addictive
     as they could.  They put in just the right
     nicotine.  They wash out it when they're
     processing the tobacco and they put it back in,
     just the right amount.
          They changed the pH to make it more
     inhalable.  They add ammonia compounds that
     freebase nicotine to the brain.  They
     controlled the nicotine content to enhance
     nicotine kick.  And increasing the pH of smoke
     above 6.0 causes other changes, particularly
     when the increase in smoke pH is achieved by
     adding ammonia to the blend.
          They've tried to make quitting smoking as
     difficult as they can.  And they've been doing
     it and they did it for Frank Gafney's whole
     life.  And despite that evidence, they say that
     it was Frank Gafney's free, unfettered choice
     to smoke cigarettes.  Not just the first one,
     but the ones after six years and seven years
     and ten years and 20 years and 30 years and
     40 years, it was his unfettered, free choice.
5601 And despite the evidence that you've seen
     in this case, they say that his death, which
     was caused by an addiction to nicotine and
     cigarettes, is not one bit their
     responsibility.  And there's strong evidence of
     his addiction in this case.  There's no
     question about that aspect of it, which I'm
     going to get to in just a minute.
          And there's no question that they designed
     and intended cigarettes to be addictive and
     hard to give up, exactly what you saw in this
     case.  And there's no question that they lied
     and concealed it to keep that going, and
     there's no question that it worked and that
     they profited from it working.
          And the only question that's facing you
     now, after sitting in here for a month, is what
     are you going to do about it?  Because you're
     going to have to decide whether you're going to
     tolerate lies and liars because it's just
     business.
          Because it's wrong to design something to
     be addictive and then lie about it and then
     market it as safe and then exploit addicted
     people to keep doing what they are addicted to,
5602 all the while knowing that your business plan
     is going to result in people dying.
          And things aren't going to square up until
     your verdict speaks that you're not going to
     let the defendants profit from lies and deceit.
     Until your verdict makes it known that you're
     not going to stand by and allow that kind of
     business plan to rob people of their lives and
     their health.
          Every Lorillard employee, every
     R.J. Reynolds executive who testified in this
     case, whether it was on video or on documents
     you saw here, every single one of them, their
     own statements show that what they did was
     intentional.  What they did was intentional.
     It was something they knew was false, and they
     did it for money.  And that's it, money.
     That's what matters to them, money.
          They knew that what they were doing was
     wrong.  And we found out that what they did was
     wrong.  And now, after being here for a month,
     you know that what they did was wrong.  And the
     question you're faced with is, what are you
     going to do about it?
          Ask yourselves, why is it?  Why do people
5603 smoke?  All of you know the answer to that,
     that's nicotine.  Nicotine addiction is why
     people smoke.  Even though they've known for
     decades how to take nicotine out of cigarettes,
     even though they've known for decades that they
     are able to grow tobacco with no nicotine in
     it, they not only choose to keep the nicotine
     in it, but they engineered the cigarettes to
     maintain that addiction.
          "The additives and chemicals that tobacco
     companies put in cigarettes may have helped
     make them more addictive because once inhaled,
     nicotine races from your lungs to your heart to
     your brain."  They were doing all they could to
     take choice away.
          They were doing all they could to take
     choice away.  And yet their defense is that
     Frank Gafney chose to smoke and that he was
     somehow immune to nicotine addiction, which
     they lied about cigarettes being addictive and
     they lied about cigarettes causing cancer.  And
     all those lies were designed to keep smokers
     like Frank Gafney to continue smoking.  That's
     what the whole program was designed for.
          You've got to take yourself back in time
5604 to understand the different time, you know,
     when we were kids and our parents would take us
     on those long trips in the car and we would
     crawl up in the back window and we could warm
     ourselves in the sun, we could play with our
     brothers or sisters, you can ask your dad a
     dozen times how long until we get there.  And
     if you saw somebody riding their kids up in the
     back window of the car today, you would wonder
     what was wrong with them.  Because we know more
     now.  It's a different time today than it was
     years ago when we had wonderful parents who
     loved us but let us ride up in the back window
     because people didn't know.
          You have to take yourself back in time to
     a place where we could all be smoking in here.
     You could all be smoking.  I told you in
     opening statement, they had ashtrays lined up,
     this place would be full of smoke.  It was a
     very different time.  It was a time where they
     promised, these defendants promised if there's
     anything bad in cigarettes, we'll take it out.
          And they promised, your health is of
     primary paramount concern to us.  And we accept
     it as our responsibility to look out for you.
5605 Trust us.  We are going to work with the public
     health authorities.  That's what they said in
     that time back then.  They were going to be the
     first to let everybody know.
          And in the meantime, use these filters,
     you'll feel better about smoking a Kent.  And
     then what did they really know to be true?  The
     illusion of filtration is as important as the
     fact of filtration.  That's what they knew to
     be true, but that's what they kept to
     themselves.
          And then years later, use these low-tar
     and light cigarettes, they are better for you.
     "Considering all I've heard, I can decide to
     either quit or smoke True, and I smoke True."
          And what did they know about low tar as
     they are marketing cigarettes like that?  What
     they know is it was important to have those
     filter traps.  "Some claimed to possess the
     least tars.  In those cases, however, the
     smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as
     much or more nicotine and tar as they would
     have gotten from a regular cigarette.  He had
     abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on
     the ground of reduced risk of health."
5606 That's intercepting people on the way to
     quitting.  That's speaking to addicted smokers
     in a way that only addicted smokers really
     understand.  Provides them with a reason to
     keep doing what it is they are doing despite
     what it is that they hear and see.  Because
     that's what the companies did is gave them
     public statements to rely upon.  And you saw
     them in this case.  We can't bring you
     everything.  We can't bring you the
     20th Century.  We darn sure tried.
          Preying on addicted smokers who don't know
     the truth is what these defendants were doing,
     that these cigarettes that they knew were just
     as deadly as your old brand that we told you
     wasn't harmful to you.  And they knew it was a
     powerful message for addicted smokers, and they
     designed it to be that way.
          And the interesting thing about this whole
     idea about cigarettes not being addictive
     because of some 1953 World Health Organization
     definition, you know, the truth is that the
     difference in cigarettes and their addiction
     and these other, you know, street drugs and
     narcotics and things like that is that -- is
5607 that cigarettes, they are not intoxicating.
     They keep saying that, the defendants said that
     the whole trial.
          And people -- people can smoke cigarettes.
     You can be like Frank Gafney.  You could be a
     model son.  You could be a wonderful husband.
     You could be a great father.  You could work
     yourself really hard and you could make your
     way in life.  You can be a good breadwinner.
     You could be responsible, a good citizen.  You
     could be all those things, and you could be an
     addict.
          Typically folks that are using alcohol and
     narcotics and all that, they have other
     problems, you know.  But people that smoke
     cigarettes, they don't have those problems
     until they are 59 years old and have a spot on
     their lung.
          So there's a difference that they preyed
     upon that you could do this and you could still
     be an accepted member of society.  They love to
     say they sell a legal product and it's the
     legality of that product that makes it so darn
     ubiquitous, it's everywhere, and it's so easy
     to get.
5608 You give up smoking, you're done for a
     week or two weeks or a month or year, whatever
     it is, and you needed gas and there it is,
     right behind the register.  You go by the
     Winn-Dixie, get a carton of milk, and there it
     is, right there at the register.  It's
     everywhere you go.  It's different than being
     addicted to something that is illegal.
          Frank Gafney was one of those people that
     could be preyed upon.  Think of the words that
     you heard to describe Frank Gafney in this
     trial.  He was friendly.  He was intelligent.
     He was determined.  He was strong-willed and
     goal-oriented and God-fearing and loyal.  He
     was a fantastic guy.  He was kind.  He was
     honest.  He was trustworthy.  You heard all
     these wonderful things.  He was someone you'd
     want as a friend.  Frank Gafney was.
          And he was addicted.  Addiction to
     nicotine is why Frank Gafney smoked.  That's
     why he smoked a carton a week for 45 years.
     Addiction to nicotine is what caused the
     smoking that caused the lung cancer that killed
     him.
          And what did Lorillard and Reynolds bring
5609 you to dispute that?  They brought you
     Dr. Kaplan.  And you saw him.  He was the whole
     case.
          As the plaintiff here, we have to prove
     certain points.  We have to prove that Frank
     Gafney was a member of the Engle class.  We
     have to prove that by the greater weight of the
     evidence, not by -- not by beyond all
     reasonable doubt, like a criminal case, but we
     have to prove it by the greater weight of the
     evidence.  The more persuasive and conclusive
     force and effect of the evidence, did we tip
     the scales in our favor, did we provide the
     greater weight of the evidence.  And I think
     the evidence is clear in this case that we did.
          First question you're going to answer on
     that verdict form, was Frank Gafney addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was
     such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer
     and death.
          Now, it's important for you to look was
     such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer
     and death.  We talked about this in opening
     statement, it's not the legal cause of his lung
     cancer, it's a legal cause of his lung cancer
5610 and death.
          Addiction doesn't have to be the only
     cause of his death.  It can operate in
     combination with other things.  You'll see that
     repeatedly in the jury instructions that you
     have and you see it repeatedly in the questions
     that you're asked to decide on that verdict
     form.  Every one of those claims, whether Frank
     Gafney was a member of the Engle class, his
     addiction to nicotine, was it a legal cause of
     his death.
          Was use of the defendants' cigarettes,
     we'll get to that in a minute, was it a legal
     cause of his death.  Was the concealment, the
     fraudulent concealment by the defendants, was
     it a legal cause of his death.
          None of them are legally the cause because
     the law recognizes that these things all act
     together.  The law recognizes the complexity of
     life.  Very few things, especially tragedies
     like what happened here, very few of those
     things happen because of one thing.  Most of
     the time, we've all experienced this, the
     world's complex and sometimes more than one
     thing operates to create something that's bad
5611 that happens.
          Same things that happen that are good,
     that the law recognizes all these things can
     work together to create something.  So
     addiction was a legal cause.  And the jury
     instruction reflects that.  In order to be
     regarded -- in the second paragraph there, in
     order to be regarded as a legal cause of lung
     cancer and death, an addiction to cigarettes
     containing nicotine need not be the only cause.
     An addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine
     may be a legal cause of lung cancer and death,
     even though it operates in combination with the
     act of another, some natural cause.
          You've heard this instruction about four
     or five times in your jury instructions that
     you're going to take back there with you.  You
     get them in every case, not just tobacco cases.
     Because the law recognizes that things work
     together.
          What was the evidence that you heard here
     about Frank Gafney's addiction to nicotine and
     cigarettes?  Well, you heard Dr. Burns testify
     to you that Mr. Gafney was addicted.  Dr. Cohn,
     his treating doctor, said he was addicted.
5612 Mrs. Gafney testified that he was addicted.
     The deposition that was read to you yesterday,
     Mr. Riegelsberger said Mr. Gafney was addicted.
          I'm going to go through the testimony of
     each of them to remind you because we've been
     here for so many weeks.  Dr. Burns testified,
     "There's no question in my mind that he was
     powerfully addicted."
          Dr. Cohn was asked whether Mr. Gafney was
     addicted.  "I think that's definitely the
     case," and he had no doubt whatsoever.
          And then we have Mrs. Gafney who said,
     consistent with the interrogatory they
     published to you today, "I'm a layperson, but I
     observed Frank had to have a cigarette to get
     through his day.  There was no way he could get
     through without it.  If that's addiction, as
     far as I'm concerned, he was seriously addicted
     all those years."
          Then you have Mr. Riegelsberger.  "Yes, he
     was addicted."
          And then you were taught about the
     Fagerstrom Test.  Dr. Cummings came and talked
     to you about it.  And I'm going to go over the
     evidence on that to show you just how addicted
5613 Mr. Gafney was.
          How soon after you wake up do you smoke
     your first cigarette?  You get three points if
     it's within five minutes.  And Mrs. Gafney
     testified, When I heard the alarm go off, I
     hear click, click, and sucking in on that
     cigarette before he ever got out of bed.  It
     was immediate.
          The second prong of Fagerstrom, do you
     find it difficult to refrain from smoking in
     places where it's forbidden?  Well, he smoked
     everywhere he went.  In the car, in his home,
     the movie theater, in restaurants.  There was
     no place he didn't smoke.  Even in the
     hospital.  When he was admitted to the hospital
     in Colorado, the doctors entered those orders
     in the chart that he could smoke if he was off
     oxygen.  And you heard Dr. Burns testify about
     it and you heard Dr. Cohn testify about it,
     that that's the kind of orders that doctors
     would put in the chart back in those days when
     smoking was allowed in hospitals, that they
     would actually enter an order to allow you to
     smoke inside the hospital.
          And the third prong of the Fagerstrom is
5614 which cigarette would you hate most to give up?
     Well, Mr. Gafney's not here to ask him that
     question.  We can't offer you that testimony,
     but the jury instructions allow you to weigh
     the evidence and what you've heard about
     Mr. Gafney, who smoked first thing when the
     alarm goes off, he smoked two before getting
     up.  He would smoke if he woke up in the middle
     of the night.  You can use your own common
     sense and reason to determine which one was the
     first one and which was the one he would least
     want to give up.  You decide that on your own.
     I don't have testimony, but you can decide that
     with testimony that you have.
          The fourth one, how many cigarettes a day
     do you smoke?  31 or more gets three points.
     Well, one and a half packs a day is in the
     medical records, all over the medical records.
          And then we get to Question 5, do you
     smoke more frequently during the first hours
     after awaking than during the rest of the day?
          Well, he would go to work after he got up
     in the morning and smoked some cigarettes, and
     so Mrs. Gafney didn't know if he smoked more in
     the morning versus more at night because he's
5615 at work and she would come and see him at
     lunch, so we can't answer that question for
     you.  But again, you can use your common sense
     and your reason based on all the facts and
     evidence that you've heard in this case.
          Question Number 6, do you smoke even if
     you're so ill that you're in bed most of the
     day?  And Mrs. Gafney testified that he would
     smoke when he had the flu or was at home.  And
     as you know, when he was confined to the
     hospital, they entered an order to allow him to
     smoke there.
          What happens when you add those up, the
     score of eight to ten points, he's got at least
     eight.  A score over seven says your level of
     dependence is high, you aren't in control of
     your smoking, it's in control of you.
          Mr. Gafney was serially addicted and you
     see when we get to the issue of whether lung
     cancer caused his death, you have, again,
     Dr. Cohn, Dr. Burns, and the death certificate
     that Dr. Cohn wrote up, all of them testified
     that lung cancer was the cause of his death.
     And the defense didn't bring you anybody to say
     that lung cancer didn't cause his death.  They
5616 brought you nothing, nothing.
          And we have Dr. Cohn said that Mr. Gafney
     smoked 40 or 45 years, a pack to pack and a
     half a day, more than enough to have been
     responsible for his lung cancer and his
     ultimate death and there was no doubt about it
     in his mind.
          Dr. Burns testified, "There was no
     question in my mind that his nicotine addiction
     led to his death from lung cancer."
          The question on Number 1 on the verdict
     form, he was addicted, his addiction caused his
     repeated exposure, and that repeated exposure
     to the carcinogens in cigarette smoke is what
     caused his lung cancer.
          And the Surgeon General tells us on how
     nicotine addiction causes death.  Now, the
     defendants' websites tell you to rely on what
     the Surgeon General says about smoking and
     health, yet, they brought you Dr. Kaplan to
     tell you that the Surgeon General was wrong.
          What do the medical records say about
     Mr. Gafney's smoking history?  A pack a day for
     40 years.  That's in February 1990.  Well, you
     do the math, that means he started in 1950, he
5617 was 14 years old.  Every one of those records,
     pack and a half a day for 40 years.  59 year
     old white male, ex-smoker, May 10, 1995, pack
     and a half a day for 45 years.  You do the
     math, he started in 1950 when I was 14 years
     old.
          What does that mean in the context of
     nicotine addiction and how nicotine addiction
     causes someone to die?  Well, you go through
     what it takes to smoke the way Frank Gafney
     smoked, the way an addicted smoker goes through
     that many cigarettes, you get eight to ten
     inhales, withdrawals per cigarette.
          Just for the sake of easy math, we just
     did eight puffs per cigarette is being
     conservatism, and there's 20 cigarettes in a
     pack.  So if you smoke a pack and a half a day,
     that's 30 cigarettes a day, 8 draws or inhales
     off those cigarettes, each of those cigarettes,
     that's 240 hits of nicotine every day.  Do you
     that 365 days a year, that's almost 90,000 hits
     of a highly addictive drug throughout the year.
     45 years of it, you come to almost 4 million
     hits of a highly addictive drug.
          Now, that's day after day after day for 45
5618 years.  And the defendants are going to say
     that Frank Gafney was somehow immune to that.
     That this highly addictive drug didn't make him
     addicted.
          And their expert's book says differently.
     Their expert's book says 80 -- between 80 and
     90 percent of regular smokers have nicotine
     dependence.  Almost one fourth of the United
     States population.  And all the more than
     80 percent of the individuals who smoke express
     a desire to stop smoking and 35 percent try to
     stop each year, less than 5 percent are
     successful in unaided attempts to quit.
          So when you get the verdict form,
     Question 1, is Frank Gafney addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, such
     addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and
     death, you know, the issue that you're faced
     with is not whether Frank Gafney had free
     choice.  The issue isn't whether Frank Gafney
     was unable to control himself or whether
     addiction took over his life.  It's whether
     addiction was a substantial contributing
     factor, one cause among many, that's what your
     jury instruction tells you.
5619 Ask yourselves, based on the evidence that
     you've heard here, if Frank Gafney were not
     addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, as a 14
     year old, do you think he would have planned to
     expose himself to the dozens of carcinogens
     every day, hundreds of times a day for 45 years
     if he wasn't addicted?  Would that make any
     sense?
          Were Lorillard and Reynolds, were they
     wrong in their internal documents when they
     told themselves that people smoke for nicotine?
     That nicotine is the sine qua non?  A
     cigarette, without which it would not be?  That
     if we take the nicotine too low, people are
     going to quit?  And that most people can't
     quit, were they wrong when they said those
     things to themselves?
          And we all know they were right what they
     said to themselves.  Of course, their internal
     documents were right.  They were right about
     nicotine being addictive.  They were right
     about why people can't stop.  They were right
     about it causing cancer.  Addiction is what
     causes people to smoke until they get sick from
     it and die.  Without addiction, that doesn't
5620 happen.
          Now, if you answered yes to question
     Number 1 on the verdict form, Frank Gafney's a
     member of the Engle class.  If you answer no,
     Mrs. Gafney loses.  And Lorillard and
     R.J. Reynolds win and you left him the blue
     ribbon on Lorillard and Reynolds.
          MR. BASSETT:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BASSETT:  Move to strike.
          THE COURT:  Granted.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  A yes answer, though, a
     yes answer means that the Engle findings will
     apply.  Smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer,
     nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, the
     defendants, both of these defendants place
     cigarettes on the market were defective and
     unreasonably dangerous.
          Both these defendants concealed or omitted
     material information not otherwise known or
     available, knowing that the material was false
     or misleading, or failed to disclose a material
     fact concerning the health effects or addictive
     nature of smoking cigarettes or both.  And that
     both of these defendants agreed with the other
5621 Engle defendant to conceal or omit information
     regarding the health effects of cigarettes or
     their addictive nature with the intention that
     smokers in the public would rely on this
     information to their detriment, and it lists
     the other Engle defendants, a couple of whom
     are now part of R.J. Reynolds, Brown &
     Williamson Tobacco Corporation and American
     Tobacco Company.  It lists the Council for
     Tobacco Research and the Tobacco Institute.
     And you heard a lot of comments from them
     during this trial.  And finally, both these
     defendants were negligent.
          Now, those findings, when you answer
     Question 1 yes, which the evidence shows you
     should, those findings become binding on the
     Court, the parties, and on you all, the jury.
     Now, this is one of those stories that has only
     one side.  What they did and why they did it,
     the things they went about doing it for,
     there's no other side to this story about what
     they did.  Agreeing to lie to smokers, agreeing
     to conceal what they knew to be true about the
     dangers of the product they were making and
     selling to people.  To carry out a scheme to
5622 lie to an entire nation for 50 years.  All that
     for money.  It didn't matter how many died, it
     didn't matter if anybody did it to them.  They
     just wanted more money.
          Question 2 on the verdict form was:
     Smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or both
     of the defendants a legal cause of Frank
     Gafney's lung cancer and death.
          This is another one of those questions
     where not only have the parties agreed, but the
     evidence is undisputed.  Stipulated facts in
     the case, as you've been shown them a couple of
     times now, that Frank Gafney was a citizen of
     Florida, and they were married on August 22nd,
     and he had lung cancer, and Camel cigarettes
     are made by Reynolds and Lucky Strike
     cigarettes are made by American and Reynolds is
     responsible for American and their brands.  And
     all the cigarettes that Frank Gafney smoked
     that we agreed on in 9, 10, 11, and 12, all of
     them contain nicotine.  And what's -- and then
     smoking cigarettes can cause lung cancer,
     including large cell cancer.  Look at
     Number 14.
          Number 14 says, to the extent Mr. Gafney
5623 may have smoked cigarette brands other than
     Camel, Lucky Strike, Kent, or True, that
     smoking was minimal and not directly, in a
     natural and continuous sequence, to contribute
     substantially to producing any injury sustained
     by Mr. Gafney, if any, that was caused by
     smoking cigarettes.
          Now, the undisputed, unrebutted evidence
     in this case is that smoking cigarettes caused
     his lung cancer.  The stipulation, the
     agreement between the parties is the only four
     brands that would have done that is Camel,
     Lucky Strike, Kent, and True.  That's an
     agreement.  What was in the evidence?
          The evidence was that he smoked a pack a
     day since he was 14, and not just his wife told
     you the brands, but his buddies from high
     school, the judge and the hospital
     administrator, that he smoked Lucky Strikes.
     He also smoked Camels.  And then it changed and
     he smoked Kent.  And then he smoked True.  And
     he smoked heavily, sometimes up to two and a
     half packs a day.
          That's unrebutted and undisputed evidence
     in this case.  And so those are the brands of
5624 the two defendants.
          Then we go to the next one, please, Baron.
          What did Dr. Burns tell you about that?
     Each of the brands from Reynolds and Lorillard
     caused and contributed to his addiction in
     proportion to which he used them.  Reynolds for
     the first ten years or so, and then Lorillard
     for the 35 years after that.
          And did each and every one of those brands
     of cigarettes cause his development of lung
     cancer?  Yes.  They brought you nothing to
     oppose that.  It's undisputed evidence.
          Question 2 has to be a yes based on the
     evidence in this case.  And again, like
     question Number 1, if you answer no to this
     question, Mrs. Gafney loses and R.J. Reynolds
     and Lorillard win.
          Now, as Mrs. Gafney said all along, her
     husband shares in the responsibility for what
     happened to him, and she came here to court
     insistent on that.  It's in the jury
     instructions that you get at end of this case.
     But neither of the defendants, even though they
     promised in the Frank Statement way back in
     1954 that they accepted responsibility for the
5625 health of their customers, and they wanted to
     cooperate with the public health authorities,
     even though they lied about that for years and
     years and had broke those promises, they tell
     you they bear no responsibility at all in this
     case.  And that's where you all come in.
          Comparative negligence instruction you're
     going to get is the defendants have raised that
     instruction -- that claim that Frank Gafney was
     himself negligent and his negligence was a
     legal cause of lung cancer and death.  And in
     this regard, the plaintiff has admitted that
     the acts of Frank Gafney relating to the
     duration and frequency of his efforts to quit
     were a partial legal cause of his injury and
     death, in combination with the fault of these
     two defendants.
          Now, Lorillard and Reynolds, they deny
     here in court that their lies and deceit
     contributed to causing Frank Gafney's death.
     But behind closed doors, in boardrooms and in
     laboratories where they celebrated how
     successful their program of deceit was in
     keeping people smoking, see, what they say here
     is very different from what they do out there.
5626 MAGUIRE:  Your Honor, if I might
     approach.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          (Sidebar discussion held.)
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Your Honor, I believe
     plaintiff has completely crossed the line here
     by saying what we do here in defending
     ourselves is inconsistent to what we do out
     there disparaging the defense.  We started by
     saying that even though --
          THE COURT:  I can't hear you, Mr. Maguire.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  I'm sorry.  Plaintiff's
     counsel started by saying even though they
     accepted responsibility, they tell you here
     they have no responsibility, directly saying
     that the defense in this case, juxtaposing that
     specifically with plaintiff's claims and
     against the conduct of the defendants outside,
     and then linked it in the last statement so I
     think we have completely crossed the line.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Sales.
          MR. SALES:  I disagree, Your Honor.  And
     if Your Honor goes back and looks at the
     transcript, you will see that counsel changed
5627 what Mr. Gustafson said when he started his
     argument about "in here."  Where he put that in
     Mr. Gustafson's argument is not where it was,
     and the record will reflect that.
          We are entitled and one would be entitled
     in any lawsuit to draw distinctions between the
     positions that the parties take through their
     lawyers in court and the internal documents in
     those companies outside of court.
          Inside of court, it's going to be what we
     present, and Your Honor can expect that it
     would be right that they will say that there is
     no responsibility on the part of the
     manufacturers for what happened here.
          But internally when they had it to
     themselves to speak privately, they take a very
     different view.  And, in fact, Your Honor, the
     documents that have been admitted into evidence
     speak to that very thing.  It is Lawsuit 101 to
     draw distinctions between the positions of the
     parties taken inside court and out of court.
          We are not attacking the lawyers.  We are
     not attacking their arguments.  What we are
     saying is that the positions that are taken by
     the parties in the case are inconsistent with
5628 what they say outside of court.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Mr. Gustafson, I
     don't have complete recollection or recall of
     exactly what was said, so I'm going by the
     comments that have been made here.
          Instead of saying "in here," which can be
     argued, at a minimum, that you're referring to
     the presentation of the case as opposed to the
     evidence, what I suggested previously is that
     you refer to the evidence brought into court,
     and if you want to refer to what's going on in
     the courtroom, you can say the evidence brought
     into court as opposed to "in here."
          I'm not granting the motion for mistrial,
     but I'm just cautioning you let's not set up
     any particular grounds so we have to hear this
     again.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  The very next thing that
     I'm going to say is that I'm talking about the
     documents and I'm talking about the witnesses.
     It's -- I can show you --
          THE COURT:  If you made that clear from
     the beginning, we would have saved a sidebar.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  In terms of the objection,
     is the objection overruled?
5629 COURT:  I'm sorry?
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Just for the record, you're
     overruling my objection?
          THE COURT:  I thought you had moved for
     mistrial.  I couldn't hear you.  I denied the
     motion for mistrial.  All right.  Thank you.
          (Sidebar concluded.)
          THE COURT:  All right.  We are ready to
     continue.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  May it please the court.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  The evidence that you saw
     in this case and documents that you've seen and
     the testimony that you've heard from the people
     who work for Lorillard and Reynolds tells you
     that what they said in their testimony was very
     different from what they actually do in the
     business.
          What we know is that cigarettes are
     designed for addiction.  And we know that it
     changes, it changes permanently a smoker's
     brain when they are addicted to nicotine.  And
     it shows up in radiology studies.
          Go to the next one, please.
          It shows up in the radiology studies.  And
5630 you compare a smoker and a nonsmoker with the
     effects of nicotine.  And we know, and you
     know, that Lorillard designed their cigarettes
     for addiction.
          We know that the way tobacco is grown,
     mixed and processed today has made cigarettes
     more addictive than ever before and that the
     powerful addicting effects of commercial
     tobacco products remediated by diverse actions
     of nicotine and multiple types of nicotinic
     receptors in the brain, which is what you see
     in the radiology study, then what's described
     in the very documents authored by Lorillard and
     Reynolds.
          After discussing -- this is Lorillard in
     November of '76 -- "After discussing the
     50 Percent Lower Nicotine Project with
     Dr. Spears, I agree we should discontinue work.
     It is our judgment that a cigarette with
     substantially lowered nicotine could not
     deliver the smoking satisfaction to sustain
     customer purchase."
          And what does Reynolds tell us?  Reynolds
     tells us that "Most of those that have smoked
     for any significant time would like to stop.
5631 Many, but not most, of those who would like to
     stop smoking are able to do so."
          They tell us that people like Frank
     Gafney, most of them can't stop even though
     they want to.  They designed cigarettes to be
     as addictive as they could.  You heard
     testimony about the ingredients and the
     additives, how they take the nicotine out and
     they put it back in and they control the amount
     of nicotine to maintain addiction.  They use
     ammonia to make smoke easier to inhale.  All of
     that --
          MR. MAGUIRE:  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  No, sir.
          Just continue.  Mr. Gustafson, you can
     continue.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  All of that was to make
     cigarettes more palatable for smokers, was to
     make it more deeply inhalable.  It was to keep
     smokers smoking, to make quitting as hard to do
     as they could.  It was to take away choice, is
     to take away choice.
          Now, you compare the parties.  You have
     Mrs. Gafney, who accepts her husband's partial
     responsibility here, even though Frank Gafney
5632 was an honest and trustworthy and loyal person
     who didn't lie and he didn't cheat, you didn't
     hear anything like that about Frank Gafney.
          And then Reynolds and Lorillard get
     together and plot and scheme and engineer
     cigarettes to be addictive, and then they
     congratulate themselves how about successful
     their plan was and how much money they made.
     And despite that evidence, they claim they are
     not responsible.
          What did the defense bring you on that?
     They brought you Dr. Kaplan.  And you know now
     that the tobacco companies recognize,
     internally they recognize it, but the witnesses
     wouldn't recognize it here in court that "the
     entire matter of addiction is the most potent
     weapon a prosecuting attorney could have in a
     lung cancer/cigarette case.  We can't defend
     continued smoking as free choice if the person
     was addicted."
          But consistent with their practice of
     saying things internally that are different
     from what these executives testified to you in
     the trial of this case, and what they say in
     their documents when the rest of us people
5633 ain't looking, they are going to tell you that
     he had unfettered, free choice to stop smoking
     whenever he chose and that addiction had
     nothing to do with it.
          Now, to the defendants, it didn't matter
     what Frank Gafney did.  If he quit, they would
     tell you he should have quit sooner.  If he
     never quit, he just chose to smoke.  Heads they
     win, tails we loose.  Heads they win, tails
     everybody else loses.
          When we get to Question 3 on the verdict
     form, which I don't have a slide for you, but
     I've got it here.  When you get to question
     Number 3 on the verdict form, it's going to
     say, please state the percentage of any fault
     that was the legal cause of Frank Gafney's lung
     cancer and death that you charge to Reynolds,
     then a percentage, then Lorillard and a
     percentage, then Frank Gafney and a percentage,
     and you add them up, it has to be 100 percent.
     All three of them added together has to equal
     100 percent.
          Now, keep in mind -- it's important, I
     think, to keep in mind that R.J. Reynolds is
     three companies.  The Engle defendants include
5634 companies that R.J. Reynolds bought or merged
     with, American Tobacco made Lucky Strike, they
     brought out Brown & Williamson.
          MR. BASSETT:  Objection, Your Honor,
     misstatement of the law as this has been
     argued.  May we approach?
          THE COURT:  No, sir.  You can continue
     Mr. Gustafson.
          And, ladies and gentlemen, you'll rely on
     the law as I've instructed you.  Go ahead.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  You will see in the jury
     instructions, in the stipulated facts that
     we've shown you, that Reynolds is all three of
     those companies, and Reynolds is responsible
     for American Tobacco and it's responsible for
     Brown & Williamson, and those were the
     companies that existed when Frank Gafney was
     alive.  It was Reynolds, Brown & Williamson,
     American Tobacco, and Lorillard.
          It was four of them, and one of Frank
     Gafney.  Four of them, and one of Frank Gafney.
     And ask yourselves, who knew more?  Who knew
     more about the dangers of smoking cigarettes?
     Who knew more about what went into cigarettes?
     Who knew more about the designs and the design
5635 changes and ventilated filters and ammonia and
     the other additives that they put in it?  Who
     knew more about taking the nicotine out and
     putting it right back in in just the right
     amount to maintain addiction?  Who knew more
     about those things?  Who knew more about
     cigarettes causing lung cancer?  Was it the
     folks that made it?  Was it Frank Gafney?
          Everybody within the sound of my voice
     knows the answer to that question is the
     companies who made cigarettes knew all there
     was to know about those things, and they knew
     plenty more than Frank Gafney.  And it was
     unfair for them to suggest to you that this is
     all Frank Gafney's fault.
          They lied to him every day of his life.
     Now, this decision that you have to make is
     yours and yours alone.  And I can make a
     suggestion to you.  If you got four of them and
     one of Frank Gafney, that's 20 percent on Frank
     Gafney, 40 percent on Lorillard and 40 percent
     on Reynolds.  Frank Gafney -- it's four to one
     and Frank Gafney is 20 percent of that
     100 percent.
          So I would suggest to you that you put
5636 20 percent on Frank Gafney, 40 percent on
     Lorillard, 40 percent on Reynolds.  As I said,
     this is a suggestion to you.  This decision is
     yours and yours alone.
          I want you to think about this.  The
     defendants told you in this case that Frank
     Gafney did not die from lung cancer, despite
     the unrebutted evidence that lung cancer killed
     him.  They say he died from something that had
     nothing do with smoking.  And then on the other
     hand, they tell you it's all Frank Gafney's
     fault.
          Now, it can't be both, because it's
     neither.  Both of their positions through the
     evidence and just logically are false.
          You get to question Number 4 on the
     verdict form.  And question Number 4 is, did
     Frank Gafney reasonably rely to his detriment
     on any statement of material fact made by each
     defendant after May 5, 1982 that intentionally
     omitted material information concerning the
     health effects or addictive nature of smoking
     cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a
     legal cause of Mr. Gafney's lung cancer and
     death?
5637 And you know now that Reynolds and
     Lorillard sold defective and unreasonably
     dangerous cigarettes.  You know that.  And you
     also know that this question is very similar to
     the first question, was it a legal cause, was
     it a legal cause to Frank Gafney's lung cancer
     and death, not the legal cause.  This is one of
     those other causes that works in combination
     with his addiction.
          You know now that Reynolds and Lorillard
     knew their cigarettes were addictive and they
     designed them to be that way and they lied
     about it.  You know that now.  You know that
     Lorillard and Reynolds knew that the addiction
     to their cigarettes meant most of their
     customers couldn't stop smoking, and they lied
     about that, too.
          And you know now that Lorillard and
     Reynolds both knew that their customers would
     get addicted, and that addiction would lead
     to -- I think the document in evidence from
     Reynolds -- or Brown & Williamson, which is
     part of Reynolds now, says it would lead to
     unattractive side effects like lung cancer and
     heart disease and other things.  Unattractive
5638 side effects, they called it.  And they lied
     about that, too.  They knew what addiction
     would cause.
          So now you know that while the defendants
     say publicly in all this stuff -- in the
     evidence that you've seen in this case that
     smoking is a choice, you know now that they
     were doing everything they could, when none of
     us were looking, to make it as addictive as
     they could.
          You know that now.  But did you know that
     when you came here when this trial started?
     Ask yourselves, did you learn anything in this
     trial?  Because what the defendants are going
     to say is -- because this is 2000 -- we are
     almost to 2014, we are a couple of months from
     Christmas.  It was summer when we started this
     trial, and there's Christmas ads on TV.  We are
     almost to 2014.  And I know that you learned
     things in this trial that you didn't know about
     cigarettes and how they affect people.
          They are going to tell you Frank Gafney
     died in 1995.  They are going to tell you that
     Frank Gafney should have known everything that
     you all have learned here in the last month.
5639 He should have known that way back in 1995.
     Ask yourself if that makes any sense.
          They were fooling the public health
     authorities.  They were withholding things from
     people like Dr. Burns and the Surgeon General
     and everybody else about the dangers of the
     designs of their cigarettes.  They were fooling
     professionals with Ph.D.s and M.D.s, high
     top-rank government officials were fooled, and
     they are saying Frank Gafney shouldn't have
     been.
          The truth is, the truth is, is they hid it
     from a lot of people that had a lot more
     knowledge about this kind of stuff than Frank
     Gafney did.  He was a loyal, trusting person.
     What kind of people, who are the people who
     would do something like that to other people?
     Who would -- who would think that anyone would
     do that?
          You all are going to have to decide
     whether you are going to tolerate that.
          The jury instruction you're going to get
     on concealment is long.  I'm not going to show
     you the whole thing.  You've got it in your
     lap.
5640 There's something I want to show you.
     It's the same kind of instruction that you got
     regarding addiction.  "Concealment or omission
     of a material fact need not be the only cause.
     A concealment or omission of a material fact
     may be a cause of lung cancer and death even
     though it operates in combination with the act
     of another, some natural cause, or some other
     cause."
          Remember how I told you each one of these
     claims has that exact same instruction.
     Because the law recognizes that there are more
     than one cause to lead to something like this.
     And it allows you to make that determination.
          And going to the verdict form on
     Question 5.  "Did Frank Gafney reasonably rely
     to his detriment on any statement of material
     fact made by defendants or other tobacco
     companies after May 5, 1982 in furtherance of
     the agreement to intentionally omit information
     concerning the health effects or addictive
     nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was
     that reliance a legal cause of Frank Gafney's
     lung cancer and death?"
          This is similar to the fraudulent
5641 concealment except this one is conspiracy.  A
     conspiracy is an agreement between parties to
     do something illegal or to do something legal
     by illegal means.  It's an agreement where all
     of them are in it together.  And they are all
     treated as the same whether you're driving a
     car or whether you're the shooter or if you're
     in a conspiracy, it's the same.  And here, all
     of these companies got together and they
     created the Tobacco Institute and the TIRC and
     the Council for Tobacco Research, they were all
     in it together.  What one did is equally
     applicable to any of the others.  That's the
     way the law works and that's the law that you
     got here.
          So the question that you're going to have
     to answer is, did he rely on things after
     May 5, 1982, which is set forth in both of
     those questions, Questions 4 and 5.  And the
     issue here is not whether the defendants could
     have said something that would have made Frank
     Gafney stop smoking.  It's not like Claude
     Teague got up one day and picked the most
     sinister document he had ever written and
     mailed it to Frank Gafney and let's see what he
5642 does.  That's not the issue here.
          The issue is whether information on the
     harms of smoking was available or whether Frank
     Gafney ever saw a warning on a pack of
     cigarettes.  The issue is whether their false
     controversy was a substantial contributing
     factor.  One cause among many, a legal cause,
     just like you've been seeing on every one of
     these questions on the verdict form, they all
     work together.  They all act in combination.
          So what was the evidence?  What was the
     evidence on Questions 4 and 5?  The reliance on
     the concealment?  Well, it started when Frank
     Gafney was young.
          September 15, 1964, Kent was marketed as a
     safer cigarette for the smoker who was
     concerned about smoking and health, and
     Lorillard exploited this advantage so that
     within a short period of two years, the Kent
     volume grew from less than 4 billion cigarettes
     to 38 billion annually.
          Frank Gafney was smoking Kent cigarettes
     at that time because he thought it was better
     for him.  What did they say in 1964 about the
     reason for the false controversy?  They knew it
5643 caused cancer and they knew it was addictive
     and they lied about it.  Why are they lying?
     Because we must, in the near future, provide
     some answers which will give smokers a
     psychological crutch and a self-rationale to
     continue smoking.  Tell them it ain't proven,
     tell them it's all nonsense, it's just the
     government.  It's all nonsense.  We are looking
     out for you smokers.  We are going to cooperate
     with public health.
          And it continued his whole life.  What was
     the testimony on this?  Mrs. Gafney testified
     whether he continued to rely on what the
     cigarette companies said about how cigarettes
     were not harmful from the '80s up until the
     '90s, yes, he did.
          Dr. Burns from -- you know, did Lorillard
     do this health reassurance message with True by
     saying, "From everything I heard, I can either
     quit or smoke True, and I smoke True."
     Dr. Burns said, yes, that message clearly
     demonstrates the people they were targeting
     were not the long-term, confirmed smoker, but
     rather the people that were thinking about
     quitting.  That's who was being targeted.  And
5644 did Mr. Gafney begin smoking True around '81,
     '82?  The answer was I believe he did.
          And the defendants, they admit, they
     admitted here, their own executives admitted
     that it was reasonable for Frank Gafney to rely
     on what they said.  Not just back in the '60s,
     but in the '80s and '90s.
          Dr. Figlar testified before you about this
     very issue.  Katie Gafney testified just this
     morning.  They played the video.
          Play what Mrs. Gafney said, Baron.
          (A videoclip was played and transcribed as
     follows:)
     "Answer:  We would be talking about just
general things and the subject of smoking would come
up and we would have the discussion what was proof,
what wasn't.  And he didn't believe, until the very
end, that there actually was a connection because he
had read too many things that said there wasn't.
          (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  What did Dr. Figlar say,
     in 1984, they had run that Can We Have an Open
     Debate Campaign.  It was a nationwide,
     full-page newspaper ad.  They went on national
     TV news and he was asked specifically, do you
5645 think it was reasonable for your customer, the
     smokers of your cigarettes, to believe what you
     said and rely upon what you publicly said,
     including these advertisements?  And that's
     1984, Can We Have an Open Debate?  And he said,
     I would say it would be reasonable, yes.
     That's why they put them in.
          And then what did Dr. Heimann say?  The
     fellow that testified back in the video in 1986
     about advertisements, he was American Tobacco,
     now R.J. Reynolds, would you expect a consumer
     to rely upon your advertisements?  Yes.  Our
     advertising is truthful and we would anticipate
     that they would rely on it.
          And then what did Lorillard's people say?
     Kristy Leung is their marketing person.
     "Lorillard told the public in its
     advertisements in 1952 that Kent had health
     protection, that it was the first cigarette
     with a filter that really works and they had
     the greatest health protection in cigarette
     history.  It wanted people to believe those
     statements.  Remember that?
          "Yes, we did.
          "And people were entitled to rely on those
5646 statements and take them as true?
          "Yes.  I believe so."
          And then Ed Robinson, their science guy.
     "Can you give me any reason why -- and I'm
     talking from Lorillard's perspective, not the
     perspective of the listener.  Any reason why it
     would be unreasonable for a consumer of
     Lorillard's products to rely on a statement
     that Lorillard made about the health hazards
     associated with its products?
     "Answer:  No.  There's no reason why it would
be unreasonable."
          Frank Gafney relied on the statements by
     the industry, and the jury instructions will
     show you it doesn't have to be an affirmative
     statement because the findings say they kept
     things to themselves.  They concealed things.
     They don't have to come out and say something.
     They can tell you, here, smoke True.  From
     everything I heard, I can either quit or smoke
     True.  I smoke True.
          They don't tell you True is every bit as
     dangerous as the Old Golds we used to make.  We
     have design changes in True to make it so that
     you inhale the stuff more deeply into your
5647 lungs and makes it more inhalable.  Just as bad
     for you as any other cigarette we sell.  They
     didn't say those things.  They kept it to
     themselves in the hopes that people would keep
     buying their cigarettes.
          And Frank Gafney relied on these.  He
     relied on them to justify continued smoking,
     and that was after 1982.  And you heard
     Dr. Burns tell you what a difference it made,
     because if he had quit smoking in 1983, he
     would have had a 73 percent decreased risk of
     lung cancer by 1995.  73 percent risk he would
     have lost.
          If he quit in 1985, he would have lost
     63 percent.  It matters that he still believed
     them in the '80s.  The program of deceit made a
     difference.  And it started when Frank Gafney
     was a child and he continued his whole life.
     We know that Lorillard and the industry
     targeted children.  That's their advertisement
     in the '50s, and then we have them in the '70s
     saying the base of our business is the high
     school student.
          And what did Reynolds say?  Reynolds,
     American Tobacco, now part of Reynolds
5648 advertising prongs in 1952 for Lucky Strike,
     and then Reynolds saying in 1974, let's look at
     the growing importance of the young adult in
     the cigarette market.  In 1960, this young
     adult market, 14 to 24 age group, represented
     21 percent of the population.  And they
     represent tomorrow's cigarette business.
          In 1960, the 14 to 24 age group was Frank
     Gafney.  He was born in 1936.  He was 24 years
     old.  He was right near the wheelhouse.  He was
     right exactly the kind of person they were
     targeting back then in the 1950s.
          They concealed, Lorillard did, the use of
     ammonia and pH manipulation in this trial.
          Dr. Burns, will you play that, Baron.
          (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
     "Question:  First as to ammonia, does Lorillard
add ammonia to its cigarettes?
     "Answer:  No, it doesn't.
     "Question:  Has it ever?
     "Answer:  No.
     "Question:  Does Lorillard alter the pH of
smoke?
     "Answer:  No, it doesn't."
5649 (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  What you know, you know,
     from the evidence you heard, that Lorillard
     Tobacco Company ingredients include ammonia and
     phosphate.  They do put ammonia in their
     cigarettes, unlike what Mr. Robinson told you
     under oath.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Objection, Your Honor.  May
     we approach?
          THE COURT:  No, sir.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  And we know from the
     Reynolds documents, we know from the Reynolds
     documents that ammonia increases the pH.  It's
     in the Lorillard documents too.  They were
     manipulating pH.  They were putting ammonia in
     cigarettes.
          But you know how it all began is in
     1953 --
          Baron, if you can circle the drop in 1953.
          We know that in 1953, cigarette sales
     dropped precipitously that year because of some
     scientific articles that got some press in the
     paper.  We all know that now.
          1953, please.
          MR. PHILIPSON:  I'm sorry.
5650 GUSTAFSON:  And what did they do?
     They decided to meet at Plaza Hotel up in
     New York and they hired a PR firm and they
     hired scientists and public health people to
     try to look out for their customers.  They
     hired a public relations firm and they met
     there and they all decided to agree to lie and
     use the public relations company to head their
     efforts.  So the public relations company went
     to work and went to interview everybody from
     these companies that were participating and
     what does the forwarding memo tell us?
          The forwarding memo says it finds some
     interesting opinions.  One of the men said it's
     fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit
     they can't break.  Said another:  Boy, wouldn't
     it be wonderful if our company was the first to
     produce a cancer free cigarette?  What we could
     do to competition.
          They knew.  They knew clear back then.
     Frank Gafney was 17 years old.
          Then they agree that when they issue the
     Frank Statement nationwide, the Frank Statement
     says they are going to promise to accept
     responsibility.  We accept an interest in
5651 people's health, we believe the products we
     make are not injurious.  We always have and
     always will cooperate with those who safeguard
     the public health, and make all these promises.
          And then they tell you in more than
     300 years, they have been given tobacco and
     every time, every time those claims have been
     dropped and that's planting the seed for what
     they are fixing to do, and that's that they're
     going to lie.
          And how do the lies work?  Well, they knew
     what they were doing was a lie because the
     Tobacco Institute, in 1968, says, "Our basic
     position in the cigarette controversy is
     subject to the charge and may be subject to a
     finding that we are making false or misleading
     statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
          They were reflecting on what they were
     doing and they still kept it to themselves.
          1968.  And then they attack -- in 1968
     they start attacking the Surgeon General and
     the government for getting the word out, trying
     to get the word out about their product.  "The
     report is a shockingly intemperate defamation
     of an industry" -- which is a lie -- that led
5652 the way in research to seeking answers.  There
     was no controversy, and they knew it caused
     cancer and it was addictive and they kept it to
     themselves.
          Then February 26, 1972, they attack the
     Surgeon General and they call him a liar,
     publicly.  "The Surgeon General insults the
     scientific community and the number one health
     problem is not cigarette smoking but is the
     extent to which the public health officials may
     knowingly mislead the American public."
          How did this program work out for them?  I
     don't have to tell you, they tell me.  1972,
     the Roper proposal, they brag about how well it
     works.  "For nearly 20 years, this industry has
     employed a single strategy to defend itself on
     three major fronts, litigation, politics, and
     public opinion.  While the strategy was
     brilliantly conceived and executed over the
     years ..."
          They love how it's working out for them
     and they love patting themselves on the back
     about how good they were about it.
          And then we learn -- in the 1981 FTC
     report, we learned that cigarettes -- not just
5653 that they are the most heavily advertised
     product in the United States, but the National
     Commission on Smoking and Public Policy
     reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry
     spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day
     than the United States Government spent on that
     area in an entire year.  And they tell you they
     weren't getting the message out?  They spent
     more on one day getting their message out than
     the government did in a year.
          1959.  R.J. Reynolds, Alan Rodgman, "The
     physiological requirements of the smoker with
     respect to nicotine can be met by the
     application of the optimum amount of nicotine
     to the extracted tobacco."  They're not talking
     about growing some sweet little plant out of
     the ground and chopping it up and rolling it up
     in paper, they are extracting the tobacco and
     they're applying the optimum amount of nicotine
     on that thing to make sure they could maintain
     addiction.
          1963.  Brown & Williamson, now part of
     Reynolds, "We are in the business of selling
     nicotine, an addictive drug."
          Here we go, the unattractive side effects
5654 of lung cancer, cardiovascular disorders,
     emphysema.  They kept it to themselves and they
     lied about it.
          1976, Lorillard:  It's known that the
     higher the pH of the smoke is; i.e., the more
     basic, the more nicotine exists in the
     freeform.
          Dr. Cummings talked to you about freebase
     nicotine.  "Free nicotine has a greater
     physiological effect and it is this effect we
     want to achieve without sacrificing taste."
          They agree to conceal that they
     experimented with freebasing nicotine in
     cigarettes and they agreed to conceal --
          The next document, Baron.
          -- that the nicotine addiction made their
     customers like rats in a cage, just pushing the
     lever for another cigarette.  Yet, they say --
     they are going to tell you that it was Frank
     Gafney's choice to quit smoking, that addiction
     had nothing to do with why he smoked.
          But this continued into the '80s.  Because
     we have Reynolds with Can We Have an Open
     Debate, "You may assume the case against
     smoking is closed, but this is far from the
5655 truth.  Studies which conclude that smoking
     causes disease have regularly ignored
     significant evidence to the contrary."
          And when an addicted smoker tries to quit
     smoking and they can't give it up and they are
     having a hard time and they are miserable and
     all they need is a cigarette, they run up to
     the Winn-Dixie to get a pack, when they see
     something like that, that's license to smoke.
          And it continued into the 1990s even,
     because they all showed up, Reynolds and
     Lorillard and Philip Morris and the others,
     they all showed up and they lied to the United
     States Congress.  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive.  We don't know what causes cancer in
     general right now.
          The evidence is Frank Gafney relied well
     after 1982 on the things that these companies
     were doing and saying, on the things they kept
     to themselves.  When you get to question
     Number 4 on the verdict form whether Frank
     Gafney reasonably relied, well, the defendants'
     own people told you he reasonably relied on
     what they said.  And they know what happened
     after May 5, 1982, and we know that his
5656 reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer
     and death.  The evidence shows you that.  You
     should check yes on both defendants on
     Question 4.
          And when you get to question Number 5, did
     he reasonably rely to his detriment on any
     statement of material fact made by the
     defendants or other tobacco companies after
     May 5, 1982, in furtherance of the agreement,
     the conspiracy to conceal, the answer to that
     should be yes as well, based on the evidence
     that you've seen in this case.
          When you get to the last question on the
     verdict form -- I'm going to skip Question 6
     because Mr. Lewis is going to discuss
     Question 6 with you.  But Question 7, "Please
     state as to each defendant below for which you
     answered yes to Question 4 or 5 whether you
     find by clear and convincing evidence that
     punitive damages are warranted against that
     defendant under the circumstances of this
     case."  And I can tell you we are going to ask
     you to answer yes to both of those.
          The entire time that Frank Gafney smoked
     from the first draw he ever took as a
5657 14-year-old boy to the last one he took in
     early 1995, every single day of his life they
     lied about things that mattered.  But behind
     closed doors, when the rest of us weren't
     around to hear, they were bragging to each
     other about how smart they were, about how
     successful their plan was.
          And we know that it was successful without
     even looking at the internal documents that
     tell us it was successful.  We know that their
     plan worked.  You can see the difference today.
     You can see the difference what their
     concealment and deceit made in this country.
     Because in Frank Gafney's generation, as you
     heard from Dr. Burns, 70 percent of people in
     his age cohort, his age group born around 1936,
     70 percent of them smoked.
          Today, the evidence you heard is these
     companies are required to tell the truth and
     today, one in five of Americans smoke.  One in
     five.  It used to be one in two back when they
     were lying.  See, the truth -- the truth is
     powerful.  Lorillard and Reynolds' deceit made
     them a lot of money.  And it resulted in
     millions and millions of Americans being
5658 addicted and dying from smoking-related
     diseases, and the result, as you heard from
     Dr. Burns, is 20 million Americans dead from
     smoking-related diseases, and today, it's
     443,000 of Americans die every year from
     smoking-related diseases.
          You could -- you could fill this room with
     chairs and you could ask people -- you could
     fill the whole room with chairs and ask people
     to raise their hand if you lost a loved one to
     cigarettes, and most of the hands in that room
     would go up.  And you could do that in every
     room in the United States of America and you
     get the same response.  It was everywhere.
          They killed a lot of people, because this
     question Number 7, this question Number 7 is --
     it's about Frank Gafney, but it's not just
     Frank Gafney.  You get to evaluate this on the
     harm they caused to the public.  You get to
     evaluate how you answer this question based on
     what effect, what consequences, what potential
     consequences that what they did, how did it
     affect the public.
          You get to evaluate that here.  In
     Phase II, which is very short, you don't
5659 evaluate that.  It's only -- you evaluate that
     issue only based on Frank Gafney and Kathleen
     Gafney.  But for answering whether punitive
     damages are appropriate, you get to evaluate
     the consequences of what they did, to all those
     rooms across the country that filled them up
     and asked them that question.
          So the jury instruction you're going to
     get on this, you remember it has one, two,
     three and four.  Four prongs to this jury
     instruction.  One, the conduct causing a loss
     so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless
     disregard to human life and the safety of
     persons exposed to the effect of such conduct.
     And then, this is important, only lawyers think
     these little words are important, but it says
     "or," not "and."  There's an "or" between one
     and two and there's an "or" between two and
     three and there's an "or" between three and
     four.  And that means the law recognizes that
     each one of these four things is reprehensible.
          We only need one of them in order for
     punitive damages to be assessed.  Only one,
     only -- a defendant -- you know, one of these
     things warrants punishment in punitive damages
5660 if it's based on clear and convincing evidence,
     which you have here.
          Interesting thing, a special thing about
     the reprehensibility of their conduct, their
     client's conduct, not the lawyers, I'm talking
     about Lorillard and Reynolds, the thing that's
     special about it in a really bad way, is they
     did every one of those four things.  You can
     wrap a blindfold around you and stick that jury
     instruction on the wall and throw a dart at it,
     and whenever that dart hit, they did it.  They
     did all four of those things.  That's the
     definition of "reprehensible" times four.
          The only acceptable question -- I mean the
     only acceptable answer here is yes.  This isn't
     a situation where they didn't mean it and they
     didn't know, you know, they were careless.
     They knew and they lied about it and they did
     it to make money, and they didn't care how many
     people died and they didn't care who they were.
     20 million people.  There was 20 million
     people, they had wives and husbands and
     children.  20 million people.
          MR. BASSETT:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Legal basis?
5661 BASSETT:  Not in evidence.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. BASSETT:  Move to strike, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Denied.
          Let's move on, Mr. Gustafson.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  They were real people,
     those 20 million.  They were real.
          Frank Gafney was one of those people.  The
     only truly acceptable answer on question
     Number 7 is yes to both of them.
          Mr. Lewis is going to address question
     Number 6.  I hope I didn't miss anything.  I
     hope I didn't go too long.  But I want to say
     that what you do here, what you do here
     matters.


                  CLOSING ARGUMENT
          MR. SALES:  Good morning, everyone.
          THE PANEL:  Good morning.
          MR. SALES:  I think this is the first
     chance that I've had to actually address you
     directly, look you in the eye and tell you a
     little bit about my perspective of this case,
     which is the case of Frank Gafney and Kathleen
     Gafney.  And certainly it is a matter of
     interest at least to think about those many
     others who were described in the Surgeon
     General's report as having lost their lives, as
     having suffered the same fate that Mr. Gafney
     suffered due to the ravages of tobacco, tobacco
     smoke and the addiction to nicotine.
5866 I want to begin -- because we're going to
     talk a lot about addiction to nicotine.  I want
     to begin just a little bit because we talked in
     this case about things that happened before and
     after Mr. Gafney's lifetime.  And Mr. Bassett
     referred you to one of those Florida Health
     Notes from 1906 and you may recall that
     Mr. Gustafson asked that another part be read.
     Was he really talking about -- was the document
     really talking about what happened in this case
     or what this case was about?  No.
          The story -- and you have this in evidence
     if you choose to look at it -- is a story of a
     minister who had traveled to San Francisco back
     in 1906 apparently and was in the basement of a
     building looking at an opium den where opium
     cigarettes were being mixed, as he described it
     and Mr. Gustafson brought out, excrement and
     tobacco.  And they go in there and they say
     it's the worst form of tobacco.  And the
     suggestion is being made to you that as early
     as 1906 -- and they have stuff they put up,
     letters from John Quincy Adams -- is that
     during Mr. Gafney's lifetime, everybody knew,
     everybody appreciated it, everybody understood
5867 it.
          Well, let's just say this is in evidence
     as well.  And, you know, are we going to spend
     a lot of time during my limited time with you
     this morning talking about 1909?  No.  But I
     want to talk about the 20th Century because
     Mr. Gafney's life was limited to the
     20th Century.
          And if you look at another one of those
     Florida Health Notes, which is in evidence, and
     can see what it says, what it says is the
     general consensus before Mr. Gafney lived, not
     from something that's mixed in an opium den in
     San Francisco, but the general consensus back
     then of tobacco, of the kind of things that
     real people actually smoked, not drug addicts
     seeking opium, a big problem, different story
     for a different time.  The real consensus was
     that it wasn't harmful and that's the century,
     the real 20th Century into which Mr. Gafney was
     born.  That's when he lived.
          And one of the things that's really
     important for you to understand in this case,
     is to understand the century that he lived in,
     from the time that he was alive until the time
5868 that he died and everything that happened.
          Now, what can we do in a case like this
     where the parties -- and I don't have a lot of
     those slides.  I'm going to try to show you
     mostly what I have in my stack here in an hour
     and two minutes now.  I may have -- or I guess
     12 minutes to deal with you.  I'm going to try
     and get you out by a reasonable lunchtime.
     Maybe I'll be done early.
          But I don't have a lot of those lawyer
     slides.  I just want to show you some things
     that happened, that really happened in the
     20th Century and how they affected Frank Gafney
     in response to some of the arguments that the
     defendants were making.
          Now, I know I'm going to run out of time.
     I know I'm going to run out of time.  And I
     want to ask you -- I'm going to refer to these
     things a little bit.  But, you know, we have
     witnesses, did they get paid for their time,
     yes.  Are some of them totally incredible, and
     we're going to talk about, that you should
     throw out their testimony -- and I think you
     know who I'm talking about -- yes.
          But we also have things that don't come
5869 from paid witnesses.  We have doctors who
     treated people who expressed opinions about
     what really happened to them in the
     20th Century and we have documents that aren't
     even authored by the defendants and they're
     certainly not authored by Mrs. Gafney, but they
     provide to you a window into what really has
     happened in the 20th Century.  And so I'm not
     going to get to tell you everything that's in
     those documents.
          I'm not -- Mr. Gustafson wants me to give
     you an opportunity, and I ask that you would,
     at least one of you who is a careful note
     taker, write down these exhibit numbers and
     take a look at them, if you would, please,
     because they provide you with a lot of
     information about the matters that I'm going to
     talk about right now.  Because, you know,
     Mr. Maguire spent over an hour talking to you
     about Question 1 on the verdict form, which is
     the question of whether or not Mr. Gafney was
     addicted to nicotine contained in cigarettes
     and whether or not that was a legal cause, a
     contributing -- substantial contributing cause
     to his lung cancer and death.
5870 And this is an addiction case.  It's not a
     choice case.  The word "choice" isn't in those
     jury instructions and it may be -- the word
     "choice" isn't in those jury instructions.  The
     word "control" isn't in those jury
     instructions.  What's in those jury
     instructions are things about what addiction
     does and doesn't do, and whether or not it
     makes a difference in the 20th Century, in the
     life of somebody like Frank Gafney.
          And, you know, it's important for other
     reasons, not just to understand an answer to
     that first question on the verdict form, but
     it's important also because it sets up, if you
     will, the real dispute of the case, and if you
     wanted to have a window when the defendants,
     through the Tobacco Institute, were speaking
     privately, secretly among themselves,
     high-ranking officials of the Tobacco
     Institute, and want to know why the defense in
     these cases consistently tries to recast the
     jury instructions and the questions on the
     verdict form, you have information that helps
     you from one of their co-conspirators, and
     that's the Tobacco Institute, and here it is.
5871 MAGUIRE:  Objection, your Honor.  May
     we approach?
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  That's in evidence.
     That's staying up there.
          THE COURT:  Yes, Mr. Maguire.
          (Thereupon, the following proceedings were
     held out of the presence of the jury:)
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Your Honor, if I understand
     the argument, Mr. Sales suggested or already
     suggested to the jury that the argument that
     the defense counsel has made in this case, that
     it was basically a continuation of the scheme
     that he's now proceeding to put in front of the
     jury about evidence and that link directly
     between defendants' conduct of their defense
     and his attack on the conduct of the parties
     seems to me to completely violate the whole
     principle that we're supposed to do, which is
     it's fair game to go into the conduct of the
     parties over the subject matter of the claims,
     but not to attack the defendants' conduct of
     their defense in this courtroom.
          The defendant, Lorillard, would make a
     motion for mistrial on that basis.
5872 COURT REPORTER:  I'm sorry,
     Mr. Bassett?
          MR. BASSETT:  Reynolds will join the
     motion.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Sales, I'm not sure
     exactly what I heard, but it sounds like you
     made reference to these attorneys seeking to
     modify the instructions and the questions on
     the verdict form, and then you talked about
     co-conspirators, which I hope you didn't mean
     to suggest that --
          MR. SALES:  The Tobacco Institute, that's
     the document itself.
          THE COURT REPORTER:  I didn't hear,
     Mr. Sales.
          MR. SALES:  The Tobacco Institute.  And I
     apologize for interrupting the Court, that's
     the document that's up, and I will clarify
     that.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I reserve on the motion
     for mistrial.  You need to clarify, because as
     I heard it, it sounds like, whether it was
     intentional or not, you were making reference
     to the attorneys being involved in a
     conspiracy.  That, as you know, is prohibited.
5873 SALES:  May I make my record?
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          MR. SALES:  I am seeking to draw a
     legitimate comparison between an admission of a
     co-conspirator as to what the issue is when
     someone is asked a question as to whether or
     not it's addiction or choice, and the arguments
     that were made here, I'm asking the jury to
     contrast evidence, matters in evidence with the
     positions taken by the parties.  I will not
     suggest that Mr. Maguire, Mr. Bassett, or
     Ms. Tedder is a co-conspirator or that they are
     actively seeking to perpetuate any fraud on the
     public.  That's not part of my argument.
          THE COURT:  Okay.  I'm going to ask the
     court reporter to note your comments so that if
     we need to go back to them, we can.  But I just
     got to tell you it jumped right out at me, and
     maybe I missed it and didn't hear it in proper
     context, but you may want to clarify.  And I'm
     reserving on the motion.
          THE COURT REPORTER:  I'm sorry, I can't
     hear anything.
          MR. BASSETT:  The argument that Mr. Sales
     is articulating is an inference to the very
5874 violation that we have been seeking to prevent
     all along.  I mean, what he's exactly arguing
     is, maybe not directly, that we, in this
     courtroom, have participated in that
     conspiracy, but that indirectly we are by
     presenting the defense we're presenting.  So
     we're defending the case in a way that he's
     going to argue by inference is consistent with
     the conspiracy that's been ongoing for the last
     40 years.
          THE COURT:  I understand your concern and
     the record will speak for itself.  Comment on
     the evidence is fair; comment on the attorneys
     is not.  So let's go on.
          (Thereupon, the sidebar conference was
     concluded and the following proceedings were
     held within the presence of the jury:)
          THE COURT:  Sorry for the interruption,
     ladies and gentlemen.
          We'll continue now.
          MR. SALES:  Members of the jury, I want to
     make it completely clear that it is not the
     position of Ms. Kathleen Gafney, Mr. Gustafson,
     Mr. Lewis or myself that these lawyers are
     participants in any conspiracy.  There's no
5875 suggestion offered that way whatsoever.
          What I would invite you to do, however, is
     to consider the evidence in this case.  The
     co-conspirator to which I was referring are --
     is the Tobacco Institute and the document that
     you're looking, which is the 1980 memo from
     Kloepfer to Knopick or Knopick to Kloepfer, is
     that document that's the evidence that's in the
     case.  And the comparison that I'm asking you
     to consider is the comparison between addiction
     and choice, as explained when no one was
     looking back in 1980 by a co-conspirator of
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and Lorillard
     Tobacco Company.  And I apologize if I left
     anyone with any confusion on that regard.
          So that is why the issue of addiction is
     paramount in the case, but it's paramount for
     other reasons that were little discussed,
     slightly discussed by counsel in their
     arguments.  And you know, because you've
     listened carefully to the instructions that
     have been given so far, that if you find for
     the plaintiff on the question of addiction,
     then the Engle findings apply and perhaps they
     were referred to, but they haven't been
5876 discussed by counsel in this case and I want to
     remind you that that is the consequence of a
     finding of addiction in this case that -- this
     is right off the instructions from --
          MR. BASSETT:  Objection, your Honor,
     misstates the law.
          THE COURT:  Again, ladies and gentlemen,
     you rely on the instructions you've been given
     by the Court as to the law that applies to this
     case.
          MR. SALES:  If you find that Mr. Gafney
     was addicted and that his addiction is a
     contributing cause of his lung cancer and
     death, these findings apply.  Nicotine is
     addictive, we shouldn't have a lot more
     argument about that.
          That the cigarettes of these manufacturers
     are defective, defective and unreasonably
     dangerous, more on that in a moment.
          That they lied, that they hid the things
     that are described right before you, you can
     read it if you choose to, and that they entered
     into an agreement with those other defendants
     in Engle, including the Tobacco Institute, to
     which I was just referring, and including the
5877 CTR which, by the way, it wasn't the public
     relations arm.  It would be unusual for the CTR
     to be speaking on behalf of the industry.  That
     was something that was mentioned just a few
     moments ago, and that they were negligent.
          But importantly, also not mentioned so
     far, is that the findings may not be denied or
     questioned by you.  You have to accept them if
     you find that Mr. Gafney was addicted to
     nicotine and that his nicotine addiction was a
     contributing cause.
          Now, I want to remind you of another
     instruction, because on behalf of Mrs. Gafney,
     I ask you not to be intimidated by lawyers',
     either side, suggestions about what your job
     is.  Because his Honor is the -- is the
     person -- his Honor, Judge Blanc, is the person
     that tells you what your job is, not the
     lawyers.  And what his Honor tells you is that
     your job is to determine what the facts are.
     You get to decide what addiction is and whether
     or not Mr. Gafney was an addicted smoker and
     his addiction caused his disease and death.
          Now, certainly you have clues that have
     been provided to you in this case that are
5878 helpful to you, and one of them is that same
     Surgeon General's report that I referred to
     from 2010.  First, as we've seen a couple of
     times, nicotine is like other drugs, drugs of
     abuse, but importantly, and this is where your
     job is, actually, as the Surgeon General has
     told us even in 2010, there is no established
     consensus on criteria for diagnosing,
     diagnosing nicotine addiction.
          Now, Mr. Maguire told you this is all
     there is, this is the book, this is the medical
     book, and if it ain't in here and you don't fit
     what's in here -- more on that in a few
     moments -- perhaps you're not addicted.  Well,
     actually, the Surgeon General talks about other
     factors.  Certainly the Surgeon General talks
     about those criteria and others, but look at
     what the Surgeon General tells us and I put
     checkmarks by the things that I would urge you
     apply to Frank Gafney.
          Did he have compulsive use?  Yes.  Lots of
     times a day.  We talked about that.  Mr. Lewis
     has talked about that.
          Did he have psychoactive effects?
     Dr. Kaplan admits that if you accept this --
5879 that's up to you -- but that he used tobacco to
     relieve anxiety because the drug in tobacco,
     nicotine, made him feel better.  So he had
     those effects.  We would submit he smoked for
     other reasons, as I'll explain.
          Did he have drug reinforced behavior,
     meaning did one drug lead to the next and the
     next?  Yes.
          And then additional criteria, stereotypic
     patterns of use, I smoke when get up, I smoke
     before I go to bed, I smoke in my office, I
     constantly have my hand in my pocket all day
     long, every day of my life, practically, yes.
          Did he have use despite harmful effects?
     Now, that's going to get us to the DSM-IV in a
     few moments, but did Mr. Gafney -- the whole
     point is you knew better, but they denied --
     they denied that it was causing him any harm.
     And you know from the cross-examination of
     Dr. Kaplan that's just not true.  He had
     difficulty walking upstairs and picking up a
     suitcase, which was attributable to smoking
     cigarettes.
          Other criteria, did he have relapse?
     Well, they don't deny that he had relapse
5880 because -- why do I say that?  Because part of
     their whole case about the word "control,"
     which appears nowhere in the jury instructions,
     is that he started smoking again.  So he
     relapsed.
          And finally, did he have recurrent drug
     craving?  Is there any question about that?  Is
     there any question about whether or not when
     Mrs. Gafney and Mr. Gafney would wake in the
     morning and you hear the click, click, she
     would hear the click, click, that she was
     referring to his lighter because he was
     lighting a cigarette?
          Did he have drug cravings?  Sure, he did.
     He had them when he woke up because his
     nicotinic receptors in his brain were empty and
     he needed his drug.
          So you are the decider.  You are the ones
     with the job.  It's you.  You get to decide,
     you get to decide whether when
     Mr. Riegelsberger that they read in their case
     that he was addicted, somebody knows what
     they're talking about, a close friend.  You get
     to decide whether or not Mrs. Gafney could
     recognize an addict in her own husband.
5881 You get to decide whether Dr. Cohn, the
     only treating physician in this case,
     described.  And you get to decide whether
     Dr. Burns, who has written the chapter in the
     two books, educated every physician coming out
     of medical school, probably even including
     Dr. Kaplan, on the subject of nicotine
     addiction, you get to decide whether they're
     right.
          And, again, you know, it isn't -- it isn't
     what the lawyers say in this regard, because
     it's your job, it's not Mr. Maguire's job or my
     job, it's your job, because his Honor has
     already read to you this instruction, you get
     to consider, when you think about Dr. Kaplan
     and Dr. Burns, where they come from and why
     they're doing what they're doing, what their
     motivation is for testifying, whether they're
     influenced by the fact that they charge by the
     hour.  You get to consider those things, and
     then you also get to consider the fact that
     Dr. Cohn, who is a man that would prefer that
     his door was locked to lawyers, said the same
     thing about Mr. Gafney's addiction.
          Now, there's a bottom part of this about
5882 experts, because the top applies to all
     witnesses and the bottom applies to the
     experts.  It's your job, it's your right, it's
     your privilege to reject the testimony of Eric
     Kaplan, M.D. and I urge you to do so, as I'm
     going to explain in a moment.
          I don't have the time to go through with
     you on this first question about addiction and
     whether or not Mr. Gafney was addicted, all the
     testimony of Dr. Cohn, which was totally
     consistent in that regard with Dr. Burns, but
     Mr. Lewis, you will recall, asked him, "Was he
     one of the doctors involved?  Did he have a
     chance to make observations and write notes
     about the patient?"
          And answer to that is yes.  And I want to
     spend very little time talking about this issue
     about the DVT, this alternative causation
     theory they spent little time on.  I'm going to
     spend very little time on it.
          Mr. Gafney had a chronic DVT, sudden,
     recent, and a problem that threatened his life,
     and it was a result of lung cancer.  There's no
     evidence in this case, none, zero, to support
     the idea that something that happened in 1990,
5883 that something was lingering around and stepped
     over the lung cancer that had already spread to
     his brain and caused his death.  That's part of
     their argument.  That's part of their case.
     There's no evidence to support it.  It's not
     part of the greater weight of the evidence.
          And I urge you to reject, Dr. Cohn
     explained that to you, Dr. Burns explained that
     to you, it's nothing except a sideshow.
          What about the issue of addiction?
     Dr. Cohn, the unpaid witness, treated smokers
     for 22 years says in qualification that you all
     and others really need, in order to understand
     whether a smoker is addicted, addicted to
     nicotine, is to take a history.  He understood
     because he had a history of Mr. Gafney's
     smoking life, started at 14, that he was
     exposed to nicotine in cigarettes very early.
          Why do we talk about youth in this case?
     Why do we show you things to show how they try
     to hook children?  It's not just for the
     purposes of considering whether or not their
     conduct is outrageous, which it is.  It's so
     that you can live in the 20th Century and not
     in the 21st Century and understand how could it
5884 be that a 14-year-old boy, young man, teenager,
     give him whatever label you will, could become
     addicted to an addictive drug, and the answer
     to that is not just one-phased, two-phased, or
     three-phased, it's many-phased.
          Mr. Gustafson talked about concurring
     causes, things that happen together and for a
     reason.  And did Mr. Gafney live in a family
     with smokers?  He did.  But was he also exposed
     to a barrage of messages from the defense at a
     very early age, not the defense lawyers, their
     clients, that smoking was fun, sexy?  They
     quit.  These cigarettes and figures in comics,
     back when Mr. Gafney was growing up, and we put
     those for you in evidence, you can look at
     them.  War heros, decorated war heros smoking
     in cartoon form, people at war smoking, pilots,
     athletes, everybody that you would admire if
     you were growing up as a young man in
     Cleveland, Ohio in the 1940s and '50s was doing
     this.  And it's not just that they were
     responsible for that, that was part of the
     culture and the time that was contributed to in
     a way that these products were marketed.
          So if it matters what happened in 1906, I
5885 would submit to you that it matters what was
     happening in 1920 and '30 and '40 and '50 and
     '60 and '70 and '80.  And in 1982, what do we
     know?  We know from a memo of a senior
     management official at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
     Company that if we look back and think about
     these things, what really matters is how and
     whether we successfully appeal to children.
     They can say "young adults," they can say "14
     to 24," they can say "14 to 17," but the
     documents show that for a period of 50 years,
     they wanted to know what children were doing,
     they wanted to know what people as young as
     12 years old were doing.
          And that's why, going all the way back to
     the 1920s, it's important to know, to
     understand the life of Frank Gafney, to
     understand that he lived in a culture and in a
     place where R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company could
     walk up to a middle school and say "buy some,
     have some."  And none of us were alive at that
     time, in the '30s and '40s, and it's difficult
     for us to turn the clock back and find answers
     to questions, and I ask you to consider that,
     talk to your fellow jurors about that, how can
5886 it be.  Because we're going to talk about this
     in a moment a little bit more, how can it be
     that a man who could be exposed to messages,
     somebody who loves him, public service
     announcements, how could it be that they would
     continue to do just what the defendants wanted
     them to do every day until they died?  How
     could it be?
          Well, getting back to Dr. Cohn, the
     younger they get you, the more likely it is you
     become addicted because your brain is still
     developing.  And, you know, it isn't a
     coincidence, it isn't a coincidence in
     understanding the life of Frank Gafney in the
     20th Century that that's when he was smoking,
     that's when he became addicted to nicotine, and
     Dr. Cohn was asked the question in a way that
     only Mr. Lewis can ask and maybe more than
     once, "Is there any doubt in your mind?"
          Nope, no doubt in his mind.
          Frank Gafney was addicted to nicotine
     contained in cigarettes.  The cigarettes they
     admit caused the lung cancer, they denied that
     the lung cancer caused the death, they brought
     you nothing in that regard, and if there were
5887 anybody around, anybody with a medical degree,
     because there are some who will take the price
     and come and say anything, we know that from
     this trial.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Objection, your Honor.  May
     we approach?
          THE COURT:  No, sir, not at this time.
          Continue, Mr. Sales.
          MR. SALES:  You have the right to reject
     the testimony of Dr. Kaplan.  You have the
     right to consider when he is confronted with
     facts that are required to be deconstructed
     over and over again that he is not honest.
          When he says, I find half the people
     addicted; when he says, I cure 80 percent of
     the people by depression, although I've only
     sold two cassette tapes to lawyers; when he
     says, I cure 50 percent of the smokers, you
     have the right to conclude that that is at
     least an exaggeration.
          Let's talk a little bit about Dr. Kaplan
     and the book because, you know, one of the
     things that happened in this case, that
     happened in the closing arguments, and it's
     just a choice about what the lawyers want to
5888 emphasize, one of the things that happened is
     that in saying that -- Mr. Maguire saying that
     Dr. Kaplan is the voice of addiction and the
     party with know-how and knowledge.  He didn't
     actually go over the criteria that are in
     there, and I want to do that with you in a
     moment, just like Dr. Kaplan did, so that you
     can, as the judge of the facts doing your job,
     make your own decision about whether or not
     Mr. Gafney was addicted and whether or not
     those findings will apply if you also find that
     the loss, the damage, the death were
     contributed to by that addiction.
          So let's talk a little bit more about
     Dr. Kaplan, if we can.  And I just want to say
     two things about him and this -- before I
     forget, which are that when he first met Ken
     Reilly, a tobacco defense lawyer on an
     airplane, traveling to and from those hundreds
     of times that he gets $150, $100 a pop to
     preach to people about the benefits of
     antidepressants, why they should use them, why
     they should prescribe them, that's fine,
     nothing wrong with that.  Trying to make a
     little money, that's fine.  But when he meets
5889 Ken Reilly in 1997, he's using in his practice
     the DSM-IV-TR for everything else, bulimia,
     anorexia, whatever, the "-imias," whatever I
     asked him about.
          And so he knows because he has a
     conversation, I would suggest to you, with
     Mr. Reilly, what the issues are, and you know,
     he says, "I'm going to stand toe to toe with
     Ken Reilly -- I suggest this is a reasonable
     inference from the evidence -- I'm going to
     stand toe to toe with Ken Reilly and with the
     tobacco industry and I am going to abandon my
     psychiatrist's criteria and I am going to
     instead apply a 1957, '6 --
          MR. GUSTAFSON:  1953.
          MR. SALES:  -- 1953 WHO criteria.  Who?
     The World Health Organization, that's who.  And
     why am I going to do that?  I'm going to do
     that because it's a trick, I suggest the
     evidence allows you to conclude.
          And the trick is if I have an issue when
     I'm testifying as an expert in a case, I get to
     say nobody is addicted because, you know, World
     Health Organization in 1953 says it's not
     intoxicating.  I'm going to stand toe to toe
5890 with the defense, with the tobacco industry,
     and that's my position.
          Until guess what?  In 1999, the paid
     expert in this case, maybe he didn't find out,
     maybe he did, I suggest to you the evidence is
     since he continued for a long period of time as
     an expert hired by the defense, what he found
     out, I suggest to you, is that in 1999, as we
     showed him on the defendants' own website, and
     you know from the Engle findings and you know
     from everywhere, including the defendants and
     their own documents going back to the '50s,
     they didn't to wait for the World Health
     Organization to change its mind.  They didn't
     need to wait.  You saw that big board, 1988,
     Surgeon General.  They didn't need to wait for
     the Surgeon General to say nicotine is
     addictive.  It is.  Not "can be."
          They design their products around that.
     They knew that.  And it's suggested to you you
     should ignore all that evidence, that it
     doesn't have anything do with Mr. Gafney.
          Mr. Bassett just told you we didn't do
     anything to design -- well, there's an
     article -- there's document in evidence from
5891 Lucky Strike, American Tobacco in the '20s or
     '30s, I don't remember, but Dr. Cummings talked
     about it.  They have known how to take it all
     out from the beginning of the period of 20th
     Century, in which cigarettes were sold by these
     defendants, not by people in a basement
     somewhere in San Francisco, these defendants.
          And so what happened with Dr. Kaplan is
     that he learns that, you know, I can't say
     nicotine is not addictive anymore, so what I'm
     going to do is I'm going to stand toe to toe
     with the defense again and I'm going to readopt
     the DSM-IV-TR, which by the way, you'll recall
     it's a manual of mental disorders.  He said
     something about that.  They took that off of
     their slide, but it's a manual of mental
     disorders.  It's a manual, by his own statement
     and by the document itself, for the dependence
     criteria applies to heroin and cocaine.
          The same witness who tells you, you know,
     the plaintiff, they're -- Surgeon General,
     that's just scare tactics, like they said back
     in 1988.  It's just scare tactics.  It's not
     like street drugs, no.
          Well, the book he uses is a book that
5892 applies to all those same street drugs.  And
     one of the things that's perhaps the most
     amazing about this entire history is that if
     Frank Gafney, for some reason, had found
     himself in Lutz, Florida in the office of
     Dr. Kaplan, back in 1995, when he died, before
     he had his airplane conversion, and Mr. Gafney
     said, well, what should I do?  If you believe
     Dr. Kaplan, he would have said, you're not
     addicted because it's not addictive, don't
     worry about it, you're fine.  By the way, you
     should quit smoking because it causes lung
     cancer.
          That's the case we're here on.  So what
     happens, Dr. Kaplan stands toe to toe, he tells
     us, I'm a reasonable individual, you know, I
     can change my mind, I can find everybody's
     never addicted, and so I'm going to go with the
     defense.  And I'll use this manual, I'll use
     this book that I've been use my whole career
     for something I said was no good before.
     That's what happened in this case.  That's what
     happened with Dr. Kaplan.
          So they don't actually show you the
     criteria.  They don't actually show you the
5893 criteria.  They didn't need to consult
     Dr. Kaplan to find out why people smoked.
          These are documents all in evidence,
     your Honor.
          They smoked for nicotine.  It's in there
     because if you don't put enough in it, nobody
     will smoke.  The industry -- Claude Teague.
     It's based on the sale of nicotine in an
     attractive dose -- excuse me, attractive dosage
     form, that would be your cigarette.  It's the
     sine qua non of the injury -- of the industry.
          And in documents, none of these ever
     revealed, none of them ever coming out and
     saying that people like Frank Gafney into the
     1980s or ever, way after 1982, not until 1999,
     you know, what we really believe -- this is
     from one of their co-conspirators,
     Philip Morris, what we really believe is that
     you're like Pavlov's dog, and if we just push
     the lever, if we allow you to push the lever,
     you'll get the pellet.  What we believe is that
     the cigarette is the lever press.  What we
     believe is that you are like lab rats.  What we
     believe is that this is so addicting, that this
     is so important, you know what, because we're
5894 so concerned about public health in America --
     oh, I'm sorry, without that compound, the
     market would collapse and we'd all lose our
     jobs and consulting fees.
          That's why these documents are important,
     because they give a window into what the truth
     was, the truth that was never shared with Frank
     Gafney, never even until the day he died,
     because you heard from the evidence in this
     case that the revelations through these
     documents that have been managed and
     administered at the request of people like the
     Attorney General for the State of New York,
     that's happened recently.
          By pure happenstance, it happened around
     the same time as Dr. Kaplan's second conversion
     in the late 1990s, or first perhaps.  But the
     point is the same:  Frank Gafney didn't know
     that.  He didn't know that he was being
     manipulated.  He didn't know that they were
     using chemicals in tobacco.  He didn't know
     that they put ventilation holes over the
     filters to change the way that you smoke, so
     that you would get the same amount of nicotine
     and keep -- keep smoking every day, all the
5895 while believing that you were doing something
     to help your health, while you were exploiting
     those things and while I, Frank Gafney, would
     say, was trying to do something because I love
     my wife and I was listening to her, I was
     listening to her.  I was aware.
          Nobody comes into court in this case and
     says Frank Gafney never heard that cigarettes
     were bad for you.  Nobody says that.  If we
     were to say that to you, we would be laughed
     out of court, and justifiably so.
          What we ask you to do is consider the
     entire history of the 20th Century, the century
     during which Mr. Gafney lived in, to try and
     make judgments about whether or not it made a
     difference to him.
          So let me go over with you the criteria
     that Dr. Kaplan says mattered.
          Guess it's up here somewhere.
          Now, it may have been suggested to you
     that you've got to be a psychiatrist to know
     how to go through it.  No, I want to suggest
     you it's not.  I want to suggest to you it's
     like every other set of criteria that you've
     heard about in this case, whether it's the
5896 Surgeon General document I showed you a few
     minutes ago, whether it's Dr. Cummings,
     whatever, Fagerstrom.  All of these things
     overlap, even though this applies to every
     substance, according to psychiatrists.
          So what do we know from the real criteria,
     when we look at it and think about it?  Well,
     the first part of it is "as manifested by."
     It's been suggested to you in this case,
     Dr. Kaplan suggests to you, you know -- and we
     don't want to insult anybody, but, you know,
     just in case, "manifested" is one of those
     words that professional people use that have
     meaning, just like other words in the English
     language have meaning, "as shown by," "as
     revealed by," "as demonstrated by," none of
     them any good for him.  So let's stick with
     "manifested by" because we will understand that
     you all know what that means.
          And Dr. Kaplan says, you know, they don't
     even look at these criteria unless you smoke so
     much you get divorced, unless you smoke so much
     that you won't apply for a job -- you know,
     think about that.
          Let's take two identical smokers, Frank
5897 Gafney and another fellow, we'll call him Hank
     Cafney, and everything about him is the same,
     everything.  They live in Cleveland, they
     brought themselves up by their bootstraps, they
     read the paper, they were kind and loving, good
     and decent, fair and honest.  They smoked
     exactly the same amount of cigarettes.
          And two of those people, Hank and Frank,
     are scheduled for appointments with Dr. Kaplan
     on the same day.  Their brains are the same.
     They're twins.
          And Dr. Kaplan talks to both of them and
     says, you know, Frank, you're not addicted, and
     you're not addicted because your wife, despite
     her loving attention and the beauty of your
     marriage and the temple of your home and the
     decency of your character, she's going to stick
     with you.
          And then there's Hank.  And at the end of
     the hour meeting where Dr. Kaplan asks all the
     same questions, he looked at Hank and he says,
     Hank, I understand your wife is so upset with
     you about your smoking that she may divorce
     you.  You're addicted to nicotine and you need
     to stop.
5898 That's the explanation when you put it in
     context of the first section, this whole "as
     manifested by."  What does it say?  If you have
     three or more of these things, you're dependent
     on nicotine according to this book.  Let's go
     through them just quickly.
          Tolerance, we had a discussion about that.
     I went over the factors of tolerance that are
     in the book.  Most people have tolerance.  It's
     on page 194.  We looked at that.  "Tolerance to
     nicotine is manifested by a more intense effect
     of nicotine the first time it is used during
     the day and the absence of nausea and dizziness
     with repeated intake, despite regular use," and
     so on.
          There's no evidence in this case that
     Mr. Gafney, after starting cigarettes at 14,
     continued to get sick like people do when they
     try them.  He had tolerance.
          Next, withdrawal.  Well, Dr. Kaplan talked
     all about that 2(a) and didn't talk anything
     about 2(b).  And you know what?  It's right on
     that same page 264.  2(b) is "the same or
     closely related substance is taken to relieve
     or avoid withdrawal symptoms."  What does it
5899 say right here?  "Many individuals who use
     nicotine take nicotine to relieve or to avoid
     withdrawal symptoms when they wake up in the
     morning."
          And the suggestion is to you that there's
     no withdrawal in this case, when if you look at
     whole book, if you look at all of it, it's
     exactly what they're talking about.
          No. 3 -- well, let's just talk about the
     20th Century.  Dr. Kaplan's refusal, sudden
     refusal to credit Mr. Gafney with not taking
     the substance in larger amounts and longer than
     he intended is nobody was there, it's not in
     the record and, therefore, I refuse to
     acknowledge that Mr. Gafney, more likely than
     not, did not intend to smoke himself to death
     when he was a boy.
          Frank Gafney has all three of those, and
     he was addicted.
          Number 4, that was the only one he gave
     us.  There's four of them.
          Go to No. 7.  Go to No. 7.  Do you
     smoke -- even though you know you've got a
     problem, a physical problem?  And Dr. Kaplan
     appeared -- even though he clipped the
5900 depositions of the witnesses in this case, even
     Mrs. Gafney, he appeared not to know that
     Mr. Gafney had trouble even walking the stairs,
     even lifting a suitcase as a result of smoking.
          So, you know, there's no direction that's
     pointed in this case to find an avenue where
     you can not say, most respectfully, by the
     greater weight of the evidence that a man who
     smoked so long and in such quantities, that he
     died from lung cancer, the greater weight of
     the evidence in this is that he was addicted to
     nicotine.
          All right.  Let's talk a little bit about
     how they did it.  How did they do it?  Because
     Mr. Maguire and Mr. Gustafson -- Mr. Maguire
     and Mr. Bassett both suggested to you that they
     weren't any good at this, that they really
     didn't do a good job -- and, by the way, this
     is from a Nordine study.  It happens to be in
     1982, which is a year of importance, as you've
     been told.
          Why did they do what they were doing?  Why
     were they keeping this all to themselves about
     the design features and stubbornly refusing,
     fighting with the Surgeon General?  Why were
5901 they doing it?  Because if people know the
     truth, most of them would quit.  Most people
     would quit.
          How did they do it?  Go out of business?
     They ain't done that.  And so they needed to
     find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers
     to stop smoking.  How did they do that?
          Well, that's a 1982 document, and it's
     been shown to you to show you that these things
     were going on in 20th Century, not in the '20s,
     '30s, '40s, but the whole century.  This was
     fluid, it wasn't new, because in 1964, you
     remember this, this is from one of the
     co-conspirators, an officer, a George Weissman
     who wrote to Mr. Cullman, became the head of
     the Tobacco Institute.  That's the people who
     did the talking for the industry.
          And what did he say?  We've got to find a
     way, got to find a way to give people a crutch
     to keep on smoking.
          And you're being asked that with all of
     the power and money that you've heard about
     that they exercised and used to deliver their
     messages 365 times more per year -- remember
     those public health messages, lights going off?
5902 More in a day than the government agency spent
     in a year communicating their messages.
          How did they do it?  You know, again,
     you've got to turn the clock back to understand
     what the diabolical nature is of these
     businesses.  Because what they say -- and this
     is from 1970 -- but it's fluid during the whole
     time.  What they say is, you know, truth for
     one is false for another, that sounds great.
     We deny what other people say is true.  Let's
     face it, what we really want is to try and find
     a way to show everybody else that cigarette
     smoking doesn't cause disease.
          How did they do it?  They spent vast sums
     of money pretending, I would submit to you, to
     be cooperating with the Surgeon General while
     their lawyers are writing letters saying,
     whatever you do, make it so irksome that they
     won't know what to do with them.  That's the
     cooperation, by giving people free cigarettes
     to conduct research, bravo.
          Where is the evidence?  The Green Monster
     is here in the courtroom.  Where is the
     evidence?  We asked Dr. Cummings about it, that
     all that money, all that work, all that
5903 research, all that good stewardship, where is
     the evidence that they ever once, before they
     came kicking and screaming in 1999, that they
     admitted what they knew to be true?
          How did they do it?  This is from 1968.
     This is fluid.  You know, this is an earlier
     time and we didn't have the Internet where
     people could race home -- you're not supposed
     to do that, you know, and I'm not suggesting
     that you do -- race home and check on things.
     So the industry, they were pretty smart people,
     so what we're going to do is we're going to
     have headlines, we're going to pay people all
     this research that we bought and paid for.
          They showed you one article, a nicotine --
     some scientist somewhere couldn't be bought and
     said, you know, I guess nicotine is addictive.
     But what were they saying?  Remember that stuff
     about the constitutional hypothesis and the
     multifactorial hypothesis?  What they were
     doing is sponsoring and paying for things that
     said it's based on -- this is what really
     happened in the 20th Century, if you want to
     understand how Frank Gafney got to be where he
     was.  They were going to tell people that it
5904 has something to do with baldness, it has
     something to do with whether you're married or
     not.
          You can read these.  They're all in
     evidence.  It has something to do with where
     you live.  It has to do with air pollution.  It
     has to do with viruses.  It has to do with
     whether you're an extrovert.  It has to do, in
     the case of heart disease, whether you're a
     white-collared worker.  It has to do with your
     genes.  Statistics, they would tell you, just
     like they were telling everybody else, were all
     wrong.
          The papers were questioning things, talked
     about books that say it's not justified.
     Talked about beer and dirt in the ground,
     that's what causes cancer.  Talking about
     animal tests.  And there's one in here, you
     know, it just sort of typifies the whole thing.
     I don't want to spend too much time looking for
     it -- oh, it's this one.  You know, carcinogens
     don't cause cancer.  That's what we're talking
     about, that's the message, that's the kind of
     message.
          Now, it's easy for us, as unaddicted
5905 smokers, perhaps, to, in the 21st Century, say
     to ourselves, you know, these things didn't
     make any difference, but we have real proof
     because Frank Gafney is, to some extent,
     speaking to us because we know -- we put a lot
     of these in evidence.  We haven't gone through
     hardly any of them, but you can look at them.
          What we know is that these things were
     reaching him.  These are from the Cleveland
     Plain Dealer, and they're across pages.  It is
     mostly early because newspaper editors who were
     not addicted smokers, they could see through
     some of this stuff at some point in time
     perhaps.  But they were saying that it had to
     do with diesel fumes.  Red, that's the old
     quaint way of referring to communists, right?
          They published every time somebody said it
     was doubt.  There were reports in the papers --
     this is what Frank actually saw.  There were
     reports that you shouldn't worry so much, and
     the shock was fading.  There were letters to
     the editor of the Wall-Street-Journal, another
     paper that he read from prominent people.  You
     can read it, it's in evidence.
          Despite many efforts, I do not know of any
5906 experimental data proof of cancer in the lungs
     produced from experimental animals like tobacco
     smoke.  There were others.  He heard in the
     paper that filters were good, just like
     Katie -- and there's lots of them.  You can
     look at them.  That was into the 1960s.  And
     you have to ask yourself, because the defense
     does, why did we show you those things?  Why
     did we show you those things from the early era
     of the conspiracy?  Because that was part of
     his life, but there it was, even if they were
     using different media, even if they started to
     use television more, even if they started to
     use their representatives in public.
          We're going to show you some videos and
     it's in the 20th Century, from the '50s to the
     '90s.  That's the period of time we're talking
     about.  And you will be able to ask yourselves,
     because they admitted that what they were doing
     was truthful, they admitted that what they were
     doing was righteous, they say, and they say,
     even today, through their own corporate
     representatives, that people were justified in
     relying on those things even until the period
     of time that we are talking about after 1982.
5907 Go ahead, Baron.
          These are all in evidence.
          (Thereupon, the video clip was played and
     transcribed as follows:)
          NARRATOR:  We accept an interest in
     people's health as a basic responsibility
     paramount to every other consideration in our
     business. DR. DUPUIS:  So far we've found none that
     would give us any cause for concern.  If we do
     find any that we consider harmful, and so far
     we have not, we'll remove these from smoke. MR. CULLMAN:  We want to be the detective
     just as much as the Surgeon General and the AMA
     and we'll cooperate in any way.
          MR. HOTTELET:  Were you saying then, sir,
     that there is something toxic about tobacco
     which are removable by filter?
          MR. CULLMAN:  Well, obviously a filter
     takes out certain tar and nicotine.  I don't
     think the industry admits there are any bad
     elements.
                 * * * * * * * * * *
5908 NARRATOR:  Take the controversy about
     cigarettes.  In the 91st Congress, a House
     committee heard testimony from leading experts
     on smoking and health.  The record shows that
     many of the country's most respected doctors
     openly challenge anti-cigarette claims. NARRATOR:  We have no program that I know
     of to try to help people to stop smoking.  We
     do talk to the question of whether or not
     cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not believe
     that cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't accept
     that. NARRATOR:  We know that a rabbit runs
     through the briar patch, it's pretty hard for
     him to look back and see which briar stuck him. NARRATOR:  We don't know what causes the
     ailments that have been attributed to cigarette
     smoking. ANN BROWDER:  The case is still open.  The
     jury has not come in.
          MR. STOSSEL:  It may not be harmful.
5909 You're not convinced?
          ANN BROWDER:  It may be or it may not be.
     We don't know. NEWSCASTER:  Earlier this week, the
     R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company took out this ad
     in a number of major newspapers and magazines,
     calling for an open debate about smoking.  In
     brief, the ad contends that medical studies
     which show that cigarette smoking causes
     disease are ignoring significant evidence to
     the contrary.
          Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer;
     yes or no?
          MALE SPEAKER:  It is not known whether
     cigarettes cause cancer --
          NEWSCASTER:  All right, sir.
          MALE SPEAKER:  -- it has not been causally
     established.
          NEWSCASTER:  Cigarette smoking, no causal
     relationship between cigarette smoking and
     emphysema?
          MALE SPEAKER:  Despite all the research to
     date, there is no causal link established.
          NEWSCASTER:  No causal relationship
5910 between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
          MALE SPEAKER:  No.  As a matter of fact,
     there are studies that while we are accused of
     being associated with heart disease, there have
     been studies conducted over ten years that
     would say, again, that science is still puzzled
     over these forces.
                  * * * * * * * * *
          (Thereupon, excerpts of the videotape
     deposition of ROBERT HEIMANN were played and
     transcribed as follows:)
     Q.   Throughout your tenure with American, it
was not only American's position but your position
that cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is that
accurate?
     A.   Through my tenure?
     Q.   Yes.
     A.   Yes, I believe so.
     Q.   That's something that American Tobacco
wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   It's a statement that American Tobacco
placed great reliance on?
     A.   We -- we issued that statement, yes.
     Q.   As far as --
5911 A.   We wanted them to believe it.
     Q.   As far as you're concerned, a person was
justified in relying on that statement?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   I'm going to show you what's marked as
Plaintiff's Exhibit 17, which is simply a package of
Pall Mall cigarettes that's currently being sold.
Would you identify that as a package of Pall Malls?
     A.   Yes, sir.
     Q.   Would you read the warning that's placed
on that for us, please?
     A.   "SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING:  Quitting
smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your
health."
     Q.   That is not a warning that is voluntarily
placed there by American Tobacco, is it?
     A.   No, it is not.
     Q.   Would you put that warning there if
Congress didn't require it?
     A.   No.
     Q.   You don't think that harms smokers so
there's no reason to put any warning on them, do
you?
     A.   We believe our product is not injurious to
health.
5912 Q.   As far as you're concerned -- as far as
you're concerned, is the Surgeon General simply
wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes
lung cancer?
     A.   I would use the term "misguided."
     Q.   Okay.  And if he is misguided, then I take
it that your opinion is he's wrong?
     A.   I was simply trying to be polite about it.
     Q.   Okay.  But not being polite about it, in
your opinion, he's wrong, correct?
     A.   Dead wrong. VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive, yes.
          CONGRESSMAN WYDEN:  Mr. Johnston?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  Congressman, cigarettes and
     nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
     definitions of addiction.  There is no
     intoxicants --
          CONGRESSMAN WYDEN:  We'll take that as a
     no.  And again --
          VOICE:  I don't believe that nicotine or
     our products are addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe nicotine is not
     addictive.
5913 VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          VOICE:  I believe that nicotine is not
     addictive.
          VOICE:  And I, too, believe that nicotine
     is not addictive. MR. WAXMAN:  Do you or do you not agree
     with the Surgeon General's estimate of over
     400,000 smokers die?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  I do not agree.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Okay.  Do you know how many
     die each year?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  I do not know.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Okay.  They agree that
     smoking causes lung cancer.  Do you agree?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  It may.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Do you know whether it does?
          MR. JOHNSTON:  I do not.
          MR. WAXMAN:  The -- Mr. Tisch, I want to
     move to you for a moment.  In a deposition last
     year, you were asked whether cigarette smoking
     causes cancer.  Your answer was, quote, "I
     don't believe so."
          Do you stand by that answer today?
5914 TISCH:  I do, sir.
          MR. WAXMAN:  Mr. Campbell, you were also
     deposed and you said, quote, "To my knowledge,
     it has not been proven that cigarette smoking
     causes cancer."  This is a rather passive and
     puzzling approach, especially in light of the
     consensus not by some, but all of the
     scientific community.
          Will you will ever be convinced, and what
     evidence are you waiting for?  And let's have
     the microphone passed over.
          MR. CAMPBELL:  Yes, I may be convinced.
     We don't know what causes cancer in general
     right now, so I think that we may find out what
     causes cancer and we may find out some
     relationship which -- which has yet to be
     proven.
                  * * * * * * * * *
          (Thereupon, excerpts of the videotape
     deposition of EDWARD ANDREW ROBINSON, Ph.D.
     were played and transcribed as follows:)
     Q.   Did Mr. Tisch set forth the position of
Lorillard in 1994 accurately?
     A.   Yes.
     Q.   And he was under oath.  Was he telling the
5915 truth?
     A.   Yes.  He was telling the truth.
     Q.   Can you give me any reason why -- and I'm
talking from Lorillard's perspective, not the
perspective of the listener -- any reason why it
would be unreasonable for a consumer of Lorillard
products to rely on a statement that Lorillard made
about the health hazards associated with its
products?
     A.   No. (Thereupon, excerpts of the videotape
     deposition of KATHLEEN GAFNEY were played and
     transcribed as follows:)
     A.   We would be talking about just general
things, and the subject of smoking would come up,
and we would have a discussion what was proof, what
wasn't.  And he didn't believe, until the very end,
that there actually was a connection, because he had
read too many things that said there wasn't.
     Q.   Did he ever have hypnosis?
     A.   No.
     Q.   Did he tell you why?
     A.   He was not convinced I was right.  He was
a brilliant man for everything but that.
5916 (Thereupon, the video ended.)
          MR. SALES:  You know, about 20 minutes
     before I have to sit down, it comes to a point
     in the case where the defendants and the
     plaintiff, Mrs. Gafney, they agree on
     something.  Frank Gafney was a brilliant man.
     I want to suggest to you, however, that the
     consequence of that when you evaluate
     defendants' position in the case is most
     respectfully that they cannot have it both
     ways.  They cannot tell you that throughout the
     20th Century, until a year before Mr. Gafney
     died, after seeing, just like Mrs. Gafney said,
     these things, when you get to this point in the
     case, they turn out not to be accidents.
          When Mr. -- Mrs. Gafney said everything he
     had read and what had he been reading for
     years, controversy, doubted, disputed, it's air
     pollution, it's sugar, it's fat, it's whatever,
     and the reason that the industry had to do that
     was because that's the way you provide the
     crutch to the person who experiences compulsive
     use of a drug, three to 4 million times in his
     lifetime, that's what you do.
          And, you know, this is one of those
5917 documents where it's just the year before 1982
     that the FTC put this out.  It's one of the
     ones that I referenced before.  Take a look and
     see if there isn't evidence in the case that
     Mr. Gafney was really like a lot of people,
     because when you evaluate his conduct and you
     compare Mr. Gafney's conduct in doing just what
     Katie described, the question is was it
     reasonable?  Was it reasonable?
          And how do we compare that if you find
     that he's addicted and the addiction causes --
     how do you compare that to the effects of
     3 million hits from a product, which his Honor
     will tell you, if we met our burden of proof,
     is unreasonably dangerous and defective.  How
     do you compare -- how do you compare the kinds
     of things that you've seen in the case about
     what it is that the defendants kept hidden?
          And I ask you when you look at that FTC
     report, consider whether or not Mr. Gafney is
     standing alone and, you know, there are other
     things in the case that help you with that and
     I just want to go over it.
          This is in that 2001 National Cancer
     Institute thing.  It's all about the illusion
5918 of filtration, one of the things they kept.
     Nobody ever told Mr. Gafney.  Where is the
     proof in this case that people came to Frank
     Gafney and said, quit smoking those filters?
     It's the opposite.  The real evidence about the
     loss of life and his family was that it
     supported the switching to supposedly less
     hazardous cigarettes that Katie Gafney urged on
     her husband, that's what the real evidence is.
          And when you evaluate whether or not
     Mr. Gafney was reasonable, what this comment --
     what this showed on the -- this line, the heavy
     black one across and the vertical one in the
     middle, I did that.  That's not in evidence,
     but the rest of that is in evidence.  And why I
     did that was I picked a point about 1959 and
     showed where Mr. Gafney fit with what everybody
     else was doing when he switched to Lorillard's
     products.  He was right in there, 50 percent.
     That's what the evidence is in this case.  And
     we know --
          THE COURT:  Excuse me, Mr. Sales.  I think
     we have a juror that needs to take a break.
          MR. SALES:  Thank you, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, will you
5919 all step into the jury room?  We want to keep
     you together.  And we'll just take a quick
     five-minute break.
          MR. SALES:  Sorry, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Remember, please, do not
     discuss the case, we're almost finished, but
     not quite.
          (Thereupon, the jury exited the courtroom,
     after which the following proceedings were
     held:)
          THE COURT:  We'll recess five minutes.
          THE BAILIFF:  All rise.  Court is in
     recess.
          MR. SALES:  I'm sorry I had my back to
     you, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  I didn't see it either.
          (Thereupon, a recess was taken from
     11:58 a.m. until 12:04 p.m., after which the
     following proceedings were held:)
          THE COURT:  All right.  Be seated.
          Mr. Sales, I'm told you have 15 minutes
     left.  So our jurors' timing was coincidental,
     I guess.
          MR. SALES:  I think so, your Honor.  I'm
     going to use every minute the clerk says I
5920 have.
          THE COURT:  All right.  Well, the clerk
     will notify you when your time is up.  And at
     that point, I'll give you one minute to wrap
     up.
          Their food is waiting, if that's a factor
     for you, Mr. Sales.
          All right.  Bring them in, please.
          THE BAILIFF:  Jurors entering.
          (Thereupon, the jury entered the
     courtroom, after which the following
     proceedings were held:)
          THE COURT:  Counsel, be seated.  Welcome
     back, ladies and gentlemen.  Mr. Sales has just
     about 15 minutes left in his closing argument.
          Mr. Sales.
          MR. SALES:  In that 15 minutes, members of
     the jury -- thank you, your Honor -- I ask that
     you indulge Mrs. Gafney and me in one more
     journey through the 20th Century, because the
     question that we're talking about again is what
     happened to Frank Gafney.
          Mr. Bassett -- because we have not really
     talked about this yet.  Mr. Bassett says to you
     that they didn't do anything.  Well, if you
5921 find addiction and disease causation, they made
     a reasonably dangerous and defective cigarette,
     those cigarettes were unreasonably dangerous
     and defective.  They were unreasonably
     dangerous and defective then, and they are now.
          And what Dr. Burns told us, which is
     totally unrebutted in the record, no medical
     witness, no addiction expert -- I guess,
     actually, Dr. Kaplan -- you know what, he did
     say how many cigarettes you smoke is
     irrelevant, but I would submit to you that you
     know that's not true.
          In fact, in the 1950s, the evidence in the
     case is, from Mr. Riegelsberger and Mr. Porter,
     that Mr. Gafney was smoking cigarettes that
     they're responsible for, those Camels and those
     Lucky Strikes.
          And what Dr. Burns told us, and it's only
     common sense, when the thing that causes the
     disease is the exposure to the addictive drug
     is that they contribute in the proportion into
     which they are used.  And Mr. Gustafson spent a
     lot of time talking about that contributing
     cause instruction.
          The second causation instruction, you
5922 didn't hear.  That's not on any of the defense
     slides, because it's important, or I want to
     say to you that it's important in evaluating
     that early smoking history in the 1950s to
     understand that it's every cigarette that needs
     to beat every other cigarette.
          And it would be impossible in this case to
     say that Lucky Strikes and Camel cigarettes,
     from age 14, whenever the start date was, until
     Mr. Gafney switched in 1959 didn't make any
     difference.  Mr. Bassett says to you it doesn't
     make any difference what we did.  It's a
     but-for test.  And you know, because you heard
     the evidence from the people who know about
     addiction in this case, that the younger you
     are, the more likely you are to be addicted,
     and that's when Mr. Gafney was smoking these
     cigarettes.
          He never would have become addicted to
     cigarettes -- now, I'm going to part company
     with Mr. Gustafson on one thing, which is that
     you may find that the contribution is what the
     contribution is.  You can add it up in years,
     you can consider the filter, whatever you want
     to do, that's up to you.  But when you go to
5923 compare Frank Gafney with what R.J. Reynolds
     did in the production and sale of unreasonably
     dangerous and defective cigarettes, those are
     matters that are appropriate for your
     consideration.
          So what happens?  What happens is that
     Mr. Gafney's use of those defective and
     unreasonably dangerous products, and all the
     while, while they were participating in the
     same lies, that if you find addiction and
     disease causation, you are obliged to accept --
     and they want to say put it all on Frank.  Got
     that.
          Let's take our tour through the
     20th Century a little bit further.  And we show
     you these ads again to put yourself in the
     position of somebody who, when they have a
     loving spouse who's trying to urge their
     husband to do something that's safer, when the
     defendants know it's not true, what do they do?
     They see things like this.  This could be Frank
     Gafney.  "Your voice of wisdom is speaking to
     you."
          Now, that is prophetic, because we know,
     and you've seen it, that decades later, not
5924 even that far after, two decades later
     Lorillard congratulated itself through its
     advertising firm and said, we were exploiting
     the health controversy.  And they didn't stop
     there, and just like everybody else, when you
     go to consider the reasonableness of
     Mr. Gafney's conduct, when he switches to True,
     the message from them again -- does this come
     up more?  That's all right -- it's True.  I
     thought all about it, I read -- read it.  It
     says, "Either quit or smoke True.  I smoke
     True, the low-tar and nicotine cigarette.
     Think about it."
          That's what this thinking man did.  That's
     what this thinking man did.  And why does it
     matter in the 21st Century what happened in the
     20th Century?  Because there are things that we
     know now that Frank Gafney never knew.  There's
     no -- there's no evidence in this case that
     Lorillard or R.J. Reynolds or any of them in
     that conspiracy said -- and we showed you
     documents for all of them, things that they
     were concealing from the public.  There's no
     evidence that they ever explained to the
     addicted smoker -- and, again, we have
5925 agreement in the case.  Dr. Cummings and
     Dr. Kaplan agree on something, that it's
     important -- why does all this matter?  It's
     important before and after 1982, because when
     an addictive smoker knows what is happening to
     them, when they are asking themselves, you
     know, I laid the cigarettes down, and what's
     happening to me?  And the answer is that your
     cigarettes are being designed so as to make it
     easier for you to use, make it better and more
     effective, the effects on you, and make it
     harder for you to quit, just like said they
     wanted to.
          And you know, they brought up this thing,
     Dr. Cummings, it's in evidence, this is a 1988
     edition -- excuse me, a 1997 edition, but
     Dr. Cummings told you it actually started in
     1988.  Let's just turn the clock a little bit
     forward.  And what you'll find -- they watched
     this, they showed you parts of it.  It's kind
     of quaint.  It's encouraging people.  This is
     happening in the '80s.
          What are the messages?  How do you get
     ready; this is what you need to do; here is
     some real people; don't wait, you'll get sick;
5926 comparing to other folks; here's the good news.
          Public health officials in the '80s and
     '90s weren't telling people this is why this is
     happening to you.  And ask yourself, would an
     educated man, a brilliant man, agreed to by
     both parties, would he, as one of those movies
     that they suggested that they played that they
     showed you, that consumption of their products
     is a disguised form of suicide?  That's what
     the message is from this case.
          Well, when the disguise is taken off, when
     public health officials get the message from
     their previously secret documents -- and this
     is in evidence as well -- what do they tell
     smokers today?  And these are things that have
     just changed within the last few years.
          Can you adjust that?
          Well, you've seen it and I'll read it to
     you.
          THE TECHNICIAN:  David, it's coming up.
          MR. SALES:  Think of the difference when
     you're asked to compare the kind of information
     that is available in 1982 to an addicted smoker
     like Frank Gafney before those ingredient lists
     were required and the kind of information that
5927 the public health officials, after they got a
     peek from the secret documents, what the
     messages have been.
          Think of the difference it would have made
     to Frank Gafney in 1994 or '3 or '2, whenever
     you decide it made a difference in terms of his
     health, if instead of this well-informed
     reasonable man who was paying attention,
     according to them, reading the newspaper, he
     didn't know that executives in a highly
     publicized way, all of them lined up together
     and continued the denials, he didn't believe
     it.  He didn't believe it, because that's what
     they were saying.
          And if you turn the clock forward, even
     now, why does 1982 and today make a difference?
     You're asking yourselves about that date
     because the Court requires that we prove that
     because there is a requirement in the law,
     there's a requirement in the law that the
     things that harmed Frank Gafney happened after
     1982 on those two claims only, on those two
     claims only, that's why we have that there.
     And ask yourself if it would have made a
     difference to Frank Gafney.
5928 I have two things I want to talk to you
     about.  Home stretch.  One of them is the
     insurance applications.  And, you know, it's
     sort of part of the same discussion, because
     they are in evidence, one of them you know is
     from 1987, kind of hard to see here -- here it
     is, 1987.  One of them is in 1977.  And one of
     them is in 1961.
          And they provide, as the instruction from
     the Court indicates, a window into things about
     health and smoking history.  They're not for
     any other purpose and you're not to consider
     them for any other purpose or assume that
     there's no evidence of it that these resulted
     in life insurance policies.  These are
     applications.
          And what do we know about the smoking
     history from 1961?  Well, they ask a lot of
     questions, and this is a reflection of our trip
     through the 20th Century.  They ask you if
     you're a pilot, if you fly, if you're going to
     go on an airplane ride.  It's kind of quaint,
     but that's what they ask.  They ask you
     questions about your health, about your urine,
     about your heart, about your friends -- about
5929 your family, rather, and what happened to them.
          And Mr. Gafney answered all those
     questions and answers them truthfully.  But you
     know what?  When you consider whether there's
     anything about smoking history in here, the New
     England Life Insurance Company in 1961 didn't
     care.  They don't even ask.
          And you know what?  In 1977, as you take
     that trip through the '70s and '80s and get
     yourself up to 1982 to find out whether it made
     a difference, in 1977, they're asking the same
     questions.  They've got a few more now.  Have
     you had any vehicle accidents?  Have you had a
     stroke?  You need to fill out the aviation
     questionnaire.  These are all in evidence.
     They ask about whether you've got scars, again,
     what your urine -- all these things.  And you
     know what?  In 1977 -- Mr. Bassett mentioned
     that Mr. Gafney understood the risk.  But you
     know what?  Actuaries are the people who decide
     risk, and the actuaries at the New England Life
     Insurance Company, apparently, in 1977, who
     were making bets, giving information to people
     who --
          MR. BASSETT:  Objection, your Honor.
5930 COURT:  Legal basis?
          MR. BASSETT:  Misstates the evidence.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry?
          MR. BASSETT:  Misstates the evidence.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          Go ahead, Mr. Sales.
          MR. SALES:  -- are providing insight as to
     whether or not to let people pay for life
     insurance and to take bets on whether they're
     going to live or die.
          In 1977, when Mr. Gafney was supposed to
     be all get-up and knowledgeable about this,
     they don't even care.  It's not until after
     1982, in this application, where they ask that
     question for the very first time.
          And you know what?  Mr. Gafney told the
     truth.  Now, that gives you a dispute in the
     evidence, and you need to decide what to do
     about that, because there's clearly evidence
     that there was a quit for a year.  But I want
     to suggest to you that there's another
     explanation possible, which is that during this
     period of time, for whatever reason, even when
     Mr. Gafney was seeking to go about trying to
     protect his wife, that he couldn't do it, not
5931 even for a year, not even for a year.
          And I'm going to say two things, one about
     damages and they talked a little bit about
     punitive damages.  Here's what I want to say
     about it.  Think about what you have heard in
     this case about the enormity of the sums of
     money that have been spent, exchanged, traded
     for a whole variety of things, and when you go
     to think about punitive damages and the cost
     that it has imposed where their lies and
     concealment in this country, even through and
     up to today, look at those Surgeon General's
     reports in 2012, the magnitude of the harm that
     they impose not only on Katie and Frank Gafney
     but through their lies, through their
     manipulation, is extraordinary.  It's
     outrageous and justifies, under any one of
     those four standards that you are to consider,
     punishment.
          How much can we tolerate as a society?
     That's why in these kinds of cases, you are
     given the immense and important power to say,
     no, I will punish.  I, as part of the jury, we
     will deter, and we will do it by speaking to
     the community and others through our verdict
5932 that this is wrong, that this is monstrous,
     that this is terrible to manipulate --
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Objection, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Legal basis?
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Improper argument.  May we
     approach?
          THE COURT:  No, sir.
          Mr. Sales -- how much time does Mr. Sales
     have left?
          One minute, Mr. Sales.
          MR. SALES:  Right on.  Thank you,
     your Honor.
          Monstrous, terrible, outrageous.  That's
     up to you.
          Finally, the last thing about damages.  No
     message involved in this except it's something
     that -- we were all young lawyers, all trained
     by the same fellow, and they all told us the
     same thing, which is that we, the lawyers, we
     need to listen to our client.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Objection, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Legal basis?
          MR. MAGUIRE:  With respect to message.
          THE COURT:  I'm sorry?
          MR. MAGUIRE:  With respect to message.
5933 COURT:  Overruled.
          Go ahead, Mr. Sales.
          MR. SALES:  What we learned is we need to
     listen to them because they're trying to help
     us.  And what we know from Katie Gafney,
     because we have been listening to her -- you
     can't talk to her, but we can, and we have some
     information about that, and it's in direct
     response to the defendants' suggestion that
     Mr. Gafney was somehow replaced by a liar and a
     cheat who broke her heart, made her feel as
     though she betrayed her husband.  No.
          MR. MAGUIRE:  Your Honor, objection to
     referring to matters outside the record.
          MR. BASSETT:  Join, your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. SALES:  There's evidence in this case
     that he was unfaithful.  No question about it.
          THE COURT:  Mr. Sales, 30 seconds.
          MR. SALES:  Thank you, your Honor.
          So they finish in their discussion with
     you by asking you -- I made myself a note, I'll
     get it in within the 30 seconds -- "Frank
     Gafney was a wonderful man, and now at 76,
     Katie Gafney is content," their word, "with her
5934 dogs."
          No.  Show by your verdict the power and
     the magnitude of this lady's loss of this
     brilliant and wonderful man.  Thank you.
