MR. FINCH:  Thank you, Your Honor.  Good
afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.  As you know,
my name is Nate Finch.  I'm counsel for Roger Giddens, and I
wanted to extend my thanks to you on behalf of Mr. Giddens,
on behalf of my colleagues, Mr. Vince Parrett and James
Ledlie, on behalf of my parallels, who really have helped me
to keep from tripping on myself, Laura Holcomb in particular
and Anjana Joshi, and also my colleague, Elizabeth Smith who
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1157 has really helped us.  I'm sure you will hear from the
defendants, when they get up in about 45 minutes or an hour,
to thank you.
The reason I'm thanking you is because you have
been very attentive.  You have spent almost a week, little
over a week here, and you've been taking very good notes and
you have been paying attention to what I imagine feels like
a fire hose of information.  The other reason that I'm
thanking you is because you came in here and you are serving
as a jury.  You are a jury of peers for Mr. Giddens and also
for the corporations who, under the law.  Are supposed to be
treated as persons, too.
(Off record comments, microphone adjustments)
MR. FINCH:  Jury service is the most important
civic duty you can have, except for serving in the military,
and the reason why, it's the only place I think where people
can be on a level playing field with the government or
people can be on a level playing field with other people or
people can be on a level playing field with corporations or
any kind of institutions.  The way we resolve our disputes
in this country is by a trial of a jury of our peers and
that has been going on in Anglo Saxon tradition for 800
years. 
And I think that the -- the reason that you're
here is to decide a very important dispute.  This is a very,
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1158 very important case.  It's a case about life and death.
It's a case about personal responsibility.  It's a case
about corporations' responsibility.
It's also a case about safety rules and what I
mean by safety rules, I'll tell you when I get a little
further into my summation, but it's basically, you all
understand if you came here, you were in a car wreck case.
You know the rules of the road.  If you rear-end somebody,
you're responsible.  This is a little bit more difficult
than that, but the basic concept is the same and the safety
rules is that the idea is that you have to give people a
chance to protect themselves.
It's been a very long journey to get here.  It's
been a long journey for Mr. Giddens.  He was -- he died 17
years ago as a result of conduct that was partly his
conduct, but partly the fault of the tobacco corporations.
That's -- that's a very long journey.
The second long journey that's involved in this
case is that you have taken a very big step back in time.
You had to see documents that were written in the 1950s and
in the 1960s, in the 1970s, in the 1980s.  That's -- that is
a very long journey over a very long period of time, but I
will try to describe the evidence as you saw it that covers
that long period of time.
The 1950s, have to put your mind back there,
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1159 Eisenhower was president, gallon of gas cost 20 cents.  A
new car might have been $1,500.  It was 50 years ago.  But
one thing you should keep in mind, we are not asking you to
judge the conduct by present day standards.  The conduct
that is at issue here was bad in the '50s and the '60s and
the '70s and the '80s, and I will explain why.
The third long journey is the journey of this case
and this is called the Engle case.  I'm sure you feel like
you've spent a very long journey sitting here watching us
for almost the better part of a week and a half, and I don't
know if you recall the very outset of the trial, Judge
Magnuson asked you all a question, have you ever heard of
the Engle litigation, and virtually all of you -- I think
all of you said no.
So what's the Engle litigation about?  Well, after
I finish my summation and after the defendants, the tobacco
corporations finish their summation, and after I get back up
to talk to you a little bit more, Judge Magnuson is going to
instruct you on the law.  And Judge Magnuson wears those
black robes for a reason.  He says what the law is and what
the law means.  And he is going to tell you the rest of the
story of this case, of which you are only a small but very,
very important part.
Now, the rest of the story, when I was a young man
growing up in Roanoke, Virginia, there was a radio station
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1160 called WROB and they had Paul Harvey.  Paul Harvey, I'm sure
a lot of you remember him.  Paul Harvey was a man, he used
to start off telling a story and then at the end there was a
surprise.  Like, he'd tell a story about a boy named Walter
who accidentally got scratched by an owl and killed the owl,
it upset him so much he never did anything, you know,
anything that had to do with hurting animals again.  He
turned his career into drawing animals.  Well Walter's last
name was Disney.  He became Walt Disney.  That's the kind of
the rest of the story.
So what's the rest of the story here?  The rest of
the story is a piece of litigation called the Engle
litigation.  You heard the tobacco corporation lawyers cross
examining Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings about all these cases
they're doing in Florida, and that litigation has been going
on as a result of court proceedings that Judge Magnuson will
tell you about in the jury charges.  Now, the jury charges
he's going to give you, he'll read them to you, and he will
provide them to you, talk about the Engle class membership
and the Engle case and what -- the first thing he's going to
instruct you is as a matter of law, which means you have to
accept what he says as a matter of law, in order to be a
member of the Engle class -- and let me back up.  The Engle
class was a piece of litigation against the tobacco
companies by a whole class of people.
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1161 MS. GALLAGHER:  Your Honor, I'm sorry, I object to
this.  It's outside the instructions and the evidence in
this case.
THE COURT:  It's final argument.  He can give a
little background on it.  Go ahead.
MR. FINCH:  The Engle class action was a class
action proceeding by a whole class of people defined as
people who were addicted -- let me see if I -- people who
were addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and did they
have a list of diseases that were determined to be caused by
smoking.  That's what the Engle class is about.  And if you
find that Roger Giddens -- not the Roger Giddens who's alive
and breathing, but that Roger Giddens, the man this case is
about, if you find that he was a member of the Engle class,
and the Judge is going to instruct you certain things are
absolutely proven and you have to take them as a matter of
law.
So what of the -- you have your verdict forms.
You do have the verdict forms here.  There are two questions
in order to be a member of The Engle class.  In order to be
a member of the Engle class, the plaintiff must prove by a
preponderance of the evidence -- now what that means, I
believe you're going to get instructions about preponderance
of the evidence.  Just about every single of our claims is a
preponderance of the evidence.  That means you might have
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1162 substantial doubts but if the scales of justice tip just a
little bit towards the side of the plaintiff on each
question, then you find for the plaintiff on that question.
And you should analyze as you take your verdict form, take
your verdict form, look at that first question, was Roger
Giddens, Sr., addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
Now, my version of the form might have a couple
typos in it or something because this is the one that I had
this morning.  The Judge is -- oh, here's my younger brain
handing me the final verdict form.  The question is exactly
the same.  Was Roger Giddens, Sr. addicted to cigarettes
containing nicotine.  That's Question Number 1.  That's what
the judge is going to ask you to make a finding on.
So let's talk about that a little bit.  That is a
question that asks was he addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine.  It doesn't ask could he quit.  It doesn't ask did
he choose to start smoking.  It doesn't ask is he at fault
for doing that.  It's just a simple, straightforward
question, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
And as to that question, I think we have proved that beyond
a reasonable doubt.  Now remember, we only have to show a
little bit of the evidence tilting a little bit more in our
favor.  Think of it as a football game, if it's a 14-13 game
with the other team on the one yard line trying to score and
I stop them, tackle them, I win.  That's preponderance of
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1163 the evidence.  Or some other -- basketball, win 51-49,
that's a preponderance of the evidence.  Just tip the scales
of justice just a little bit.
Now, what did we hear?  What evidence, evidence,
evidence, evidence did we hear in the courtroom about the
question of addiction?  Well first of all, you heard from
Dr. Michael Cummings who has treated addiction, wrote a
pamphlet on how to quit smoking.  He's studied the question
of addiction.  He's written lots of peer reviewed papers,
and he came in and he said, I looked at Roger Giddens'
smoking history, I listened or read the records, and I
concluded that he, in fact, was addicted.  There is --
that's the perspective of an expert.
Did they bring you any witness to say that Roger
Giddens wasn't addicted?  Did they bring in anybody?
Anybody?  They showed you some newspaper articles.  They
made arguments.  Remember what the Judge said, what I say
isn't evidence, what Ms. Gallagher says isn't evidence, what
Mr. Walker says is not evidence.  The evidence is what comes
out of the witnesses' mouth and what exhibits are on that
table, many of which we showed to you through the testimony
of Dr. Cummings and a handful of the testimony of Dr. Burns.
Now, what did Dr. Cummings tell you and show you?
Can I have the slides?
What we showed you is that addiction is a disease
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1164 of the brain.  He showed you how addiction to nicotine in
cigarettes affects, affects the brain.  It's a medical
condition.  He defined addiction as -- addiction is defined
as a chronic relapsing brain disease as characterized by
compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful
consequences.
Now in addition, you heard from Dr. Cummings, you
heard from Dr. Burns.  Dr. Burns was the doctor who you
heard about had the unfortunate accident before we started
trial.  He sat on the stand and talked for the better part
of a day about medical issues.  You may recall in opening
statement, counsel for the tobacco companies said, well,
this case is going to be about everybody but Roger Giddens.
I asked Dr. Burns a lot of questions and except for some
general things, like how does smoking generally cause
cancer, all of the questions were about Roger Giddens and
what -- Dr. Burns is a world renowned medical expert.  He
has been involved in the publication of every Surgeon
General's Report since 1975.  He has taught doctors on how
to treat addiction.  He has taught people in the field on --
on what it means to do that.  He has examined the causes of
lung cancer as a result of cigarette smoking.  He spent
his -- the vast majority of his career doing that.  And what
did he conclude?  He concluded, next slide, that cigarette
smoking is addictive and nicotine is the addictive agent.
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1165 Well, one of the things you're going to hear when
the Judge reads the Engle findings to you, Judge is going to
say, if you find that Roger Giddens, Sr. was an Engle class
member, you must apply certain findings by the Engle court
and they must carry the same weight they would have if you
had determined them, yourselves.  These findings are:
Number 1, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer and
cerebrovascular disease; Number 2, that nicotine in
cigarettes is addictive.
I think we've proved beyond any shadow of a doubt
that the nicotine in the cigarettes is addictive.  All you
have to do is look at some of the tobacco companies'
internal documents to know that.  They were studying
nicotine addiction back in the 1960s.  There was Exhibit 77,
which was a document from 1962, where the tobacco companies
write -- this is in evidence.  It's going to be on the
table.  You'll be able to look at it when you go back and
deliberate.  They know far more about nicotine than what's
in the published literature.  They've been studying it for
years.
Another document that we showed you, which is
Exhibit 163, is that, and this is a document from 1963 --
now, I know it looks like there's a pile of paper on the
table there but the vast majority of it is four big
documents.  There's the two Surgeon General's Reports from
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1166 2004 and 2010.  There's a couple of Federal Trade Commission
reports we think are important.  I'll get to those in a
little bit.  But most of the documents are short.  I mean,
one of the things about going back in time is that 50, 40,
30, 20 years ago, people didn't have email.  When they
wanted to write a memo, they typed it up and they'd pass it
around, and the chairman of the corporation or his research
guy signed it and it was a two-page letter, three-page, few
documents longer than that, but you get right down to it,
there's not a whole lot of documents to wade through.
So if you were to look at Exhibit 163, you would
see that we are -- the tobacco companies are in the business
of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the
relief of stress mechanisms.  And I could walk you through
many of the documents where they talk about how addictive
their cigarettes are, and you saw the evidence.  You saw the
documents.  The document I read to you on Friday,
Exhibit 70, which is the -- remember the document where
Philip Morris was talking about comparing people to rats and
that the pushing the lever was a dose of nicotine, the
addictive food was the rats.  Well pushing the -- smoking
the cigarette is the dose of nicotine for the person.  So
the tobacco corporations know nicotine is addictive.
And John, could I have this slide?
So we know that nicotine is addictive and then
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1167 what Dr. Burns did, he analyzed Mr. Giddens and you heard
the testimony from the people who knew Mr. Giddens best, you
also heard testimony from people who didn't have a dog in
the fight, like Sandra King who used to be his boss back in
the early '80s and she testified by deposition as to how
difficult it was for him to quit.  Her husband had a heart
attack.  She told everybody in the place not to smoke.
Roger was such a good employee they made an exception for
him.  He tried to quit, couldn't do it, tried to quit,
couldn't do it, and they had to make a special little
cubical for him that could vent the smoke out.  We heard
testimony from James Ashley Giddens and Vera Giddens,
Roger's brother and sister-in-law, about how he's a chain
smoker, how he would light one up and sometimes the minute
his foot hit the floor.
So I think on the Question Number 1, which is a
medical question, I think there's really no other answer but
that Roger Giddens was addicted to cigarettes containing
nicotine.  So I think when you're thinking about this,
filling it out, the verdict form, which is the questions you
have to answer, that has to be a yes.
The second question, was Roger Giddens' addiction
to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his
death.  So that's sort of a mouthful but let me break that
into pieces for you.  The Judge is going to instruct you as
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1168 to what legal cause is, and you'll hear when he instructs
you that lawful conduct is the legal cause of someone's
injury or damage, including the legal cause of damages
resulting from someone's injury, if it directly and in
natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes
substantially to producing such injury or damages so it can
reasonably be said that but for such wrongful conduct, the
injury or damage would not have occurred.  That is sort of a
mouthful, but what it boils down to, is that if something is
part of the events in a chain that leads to something else,
it can be a legal cause.
The other thing that's very important about legal
cause is there can be more than one legal cause.  You could
find, yes, Roger Giddens was a legal cause of his smoking to
death, but that really goes to putting the blame on him.  It
doesn't go to whether the addiction was a legal cause.
That's a medical question.  It's a combination of medical
question and using your common sense.  Dr. Burns testified
that to a substantial -- reasonable degree of medical
certainty and substantial degree of medical certainty that
Roger Giddens' addiction to nicotine in the cigarettes
caused his lung cancer and it caused his stroke.
Now, the Engle findings, Engle findings instruct
you as to what doctors sometimes call general causation and
what the findings are, if you find that Mr. Giddens is a
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1169 member of the Engle class, they will -- the Judge is going
to instruct you as a matter of law that smoking cigarettes
causes lung cancer and cerebrovascular disease.  There's no
exception in the Engle findings for what kind of
cerebrovascular disease.  Do you remember when I was talking
with Dr. Burns yesterday, how we drew on the -- on the
board, the stroke, cerebral hemorrhage, cerebrovascular
disease, they're all cerebrovascular disease.  There's no
dispute that smoking causes them.
And who came into this courtroom and testified
that Mr. Giddens' addiction to nicotine from smoking
cigarettes caused his death?  Dr. Burns did.  Dr. Burns
reviewed the medical records, he is a world renowned expert
on the subject of the causation of smoking related diseases.
He wrote the book.  He was the consulting scientific editor
for two of those big fat documents.
Your Honor, may I approach the exhibit table?  I
won't remove them.
THE COURT:  You may.
MR. FINCH:  You're going to have up here the 2004
Surgeon General's Report and the 2010 Surgeon General's
Report.  He was involved in every single one of them and
what he testified to was that Mr. Giddens' nicotine
addiction and smoking caused his lung cancer and it caused a
stroke and it caused his death.
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1170 John, let's just turn this off.  I'll just talk.
You heard that from Dr. Burns.  Did you hear the
tobacco companies bring any witness to come in and challenge
that?  They cross examined Dr. Burns but he didn't -- he
didn't vary his opinion.  He said Mr. Giddens' nicotine
addiction from smoking cigarettes caused his death.
And there's sort of two questions in that.
There's one, can smoking cigarettes cause cerebrovascular
disease.  The Judge is going to instruct you that it can.
The 2004 Surgeon General's Report, which is in evidence if
you want to look at it, you should -- you actually should
check, you should double check everything I say, just like
you should double check everything they say.  At Page 395 --
now, there's different Bates number.  Get the 2004, it's
Exhibit 574, and look at the evidence synthesis.  You come
to the conclusion that the Surgeon General did, which is
that smoking has been demonstrated and shows consistent
associations of smoking with all major types of stroke.  And
I believe we have a board -- Your Honor, may I get my board
over there?
THE COURT:  You may.
MR. FINCH:  So, absolutely clear that the smoking
caused the stroke.  It's not even disputed that smoking
caused the lung cancer.  For years and years and years
tobacco companies tried to argue that smoking doesn't cause
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1171 lung cancer but they didn't even put on a single witness
here to try to say that Mr. Roger Giddens' lung cancer was
caused by something else.  They suggested it in opening
statement.  They said, you know, some lung cancer might not
be -- might not be smoking related, might be related to
asbestos or something.  That may be true.  Did they put on a
witness to tell you that, to swear under oath, that you
know, in my opinion to a reasonable degree of scientific and
medical certainty the cigarettes didn't cause Mr. Giddens to
die?
Now, on the -- on the cause of death, if you
believe Dr. Burns, it's over.  Cause of death was smoking.
If you want to go through the medical records, yourself,
they're in evidence.  We got nothing to hide.  It's
Exhibit 3008.  Remember how I showed you with Dr. Burns, he
had reviewed the records, the time frame was first there was
a diagnosis in February of 1995 of primary and metastatic
lung cancer by a doctor, Walter P. Scott, and then when --
that's on Page 6 of the medical records.  If you look at the
medical records, a long Bates number, go and find them, it's
Exhibit 3008.  You'll see at .006, there's a diagnosis of
lung cancer.  And then the medical records are kind of not
copied in the order that they chronologically go, so I'll
walk you through them, but when Roger Giddens had the
stroke, he goes to the hospital -- and, John, can I have the
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1172 ELMO?  Madam, may I have the ELMO?
There's Dr. Scott, Sir Walter -- not Sir Walter
Scott.  Not the guy who wrote Ivanhoe, but Dr. Scott.
Dr. Scott is the man that's treating this man for lung
cancer.  So he comes into the hospital for a stroke.  They
call Dr. Scott.  Prognosis, six months.  They talk about the
lung cancer in the records, undifferentiated cancer.  The
family -- this is a -- this is a piece of the record that I
didn't show you with Dr. Burns but you can take a look at
it.  It's Page 192.  They charted this and they said until
further information, we would not recommend DNR.  DNR, I
believe I can say, means Do Not Resuscitate, or at this
time, we need information on tissue diagnosis and staging of
cancer.  That's the hospital Roger Giddens is in because of
his stroke and the date of this record is July 26th.
So what do they do?  They get the tissue from
Dr. Scott, and again, these are doctors.  They didn't come
into the courtroom and testify, but they had the obligation
to treat Roger Giddens and try to save his life.  They were
his treating doctors.  I asked Dr. Burns about the
Hippocratic Oath, which is the first thing, you don't do any
harm to your patients.  They were doing the very best they
could to figure out how best to treat him.  And what do they
do in July of '95?  You see they -- the 2/11/95, that means
that's when the specimen, the tissue with cancer in it was
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1173 collected, and then on July 28, '95, it goes to University
Medical Center Department of Pathology.  Pathology is the
place where you look at the tissue under the microscope and
you can see what it is.  And what does a different doctor in
addition to Dr. Scott -- Dr. Walter Scott says, metastatic
large cell undifferentiated carcinoma.  What does that mean?
Lung cancer.
So then this is a record from August 1st, 1995,
and there's a discussion, end stage metastatic lung cancer,
which means Roger Giddens had very little time left to live.
Dr. Scott, unfortunately, was right on on his prognosis of
six months.  He said, you know, in July of 1995, six months
to live.  August, September, October, November, December,
January.  If the question is for a preponderance of the
evidence what killed him, of course it's the -- it's the
lung cancer.
But even if you were to think, well, maybe it's
the stroke, Dr. Burns said that the stroke is caused by the
smoking, too.  They didn't bring anybody to come in and say
that he's wrong about that.  They just asked him some
questions and tried to show him different studies that were
much older and they were all in the 2004 and 2010, went back
to the 1989 study.  He was absolutely clear.  And if you
don't believe Dr. Burns, you absolutely should, because he's
a doctor.  He's spent his entire career working in the
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1174 Public Health Service and the tobacco corporations are
trying to demonize him.
So the family tells the University Medical Center,
do not resuscitate.  They give him a DNR because the man has
end stage metastatic lung cancer.  Roger Giddens is going to
die.  He's going to die from his lung cancer and there's no
point in keeping trying to resuscitate him.
I think that, you know, they make a big deal out
of the death certificate saying natural causes.  Well, they
asked Roger Giddens about the death certificate.  He's not a
doctor.  Dr. Burns was asked about it.  I asked him.  First,
he said what that means as a medical doctor is that the lung
cancer contributed to his death.  Did they bring anybody to
come in here and say no, Dr. Wrong -- Dr. Burns is all wet,
he's wrong, that's not how you fill out a death certificate,
he just doesn't know what he's talking about.  He's from
California?  Did they bring somebody here to testify about
that?  Remember, testimony is evidence, not what lawyers
say.
So back to my verdict form, the question of was
Roger Giddens' addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a
legal cause of his death, I think the evidence is absolutely
clear that it was.
So now we're at Question 3.  Please state as to
each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1175 that defendant was a legal cause of Roger Giddens, Sr.'s
death.  That fits into the negligence and strict liability
counts.  And this is why, look, you've already made the
determination that the smoking cigarettes manufactured by --
assuming you believe Dr. Burns, you have made a
determination that smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of
Roger Giddens, Jr.'s [SIC] death.  Is there any real dispute
that he smoked Marlboros?  He smoked Marlboros for 40 years.
The testimony about exactly when he started, James Ashley
Giddens said, well, I thought I saw him smoking at the time
he went to the Army.  Let's say he was wrong about that and
he didn't start smoking till he was 20.  It's still 38 years
and by the -- by the -- it was absolutely clear from the
evidence and testimony you heard, he was an addicted, heavy
chain smoker.
So you've already gotten over the legal cause
hurdle.  Now you've just got negligence.  So if the Engle
case didn't exist, which it does, then I would talk to
y'all -- and I will talk to you, because I think you have to
understand that negligence just means being careful.  Let's
take cigarettes and think about what's going on here.  Think
about what you heard the evidence was in this case.  You
heard evidence of a man, Roger Giddens, who picked up the
first cigarette sometime in 1950s.  You heard and saw
evidence from the internal files in the tobacco corporations
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1176 that showed that they weren't careful.
Why do we have safety rules?  To allow people the
opportunity to protect themselves.  It goes back to the
Bible, Leviticus 19:14, thou shalt not throw a stumbling
block in front of a blind man.  It's making your products
safer, making your products less harmful.  Did the tobacco
companies do that?  Were they careful?  Were they trying to
make their -- make their products more safe?
The reason that it's important for companies to
tell the truth about their products is to give people the
ability to protect themselves.  You -- it's not against the
law to make a dangerous product.  We live in America.  It's
a free land.  There's nothing wrong with that.  But if
you're going to make a dangerous product, particularly if
the danger is hidden -- and in the '50s, the tobacco
companies knew a lot more about the hazards of cigarettes
than the public health community and they knew a lot more
about the nicotine addiction.  They didn't tell the world.
They didn't admit to the world that they were trying to make
their cigarettes addictive until after Mr. Giddens was dead.
You saw the testimony from the CEOs of the tobacco
companies.  The tobacco corporations got up there and swore
under oath before Congress that their cigarettes weren't
addictive.  Well, they're sitting on a pile of documents
that said that they were.  That's -- is that being careful?
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1177 Is -- you know, you know what happens in a multi-car
pile-up, the person, if there was three cars, they go bam,
bam, bam.  The guy in front, he's not at fault.  The guy
behind, he's at fault for not slowing down and he hit that
guy.  So he's careless.  Guy behind him, hit him, he's
careless.  All of them combined, all of their lack of care
is what negligence is.
Strict liability is -- basically means that you
got to be careful if you're making products.  And you know,
this isn't -- this isn't -- is not a new concept.  We are
not asking you to judge the tobacco companies' conduct by
modern day standards.  Were asking you to judge their
conduct by Biblical standards.
I went to a baseball game Friday night, Boston Red
Sox.  On the back of the ticket it talks about assuming the
risk if you get hit in the head with a foul ball.  Now, how
many people have gotten killed at major league baseball
games?  This was a spring training game.  Wasn't the Red Sox
versus the Yankees in the American League championship
series, but closest I've ever been to a field where
somebody's throwing a ball 97 miles an hour.  But I assume
the risk to sit there because I knew it was a hazard.  They
still tell you about it.  The tobacco companies didn't tell
people.  Instead, they told the exact opposite.
So negligence and strict liability ought to be
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1178 easy.  And in fact, it is easy because the Judge is going to
instruct you that the Engle defendants, including R.J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company and Philip Morris U.S.A., referred
to as the Engle defendants, placed cigarettes on the market
that were defective and unreasonably dangerous.  He's also
going to instruct you that all of the Engle defendants were
negligent.
Now, you may all have different views about
smoking in our society and that's fine.  But you all swore
an oath when you came in here that you would try to set
those aside and that you would follow the law.  The Judge is
the law.  The Judge is speaking as a federal judge what the
law is in the State of Florida.  He's asking you to follow
the law.  He's telling you that it's already been
determined.  You shouldn't revisit that.  These tobacco
corporations, they were negligent and they were guilty of
strict liability.
Now, once you -- I think unless you're just going
to ignore what Judge Magnuson tells you, I think you got to
check yes as to both of these.
Now, R.J. Reynolds may argue, well, you didn't
hear very much testimony about Winston, and they're right
about that but you can deal with that when you get down here
to where you allocate the fault of the parties.  That's
Question 6.  Question 3 and 4 is just are they negligent and
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1179 was the negligence a legal cause of Roger Giddens, Sr.'s
death.  Well, if you believe Dr. Burns, the cigarettes, all
the cigarettes he smoked substantially contributed to his
lung cancer and his stroke in the proportion in which he
smoked them.  You heard in response to Ms. Gallagher's
question that Dr. Burns said there's no safe level of
exposure to nicotine and tobacco smoke.  I mean, he showed
you the slides about how cancer forms from breathing in the
smoke.  What in doctor speak it's sometimes called the
multi-hit theory of carcinogenesis.  What he's saying, the
more cigarettes you smoke, the more likely you are to get
lung cancer.  So the more cigarettes that Mr. Giddens
smoked, the more likely he's going to get lung cancer, and
he got it, and it killed him.
So once you get to here, then the only question
becomes -- I'm going to skip over 5 and 6.  Skip over 5 and
6 and I'll come back to those in a minute.  Then the
question becomes what percentage of responsibility that was
a legal cause of Roger Giddens, Sr.'s death do you allocate
to the parties?  And what that is is going back to my
discussion of the rules of the road where you have the
multi-car bang, bang, bang pile-up.  Instead of having three
cars, this has five cars, and you're in the middle car.
You're partly at fault for your injuries.  So is the person
behind you.  Another example I'm sure all of y'all have
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1180 seen -- I don't have my Blackberry with me because I don't
want it when I'm standing up in front of you.  Have you ever
seen somebody walking down the street doing this and you've
seen somebody else coming down the street doing this, and
they run into each other?  They're both at fault.  So the
question is, how much fault?  What percentage of
responsibility that was a legal cause of Roger Giddens,
Sr.'s death do you allocate to the parties?
And the tobacco corporations want you to say a
hundred percent.  They want you to say, well, he could quit,
he could quit, he could quit.  I don't see the word quit on
this form.  Some people get addicted to cigarette smoking
and they quit.  Absolutely they do.  Dr. Burns testified to
that; Dr. Cummings testified to that.  You get addicted to
cigarettes, you can quit.  That is wonderful and that is the
goal of everyone.  But some people aren't able to quit.
Remember that graphic I showed Dr. Burns where he showed
those age cohorts?  I'm not going to try to pull it up.
It's the one with the pretty rainbow lines.  The point is
that for the people in his age cohort, Mr. Giddens was like
very -- you know, a big percentage of them.
So what percentage of the responsibility is a
legal cause of Roger Giddens, Sr.'s death do you allocate to
the parties?  Well first of all, Roger Giddens paid the
ultimate price for his death.  He died and that is his
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1181 responsibility.  That is his responsibility.  Now, as a
jury, you are the values of this community here in Fort
Myers, Florida, in Lee County.  You all came from different
walks of life, didn't know each other.  You sat here for
over a week and you're going to have your own very strong
views about this and you should hash it out.
Now, we know Roger Giddens, Sr. was at fault, some
percentage of fault.  Is it 10 percent, is it 20 percent, is
it 30 percent?  I think if it's 30 percent, that's -- that
would be fair, but it's your decision.  You get to say.
There's no rule book that says.  But what -- what I want you
to consider, it's not a hundred percent.  It is not a
hundred percent because the tobacco companies did not tell
the truth about their products.  That's what the negligence
piece of this was.  They did not make safe products.
Now the tobacco companies might say, well you
know, Mr. Finch and his colleagues just showed you snippets
of documents or pieces or testimony, you didn't see the
whole picture, you didn't see the rest of the story.
Well, let's talk about the rest of the story.  The
rest of the story for Roger Giddens is, let's say you say
he's 30 percent at fault, then you got to decide, well, what
about them, what about their conduct?  So don't they bear
some blame, too, just like the two guys who are holding the
Blackberries and run into each other?  Just like the people
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1182 in the bang, bang, bang car wreck?  You bet they do.  You're
all intelligent people.  You paid a lot of attention.  You
can allocate it between R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris
however you think is -- is fair.
But the rest of the story is not just listening to
what you heard in this courtroom.  It's also thinking about
what you didn't hear.  They're saying, well, you took this
stuff out of context.  What we showed you was memoranda
written by very senior executives in these tobacco
corporations.  They weren't -- you saw -- the last thing you
saw yesterday was the video, Death In The West, and you saw
the -- the senior executives from the Philip Morris
Corporation sitting there saying that they didn't think that
cigarettes were hazardous and they didn't think that
cigarettes were addictive, and that was in the late 1970s.
They knew better than that.  They were at fault.  And so
it's not like we have showed you a document written by a
junior research scientist who is ten levels down.  These are
some of the most senior people in these companies and they
created the tobacco information society, go out and
publicize all this stuff to try to create doubt so that
people like Mr. Giddens would have a hard time quitting.
So at the end of the day, we think you should put
no more than 30 percent -- I happen to think it should be
less, but it's your decision.  So let's say -- and then you
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1183 figure out the rest.
Now, damages.  What damages do you find, if any,
with respect to the following elements?  Number 7 is the
estate's loss of earnings, medical expenses, and funeral
expenses as a result of Roger Giddens' illness and death.
There is a composite exhibit that we put together.  It's
Exhibit 3009, and if you add up all of his medical bills and
funeral expenses that we could prove -- it's been a long
time, couldn't get all the records and we have the burden of
proof it's more likely than not what they were.  You'll find
that that adds up to about $20,000, the bottom line.
Glenda Giddens, loss of support and services
including interest on any amount awarded for such loss from
the date of injury to the date of death.  Well, there was
testimony that Roger Giddens, who was her husband, gave her
$150 a week from 1985 until the time he finally had a
stroke.  Do the math, $150 a week times 50 weeks a year,
$7,500, times ten years.  His life expectancy was 20 years,
but you know, he may have died short of that and he may have
stopped working, but I think the evidence is sufficiently
clear that I think it's more likely than not he would have
continued to pay her $75,000 over the rest of her life.
And then we get to what I think is the hardest
part of this, which is that what's the value of a man's life
to Glenda Giddens?  What's the value of that?  There's a
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1184 movie from Clint Eastwood called Unforgiven where he said,
"Kill a man, take away all he's ever been, all he ever will
be."  What's the value of a husband's life to his wife?
People have all kinds of circumstances.  I'm not going to
stand here and tell you that I can put a number on that.
Different communities and different parts of Florida will
say in the context of the Engle litigation different things.
You know, the value of a life, the value of the harms and
losses caused to Glenda Giddens from the death of her
husband is something you have to decide and I can't -- I'm
not going to even suggest to you what the number should be.
You should -- I can tell you that there's a lot of things
about the world that don't make any sense.  If a ball player
making $20 million a year got run over by a bus, he could
blackboard $20 million.  Is that fair?  Is that right?  Is
that just?  I don't know.  Maybe it is.  But if a -- if you
as a the conscience of this community put a number here,
whatever that number may be, Mr. Giddens will respect it and
we'll respect it because you've helped the parties to
achieve justice.  And that's all I can ask of you, that's
all my client can ask of you.  The goal is justice.  The law
is a means to an end and the end is justice.
Now questions 5 and 6, please state as to each
defendant whether Roger Giddens, Sr. relied to his detriment
on defendants' agreement to conceal or omit material
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1185 information concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal
cause of his death.
Well that's a two-part mouthful.  But I -- excuse
me, I'm sorry, I -- you know the question, the form you were
sitting there looking at all weekend, it has negligence and
strict liability broken out into two questions.  And so when
the Judge renumbered it, I got thrown off and I apologize
for that.  But so it's now Question 4 and Question 5.  It's
fraudulent concealment and conspiracy to commit fraudulent
concealment, and it's two pieces.  As -- as my younger
brains would say, two sides of that pancake.  There is a --
there is what did they do and what did Roger Giddens do.
The first question you've got to ask yourself is,
did the defendants have an agreement to conceal or omit
material information concerning the health effects or
addictive nature of cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance
a legal cause of his death.
Well, legal cause of his death is covered in
Question 2.  So now Question 2, did the tobacco companies
lie about the dangers of their product?  And they tried to
show you a lot of information out there that was -- the
Surgeon General was saying this and there were warnings on
the cigarettes but Judge Magnuson -- Engle case has decided.
This is what he's going to instruct you.  You may not like
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1186 this instruction, you may totally disagree with it, but it
is the law and you have sworn an oath to follow the law of
this Judge.  What the Judge is going to tell you is that the
Engle defendants concealed or omitted material information
not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was
false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact
concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes, or both.  He's going to instruct you that's what
you have to determine.  Then he's going to instruct you that
the Engle defendants agreed to conceal or omit information
regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their
addictive nature with the intention the smokers in the
public would rely on this information to their detriment.
So, that's the first piece of this mouthful of a
question.  You've got to find they did something bad but how
do you say -- how could Roger Giddens rely on something they
didn't tell him?  There's an old saying, put your money
where your mouth is.  He kept buying their cigarettes and
you heard the testimony of the big tobacco executive, Robert
Heimann, who said it's reasonable for people to rely on our
advertisement, it's reasonable for people to do that.  You
buy Captain Crunch cereal -- my kids buy, I buy Captain
Crunch cereal for them.  They like it because it's Captain
Crunch.  They rely on the advertisement.  When you buy
toothpaste, maybe you like the taste but you rely on the
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1187 advertisement.  When you buy anything, you're relying on the
advertisement and you're relying on the maker of that
product to tell you the truth.  You're relying on the
engineers to take care.
My father was an electrical engineer and the goal
of an engineer is to solve problems and make products safer.
Did the tobacco corporation's engineers try to make
cigarettes safer?  Did the tobacco corporation's engineers,
did they try to get the nicotine out of cigarettes?  What
did they try to do?  They tried to hook people.  So they
weren't trying to make their products safer.  They were
doing just the opposite.  So Roger Giddens, the question is
of reliance, he kept buying the product and that is the best
evidence of what was going on.  If you don't believe the
testimony of his son or the testimony of Sandra King or the
testimony of any of the witnesses, believe Roger Giddens'
own words.  He's dead, but Exhibit 3040, which is in
evidence, this exhibit, this is a -- the document that we
showed to Dr. Cummings and it is a -- it's surveys,
questions to Roger Giddens, sent to Glenda Giddens' house,
Roger's house, and in May of 1995, what's your current
brand?  Marlboro.  He was a Marlboro man.  He got stuff from
Marlboro.  He kept buying their cigarettes.  You saw that
piece of a Marlboro commercial.  You think St. Augustine,
Florida, was under some big magic bubble where cigarette
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1188 advertisements didn't get into it in the '50s and '60s and
'70s?
Sports Illustrated is a magazine that people I
know personally have gotten for 50 years.  You start looking
at the old ones in the '50s and '60s and '70s, full of
cigarette advertisement.  TV ads full of cigarettes.
Football games -- do you disbelieve Roger Giddens, Jr?  Do
you seriously think he was lying to you when he sat down on
the couch and watched football games with his dad in the
'60s?  What did he see?  What did his dad see?  Do you
really think there was no cigarette advertising, no Marlboro
man ads?  I mean, come on.
So I think the answer to 4 and 5, put your money
where your mouth is, conduct proves reliance.  The fact that
he kept buying the product proves it.  If there's any doubt
about that.  There is an FTC report in evidence.  James,
what's the A1 FTC exhibit number?  It's 129.  It's a big,
fat, 500 page document and what that basically says in 1981,
the Federal Trade Commission went out and it was looking at
the effectiveness of cigarette ads and the effectiveness of
the Surgeon General's warnings and it concluded that people,
particularly addicted smokers, at the very end of the
conclusion section -- and I don't have time to show it to
you now, but you can look at the very last part of
Exhibit 129 and see right there that it showed that people
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1189 were not getting the message.  And why were they not getting
the message?  Because remember, Dr. Burns showed you the
wheel, the cycle of addiction and how doubt and controversy
affected that?  Because smokers, some of them, the ones who
get addicted, it affects some of them.  I'm not saying it
affects everyone.  It affects some of their ability to
process information.
So, where are we?  I think the answer to
Question 4, the fraudulent concealment as to R.J. Reynolds
has to be a yes; as to the Philip Morris Corporation, it has
to be a yes.  They were in arms together.  You heard about
the meeting at the Plaza Hotel from Dr. Cummings in 1953,
December, '53.  There's one document that I'd like you to
read.  It's a document called the Forwarding Memorandum,
because -- this was in 1953, the Forwarding Memorandum.  We
showed you parts of it.  It was the -- it's a short document
dated 1953.  What did the tobacco companies do when they
started to find out that their cigarettes were causing lung
cancer?  They hire scientists to help them get the
carcinogens out of cigarette smoke?  Did they hire doctors
to help advise them, what can we do to make our products
less addictive?  No, they hired Hill and Knowlton, public
relations firm.  Go out there and spread a message to the
world that, hey, there's another side to the question.  And
they continued this conduct all the way -- all the way up
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1190 through the time that Roger Giddens died.  They put out
press releases in 1988 saying that cigarettes were not
addictive.  They kept sending as an exhibit, Exhibit 48
which is in evidence, which is a letter to someone from
January 11, 1990, less than five years before Roger Giddens
died, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, it's Exhibit Number 48,
late 1948.  The tobacco industry is also concerned about the
charges being made that smoking is responsible for so many
serious diseases.  Despite all research going on, the simple
and unfortunate fact is that scientists do not know the
cause or causes of the chronic diseases reported to be
associated with smoking.  1990, they're saying this.
I'm not saying that Roger Giddens ever saw that
letter, but that is evidence of fraud.  That's evidence that
the Judge is going to instruct you happened.
So the last question on the verdict form -- or
actually, there's two questions about when -- if you
answered yes to the fraudulent concealment and if you
answered yes to the question about the conspiracy, did it
happen before 1982 and did it happen after 1982, or did it
happen both before or after 1982.  The reason why they ask
you this question, I'm not going to get into.  But I think
the evidence is absolutely clear Mr. Giddens was buying
cigarettes before 1982; he was buying cigarettes after 1982.
He was getting so much cigarettes from Marlboro he got this.
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1191 He was addicted.  He was hooked.  He was buying a product.
He was relying on the ads but he was also relying on the
fact that he was addicted to the product and he kept on
buying and he kept on buying.
So all their defenses, what he knew, what he
should have known, all that, all that goes to, that goes to
questions about conspiracy to commit fraudulent concealment
and fraudulent concealment.  That's the only one where
there's reliance.  That's the only ones that asked you about
what he relied on and what he knew.  The rest of them is was
the cigarette smoking a legal cause of his death and if you
believe Dr. Burns, cigarette smoking killed him.
So now you get to the question of punitive damages
and that's a question where we have the burden of proof by
clear and convincing evidence, which is a higher standard
than a little bit more than none.  I have the privilege and
the honor to go into courtrooms and ask people like you to
consider the story of common senses.  A lot of people say,
geez, shouldn't be, too much lawsuits, shouldn't be suing
lawyers -- lawyers shouldn't be suing companies.  But I'm
proud of what I do and the reason I do it, I spend a lot of
time away from my wife and little kids, is because I think,
in front of a group of people like you is the only place
left in this country where people can be on a level field,
playing field with big corporations who lie to them, big
PLAINTIFF CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1192 corporations who hurt them, big tobacco corporations who
don't tell the truth year after year after year and lie to
Congress about it.
I grew up in Virginia.  I live outside of
Washington, D.C. Washington.  D.C. is a cesspool.  Nothing
gets done there because there's so much lobbying going on.
There's so much stuff going on.  This is the only place a
jury, where a person can be on a level playing field with
the United States government in a criminal case or a civil
case.  In any other -- imagine if this dispute were to
happen in front of President Obama.  Do you think Roger
Giddens would get as much time in front of President Obama
as someone who is going to say yes, we will contribute to
your campaign?  Of course not.
You are the conscience of this community.  You can
listen to both sides of the story.  They don't get any more
time in front of you than I do.  You can be fair.  I think
it's absolutely clear and convincing that the conduct here
is not something that your community wants to condone.  It's
not something you want to say, yeah, it's okay, we'll give
that a pass.
So I leave this in your hands.  I trust people
like you, client trusts you.  He thanks you very much for
your attention and time and patience.  And at this point, I
will just say that I think the just result here is a verdict 1193 for the plaintiff.  The damages are in your hands.  The case
is in your hands.  If I've misspoken, please don't hold it
against my clients.  I just am doing the best I can.  I
thank you very much.



MR. FINCH:  Mr. Walker has a different definition
of brief, perhaps, than I do.  I'll be done -- I'll be done
in five minutes, maybe seven.  I know y'all are tired, want
to get out of here.  I'm kind of tired, too.
He said there wasn't much evidence about Winstons.
There was lots of testimony about cartons of Winstons, that
Roger Giddens smoked cartons of Winstons and saw Winston
ads.
He talked about legal cause and that I didn't ask
Dr. Burns whether something was a legal cause.  I didn't ask
him whether something was a legal cause because he's a
doctor.  The question is for you whether something is a
legal cause.  
And he showed you -- might I have the ELMO, ma'am?
He showed you the document from which you're going
to get which is definition of legal cause.  If it directly,
in natural and continual sequence produces or contributes
substantially to producing such injury or damages so it can
be reasonably said but for such wrongful conduct the injury
or damage would not have occurred.  There can be more than
one legal cause.
PLAINTIFF REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1254 I want to show you a big tobacco document from the
1950s.  With one exception, the individuals who we met with
believe that smoking causes lung cancer if by causation we
mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer
and which involves smoking as an indispensable link.
Clearly, smoking is the indispensable link.
Dr. Burns testified that both the lung cancer and
the stroke caused and contributed to causing Roger Giddens'
death, which is exactly the definition in the Judge's jury
instructions, and in the Engle findings -- and oh, by the
way, those Engle findings don't have any exception for this
kind of stroke or that kind of stroke.  They say -- all this
is about general causation.  It's whether something can
cause something else.  The short answer is the 2004 Surgeon
General's Report says that smoking causes all types of
strokes and it caused Roger Giddens' stroke.
And this is Dr. Burns' final opinions which you
saw yesterday.  The nicotine addiction caused his lung
cancer.  Both his lung cancer and his cerebral hemorrhage
contributed to his death, with lung cancer making a larger
contribution.  It's a medical question.  They didn't put on
any evidence.  They just had lawyers talk to you about what
the evidence showed.
I don't see anywhere on this verdict form a
question what caused Roger Giddens to start smoking.  Don't
PLAINTIFF REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1255 take your eye off the ball.  That's not a question.  The
questions are the questions.  You'll hear the instructions
from the Judge.
The tobacco company lawyers are great lawyers.
They're more eloquent, they're more articulate than me.  The
tobacco companies have been at this for a long time.  They
want to create doubt with you.
Can we have an open debate about smoking?  We're
not saying that Roger Giddens saw this ad in New York Times.
We're saying that they knew that their products kill people
from causing cancer and they were wanting to create doubt.
This is a R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company document.  This is
an internal secret document from the Philip Morris
Corporation which says, for nearly 20 years, this industry
has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three
major fronts, litigation, politics and public opinion.
While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed
over the years helping us to win important battles, it is
only fair to say it is not nor was it intended to be a
vehicle for a victory.  On the contrary, it has always been
a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the
health charge without actually denying it.
And one of the tobacco corporation documents say
doubt is our product.  And why is that?  Because they know
darn well that this is how addicted smokers think.  This is
PLAINTIFF REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1256 how they -- the addiction affects their ability to make
choices.
And we're not saying that Roger Giddens had no
choice.  But he had a messed-up choice by the poisons in the
cigarettes that he was addicted to.  And I will come back to
that in just a moment, but if you have any doubt about
whether or not the tobacco companies' advertising campaigns
were effective, this was a document I was going to read to
you this morning that's a FTC document.  Federal government
was investigating false advertising claims about the
cigarette advertisers.  It's Exhibit Number 129.  Just read
the first couple of pages to tell you what it's about and
just flip through it.  It's a lot of information there, but
the bottom line, 1981, in sum, cigarette advertising does
not disclose material health and safety information.  As a
result, many smokers remain unaware of the very basic fact
that smoking is hazardous to health and many more hold false
beliefs about the existence, probability, and severity of
these dangers.
So John, can I please have Clip Number 9 from
Death In The West?  
Death In The West is an exhibit that's in
evidence.  It's the exhibit that you saw at the end of the
day.  It's the last clip.  Madam court reporter?
(Video displayed, Death In The West, Clip 9)
PLAINTIFF REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1257 MR. FINCH:  That's the darn good advertising.
What do we know about Mr. Giddens' addiction?  He smoked two
packs a day for 30 or 40 years, day in day out, first thing
in the morning.  We know he got lung cancer in 1995.  Vera
Giddens was the person that had to empty the ashtrays and
the one thing she was certain about was he got -- he got
lung cancer and then he kept on smoking.  And it was one
other point of her testimony, I wrote it down because it
was -- it was interesting to me, and it's important.  It
doesn't really -- you know, if you believe this testimony,
absolutely he was so sick, he is just -- he is just addicted
beyond belief, but what she said is that she and her husband
were taking Roger Giddens from the nursing home to dinner at
her house after he had the stroke and she said that Roger --
and this is the last words we ever heard from Roger in the
case -- Roger, the man who's dead, who this case is really
about, this man said to his brother, "Can I have a
cigarette?"  And James Ashley Giddens said back to him, "No,
you've quit."
Does that sound like somebody who's quit to you?
When your client is dying of cancer, when Mr. Giddens is
dying of cancer and they are trying to suggest to you that
he wasn't addicted, take a look at Exhibit 34 one last time.
This is the document they tried to suggest -- they tried to
cast doubt on their own document.  This is a document that
PLAINTIFF REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1258 comes out of Philip Morris' files.  It's not something that
I put together.  It's -- they're saying it's inaccurate,
something you shouldn't believe.  Well, Roger -- they
misspelled Mr. Giddens' name but his birth date's accurate.
The address, it's Glenda's address.  They keep -- they keep
sending him stuff.  It's got the -- it's got the jacket on
it.  He got it himself.  It's got the jacket on it.  And
what's the last thing he says?  What's your current brand?
Marlboro.  He's addicted and in May of 1995, that's three
months after his stroke -- no dispute, three months after
the lung cancer and there's no dispute about that.
I'm sorry I'm worked up about this.  I want you
to -- I want you guys to know that I -- I thank you so much
for listening to me, but I want you to leave with one final
thought.  The lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the entire
matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting
attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case.  We can't
defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was
addicted.  
And I want to leave you with a thought experiment.
I want you to imagine -- we didn't show you the Frank
Statement to suggest that Roger Giddens saw it.  We showed
it to you to show what they were doing.  I want you to
imagine, look at this, every major tobacco company in the
world, Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, the Tobacco Industry
PLAINTIFF REBUTTAL CLOSING ARGUMENT
  1259 Research Committee.  They put this out at the meeting at the
Plaza Hotel.  Imagine if instead of locking arms, arms in
arms and they wanted to create this 50 year controversy of
doubt, what if one of them just said, "Hey, why don't we say
our products can kill you if you smoke them?"  Imagine that.
Thank you very much.  I appreciate your time.  I
appreciate your attention.  My client doesn't want your
sympathy.  He just wants justice.  You are the people in
this community who can talk about this, spend some time
looking at the documents.  Not suggesting you do it this
evening.  Go home, sleep on it, whatever Your Honor requires
you to do.  But I think this is a very important case.  And
I, my client and I thank you for being here and we put our
trust in you.  Thank you very much.
