MS. PARKER:
Ladies and gentlemen, I am going to start by
May it please the Court --
Yes.
-- and Mrs. Gollihue and counsel.
thanking you for your services as jurors and thank you for
all the attention you have paid over the last two weeks now.
We have all noticed you all were diligent in taking notes and
paid attention and we very much appreciate your service.
And
we know that you all will be fair and the issue will be in
your hands soon.
So I want to start, and Mr. Davis will go
after I do.
During his statements to you, Mr. Heimann used the
I want
term "simple truth," and I want to follow up on that. 140
to spend my time with you this afternoon going over what I
think are the simple truths of this case.
Now, you've all heard a lot of evidence and seen a
lot of documents and a lot of different witnesses and things
on the screen.
I've really tried to boil all that down, and
I've tried to boil it down into ten different simple truths,
and that's what I'm going to go over with you.
Here's the first one.
This case is only about one smoker.
This case is only about one
It's only about
person.
Ray Gollihue.
verdict form about anybody else.
decide in this case is about Mr. Gollihue.
You're not going to have a question on the
Everything that you have to
It's about his choices, his life, his smoking.
It's not a crusade, the way it sounded
It's not a chance to vote how you
It's not a cause.
like from Mr. Heimann.
feel about smoking, because our society has already done that
and said smoking is all right.
It's only the issues that you
are going to have in front of you on the verdict form.
You may not agree with smoking, you may wish that
cigarettes would just go away, and that's fine.
that's not what you are going to be asked to decide here.
Let me give you an example of why we are asking you to keep
your focus on Ray Gollihue.
Again,
During Mr. Heimann's closing, he put up some
documents and talked to you very strongly about -- he showed 141 you snippets, snippets of documents about what he called
He put those up.
targeting youth.
Do you remember that?
Now, those documents are going to be in evidence;
and when you go back to actually deliberate, you'll have
those with you.
Those documents that have come into evidence and
Mr. Heimann is talking about here has the snippets from are
Ladies and gentlemen, that's when
dated 1972, 1974, 1984.
Mr. Gollihue was between 30 and 40 years old.
He was not a
Those documents don't have anything to do with him.
youth.
When he was a youth, what was going on in his
In his household, his sister was beat with a belt
household?
Do you remember
when she smoked and disobeyed his father.
His father did not let any of the children
that testimony?
Remember, he said, uncontroverted
in the household smoke.
So from
evidence, he would make them eat the cigarettes.
Mr. Gollihue, the only person you have to decide this case
about, Mr. Gollihue, those documents don't have anything to
do with him.
And in his household, his life, he knew from
when he was growing up that smoking was bad for him.
Here's simple truth No. 2.
Ray Gollihue had BAC.
Now, that's going to be the first question on the verdict
form.
That's the first
question that you will be asked on the verdict form.
If we could pull that up, please.
Now, Mr. Heimann made it sound like it was an
V8 - 142
Every single witness
And
And everybody agreed
Remember the testimony was, there are two
either/or issue, but that's not right.
who testified in this case agreed that BAC is a type of
adenocarcinoma.
main divisions; there's small cell -- everybody says he
didn't have that -- and then there is non-small.
non-small is further divided up, and one type of non-small is
adeno, and everybody agreed to that.
that BAC is a type of -- sub-type of adeno.
doesn't mean that those are different things.
all -- they are sub-types.
a Buick.
car, but you also know it's a Buick.
not a car.
of car.
That doesn't mean it's
It just means that a Buick is a particular type
That's what the situation is here.
Every one of those medical records that describe
the type of cancer he had is consistent with him having a
BAC.
It's kind of like being a car and
Okay?
That
They are
Let me give you that example.
Okay.
So it's a
And the burden of proof here is on the plaintiff,
on Mrs. Gollihue, to prove to you that it was not BAC.
And
you're going to hear with instructions from the judge at the
end of the case that BAC is not caused by smoking.
Now, you all remember Dr. Barsky who came in here
Dr. Barsky has written papers about BAC for over
He's a cancer researcher.
This is what he does
He was writing papers and doing research on
yesterday.
25 years.
for a living. BAC before he ever started being contacted by any tobacco
company, and he explained the four reasons why this was a
BAC.
V8 - 143
The first reason was the location.
I Want to pull
This is the medical record.
And the apex,
up that medical record, please.
It says it was in the left lung apex.
he explained to you, is the periphery.
also know that.
what Dr. Aplin and Dr. Barsky both explained to you about the
bronchoscopy.
Okay.
And here's how we
It's not just this medical record.
It was
Remember there were a lot of questions like why
didn't they take tissue from the lungs?
Why is it that they
did the biopsy from the lymph nodes?
And they all said it's
because they couldn't get the bronchoscope in there because
it was so far out.
That's why they did not take that tissue
sample from the lung.
Remember Dr. Barsky drew that -- drew how the
bronchoscope would have to go in and it would only go so far
out.
outside.
But this location was peripheral, it was on the
That's why they couldn't do the bronchoscope.
He also talked to you about scarring.
There is no
disputes in all of the medical records there was scarring
here in this cancer, called desmoplasia in the medical
records.
That's a medical term.
Third reason was blood clots, something called 144
migratory thrombophlebitis.
to the blood clots, so there is no dispute about that.
Again, Mrs. Gollihue testified
And his fourth reason was his relatively young age
compared to the age when most people who get lung cancer
caused by smoking are diagnosed.
And all of that together, remember Dr. Barsky said,
if one of them is present, that gives you some assurance; if
the second one is present, it gives you more assurance; but
with all four of these factors present at the same time in a
patient, he said it was 30 times more likely that this was a
BAC.
Now, Mr. Heimann talked about Dr. Aplin, and I just
She was one of the treating
She said she did not remember him.
want to remind you all of this:
physicians for Mr. Gollihue.
here.
I don't remember.
it was 17 years ago.
only going by what was in the records.
different than what Dr. Barsky did.
testified based on the records.
But here's what's important
Remember she said
She said she was
Well, that's no
Both of them came and
The fact is that some lung cancers -- some types of
And
lung cancers are caused by smoking, but others are not.
so when you have a smoker who has lung cancer, you have to
find out more.
You can't just say, well, the person smoked
and got lung cancer and that's the end of it.
Some of the reasons that you heard at trial that 145
caused lung cancer -- family history, genetics, workplace
exposure, radon.
smoked and he got lung cancer.
It's not enough for Mrs. Gollihue to say he
The fact is Mr. Gollihue would have gotten lung
cancer even if he had never smoked, and we know that because
of the type of lung cancer that he had.
Now, again, this issue on the verdict form,
Mrs. Gollihue has the burden of proof.
any physical evidence because there is none.
She did not bring you
She did not bring you any evidence from an autopsy
because there was none.
She did not bring you any results of any tests that
were performed on the lung tissue because there were none.
She did not bring you any lung tissue because there
was never any tissue from the lung.
She did not bring you any information from any type
of investigation by any of the doctors as to what caused his
lung cancer because they didn't do that.
Back in 1994 and 1995, when he was being treated,
there was no lawsuit.
criticizing his doctors.
done that.
They weren't asked to do that.
There was no reason -- we are not
There is no reason for them to have
Let me show you, if we will pull up the record from
Remember he went to MD Anderson for a second
What did they say?
They only found in their
MD Anderson.
opinion. 146
All the records from
assessment non-small cell lung cancer.
MD Anderson that you are going to see back in the jury room,
not a one of them mentioned smoking.
And then let's pull up the death certificate that's
in evidence.
This was filled out by Dr. Aplin.
What does it
And here's what's
Non-small cell lung cancer.
say?
important:
Dr. Aplin testified she filled out hundreds and
hundreds of death certificates in her career and she had put
smoking as the cause of death on hundreds and hundreds of
death certificates in her career, but she didn't do it here.
So when you get to that first question on the
Yes.
verdict form that asks you -- if you could pull that first
one back up, please.
Okay.
The verdict form.
When you get to that first question on
the verdict form, was Manuel Ray Gollihue's death caused by a
The answer is no because it was
non-BAC form of lung cancer?
a BAC, and you can stop right there.
If you find that in our
favor, that's the end of it and the directions from the Court
will be you can stop right there.
But you've heard a lot of other argument this
You heard other evidence in the case, so I'm going
morning.
to go on and talk to you about the other simple truths in
this case.
Truth No. 3 is that Mr. Gollihue knew -- personally 147
knew about the health risk of smoking the whole time.
You need to know that about Mr. Gollihue.
You need
to know about that in detail about Mr. Gollihue so you can
make decisions about him and his life and his smoking.
Remember you heard -- you saw the video from -- his
He was his boss there; he
He was on the video and, again, the one
name was Gene Wygal from the FAA.
was a supervisor.
with the white hair and the suit, the navy jacket on.
Mr. Wygal told you all about what a responsible person that
Mr. Gollihue was, about how the buck stopped with him, that
he had responsibility for the lives of thousands of
passengers on the airlines.
That is the true Ray Gollihue.
He took responsibility for that.
But what did you hear about in this case from
Remember Mrs. Gollihue firmly took the
Mrs. Gollihue?
position that Mr. Gollihue did not know that smoking caused
lung cancer until he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994.
That's what she said.
And then she said she found out about
it when she read a "People" magazine article about lawsuits
against tobacco companies.
you've heard, ask yourself, is that the real Ray Gollihue?
Well, given all the evidence
Let me summarize for you what the evidence was
about Ray Gollihue and his awareness of the risk of smoking.
He stole cigarettes from his father.
He knew that he was not
supposed to smoke.
As I mentioned earlier, remember his 148 father told him he was -- they would have to eat cigarettes
His school taught about
and beat the sister with the belt.
the health dangers of smoking every year.
His high school
had rules against smoking.
we put up the yearbook page.
years, track three years.
rules against smoking.
His brother Frank quit smoking in
1964 because he was playing basketball and he had problems
breathing.
He played football all four
His high school coach -- remember
His high school football coach had
In 1964, the Surgeon General report came out and
Mr. Gollihue was in the
That's the
got all that widespread coverage.
Air Force at the time.
newspaper he was getting in the Air Force.
And let's pull this up.
Mr. Gollihue was exposed to these warning labels on
the packages.
And if we could briefly put those up again.
There is absolutely no reason that Mr. Gollihue could not
read and understand those warnings on the cigarette packages.
His father was age 62, and he died of a heart
attack and that was back in 1975.
connection with his father's death, because he saw his father
die from smoking, he quit for a period of time.
It shows his
awareness.
The evidence was that in
In 1979 -- if we could pull this record up.
In
1979, Mr. Gollihue himself went to the doctor and complained
How
about chest pains, and his doctor told him, no smoking.
V8 - 149 much stronger warning can you get when your doctor tells you
to quit smoking?
He caught his son Randy smoking in the 1970s, and
he yelled at Randy about his smoking.
You heard testimony
from his sister Lois Slone.
Mrs. Slone said that in 1980,
1980, he told his sister, quote, I know cigarettes are bad
for me and we ought to stop.
Then you heard testimony from his son Shane that in
the early 1980s, the son Shane had learned about the health
risk of smoking in his own school.
Remember Shane said he
was in the pickup truck sitting between his father and his
mother, and he specifically remembered telling them what he
had learned in school about the health risk of smoking.
Remember all those other friends and family
members -- I went over that list when I asked questions of
All those other people, friends of theirs,
Mrs. Gollihue.
family members that they knew who had health problems and who
had passed away from smoking.
His family testified that they
were familiar with the term cancer sticks and they knew that
from when Mr. Gollihue was alive.
You heard Mr. Wygal say on his videotape that in
the FAA break room, that that's what cigarettes were called.
There was a smoking ban put in place at the FAA, and
Mr. Gollihue himself, as a supervisor, enforced it.
After all of that information, their testimony is
that he did not know about the health risk of smoking until
1994.
V8 - 150
Now, Mr. Heimann put up on the screen during his
closing a report from the FTC from 1981 and he talked a lot
about it.
and he's been using that document to suggest that people
really did not know about the health risk of smoking.
If we could pull that up.
This is the FTC report,
Well, every expert, every witness who came to court
and testified, both his witness Dr. Burns, as well as
Dr. Hoffman, both of them said they did not agree.
what -- here's what their witness Dr. Burns said and, again,
this document is 1981.
Here's
Dr. Burns said, More Americans knew that cigarette
smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name of the
President of the United States.
And in 1981, the exact same year of this report,
remember Dr. Burns said he gave a speech -- I think it was to
the American Lung Association, but I can't remember exactly
-- but he gave a speech, and I asked him about this.
admitted that he said in his speech the same year, 95 percent
of people were thoroughly aware -- that's what he said in the
speech -- 95 percent were thoroughly aware.
He
And what was going on in Mr. Gollihue's life back
in 198 -- well, at the time of this report?
already tried to quit smoking and quit smoking for a period
Mr. Gollihue had 151
He had
of time because his father had died from smoking.
already gone to the doctor with chest pains and his doctor
told him to quit.
Whatever may or may not be in that report, their
witness, Dr. Burns, admitted he had a different view.
does not apply to Mr. Gollihue, because we know what was
going on in Mr. Gollihue's life at that time that he -- he
did have that awareness.
And it
Those are the facts for the real true Ray Gollihue.
Truth No. 4:
That's going to be important because one of the
Mr. Gollihue was able to quit
smoking.
issues you are going to have on the verdict form relates to
the legal cause, the legal cause of Mr. Gollihue's death.
That's actually question 2 and 3; this relates to
Remember, our
questions 2 and 3 on the verdict form.
position is he had a BAC, so you should answer Question 1 in
our favor and just stop right there.
and talking about the other questions.
What did the evidence show?
But I'm going on now
What do you believe
about Ray Gollihue?
Did he have a nicotine addiction that left him no
choice, no matter how hard he tried, but to keep on smoking?
Or did he have the ability to quit, but he just chose to
continue smoking until 1994?
Mr. Heimann made it sound like nobody could quit 152 But
But it is hard.
It is hard for some people.
smoking.
60 million Americans have quit.
Those are the official
government numbers that you have heard about during the
trial.
And this case is not about the general issue about
whether cigarettes can be addictive or whether some people
are addicted, because they are.
Gollihue.
This is only about Ray
Some people try all sorts of different things to
try to quit, and some people are very sincere in their
efforts and they try over and over and are very persistent in
their quit attempts.
Some people just hate smoking and want
to quit, but they just have not been able to.
That's not Ray
Gollihue.
It's one of the instructions that I believe you are
going to get from the Court later this afternoon.
I believe
you are going to have them back with you in the deliberations
room.
does not mean that a particular individual was addicted.
That's your question.
Ray Gollihue.
It says that the fact that cigarettes are addictive
Not about smoking in general, but just
The best evidence that you've heard on these issues
relating to addiction is the fact that he quit.
Mrs. Gollihue testified that he quit.
medical records that he quit.
constrained choice like you heard about at trial.
He didn't have any type of
He was
It's in all of these
V8 - 153
able to quit.
You know, nicotine addiction does not prevent
It does not prevent smokers from
smokers from quitting.
understanding the health risk of smoking.
Both Dr. Cummings
and Dr. Burns, both the plaintiff's witnesses, admitted any
smoker can quit, including heavily addicted smokers.
In fact, do you remember Dr. Cummings had this
If you could, pull that up.
He used to
brochure that I asked him about?
Remember, Dr. Cummings just moved to Charleston.
work in New York; and when he was in New York he had a
hotline for people to call, and he gave this brochure out
that says, "People Can Quit."
He didn't tell people who
called his hotline, oh, forget it.
you're not going to be able to quit.
Don't call me, because
That's not consistent with Dr. Cummings's testimony
You know, if smokers had no choice, if smokers
in this case.
were so heavily addicted that nobody could quit, they just
had to keep on smoking, well, that's not consistent with what
you heard from Dr. Burns who said -- remember he put that
chart up and said during the Great Depression, smoking rates
dropped.
smoking, there would not be that fluctuation.
not be that fluctuation because of the Great Depression.
And you heard from Dr. Burns that people quit
If the smokers were all addicted and had to keep
There would
smoking for a lot of different reasons.
I want to go over 154 some of those with you, what he said.
smokers when the price of cigarettes goes up -- remember he
talked about taxes and the price of cigarettes go up, they
quit?
That's not addiction.
For some
Price.
He talked about workplace restrictions.
Sometimes
when their workplace restrictions are put in place, smokers
quit because it's more inconvenient for them to smoke.
That's not addiction.
Dr. Burns said that for other smokers they quit
That's not
because it's not socially acceptable to smoke.
addiction.
What's important is the smoker has to be motivated
They have to want to quit.
They have to make their mind up.
to quit.
They have to want to
quit for themselves, not somebody else telling them what to
do.
and they have to try and try more than one time, but they
have to be persistent and motivated and, then, just like
Mr. Gollihue, Mr. Gollihue was able to quit.
They have to go do it,
Now, I want to briefly go over a couple of records,
several records, medical records that you are going to see.
They are in evidence that are actually from the FAA, and I
want to make sure you all are aware of those out there.
We
showed them to you during the trial, but the medical records
from the FAA that he filled out himself -- remember,
Mrs. Gollihue said, yes, that's his signature, and it says on
there that he was certifying his answers and that he
understood he had to answer truthfully and completely or his
job depended on it.
Job depended on it.
V8 - 155
What did he say?
Not what other people say, but
what did he say?
What he said in those reports, he smoked
between one-half and one pack per day, and in those records
it said he smoked for -- one of them said 20 years.
period of time -- remember we worked back with the math?
When you work back with the math, he said that he started
smoking in 1969.
You know what, that makes sense because
that's when he came back and got out of the Air Force.
So the point in time -- that's what he said.
He had a
That's what he said about his smoking.
say the exact same thing and they are five years apart.
So
there is some consistency about what he said himself about
his smoking.
And those records
The truth No. 5 is that Mr. Gollihue could have
Now, you heard about his efforts to
I'm going over those because the evidence is
Let's go over what the
Mrs. Gollihue admitted he did not throw out
He did
quit smoking earlier.
try to quit.
they were really only half-hearted.
evidence was.
his cigarettes.
not go to any doctor and ask for help quitting.
She says
that one time he tried the Nicorette gum when he smoked at
the same time, even though it says on the package you
He did not throw out his ashtrays. 156 shouldn't do that.
he said he was not faithful.
faithful using the patch.
He tried the nicotine patch one time, and
Those are her words, he was not
He only tried it about one week.
According to their testimony he only tried to quit
Now, think about that.
smoking about once every four years.
That is half-hearted.
don't you keep trying?
years, and when you are trying you don't even throw away your
cigarettes, you don't throw away your ashtrays, you don't go
to a doctor and ask for help.
If you really, really want to quit,
You don't try just once every four
Remember the testimony of Mr. and Mrs. Gollihue's
daughter Melissa Lott who took the stand?
direct, when she was being asked questions, she said he had
tried to quit 18 times in a three-year period.
remember that?
Remember on
Do you
But on cross-examination, we examined her about her
prior sworn deposition testimony where she had said he only
tried to quit two to three times.
You are going to have to
be the judge of that evidence.
And when he quit in 1994, he
had no withdrawal symptoms of any kind.
testified he could go to work, he performed well at work, she
said he was, quote, extremely happy.
Mrs. Gollihue
We know he was able to quit, and he could have
tried harder to quit sooner.
evidence on that.
There is proof positive
V8 - 157
For those reasons, your answers on the verdict
forms on those questions relating to addiction should be in
favor of Reynolds.
Now, I want to pull up Question 3 on the form,
And it talks about legal
I want to spend a moment talking with you about
That asks, Was the addiction a legal cause of his
Again, you shouldn't even get there because he had
But if you were to get to
which -- there it is, Question 3.
cause there.
that.
death?
BAC and that's the end of that.
those questions, the answer is, in Reynolds's favor, the
answer is no, because addiction was not the legal cause of
his death.
He continued to smoke even though he could have
quit earlier.
whole-hearted effort.
He could have if he had just made a
Simple truth No. 6 is that the plaintiff here,
Mrs. Gollihue, cannot establish this issue of legal cause
which goes throughout a number of questions on the verdict
form that you are going to have.
You heard from Mrs. Gollihue, their daughter
Melissa, their son Shane, and his brother Gary who testified
by deposition, all of them, that Mr. Gollihue did not blame
Remember the evidence
tobacco companies for his lung cancer.
was that when he was diagnosed with lung cancer he was angry
at himself.
He was not planning to
Please don't let
sue anyone.
He didn't blame anybody.
Mr. Gollihue was not a victim. them turn him into a victim in this case to get money
damages.
V8 - 158
Every one of the middle set of questions on the
verdict form asks about this legal cause, and your answer
should be in Reynolds's favor that there was no legal cause
because the plaintiffs are not -- have not proven a link with
any of this they have been talking about and Mr. Gollihue.
Legal cause is more than guesswork.
speculation.
This is not a no-fault case.
Simple truth No. 7:
It's proof, and they do not have that proof.
There was no reliance by
It's more than
Mr. Gollihue on any of this that you've been hearing
Mr. Heimann talk about, these documents, all of that.
Where is the link to Mr. Gollihue?
Why are they doing this?
Well, there is
Why are they putting on
There is no evidence that he ever saw, heard.
Because they are trying to make you
no link.
this evidence?
Why are they doing that?
mad, trying to make you mad -- trying to make you so mad
you'll be mad about Reynolds, you'll be mad about the tobacco
companies and you will forget Mr. Gollihue.
They are trying
to divert your attention from Mr. Gollihue because this case
is about him, and he did not rely on any of this.
He did not
want to sue a tobacco company.
his actions; he didn't blame anybody.
He took responsibility for
Here's what the evidence was.
Mr. Gollihue -- and 159
Mr. Gollihue never saw
He never read the "New York Times."
Mrs. Gollihue admitted all of this.
and he never heard any kind of statement from any tobacco
company.
put up things from the "New York Times."
"Wall Street Journal."
Street Journal."
They put up things from the "Wall
Remember they
He never read the
He never said that a tobacco company did something
He never said
He never said a tobacco company fooled
He never said he had been duped by a tobacco company.
or said something that made him start smoking.
that a tobacco company said or did something that made him
continue smoking.
He never said a tobacco company withheld
information from him.
him.
He never said he'd even heard of the TIRC.
he'd even heard of CTR or the Tobacco Institute.
had any communications with Reynolds; he never had any
communications with Philip Morris or any other tobacco
company.
He never said
He never
And she agreed that Mr. Gollihue was his own
He was not a follower.
He was not
person.
And that's why Mr. Heimann in his closing
a gullible person.
he gave this morning admitted that he has no direct evidence
of any reliance.
He was a leader.
Now, the witnesses that you heard from the
plaintiffs did not tell you the whole story about the
documents that they showed you.
They just showed you little 160
Let me remind you about some of that.
Remember
snippets.
they showed you some documents and then I pulled them up on
cross and they were drafts?
And then I don't know what Mr. Heimann -- he goes
after us, after Mr. Davis and I.
He has some more time to
talk to you. I don't know what he's going to say to you and
I'm not going to have a chance to respond.
But when you hear
him, when he puts up any documents, you ask yourself, wait a
minute, does this have anything to do with Mr. Gollihue?
And here's an example.
There is one document he
keeps talking about, talks about bags of money, remember?
Okay, where did that come from?
It came from the British
American Tobacco Company.
England.
company over in England.
The British merican Tobacco Company is a separate
Mr. Gollihue never went to
Why did he show that to you?
because it talks about bags of money.
Just to rile you up
Then remember he showed you another document during
his case that talked about the evidence of cigarette smoke as
a health hazard was overwhelming, and it did say that.
Now,
on cross I said, okay, well, put up the rest of that; put up
It
the rest of that paragraph.
said evidence of other causes of lung cancer were also out
there and some, like air pollution, were even greater.
And then what did it say?
Remember he showed you a document from Reynolds 161
from 1959 from a scientist named Alan Rodgman that talked
about different carcinogens in smoke?
I had to bring out that same year, the same month, in 1959,
Reader's Digest said the same thing.
(indicating)?
Remember that
Then remember on cross
Ask yourselves why is it they didn't tell you the
They are only pulling out these little snippets
Remember how Mr. Heimann showed you
whole story.
to try to make you mad.
a document that listed the speaking engagements for a lady
who worked for tobacco companies?
cross-examination of Dr. Cummings said, wait a minute, you
described that as being one month's worth of engagements;
it's six years' worth.
Then Mr. Davis on
Let's talk about Dr. Cummings for a moment.
This is what he does.
Dr. Cummings, you heard from his testimony, he goes around
and testifies.
it as a second job.
testified three times just this year.
time according to his testimony.
He goes from place to place.
Remember he described
He's
Well, now the fourth
He goes around and testifies and puts on the slide
show and he tells his story.
They are just pulling out little snippets.
There is another part to it.
And then I want to talk about advertising for a
Advertising cigarettes is legal and during that
moment.
entire period of time that Mr. Gollihue smoked and there was 162
There's
There is no evidence that he started smoking
advertisements on TV that you saw, that was legal.
been no allegation that any of our advertisement was anything
but that.
because of an ad.
his father smoked and his older siblings smoked.
That
advertising did not shield him from this avalanche of
information that he was getting in his own life about the
health risk of smoking.
The evidence is he started smoking because
Now, Mr. Heimann showed you the Frank Statement
Okay, Frank Statement
Remember that?
Can we pull that up.
It was
again this morning.
was published one time.
published one time, January 4th, 1954.
eleven years old then.
ever heard about it.
Mr. Gollihue was
There is no evidence he ever saw it,
And remember the Jim Johnston video?
That's the
video that the people -- the man raised his hand and
testified.
Remember I had to come back and show the rest of
that video where Mr. Johnston explained, you know, it depends
on the definition you use of addiction.
addiction changed by the Surgeon General.
included intoxication and everybody -- Reynolds and the
Surgeon General, everybody agreed smoking does not cause --
it doesn't make you drunk.
It doesn't cause intoxication.
They only showed you a little clip.
rest of that.
The definition of
Prior to 1988 it
They didn't show you the 163
There is zero evidence here that Mr. Gollihue ever
saw or heard any statement by Reynolds or Philip Morris;
there is zero evidence that any statement, any information
put out by Reynolds or Philip Morris had any impact on his
smoking decisions.
Now, Mr. Heimann talked this morning about
circumstantial evidence.
doesn't have any direct evidence.
oh, we have circumstantial evidence.
Remember that?
That's because he
So now he's trying to say,
Remember, even when he was diagnosed with lung
cancer, Mr. Gollihue didn't blame a cigarette company.
didn't talk about suing anybody.
just found this out.
Is
that circumstantial evidence of a man who had been lied to or
duped?
He
He didn't say oh, gosh, I
He took responsibility for his own choices.
I can't believe it.
This is awful.
No.
Simple truth No. 8 is:
The government knows that
All of that that you all have seen
cigarettes are dangerous.
in this case, everything you've heard about death rates and
how many people smoke, all of that, all of these documents,
All of that is
all of that is known by our government.
publicly available information that's on the internet.
heard all of that.
Our government knows all of that.
like Mr. Gollihue knew what was important, which is that
Our government knows
smoking cigarettes have health risks.
all of that, but our society here in the United States has
You
Just decided that adults have the right to make that choice.
like Mr. Gollihue did.
V8 - 164
Just
Which leads us to truth No. 9, which is that
Throughout the whole entire time
cigarettes are legal.
Mr. Gollihue smoked, cigarettes were a legal product.
other than just going out of business, there is nothing that
Reynolds could have done that would have made any difference
to Mr. Gollihue and his smoking.
And
Reynolds and Philip Morris cannot be held liable
here merely for selling cigarettes, because that's legal.
And you heard Reynolds has complied with all of the
federal and state laws, regulations, and rules.
In the United States, we adults have the right to
Drinking alcohol, riding a motorcycle,
make risky decisions.
buying a convertible instead of a big heavy car.
Those are
our rights here in the United States, and they include the
right to choose to smoke.
And then truth No. 10 that you heard from
Dr. Gentry yesterday, Reynolds has worked hard to try to
reduce the health risk of smoking.
If we could pull up this.
Remember all these
We have brought you
We brought you the person who was head
efforts that Reynolds has gone through?
the top scientists.
We've
of -- he's over the person who is head of R and D.
brought you the top man from Reynolds to come here and to 165 look at you and to testify and to tell you what all Reynolds
had done over the years.
And Reynolds always operated its Research and
Development Department under this bedrock premise that
cigarettes cause cancer, so they tried to do everything that
he described in his testimony to try to reduce those harmful
effects.
And Reynolds has done -- besides all that you heard
that Reynolds did from Dr. Gentry, internally, Reynolds and
Philip Morris funded research.
research that was done at FSU, University of Florida,
University of Miami, USF, and remember it was done by
scientists, including seven Nobel Prize winners.
Remember they funded all that
Reynolds worked with the National Cancer Institute
with what's called the NCITWG, National Cancer Institute
Tobacco Working Group, for ten years until the government
stopped that program.
That was an effort, a joint effort
that we cooperated in to try to have a safer cigarette.
And then if we could pull up the product
Dr. Gentry talked to you about the product
stewardship.
stewardship program at Reynolds, how they test the cigarettes
to try everything possible to try to reduce those inherent
health risks of cigarettes.
Dr. Gentry was candid; he was forthright.
He
didn't come in here and tell you everything Reynolds had ever
V8 - 166
Nobody is
No company is perfect.
Dr. Gentry explained to you
done in the history of the company was perfect.
perfect.
the difference between epidemiology and statistics, on the
one hand, versus the classic definition of cause where you
need to know the mechanism.
The Reynolds employees had to
make real decisions in realtime.
They should be judged based
on what they knew back then, not based on what we know today
looking back.
I want to stop for a moment and talk to you about
Well, first of all, those findings do
Otherwise, I
these findings that Mr. Heimann talked to you about.
Remember those are the findings that were made by another
jury some years ago.
not answer the question on your verdict form.
mean, why would you be here?
those questions on the verdict form.
to hear about Mr. Gollihue's cancer, to hear about
Mr. Gollihue's life.
liability here.
Those findings do not establish
You are the only jury
You are the only jury to answer
In fact, they don't even apply at all unless they
first prove to you the legal requirements to even use them.
They have to prove to you that his cancer was not
They have to prove to you that Mr. Gollihue was
BAC.
addicted; and they have to prove to you also that even if he
was addicted, that was the legal cause of his cancer.
So you
don't even get to the findings unless you make those 167
determinations.
when you get to the verdict form.
As I've said, you should stop right there
I've gone over with you what are the ten simple
truths about the evidence in this case.
a few minutes now and go over with you the law and the
verdict form and how those simple truths apply.
I just want to spend
At the end of the case, after you go back and
review all the evidence, you review those simple truths, your
verdict should be in favor of Reynolds and Philip Morris.
A couple of things for you to look out for on the
First of all, is
The plaintiff has the burden of proof
instructions that you get from the Court:
the burden of proof.
on all those substantive issues we have just been talking
about.
They have the burden of proof.
And then you're also going to be instructed that
you should not reach your verdict based on sympathy or
prejudice; prejudice against a party, sympathy for a party.
You are going to hear about that from Judge Dalton.
I'm going to go back and talk to you a little bit
more about this issue of legal cause.
just plain old cause like we use, you know, as laymen.
cause has a specific definition that you are going to hear
about from Judge Dalton.
Legal cause is not
Legal
Mrs. Gollihue is going to have to prove that he
would not have developed his illness but for the different 168
allegations that they make that are on your verdict form, and
she is just not going to be able to do that because the
general attacks against smoking and against tobacco companies
are not enough.
Now, that gets us to another question on the
verdict form as you go down further about comparative fault.
Again, we don't want you to even get there.
should be no to begin with, so you are not even dealing with
this; but as part of my job, I have to go over that with you
as well.
Your answer
By all accounts, Mr. Gollihue grew up from humble
beginnings to become very successful at FAA as a supervisor,
responsible position.
When he retired, he went to work in
law enforcement.
Again, you heard the video deposition of
Mr. Wygal, and you heard what his brother Gary said.
His
brother Gary testified that he's the kind of person who,
whenever he set his mind to it, quote, it got done.
We have already gone over all this evidence to show
that when he smoked, when Mr. Gollihue smoked, he did it with
his eyes wide open about the health risk of smoking.
made these decisions whether he smoked?
Where he smoked?
stop?
Mr. Gollihue is the one who made every one of those decisions
for himself.
Who
When he smoked?
Whether to try to
He was entitled to do that.
How much he smoked?
When to try to stop?
What brand to smoke? 169 The bottom line is no one forced him to smoke.
He
Remember, even after he quit,
didn't hate tobacco companies.
even after he quit, he kept -- he and Mrs. Gollihue kept
ashtrays out at their house for other people to use, for
other people who smoked.
Then his son Shane, who is also
seeking money in this lawsuit, he continued smoking even
after his father died.
after Mr. Gollihue quit.
And Mrs. Gollihue kept smoking even
Mr. Gollihue understood he made the choice to smoke
and he decided to smoke despite knowing about these health
risks.
Every time he smoked, there was a warning on the
package; he made that choice.
When he began smoking again
after he had quit in 1975, and he quit that time when his
father had the heart attack and died -- when he started
smoking again after that, he made that choice.
When he decided to disregard his doctor's warning
that we showed you on the screen, when he decided to
disregard his doctor's warning to quit, that was his choice.
When his son Shane sat in that pickup truck and all
those other times and said, here's what I learned in school
and you ought to quit smoking and he disregarded that, that
was his choice.
Mr. Gollihue took that responsibility, did not
blame anyone.
V8 - 170 Ladies and gentlemen, Reynolds has zero fault in
this case for all those decisions and choices that
Mr. Gollihue made.
Who made those choices for him?
He did.
We are not blaming him.
We are not criticizing him.
He had
the right to smoke.
But that doesn't mean that Mrs. Gollihue
can come to court and get money damages from Reynolds because
of the choices that Mr. Gollihue made in his life.
Whether you agree with his choices is not an issue
for you to decide.
You may have decided differently.
may not like smoking, you may not want to smoke; but
Mr. Gollihue made that decision for himself in his own life.
And we shouldn't second-guess his decisions that he took
responsibility for.
You
Now, that brings me on down the verdict form to the
next question which I have to talk to you about, which is the
amount of damages.
Now, you heard what Mr. Heimann said.
Any damages
that you award go to Mrs. Gollihue and to Shane, Shane
Gollihue, their son.
There's no claim here for medical expenses; there's
no claim here for funeral expense; there's no claim here for
lost wages.
loss of companionship.
The claim is for their pain and suffering and
Ladies and gentlemen, this is just not a case where
We think you should stop and you
damages should be awarded.
V8 - 171
shouldn't even get to that point; but if somehow you do, the
amount of damages in this case should be zero because
Mr. Gollihue would not -- did not want this lawsuit, never
indicated that he wanted a lawsuit.
He did not blame us.
He made all those choices about his
took responsibility.
smoking.
He
He was a successful man; he was intelligent.
There's no reason to believe at all -- there is no reason to
believe that he did not understand all those warnings that
came to him from all those different sources over all those
periods of time.
The answer on punitive damages
I need to talk to you also about punitive damages,
Mr. Heimann
which is another question on the verdict form.
talked to you about it.
should be no.
It was not reprehensible conduct that should
be punished for Reynolds to do all the research they did to
identify the constituents of cigarette smoke, to go in and
all that research that they did to try to eliminate that part
of the smoke -- and remember the chart that Dr. Gentry showed
with you a 48 percent reduction.
With
That's
this reduction in tar and nicotine over the years?
Remember
not reprehensible conduct that should be punished.
all the work that Dr. Gentry described that they did to lower
these tar and nicotine levels?
That should not be punished.
Do we have that one?
They followed the suggestions from the public 172 That should not be punished.
health community regarding what to do to reduce the risk of
cigarettes.
They did research
that was cited in the Surgeon General's report and they
published -- remember this book (indicating), that should not
be punished.
Institute.
a billion dollars to develop that new cigarette called
Premier that heats instead of burns tobacco.
be punished.
They cooperated with the National Cancer
That should not be punished.
They invested over
That should not
Ladies and gentlemen, you are going to hear
It's not the same burden that you have in the rest
Instead, it's a high burden, something called
instructions from the Court that punitive damages have a high
burden.
of the case.
clear and convincing evidence.
evidence, and the evidence in this case just does not support
a finding of punitive damages.
Clear and convincing
You need to remember when you are evaluating
Reynolds, do so based on what they knew back at that time.
BACs are
So you should answer Question 1 on
So in summary, Mr. Gollihue had a BAC.
not caused by smoking.
the verdict form no.
Mr. Gollihue was aware from all those different
sources in his life that smoking was bad for him, but he
chose to smoke despite knowing about the risk.
not keep him from quitting.
He quit successfully, and he
Addiction did
V8 - 173
could have quit at any time before then.
responsible for those decisions about smoking that
Mr. Gollihue made for himself.
Reynolds is not
And under all those circumstances, under all those
facts, you are going to have to decide whether Mrs. Gollihue
and their son Shane Gollihue deserve money damages.
We say
they don't, and we hope you will, too, when you review the
evidence.
You know, some of you may not like some of the
snippets that the plaintiff pulled out and put on the screen.
You may think, well, you know, Reynolds should have acted
sooner.
But you're not being asked to decide that in this
case.
is whether the conduct of Reynolds was a legal cause of
Mr. Gollihue's death, and the plaintiff just has not put on
the facts to meet their burden of proof on that.
What you are going to be asked to decide in this case
I would like to respectfully submit to you that in
this case, it would be wrong to award money damages where the
smoker had BAC that is not caused by smoking where he knew
the health risk.
showed that technical volume up on his deposition.
the boss at FAA.
said, oh, that's something he kept up with.
was independent, and he was well read.
to believe that he did not know about the health risk of
He was
He showed you the technical book, and he
There was no reason
He was smart.
Remember, Mr. Wygal said he
He was smart, he smoking.
V8 - 174
He never blamed Reynolds.
He never blamed any tobacco company.
He never blamed Philip
So, please,
Morris.
when you go back and you are all going to work together as a
group, but you also have your own individual convictions, and
I would like to respectfully ask that you not just give in
and award money here.
This is a case that does not deserve
money damages.
This is a case where the smoker did not have
lung cancer caused by smoking, and he knew the risk.
Now, I want to leave you with one final thought
before I turn the time over to Mr. Davis.
If Mrs. Gollihue can get money damages here, then
anybody whose used a risky product and took those risks
could.
If you drink alcohol, ride motorcycles --
Your Honor, I object.
It's improper.
MR. HEIMANN:
THE COURT:
MS. PARKER:
Sustained.
What the plaintiffs have done here is
to go through some old documents, ancient documents, pulled
out little snippets to show you to try to rile you up about
what's in there.
As you hear whatever it is Mr. Heimann says when he
finishes, when he has his time that we can't respond to, ask
yourself, does that have anything to do with Mr. Gollihue?
Did that affect his life in any way?
What did the rest of
that document say? 175
Based on all of the facts of his life, the right,
fair, and just verdict here is in favor of Reynolds and
Philip Morris, based on everything that we know about the
real Ray Gollihue.
Thank you so much for your attention and for
listening to me talk with you this afternoon.
cases like this, I always, always feel like this.
could have a conversation.
down and talk and you could tell me if you had any questions
and I can answer your questions, but we can't do that.
It's
just me giving you my summary.
You know, I wish we could sit
When I try
I wish we
So I hope that I have answered any questions you
might have.
I hope that I've summarized the evidence for you
in a way that would be helpful for you when you go back into
the jury room.
When you hear whatever Mr. Heimann says when he
finishes, just ask yourself, what would Reynolds say?
What
would Reynolds say in response to that, because I won't have
a chance to tell you that directly.
Thank you again very much.
Your Honor, that concludes my closing argument.


MR. DAVIS:
I guess you figured out by now from watching
Sure.
Good afternoon everybody.
Mr. Heimann, Miss Parker, and me how I feel up here, but
these are pretty special times for us who have the privilege
to try the cases because we don't get a lot of opportunity to
talk to you in the course of a trial.
We have a little bit at the first, and then we have
It's a great
to ask questions, and that's the way it should be, but we
don't have a chance to just stand up and talk.
relief, actually, to be able to stand up and address you
directly, look you in the eye without sneaking to see how you
are reacting to things, but just to sit and talk with you.
I
think about it, and it may be similar to the relief you feel
when you get to go back to the jury room and actually start
discussing and engaging all this evidence that you've heard.
So it's a pleasure to be here, and thank you for
All the lawyers say that, but we mean it,
your service.
because we do know how disruptive and difficult it is to come
here for almost two weeks and sit and concentrate and listen,
and we appreciate it.
It's important to all our clients and
to the system, and it means a lot to the way we go about
resolving disputes.
So thank you very much for your service.
I'm sort of the last one here, and I won't take as
long as Miss Parker did, and she covered very important 177 issues that apply not only to her client, R.J. Reynolds, but
also to mine, Philip Morris, and I agree with everything she
said.
Everything she said.
She talked about some topics that I'll talk about.
So thank
She talked about it many ways better than I could.
you for that, and it will shorten my time.
I do want to start with one other point, though,
It's an additional reason beyond all that
and it's a reason that applies only to my client Philip
Morris.
Miss Parker so capably presented to you as to why my client,
Philip Morris, should not be held liable in this case.
I had about five minutes to talk to you folks on
opening statement, and what I tried to do was say, can we
agree on two questions that would be fair to ask in the case.
The first is, what is the basis upon which Miss Gollihue is
seeking money damages from my client Philip Morris.
part of that, what is the evidence about Mr. Gollihue's
actually smoking Marlboro cigarettes, because Marlboro is the
only brand -- among all the brands that he smoked, Marlboro
is the only brand that was made by Philip Morris.
As a
I asked you to -- I hoped we could agree in the
context of this trial those would at least be fair questions.
Well, the answer, now that we have had the
evidence, as to what is the evidence about Mr. Gollihue's
smoking Marlboro, I suggest to you, is not much.
There is simply no clear evidence in the record of
V8 - 178
when Mr. Gollihue smoked Marlboro.
evidence.
and there is no evidence whatsoever of any role that his
smoking of Marlboro played in his lung cancer and death.
No clear evidence of how much he smoked Marlboro,
I mean clear, specific
Now, Judge Dalton will instruct you that the
Not guesses.
Evidence.
Not maybe that.
plaintiff has the burden of proof in the case.
proof.
Not hunches.
this.
evidence that comes from the witness stand and documents and
the exhibits that have been admitted and then the other
instructions that you will get.
Not words of lawyers, but the
Burden of
Not maybe
Now, we heard seven witnesses during this trial who
had personal relationships with Mr. Gollihue at various times
in his life.
We heard from Ray Gollihue, Jr., his oldest
son; Melissa Lott, his daughter; Lois Slone, his sister;
Shane Gollihue, his son; Eugene Wygal, his supervisor, the
one we saw in the video from the FAA center; Kenneth Gholson,
we heard his testimony by deposition.
friend, and Miss Gollihue.
He was his life-long
Now, these were the people that knew him best, and
Five of those
they came in, one way or another, to testify.
folks, five of them:
Gollihue; Gene Wygal; and Kent Gholson either had no
knowledge of Mr. Gollihue's brands or they specifically
Ray Gollihue, Jr.; Lois Slone; Shane remember him smoking brands other than Marlboro.
Now, just stop for a moment and think about that.
His oldest son, Ray, Jr., who went to all those
V8 - 179
His sister Lois, they grew up together, just a
She moved to Florida,
Fourth of July weekends, did not testify that he smoked
Marlboro.
year apart, kept in touch, visits.
went down to see him when he was in Fort Lauderdale, did not
testify that he smoked Marlboro.
His son Shane did not
testify that he smoked Marlboro.
His long-time supervisor,
Gene Wygal, you could tell how closely they worked together
in that FAA center, guiding those airplanes around.
testified that he smoked Marlboro.
buddy, Kenneth Gholson, did not testify that he smoked
Marlboro, and these are people -- if you put them together,
these are people who knew Ray in all aspects of his life.
Home, work, family, and recreation.
He never
His long-time friend, his
There is no evidence from them whatsoever that he
None.
Now, there are only
ever had a Marlboro in his mouth.
two witnesses -- Virginia Gollihue, Miss Gollihue, and
Melissa Lott -- who testified he even smoked a single
Marlboro cigarette.
Now, Miss Lott, Melissa Lott, was born in 1967, and she told
us three things.
First, when she was little, when she was a
young child, Marlboro was one of the brands she remembers her
dad smoking.
But she couldn't tell us with any specificity
So what did they tell us?
All right. 180
And
when he smoked Marlboro.
she couldn't tell us how much he was smoking Marlboro among
the other brands that he was smoking at the same time.
How much he smoked Marlboro.
The third thing she told us -- and I do think this
is significant -- is she said her dad preferred unfiltered
cigarettes, and there is no dispute, no debate that Marlboros
always had a filter.
So, in other words, from Miss Lott, no
specific evidence.
Now, what about Miss Gollihue in her testimony?
She testified that her husband smoked Marlboro cigarettes.
She told us a lot about that one time that she remembers.
She thinks it was 1973, 1974 when she went to the store, she
was supposed to get Marlboro, she same home, looked, weren't
Went back to the
in there.
store and came back, and lo and behold they were there.
She
remembers that.
My goodness, they are not there.
That was it on direct examination.
Then on cross, I tried to get down to the
specifics, and I asked her questions, saying, just let's get
down to the specifics of what you really know about him
And what she said was that her
smoking by client's product.
husband smoked Marlboro cigarettes for a total of somewhere
between 6 months and 12 months, for sometime between the time
she met him in 1972 and 1980.
She doesn't know anything about Marlboro in the
And, of course, she doesn't
Eighties, Nineties, nothing. 181 know anything about whatever he was smoking before 1972, as
So that's it.
she told us, because that's when she met him.
Six months to a year, sometime between '72 and '80.
But she
also told us that during that time he was smoking other
brands.
smoking how many cigarettes were Marlboro as opposed to those
other brands.
There is no evidence in the case that Marlboro
was ever his primary brand.
The evidence seems to be that he
would just borrow them or bum them.
She couldn't tell us among the other brands he was
Remember that she acknowledged that Marlboro are
They aren't discounted, and yet
premium cigarettes.
Mr. Gollihue was a frugal guy and he would go to Georgia.
She told us sometimes he would drive all the way to Georgia
to buy cigarettes or go to the Seminole store to get
cigarettes at a discount.
So the most plaintiff can prove about Marlboros is
that Mr. Gollihue smoked and unspecified number of Marlboros
between 6 and 12 months over that 8-year period.
That's it.
That's it.
But one thing we know for sure is that every pack
of Marlboros he had in his hand, however many that was, had
one of those warnings on them because those warnings went on
in 1966.
So whatever it was, however little it was in that
6- to 12-month period, it's probably the same period, if you
look at Melissa Lott's age, that she remembers her dad
V8 - 182
smoking Marlboros and that would be the Seventies.
born in '67.
She was
Every pack he had in his hand had a warning.
Now, what about the connection between smoking
Marlboro and his lung cancer and death.
Can you say that but
for smoking Marlboro he would not have gotten lung cancer and
would not have died?
But for the Marlboro?
Well, they had some doctors here that could have
helped us with that.
treated Mr. Gollihue.
connection between his smoking Marlboros and his death.
They had Dr. Aplin, the oncologist who
No testimony at all about any medical
They had Dr. Burns, a pulmonologist, testifies all
over the country in these kind of cases.
this case about any connection between Marlboro and his
death.
No testimony in
They brought Dr. Cummings.
Now, Dr. Cummings is
As a
He's a public health official.
He said that before a person reaches ten
not a medical doctor.
public health official he told us something that's very
important.
pack-years, their risk of getting lung cancer is
indistinguishable from a nonsmoker.
a day for a year is a pack-year.
years, pack a day, that's ten pack-years.
He explained that.
Ten
Indistinguishable.
Pack
Dr. Cummings, their witness, tells us that you have
to get to that threshold before your risk of contracting lung
cancer from smoking is distinguishable from a nonsmoker. 183
Well, if you look at the Marlboro history, they
Not even one pack-year.
can't even prove one pack-year.
Now, other than his history with Marlboro, is there
anything else that Philip Morris did or didn't do or said or
didn't say that had any impact on Mr. Gollihue?
Well, let's
talk about reliance.
You will hear the judge instruct you about reliance
The judge will instruct about did
in the sense of the conspiracy claim and in the fraudulent
concealment claim.
Mr. Gollihue rely on something Philip Morris did or said or
didn't do or didn't say about the health risks of smoking
that had it not happened, he wouldn't have gotten lung cancer
and his death.
That's the but-for standard.
Well, there was a question that was asked by
He asked during his
Mr. Heimann.
presentation, he said, would you expect someone to testify he
heard something or saw something?
It is fair question.
Yeah, I would.
You know, I'm not saying that he has to come in
No.
I'm not saying that.
I'm not saying he has to come in and
with evidence of some specific thing that he heard or said --
or the tobacco said or did.
That's not
common sense.
remember a specific article from 1963 or something specific
from 1974; but what I expect is there to be some evidence in
the case that if there was any connection between all of this
stuff that we have seen and Mr. Gollihue, that we would hear 184
something about it.
Would I have expected that maybe he and Kenneth
Gholson would have talked about -- there would have been
something about him growing up, saying, Hey, Kenneth, I just
saw the Surgeon General's report.
Looks like smoking is bad
for you.
Unless I heard something from the tobacco company,
then it's not.
Or when Shane talked to him about the risk of
smoking, instead of fluffing it off or whatever the son said
he did, that there would be something like, you know, I can't
remember what it was, but tobacco companies said this wasn't
going to hurt me.
I would expect evidence.
And you know why?
Because this is a court.
that's what this is about.
coming in and saying it's circumstantial evidence.
It's not just about, you know,
They have the burden of proof, and
Sure, circumstantial evidence can be really good
evidence, but it has to be from something.
MR. HEIMANN:
Your Honor, I object.
This is
I think you understand what I mean.
You're a little late, but, yes, I
improper argument.
THE COURT:
sustain your objection with respect to the previous comment.
MR. DAVIS:
All right.
Now, you heard no
evidence -- no evidence that Mr. Gollihue ever heard or read
anything that Philip Morris ever said.
MR. HEIMANN:
That's the same basis for that 185 objection.
THE COURT:
MR. DAVIS:
Overruled.
Much less relied on it.
Much less
I would further submit, as Miss Parker said, that
relied on.
he didn't rely on anything Philip Morris did not say about
the health risk of smoking.
He was aware from an early age -- there is no
question that he was aware from an early age, from the
evidence, about the health risk of smoking, from the school
and all of the stuff that she explained.
Now, what I did hear say, again, in Mr. Heimann's
opening, or presentation -- I think I got it right -- we
don't deny that Mr. Gollihue heard the health risk from the
public health authorities.
We don't deny that he heard it.
I think -- well, that's not evidence, because the evidence in
the case -- and it's undisputed in the record of this case --
is that Miss Gollihue has taken the position and swore to you
under oath that he didn't know anything about whether smoking
could be bad for him until 1994.
She testified to that.
So I'm hearing the statement that we don't deny
that he heard, and I don't know what to do with it in
argument.
did he hear and when did he hear it?
case is that Miss Gollihue was not accurate in her testimony,
her consistent sworn testimony that Mr. Gollihue did not see
I mean, it makes we want to go back and say, what
If the premise of the
V8 - 186
Did he hear about the
Well, what did he hear and when
or hear or know anything about the health risk of smoking
until 1994, if that's inaccurate and that's the basis of
their case, I honestly don't know what to do with it.
I
almost want to start over.
did he hear it and let's go back.
Surgeon General's warning?
Is that what they admit that he
heard now?
Does that mean that we should go back and figure
out if there is a witness that he discussed that with to see
if there is any connection between all of this stuff they say
the tobacco companies did and to present it to you.
And this
How can you build
man, Mr. Gollihue, were there discussions?
a case on the premise that you have to reject the testimony
of the plaintiff?
We have talked about legal cause.
You know,
We were talking about
We ask so much of you folks.
Miss Parker did a great job of that.
it.
judges of the facts, and we ask you to come in and listen to
all the facts and assimilate it and put it altogether and
say, on top of all that, you have to listen to lawyer legal
language and apply it.
We really do.
You are
But I do want to spend -- I do want to focus on two
words that you will see over and over and over again in this
legal cause instruction.
important because that's the legal link that's under the law
That's why the lawyers focus
between conduct and liability.
The legal cause instruction is 187 What you will hear is, that among other things, for a
on it.
conduct to be a legal cause in this case, it has to be
reasonable that, but for -- but for that conduct,
Mr. Gollihue would not have gotten lung cancer and died.
for.
But
I just encourage you, as you pour over those
instructions and listen to Judge Dalton, look for -- because
you are going to see it, whether it's in the addiction part
of the verdict form, whether it's in the negligence, product
defect, conspiracy, fraud, anything of it, defect, whatever,
all of those instructions, every time you get to a claim, you
are going to see the same language over and over and over
again that it's not a substantial contribution -- it's not a
substantial contribution to his harm unless you can say, but
for his injury, but for the conduct, he would not have gotten
lung cancer and died.
That's the instruction.
So, you know, you can look over the verdict form
You're not
and you can see the questions that are asked.
going to see questions like, do you approve everything -- are
cigarettes legal.
Do you approve everything that the tobacco
companies did and didn't do over the course of 50 years?
That's not the question in front of
That's not in the form.
you.
The questions that you will see require that you look
at the evidence in the case and connect them to the harm by
that legal cause standard.
You know, there are three things that I took away
V8 - 188
I think the evidence showed that
He
That's the image that seems to emerge
Curious.
He was a life-long learner,
Lots of pokers in the fire.
from the evidence about Mr. Gollihue that I would like to
share with you.
Mr. Gollihue was intelligent, successful, independent.
was a curious man.
from the evidence.
someone described.
in the FAA, goes to the police academy, learns how to farm,
350 goats.
learning about his environment.
an informed person who reached out and kept learning.
Constantly reading, constantly expanding,
He was an informed person,
He's working
Why would we think he would not understand or have
heard anything about how smoking could be bad for him until
1994, which has been the consistent testimony in this case,
until apparently it was different just on the opening and
closing argument.
We know he had the ability to quit.
He's a strong
He had the ability to
I mean, he's an independent man.
He did quit.
guy.
quit.
As Miss Parker told you, he quit four
months before -- the evidence is he quit four months before
his diagnosis, when he was motivated to do so.
I do want to talk with you briefly about punitive
damages and to talk to you about damages in general.
$10 million is a lot of money.
That's a lot of
money.
I suggest to you that that's not an appropriate 189
This is not a millions of dollars case.
amount in this case.
If you look at what's really the evidence here of the
relationships -- and I know you will do that, the real
evidence of the relationships.
Couple of points.
It's okay to ask for money.
If
I suggested something in any of my questions of these
witnesses that I am somehow denigrating the right of
Miss Gollihue or anybody to come into this courtroom and ask
for money, then I have badly misspoken.
We should all be proud of a system where a citizen
can come in and bring a case against two companies like this
and be represented by lawyers and have that claim resolved by
people drawn from different walks of life, like you, in front
of a judge that makes and enforces the rules.
so proud of that.
nothing wrong with that at all.
We should be
There is
I spent my life in it.
I am.
We don't criticize -- if I have said something,
some mention about blaming Ray Gollihue, if I have said
something or if I have asked a question in the course of this
proceeding that led you to believe that I have anything but
respect for Mr. Gollihue and his family, I have misspoken.
Of course he has the right to smoke.
Of course he
Of course she has the right to come
has the right to choose.
in and seek money damages under the rule of law.
But with those freedoms and with those 190 We are just
responsibilities, come responsibilities.
asking -- we are not saying she shouldn't be here.
saying that if you look at the evidence and apply the law as
the Court will instruct you, you will come to a result that
she's not entitled to money damages; but that's very
different, very different than her right to be here.
We are
Punitive damages, I think Miss Parker covered it
Couple of things.
Clear and convincing
beautifully.
evidence, very high standard.
The other thing I don't want
to get lost here is the instruction that you will get that
whether or not Miss Gollihue and Shane are entitled to money
over and above what would fairly compensate them is to be
judged by you based on conduct that was directed to
Mr. Gollihue.
It's not about all of the things that you might
find fault with across the board, you know, filters, low-tar,
which I'm not sure why they are in the case anyway.
didn't like unfiltered cigarettes.
he ever, ever chose a low-tar cigarette for health reasons.
I'm not sure what that's about.
There is no evidence that
He
My point is that whatever the conduct is, whatever
the evidence is that you are considering, if you ever get to
that punitive damage question, and I submit, like
Miss Parker, I want to be clear, I don't think you should.
One, no; two, no; three, no.
Those first three questions:
V8 - 191
You say no to one of those three questions, you can go.
If you do say yes to the punitive damage, if you
get that far, we will come back and have another proceeding,
which you'll see.
But my point is that the evidence that you
apply in making that decision as to whether or not these
folks get money over and above what you've already given
them, because you wouldn't be here if you hadn't already
decided to give them some compensation, is only conduct that
is directed to Mr. Gollihue.
This
is Mr. Gollihue's case.
It's not about the world.
You heard from these witnesses that have testified
enough to know in courtrooms across American we have cases
like this.
MR. HEIMANN:
Your Honor, objection to that.
That's improper.
THE COURT:
MR. DAVIS:
Overruled.
But this is Mr. Gollihue's case.
This
is your case, in about 20 minutes; and the decisions that are
going to be made here have only to do with the people that
are in front of you.
I appreciate so much the opportunity to talk with
I appreciate
I appreciate your attention.
you about this.
your time.
actually get a chance to address you directly.
I wish I had more, but it's a pleasure to
I thank you very much, and I ask that you return a 192
verdict for Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.
Thank you.
