         MR. FOOTE:  Good morning.
         Judge, Mr. McCarter, Mr. Geise, all of us here,
    thank you again for what will turn out to be about
    three weeks of service.  And as I said when we
    started this, we stand up out of respect to you just
    as we do with the Court.
         And shortly, because now you've heard the law,
    what's going to be turned over to you is to decide
    the facts in this case.
         The battle -- the battle against lung cancer
    really occurs on two fronts.  Okay?  You've heard
    how on one front the Surgeon General, Federal Trade Commission, even President Kennedy has tried to do
    things in a global perspective to make the fight
    against lung cancer work.
         It's sort of -- in economics there's a term --
    the term "macroeconomics" and "microeconomics."  And
    they do the macro stuff.  But what's important for
    you today is that you're going to do the
    microeconomics.  You're going to decide for one
    person how the conduct of the Defendants affected
    the Gore family.  And so, today, you are just as
    important as the Surgeon General; you're just as
    important as the FTC; you're just as important as
    President Kennedy when he made -- they all made
    their decisions about what to do.
         Today is about Gloria Gore.
         You will, as the judge said, get a full set of
    the instructions.  And as -- and you should read the
    instructions and treat them as a group, as -- as the
    Court will tell you.
         The -- each of the instructions is important.
    And the first thing you should do when you get back
    to the jury room, hopefully later today, is pick a
    foreman so that someone can run the way that the
    jury operates and how you make your decisions.
         And, basically, you have seven questions to answer, because after you read the instructions,
    you're going to get this verdict form and on it are
    seven questions.  And my job this morning and this
    afternoon is to argue to you how you should answer
    those questions and why.
         The answer to each of the questions should be
    "yes."  Each of the questions that you have a "yes"
    or "no" answer to, the answer to each of the
    questions should be "yes."  And when you get to the
    question about compensation for Mr. Gore, later on
    when I talk to you I'm going to give you a number as
    to what I think is fair.
         Also, you're going to be asked to divide the
    responsibility between Mrs. Gore, Philip Morris, and
    RJR.  And -- and as the Court will tell you, that
    responsibility has to add to 100 percent.
         A lot of the proof in this case has been about
    why we believe that they are at fault and not just
    Mrs. Gore.  But one thing is for sure:  Mr. Gore is
    not at fault.  He's sort of a character -- you're
    going to see nothing in here about Mr. Gore and his
    fault, because it's not part of the case.  What
    relates to Mr. Gore is the compensation for what he
    lost, and only that.
         So I'm going to go through these questions now -- and I'll just rely on the Court to stop me
    or, if one of you needs a break, I'm sure that the
    Court will allow that -- as I go through the
    questions that you're going to be asked to answer
    today and why you should answer "yes" to these
    questions.
         So, Baron, can you put up the first slide.
         First is the burden of proof.  As the Court
    told you -- and there will be one exception to
    this -- and as Mr. McCarter told you at the
    beginning, we have the burden of proof.  And what
    that means is that we have the greater weight of the
    evidence on these questions that you have to decide.
         And there's lots of ways to describe what the
    greater weight of the evidence means.  If you think
    of the scales of justice, when this trial started
    out, the scales of justice were even.
         And our burden is to move the scales of justice
    a little bit in our favor.  That's all it has to be.
    You may think that we moved it a lot.  But if you
    put a quarter or a nickel or a penny on the scales
    of justice and that moves the scales of justice to
    our side -- or a feather -- that means we've met our
    burden of proof in terms of the greater weight of
    the evidence.      So in a -- and there's a lot of basketball on.
    Now, in a basketball game, if you win 98 to 97, you
    still win.  In legal terms, that's the greater
    weight of the evidence.  If you win a football game
    7 to 6, you still win.  That's the legal definition
    of the greater weight of the evidence.  That's our
    burden.  Put a feather on one side, which I think
    we've done way more than that, and we win.
         But I wanted you to understand what those
    scales of justice mean.
         So the first question:  Was Gloria Gore
    addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
         And, again, all these will be on your verdict
    form.
         And if so, was her addiction a legal cause of
    her caro- -- carotid artery stenosis?
         Next slide.
         What's important about the definition of a
    legal cause -- it's all important, but what I want
    to point out to you is three things:  One, it talks
    about a cause.  Now, there is a difference -- it's
    common sense, and you're going to bring your common
    sense to this.  There's a difference between "the"
    cause and "a" cause.  "A" cause, as the judge
    described, means there may be other things that affected it; so it's, was it one of the causes?  Was
    it a cause in terms of your determination?
         As it says, it need not be the only cause.  It
    need only be a cause that con- -- contributes
    substantially.  That's our burden.
         Next slide.
         Contributes substantially.  Did the addiction
    play an important role on this first question?  Was
    it a cause?
         Next slide.
         But for the addiction, would the carotid
    stenosis have occurred?  If she was not addicted to
    nicotine, would she have smoked one and a half to
    two packs of cigarettes per day for 46 years and
    develop this disease?
         Next slide.
         You've heard this from a lot of different
    folks:  Addiction causes continued smoking, causes
    carotid artery dise -- artery disease.  Addiction
    was a cause of the continued smoking.  Continued
    smoking was a cause of the carotid artery stenosis.
         Next slide.
         Surgeon General agrees that cigarettes and
    other forms of tobacco are addicting and that
    nicotine is the drug that causes addiction. I'm going to talk a lot about nicotine because
    I think another thing that I hope happened this
    week -- these last few weeks, for all of you, is
    that you learned something.  Part of being in these
    trials, being in an interesting trial, is that you
    learn something.  Whether we win or lose, I hope
    that you-all learn something about what's going in
    this battle for lung cancer in the United States.
         Next slide.
         Addiction is a -- is defined by the National
    Institute on Drug Abuse -- you heard Dr. Burns talk
    about that.  It's characterized by compulsive
    drug-seeking and use despite harmful consequences.
         Now, Gloria Gore, I'll talk more about her
    later, but there wasn't a bad word said about her.
    She was an intelligent, wonderful person, with one
    problem:  She started smoking too young, and she was
    in the group that, by 25, was addicted, and that's a
    cycle that she could not get out of.  Even though
    there were harmful consequences and she knew that
    there were harmful consequences, the addiction is
    what took over.  And you've heard that from a lot of
    people.
         And the addiction took over to the point where,
    during a hurricane, as you heard one of her daughters, I think, tell you, they went out to get
    cigarettes because she --
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         MR. FOOTE:  -- not smoking.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. McCARTER:  Daughters didn't testify to
    that.
         MR. FOOTE:  You heard the testimony from
    somebody.  I apologize.
         Next slide.
         The evidence of her smoking is related to what
    the medical professionals then get to look at to
    determine whether or not she's addicted.
         So the evidence of her smoking was -- why did
    we put that in?  Because the evidence of her smoking
    is important for a medical opinion about the medical
    diagnosis of addiction.
         So you can see that she smoked for 46 years.
    You -- you see how much she smoked.  She smoked
    everywhere.  She smoked in bed.  You also heard --
    and this is part of the addiction -- that she tried
    to quit in many different ways.  She smoked before
    going to bed.
         She -- no one said she was not addicted.  Never
    heard that during this trial. Next slide.
         This is how much time she spent smoking.
    Again, who does this if they're not addicted?
         This was the damage to her body.
         Next slide.
         You got to hear Dr. Burns, and you got to hear
    his qualifications, and you got to hear that he is
    one of the best in the world on these issues to the
    extent where the Surgeon General, in the macro
    world, needed his assistance to work on the Surgeon
    General's Reports, and asked for his assistance with
    respect to the Surgeon General's Reports.
         And he came here in the micro world to talk to
    you about Gloria Gore.
         Next slide.
         And what did he tell you?  He's a doctor.  And
    he told you that she was powerfully addicted and
    that she tried to quit but nicotine had a hold on
    her.  And that is absolutely what happened to
    Mrs. Gore.
         Next slide.
         He talked about each of the four brands of
    cigarettes that you heard were -- were smoked.  He
    talked about the fact that each of them contributed,
    both the RJR cigarettes and the Philip Morris cigarettes, because this is continuous.  This is a
    continuous event.  Every cigarette that she was
    addicted to, every cigarette that she smoked, was
    part of the chain that led to her sickness and her
    death.
         Next slide.
         Do you see there it says "to a reasonable
    degree of medical certainty"?  That's how doctors
    legally give opinions:
         Do you have an opinion to a reasonable degree
    of medical certainty as to whether Mrs. Gore's
    addiction to nicotine was a substantial contributing
    factor -- and this -- that word comes out of the
    instructions, you'll see -- in the development of
    the carotid stenosis?
         Yes, I do.
         What's the opinion?
         That it was a substantial contributing factor
    to the development of her carotid stenosis.
         That's the guy that the Surgeon General asked
    to help him.
         Next slide.
         Then you heard from Dr. Beckett.  He's here.
    He's part of the Vero community.  He took his time
    to come here and talk to you.  I think he was here for a few hours.  He was a treating physician of
    Gloria Gore.  He actually was the person that can
    talk about this; who saw her, talked to her, touched
    her, had -- had the verbal and nonverbal
    communication with her.
         And what did -- what did Dr. Beckett tell you?
         That she was addicted to nicotine in
    cigarettes.
         And you saw the question -- you know, about, do
    you have an opinion to a reasonable degree of
    medical certainty.  He's sure.  There is no question
    that in Dr. Beckett's mind, the treating physician,
    she was addicted.
         Next slide.
         Again, did she suffer from the cerebrovascular
    disease in 1992?  No question.  Here's -- here's an
    important question.  But for -- but for her
    cigarette smoking, she would not have developed the
    disease in 1992.  He said, I would say that.  But
    for smoking, Mrs. Gore would not have developed the
    disease.
         Next.
         Here's the medical records -- records.  Carotid
    stenosis with plaquing.
         Next slide.      You also heard from Michaela Scott, who did not
    want to come in and testify.
         She was convinced that Mrs. Gore was addicted.
    She was sure that Mrs. Gore was addicted.
         Next slide.
         So what do we have on this first question about
    whether she was addicted to nicotine contained in
    Defendant's cigarettes?  We have three medical
    opinions and no opinion otherwise.
         This is not the greater weight of the evidence.
    This is 100 percent of these people believe, these
    doctors believe and told you that she was addicted
    to nicotine contained in Defendants' cigarettes.
         So I think you noticed that these were the only
    people allowed to actually talk about addiction.
    And why is that?  Because they're M.D.s, they are
    trained to be the people to talk about addiction.
         You might remember that Mr. Gore talked about
    his wife being hooked.  Okay?
         But these were the only people, the only
    people, that you heard talk about addiction and give
    the opinion of addiction.  And that's the only proof
    you have.  So there is absolutely no question, based
    on the evidence you heard, that she was addicted.
         So when you get to Question 1, "Was Gloria Gore addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if
    so, was the addiction a legal cause of her carotid
    artery stenosis," there is no question that your
    answer should be "yes."  And you heard from
    Dr. Beckett that there would not be that -- in her,
    there would not be that carotid artery stenosis
    without -- without all of the exposure that she had
    to cigarettes because of her addiction.
         So that's why the answer to Question No. 1 is
    "yes."
         Now, what does that mean when you answer that
    question "yes"?  That means that now Gloria is part
    of the Engle class.  And the rulings that the judge
    will have in your instructions with respect to the
    Engle plaintiffs apply to her as soon as you answer
    that question "yes."
         I'm not going to go through those rulings right
    now, you just heard from the judge, but basically
    they are determinations of things about addiction,
    they're determinations about things about
    cigarettes, and they're determinations about things
    that the Defendant did which you now must take as
    true once you answer that first question about which
    there is no doubt, yes.
         Second question:  "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each Defendant a legal cause of lung
    cancer in Gloria Gore?"
         Well, first off, remember what the judge said
    about continuous.  She started smoking R.J.R.
    cigarettes and then she switched to Philip Morris
    cigarettes.
         So the damage started, as you heard from the
    witnesses, with R.J.R. and Philip Morris finished
    the job, and that's why they're both responsible for
    her lung cancer.
         One thing that you will not see in the
    instructions is the word "choice," because, as you
    saw from the Surgeon General, the addicted have no
    choice.  That's the idea of a medical addiction.
         So you're not going to hear anything in the
    instructions about choice.
         What was the legal cause?  Her smoking was the
    legal cause of her lung cancer.  There is no
    question she had lung cancer.  I don't think there's
    any question in your mind about where the lung
    cancer started and what the reason for the lung
    cancer was, but let's go through a few things.  This
    is an easy question.
         Next slide.
         You saw in the proof -- I'm now trying to publish this to you -- from the Defendants'
    documents that -- and this is PT 1525.  If I forget
    to identify a particular document to me -- if I
    forget to identify a particular document, let me
    know.
         This is in 1987.  So what is the plan in 1987?
    "Lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, I do
    not concede that even one person dies of a chronic
    disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes.  Sauce
    for the goose is sauce for the gander.  That is all
    I am saying."
         Next slide.
         Dr. Burns:  "There wasn't any question in my
    mind, in reviewing the record, and certainly there
    wasn't any question in the record by the physicians
    that once they had all the information, that this
    was a primary lung cancer."
         All you see in all the records, what you hear
    from all the doctors, is primary lung cancer.  And
    Dr. Burns has seen thousands and thousands of
    patients.
         And, yes, he's paid a lot, because he's the
    best.  You heard about 200 billion dollars spent by
    the Defendants.  Dr. Burns has been paid millions of
    dollars because these people need it.  He's the best.
         No question in Dr. Burns's mind that the
    smoking caused the lung cancer.
         Next slide.
         This is Dr. Michaela Scott.  I want to get back
    to the medical way that a medical opinion is made.
         "And at that time you believed within a
    reasonable degree of medical probability that she
    had carcinoma, left lung, nonsmall cell; is that
    right?  To a reasonable degree of medical certainty?
         "Yes, I thought she had lung cancer with all
    her presentation."
         Next slide.
         Again, the records show lung cancer.
         Next slide.
         More records showing lung cancer.
         Death certificate.  Lung cancer.
         So there's really not, again, much doubt about
    the fact, when you get to the next question.  Or,
    again, it's a cause.
         The question is, "Did it contribute
    substantially to her lung cancer?"  If smoking did
    that, then with the next questions you answer "yes."
         And, again, on those questions, we use the same
    standard, the greater weight of the evidence.  So was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each
    Defendant a legal cause of the lung cancer in Gloria
    Gore?  Yes.
         All right.  Now, I want to turn -- I'm going to
    get back to the questions, but I want to turn the
    talk a little bit to the conduct of the parties.
         Next slide.
         Next slide.
         Conduct of the parties.  As I said, the conduct
    of Mr. Gore is not at issue.
         What was the conduct of Gloria Gore?  Well, she
    was not a liar.  She certainly didn't defraud
    anybody.  She didn't decide to not make safer
    cigarettes.  What did she do?  What was her conduct?
    She smoked.  That was her conduct.
         She started smoking at a young age.  She got
    addicted, as Dr. Burns said, by at least 23, when
    the Defendants call at that age a young, adult
    smoker.  From whatever age, age 25, she got addicted
    to cigarettes in that time period, and she tried to
    quit, but she couldn't.  That's her conduct.  That's
    it.
         She was an addicted person who, in her
    particular situation, she could not get off of this
    drug. Now, let's look at the Defendants' conduct.
         It is hard to believe... you saw the chart from
    R.J.R. that started at Page 9, and you'll have it,
    Page 9 to 25.  It's hard to believe that
    understanding that the replacement smoker, who are
    people between 9 and 25 -- it's hard to believe that
    the replacement smoker who they know they may kill,
    is a target.
         It's really hard to believe that 20 or 25 years
    down the road the person that starts out before
    their brain is even fully formed, the person that
    starts out doing this for glamour or doing it
    because it's cool, the person who starts out with
    the first cigarette not even liking it, but after a
    few more cigarettes and a few more cigarettes, as
    Mr. Teague said, the real satisfaction starts to
    kick in, the real satisfaction being the beginnings
    of addiction to nicotine.  So it's really hard to
    believe that replacement smokers are what they need
    because of greed.
         The money -- where does the money come from?
    Where does the 200 billion dollars come from?  The
    addicted people.  They are paid for their own
    addiction.
         You think the chainsaw was free?  How much was spent in a chainsaw.  Mr. Gore thinks it was free.
         So you start with the replacement smoker.  You
    get the replacement smoker addicted.  You know the
    replacement smoker will probably die prematurely.
    In this case about 23 years prematurely, or -- if
    you look at the life tables for Gloria Gore.
         It's hard to believe that knowing they're going
    to kill people, they still target the replacement
    smoker.  Because if they don't, then they won't have
    any more addicted people and they won't have any
    more cigarettes and they won't sell any more
    cigarettes and they won't have billions of dollars
    to spend on the next generation.  So the next
    generation can become a replacement smoker, an
    addicted smoker, and the cycle continues.  It's
    really, really hard to believe.
         Next slide.
         "Young, adult smokers have been the critical
    factor in the growth and decline of every major
    brand over the last 50 years."
         This was 1984.  1934 to 1984, 50 years, young,
    adult smokers, both the replacement smokers, without
    them using the 200 billion to get those replacement
    smokers, there would not be another generation over
    those 50 years. Next slide.
         "Young, adult smokers are the only source of
    replacement smokers."
         Once you're really an adult, you know, people
    mature at different ages, but some people are mature
    at 18, some people aren't mature until they're 30,
    some people never mature; but use your common sense
    about when people really grow up, and they know that
    25 is a really important age.  Because if you make
    it to 25, you're probably never going to be a
    smoker, and they've lost you.  So they need you
    before you're 25.  If younger adults turn away from
    smoking, the industry must decline.
         Next slide.
         Median age, 16.7 years, as young as 9.  Median
    age.  A 16-year-old who starts smoking does not have
    the advantage of someone who's 26, where it appears,
    by their own study, almost nobody starts smoking.
    And that's why the young, adult smoker is so
    important to their billions of dollars.
         Next slide.
         Here is one of their replacement smokers.  Here
    is one who died early.
         Here is one who, in 1953 or '54 is about when
    this picture was taken.      What were the Defendants doing in 1953 or 1954?
    Well, about this time this beautiful young girl was
    about to have her first cigarette to be cool, to fit
    in.  They were having a meeting in the Plaza in New
    York.  All of them.  And they made an agreement.
         Now, when you make an agreement to do things --
    it can be a contract, it can be lots of different
    things.  When you make an agreement to do bad, which
    is what this agreement was, that's called a
    conspiracy.  A conspiracy to do bad because they
    knew in 1953 that they had a problem.  And they had
    to make a decision:  Do we fix this in a healthy
    way, or do we make an agreement to keep stuff
    secret, keep things secret from the public, to keep
    things secret from the Surgeon General, to keep
    things secret so that we can continue to sell as
    many cigarettes as possible?  Even though we know --
    because of Mr. Teague at that time -- even though we
    know it's going to kill people.
         Next slide.
         I...
         People are crops?  That's how little respect
    for human life these rich --
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.      MR. FOOTE:  That's how little respect for human
    life the people that ran these companies had.
    People are crops.  And we need more crops because we
    need more money.
         Next.
         Kool.  You heard that Kool was one of the
    brands that Gloria smoked.
         High filtration products skew more female, and
    so do high filtration menthol brands.
         She was the perfect target at the perfect age
    for Kool cigarettes because of what they at one time
    said were the health effects of the menthol, which,
    in fact, the menthol just makes it easier for
    someone to become a smoker.
         Growth is from 16- to 25-year-olds.
         At the present rate, a smoker in the 16- to
    25-year-old age group will soon be three times as
    important to Kool as any other prospect.
         It's just undeniable that they knew once you
    get to 25 you're safe.  You're probably safe.  And
    one of the decisions is that is since we know
    they're probably safe, we're going to go ahead and
    we're going to get the 9, 10, 11, 12.  We're going
    to do sampling.  We're going to go out into
    neighborhoods and give free cigarettes.  We're going to make it look cool.  We're going to spend
    200 billion dollars so that the culture is such that
    people don't think -- at certain times; now we do --
    smoking is bad.
         Next slide.
         If you remember, the -- Dr. Proctor was on the
    stand talking about Griffin and Battelle:  What's
    important here is certain unattractive side effects.
    Certain unattractive side effects.  That is what
    lung cancer is to them:  A certain unattractive side
    effect.
         Next slide.
         The cigarette, the modern cigarette, is one of
    the most highly designed, specialized products ever
    created by man.
         And what the modern cigarette does is applies
    the optimum amount of nicotine.  Now, the reason
    that there's an optimum amount of nicotine is
    because nicotine is a poison, and every person has
    their own ability to -- when they become addicted,
    their own usage requirement with respect to
    nicotine.
         And so in order to keep people addicted, it
    can't be too much and it can't be too little.  And
    they spent a lot of time studying exactly what the optimum amount of nicotine was to be.  And as you
    can see there, they can be extracted from the
    tobacco, also can be added to the tobacco.
         But what's important is the pH.  And what's
    important about the pH is, if you take ordinary
    nonflue-cured tobacco, it's very difficult to
    inhale.  Once you get the pH up, not only is it
    easier to inhale because it's more like the pH of
    our lungs, it allows you to inhale it.  But that's
    what frees up the nicotine.
         You heard about freebasing and free nicotine.
    This is what freebasing... and that's what gives you
    the kick in seven or eight seconds.
         Now, the faster you get the kick, the more
    likely you are to either become addicted or stay
    addicted.
         The... you heard Dr. Proctor -- again, someone
    who is, in -- in my view, the best in the world --
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection to counsel's personal
    view.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. FOOTE:  -- in many people's view is the
    best in the world -- he talked about the fact that
    they had a choice.  They had a choice to make a
    different cigarette that was safe or safer.  The problem with that cigarette was the agreement.
    Because they stuck to their conspiratorial
    agreement.  And part of the agreement between these
    companies was you couldn't talk about safety
    because, once you started down that path, a big
    problem would start for all of them because they all
    had to deny, as they did until they were caught --
    they all had to deny that there were safety problems
    or that there was a problem with nicotine.
         So what their conspiracy did was not even allow
    them to make their product safer.
         Again, like the replacement smoker, that's
    unbelievable.  They kept to that conspiracy to the
    point where, when they had safer cigarettes, they
    couldn't call them "safer."  And what they could
    have done -- if they can make an agreement to lie, a
    conspiracy to lie, a conspiracy to hide things, a
    conspiracy to trick the Surgeon General even --
    which we'll talk about in a little bit -- why
    couldn't they make an agreement that they were going
    to do it the right way?  Let's make it a good
    agreement?  Let's make an agreement where we all --
    we control the market?  Let's make an agreement we
    all make a cigarette that's safer?  That's a good
    agreement.  That was a choice they made, to not make that safer cigarette.
         And as a result of that, we have the largest
    epidemic that the U.S. has ever seen.  20 million
    people died prematurely because of the decisions
    that came out of the conspiracy.
         Next slide.
         So what did they conceal?  Well, as we know, it
    started in 1953 and it lasted until 2000.  I think
    you heard the story about somebody actually being
    concerned about these documents and puts them in
    their pants so that they can become public at one
    point.
         And, eventually, they had to admit certain
    things because they were caught.  You heard
    Dr. Proctor talk about the fact that there was this
    deal with the states, and they had to turn all their
    documents over.  So it wasn't until then that they
    started admitting things, the sorts of things that
    you're going to hear they admit today.
         But in any case, during that time when Gloria
    was first their replacement smoker and then their
    confirmed smoker, what did they conceal?
         They concealed false -- the fact that they were
    doing false science.
         Again, America was built on science.  You know, we wouldn't have the lights.  We wouldn't have the
    air conditioning.  We wouldn't have the cars.  We
    are built on good science.  We wouldn't have gone to
    the moon.  We were built on good science.  Good
    science is important.
         Bad science is medieval.  And what -- what they
    did was use bad science to create doubt and
    concealment.  And you heard that from Dr. Proctor.
         They misled the Surgeon General.  They were the
    ones -- when you look at all these documents when
    you have a chance -- they were the ones who knew
    about the fact that the light cigarette, which
    people believe was making them safer -- they were
    the ones that knew it was a lie.
         But they didn't tell anybody that it was a lie
    because they couldn't break the conspiracy.  They
    didn't even tell the Surgeon General.
         And the one mistake the Surgeon General made --
    not on purpose -- was to believe that there might be
    some health effect from the filters, which turned
    out to be totally false, and nobody knew it until
    after Gloria died.  Nobody knew that filters did
    nothing.  And, in fact, in certain cases, they're
    more harmful than a cigarette without filters.
         They knew that they were killing 400,000 Americans a year.  And they -- they had studied
    nicotine like crazy because they know that what they
    were really selling -- you'll see in their
    documents -- they knew they were selling a drug.
    They knew they were selling a drug as -- as
    addictive as cocaine and heroin and that, what their
    product really was, was a nicotine delivery device.
         Why was that important?  Because it was
    addictive.  And that's what created the replacement
    smokers, and that's what created the $200 billion.
    Without the nicotine, there's nothing.
         So they knew for a long, long time, from the
    time Gloria started smoking, that nicotine was a
    problem.  And all the way up to when they stood
    before Congress and raised their right hands, the
    heads of these companies, in '94, and told Congress
    nicotine is not addictive.  They knew they were
    lying.  That was part of the conspiracy.  They had
    to lie.
         The conspiracy wasn't broken until all the
    documents came out.  They had to lie.  They had to
    conceal, because that's what they had agreed to do.
         Next slide.
         So they -- as we've discussed a little bit,
    they manipulate the levels of nicotine so that people keep buying cigarettes.  If it's too low,
    addiction goes away and people won't buy cigarettes.
         They concealed the fact that they knew there
    were cancer-causing agents in every puff of smoke.
         How many puffs did Gloria take?  How many times
    was she exposed to these carcinogens?  They knew
    that filtered cigarettes were no safer than
    nonfiltered; but, again, they didn't tell anybody,
    even the Surgeon General.
         So as there were scares -- think about -- think
    about the way that they kept people -- they kept
    their addicted consistent smokers going.  As there
    were scares, they came up with a response.
         So smoking causes cancer; so we'll add a
    filter.
         Okay.  Now we're safe.
         Well, there's still tar and nicotine; we'll
    have a low-tar, low-nicotine filter.
         Okay.  We're safe.
         This is what Gloria was thinking as she -- as
    she progressed towards the Benson & Hedges
    ultralights.  They still had a light cigarette.
         Okay.  We're safe.  This big company wouldn't
    lie to me; so I'll smoke light cigarettes.  I'm
    going to be safe.  And even I'll smoke ultralights because then I know I will be safe.  Because these
    big companies wouldn't lie to me.  They're big
    American companies.  They're not going to lie to me,
    a devoted customer.
         Next slide.
         So what did they know?  That carcinogens are
    found in practically every class of compounds in
    smoke, and present technology does not permit
    selective filtration of particulate smoke.
         What does that mean?  It means filters meant
    nothing.  And they knew this in 1961.  Filters meant
    nothing.  They were deceiving the whole country.
         Next.
         All right.  One of the jurors asked a question,
    I think, about what --
         Can we go back to the prior slide?  Does that
    show the -- go back to the prior slide.
         I think one of the jurors asked a question
    about the list of carcinogens that they knew about
    and then what they told -- was there ever anything
    told to the Surgeon General.
         Next -- next slide.
         So when they wrote to the Surgeon General after
    they knew about all these carcinogens, they knew all
    the -- the whole list you saw.  They knew they were all carcinogenic.  None of the chemical substances
    listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by
    scientific research to be harmful to the health of
    the smoker in amounts reported in smoke, and it's
    possible to modify the chemical composition of
    cigarette smoke by the use of filters.
         1963, two lies.  Two lies to the Surgeon
    General when they knew that the Surgeon General was
    putting a report out.
         Next slide.
         This is in evidence.  It's not very long.
    We'll play it for you again.
                       (On video.)
                        * * * *
         MALE SPEAKER:  This is CBS News Extra on
    smoking and health.  The findings of the Surgeon
    General's Committee.
         In our studio this afternoon, following the
    Surgeon General's news conference, CBS News
    correspondent Richard C. Hottelet put some questions
    to one of the leading spokesmen of the industry,
    Howard Cullman, president of the Tobacco Merchant's
    Association and a longtime director of the Philip
    Morris Company.
         Mr. Cullman, prominent in the New York theater and civic affairs, is a third-generation member of a
    tobacco family.
         MR. HOTTELET:  Mr. Cullman, the conclusions are
    pretty stark and pretty solid.  They say -- quite
    flatly they express the judgment that cigarette
    smoking contributes substantially to mortality from
    certain specific diseases and to the overall death
    rate.  Then they have the rate of ten times as high
    for smokers in the case of lung cancer and rather
    higher in other cases.
         MR. CULLMAN:  Well, it's awful hard to define
    the word "substantial."  I don't believe that most
    people who smoke get lung cancer.  We are now in an
    era, as you know, of moderation.  We eat more
    carefully.  We have cholesterol habits.  We have
    drinking habits and lighter whiskey.  We have
    smoking habits which, incidentally, are today
    changing the type of cigarettes from regular
    cigarettes to filters.
         Now, I was surprised, at the beginning of the
    conference, when Dr. Terry was supposed to have said
    they had very little evidence, if any, on the
    effect, if any, of filtered cigarettes.  So when we
    have today 60 percent of the business and the filter
    field compared to 3 percent ten years ago, I think we need a little more research.
         I'm convinced that, eventually, they will find
    some element through a filter or through
    leaf-growing or a special type of seed-growing that
    will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking
    for.
         We want to be the detective just as much as the
    Surgeon General as the A.M.A. and we'll cooperate in
    every way.
         MR. HOTTELET:  Well, are you saying, then, sir,
    that there is something toxic about tobacco which
    are removable by filter?
         MR. CULLMAN:  Well, obviously, the filter takes
    out tar and nicotine.  I don't think the industry
    admits there are any bad elements.  If there are bad
    elements, through our laboratories, through the
    Surgeon General, through the A.M.A., through acts of
    God and the like, we hope we may find them.  And if
    they are found, they will be removed.  But at this
    point we do not know.
         MR. HOTTELET:  Does any of the research that
    the tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any
    part of the findings here or the conclusions as a
    whole?
         MR. CULLMAN:  Well, without reading the report, I couldn't answer that to begin with.  I don't think
    the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the
    conclusions.
                   (Video concluded.)
                        * * * *
         MR. FOOTE:  So you can decide what he meant
    when he made those statements to the public.
         Next slide.
         Psychological crutch.  They actually did
    psychological research because, again, they knew the
    importance of nicotine to their business of selling
    a product that was killing people.
         So how do you give people the psychological
    crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking?
         Even if they know it may be harmful to them,
    what do you tell them?
         Well, first they started telling people not --
    no harm.  It doesn't matter what cigarette; this is
    all baloney.  This is caused by radon.  This is
    caused by there's too much sunshine.  This is caused
    by something else going on.  This is caused by
    genetics.
         Then when the health scare comes, they slide a
    little bit more filters, as I said before, filters,
    lights.  So this is how you keep the self-rationale. And you remember the cycle of addiction Dr. Burns
    talked about.  If you're in the cycle of addiction,
    it's very easy to self-rationalize that it's going
    to be okay; especially when a new cigarette comes
    out that's even lighter than the one before.  A new
    cigarette that comes out that's safer than the one
    before so that you don't have to worry about what's
    going to happen to you.
         Next slide.
         So 1969.  When people are in a conspiracy, and
    when people know they are lying, what do they do
    behind the scenes?
         They have what-if meetings.  What if we get
    found out?  What if a whole bunch of people start
    filing tobacco suits because our product is killing
    people?
         And so the top legal firms got together way
    back in '69 for the what-ifs.
         No one knew at that time, even the President of
    the United States, even the Surgeon General, no knew
    what they had in their secret files, but they did.
    So they held what-ifs, they had to have meetings,
    they had to have plans.  And what was going to
    happen if litigation started involving cancer suits.
    Why would they ask that question if they didn't know that cancer was from their product?
         If they really believed cancer was not in their
    product, they wouldn't be concerned about this.  But
    they knew it was.
         And so behind the scenes, secretly, they
    started having meetings and formulating plans about
    what to do about it.  And one of the things to do
    about it was doubt.  And this goes back to
    self-rationale.
         "Doubt is Our Product."  Because doubt for an
    addicted person can overcome a body of fact.  Doubt
    for an addicted person can establish a controversy.
         There was no controversy.  But they knew that
    behind the scenes they had to figure out a way to
    establish a controversy so that they could keep the
    people smoking; they could keep the self-rationale
    going; they could keep the people -- have a reason
    to continue to use their product.
         Next slide.
         So in 1978, same thing.  When you're in a
    conspiracy, and when you know you're lying, when
    you're afraid that someday you're going to get
    caught, what do you do?
         Well, you try, as best you can, to keep these
    things secret. And you don't want any admissions made by
    anybody in your conspiracy, because that would open
    the door to problems that weren't opened until the
    vault of secret documents was opened.
         So no admissions.  You can't say nicotine is
    habituating.  You can't say nicotine is a drug.  You
    can't say that cigarettes caused cancer.
         1978.  They knew all this.
         Why have these meetings?  Because they don't
    want any admission of guilt with regard to the lung
    cancer problem because that might cost them money.
         It might cost them money because it would open
    the door to legal suits in which the industry would
    have no defense.
         So they had to keep it secret as long as they
    could.  And they were successful for 22 more years
    after this little meeting about keeping all these
    things secret.  They were successful for 22 more
    years to avoid the admission that nicotine was
    addictive and cigarettes caused cancer.
         Next slide.
         Again --
         THE COURT:  Hold on.  Is everybody okay over
    there on the jury?  You don't need a break?
         MR. FOOTE:  Time for a break? THE COURT:  You need a break.  All right.
    Let's take about a seven- to ten-minute break.
         Remember, you are not to discuss this case
    among yourselves or with anyone else.  Please leave
    your notepads on your chair.
         (The jury left the courtroom at 12:37 p.m.)
         THE COURT:  Take a recess.
         (Break taken from 12:37 p.m. to 12:51 p.m.)
         THE COURT:  All right bring the jury in.  We're
    back on the record.
         (The jury entered the courtroom at 12:52 p.m.)
         THE COURT:  All right.  You may be seated.
         Mr. Foote, you made proceed.
         MR. FOOTE:  Sure.  And thank you for your
    patience in getting to lunch, because I do have a
    lot of --
         THE COURT:  Well, you know what?  Actually, let
    me see if they want to break for lunch now and
    finish, or if you want to just go ahead and let him
    finish.
         Can I see a hand of votes?  Do you want to go
    to lunch now?  It is 5 of 1:00.  Yes?  Who wants to
    go to lunch?  Show your hands.  No one.
         MR. McCARTER:  Are we allowed to vote?
         (Laughter.) THE COURT:  Okay.  Who wants to stay?  Show
    your hands.
         Well, nobody is voting.
         Okay.  So they want to stay.  All right.  The
    majority does.
         MR. FOOTE:  Thank you for your patience.
         THE COURT DEPUTY:  Judge, one second.  One of
    the jurors wants me to get her a ginger ale; so I'm
    going to collect money.
         MR. FOOTE:  Thanks, Leslie.
         May I proceed, Judge?
         THE COURT:  You may.
         MR. FOOTE:  So -- if you put the picture up.
         So what -- it is a free country, and they can
    sell cigarettes.  They don't have to sell
    cigarettes.  Nobody makes them sell cigarettes, and
    nobody makes them sell defective cigarettes.  But it
    is a free country.  And what you need to do in our
    free country -- on the one hand you have this gal --
    this is when she graduated from -- here in Vero.
    And on the other hand you have all these folks.
    You've seen the names.  You've heard the names.  Who
    they are:  RJR and Philip Morris.
         That's what you have to compare.
         You have to compare the responsibility of this person to these people.
         Now, I told you, when I did opening statement
    that I was going to try to figure out a way to help
    you come up with how you should divide that
    responsibility.  And we admit some fault, but I'll
    tell you what:  We admit no fault until she's 25.
         She's a replacement smoker.  When she's 14, 15,
    16, whatever you decide -- 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 --
    before she's really an adult, when she was a young
    adult smoker, before she's fully matured, we accept
    no fault.
         They targeted her and they got her.
         Now, after she's 25, that's when we accept some
    fault.
         And I think it's equal after she's 25:  a
    third, third, and a third.  And if you do the math
    on that, the arithmetic -- it's not really math.  If
    you do the arithmetic, it's going to come pretty
    close to my suggestion for what percentages of fault
    be.
         Remember, until she was 25, I think it's only
    fair she get no fault.  And after that, we weren't
    there.  We know what they did.  We know she tried,
    but that's why we took some responsibility.  And
    this is a fair portion given what happened to her in terms of how the responsibility should be laid out.
         And so that is your Question 5.  I suggest you
    answer 10 percent for Gloria Gore and divide the
    rest equally between them.  And remember the total
    has to add up to 100 percent because you're dividing
    up all the fault between those three parties.
         And, again, you notice who is not on there:
    Bob Gore.  No responsibility.
         Next.
         This -- these next two questions, again, I
    suggest all four of them be answered "yes."  This
    relates to Gloria's reasonable reliance, reasonable
    reliance, on things that the Defendants did or
    didn't do.
         How do you know what somebody doesn't do until
    the vaults are opened?  You can't.  The Surgeon
    General didn't know until the vaults were opened.
         So concealed or omitted material.
         Her reliance was on their truthfulness.  Her
    reliance was her trust.
         You know, it's okay to trust a liar.  That's
    human nature.  People are trusting.  It's not okay
    to be the liar with the intention that people trust
    you.  That's not right.
         So what was it -- and the date is May 5th, 1982.  What was it that happened?  What was it that
    she was relying on from that date forward?
         Well, some of it already happened and
    continued.  It was continuous.  What was the lie?
    Nicotine, not addictive.  We're not doing studies on
    animals in Germany.  We're not examining the
    psychological effects behind the scenes so we can
    get exactly the right amount of nicotine.  We are
    not telling you that cigarettes are safe because
    we're lying.  But they were.  And she was their
    perfect subject for their conspiracy.  The perfect
    subject, because she did everything they wanted her
    to do.
         If -- if we were sitting in a board meeting in
    1953 and they could say, "Who is our perfect
    subject?  Who is the perfect person that we're going
    to be able to turn into a smoker and keep as a
    smoker?  Well, let's see.  Who's our perfect
    person?"
         Well, first of all, a female.  Because, as you
    see in the psychological studies, especially a
    strong female -- and I think that you heard it from
    Mr. Gore she was a strong female -- they're more
    likely to make their husband quit than them,
    themselves quit.  So who do we want?  We want a female.
         We want them young.  We want them addicted.  We
    want them to be a replacement smoker.  And then
    we're going to lie to them because we know the
    truth.  We're going to lie to them as long as we get
    away with it.
         And we got away with it way after May 5th,
    1982.  We got away with it for 18 more years.  For
    18 more years, we got away with our conspiracy, our
    lies, our ability to keep more people smoking.
         The sad thing is the conspiracy worked.  The
    conspiracy really, really worked.
         So here we have the perfect subject.  She's
    young, so they get her addicted before her brain
    comes together.  She listens to them and believes
    that the filters are safer.
         She believes the filters are safer after
    May 5th, 1982.  She believes light cigarettes are
    safer.  She believes ultralight cigarettes are
    safer.  She believes menthol are safer.  She
    believes, "This is not going to happen to me.  It's
    not going to happen to me because I trust these
    people and what they're telling me."
         So she relied on them and she relied on their
    concealment and their omission. And how could you do that to somebody?
    Seriously.
         They spent her money, get their 200 billion
    dollars, so that they could keep her relying after
    May 5th, 1982.
         That is the incredibly unbelievable thing about
    this scam:  They're using the people's own money.
    That's the source of revenue.  It's the people
    buying the cigarettes.  That's where the 200 billion
    comes from.  They use their own money to trick the
    people.
         If you want an example of is it -- was it
    reasonable for her to rely?  Was it reasonable for
    her to rely on them?  Well, the Surgeon General did.
    Surgeon General did until almost 2000.  So if it was
    reasonable for the Surgeon General to rely after
    May 5th, 1982, how could -- he's got everything.
    How could it not be reasonable for her to rely after
    1982?
         That's part of the reason that you should
    answer "yes" to these four questions.
         But let's go through some specific stuff that
    you saw and heard.
                       (On video.)
                        * * * * MALE SPEAKER:  Would it be correct, then, from
    1954 until 1980, it was also American Tobacco's
    position that cigarettes are not injurious to your
    health.
         MALE SPEAKER:  That is so.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Could you expect a consumer to
    rely upon your advertisements?
         MALE SPEAKER:  Yes.  Our advertising is
    truthful, and we would anticipate that they would
    rely on it, if they chose.
         MALE SPEAKER:  That's your promise as to what
    the consumer can expect from your product, isn't it?
         MALE SPEAKER:  Yes, it is.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Okay.
                   (Video concluded.)
                        * * * *
         MR. FOOTE:  1986.  That's after 1982.  On
    national TV.
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection.
         MR. GEISE:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. FOOTE:  I withdraw that.
         1986, this was their position.
         Next.
         Now, this started before '82, but it continued after '82 because the filter fraud, the filter scam
    continued until 2000.
         So for 18 years after 1982 they knew, but they
    didn't tell anybody else, that switching to these
    lighter cigarettes created the same amount of smoke
    and disease and danger as did any other cigarette,
    and she had a right to reasonably rely on that after
    1982.
         Next.  Same for the illusion of filtration.
    Who knew it was an illusion?  In 1983, who knew it
    was an illusion?  The Surgeon General didn't.
         Only the tobacco companies knew it was an
    illusion in 1983.  For them, it was magic.  It was
    magic for them because the illusion of filtration
    caused all these dollars, these magical dollars to
    float in.  So they created an illusion, and the
    illusion worked, and the result was money.
         Next.
         The new filter brands make extraordinary
    claims, but the customer is getting the same.
         The customer, Gloria Gore's customer number,
    10856341 or whatever it was, that customer, the one
    they kept track of, she's getting the same nicotine
    and tar from '76 all the way until 2000.
         Why did she do it?  As they say:  On the ground of reduced risk to health.
         Next slide.
         You saw this study that Philip Morris did.  Did
    they tell anybody about this study?
         Did they -- in 1980, '82, '83, did they tell
    anybody, "Look, we actually did a study, and it
    turns out that light cigarettes make no difference
    to your health"?
         Why wouldn't they?  Why wouldn't they tell
    people?  They couldn't.  We're back to the
    conspiracy.  They couldn't tell.  Otherwise, the
    conspiracy falls apart and then what happens?  All
    the stuff that they've got in their vaults comes
    out.  And instead of it coming out in 2000, it comes
    out in 1975.
         So was it fair?  Was it reasonable for Gloria,
    in 1983, to rely on lights and filters?  It was.
    Was it reasonable for them to keep it secret?  It
    wasn't.  It's another thing that's really
    unbelievable, that they kept Americans believing
    this for so many years.
         Next.
         Boy, they're doing a lot of studies.  Doing a
    lot of studies because they still want to make sure
    they get that perfect balance for the perfect profit.  So behind the scenes, without telling
    anybody -- they're not telling the Surgeon General;
    they're not telling the FTC -- behind the scenes,
    they're doing these studies, and they, again, find
    out:  No difference.
         But we can't tell anybody.
         Next slide.
         So you know there's no controversy about it,
    that the -- towards the end of her smoking days,
    Gloria went to the Benson & Hedges Lights and then
    the Benson & Hedges Ultralights, the Philip Morris
    product.
         Women attribute elegance and class image to
    Benson & Hedges.  They feel glamorous, and it sets
    them apart.  And they're menthol.  So they're light;
    they're menthol; they're glamorous.
         This is what -- this is what the company is
    saying.  This isn't what Mr. Gore said.  They --
    Gloria -- perceive they're cutting down, and as an
    alternative to quitting, they're trying to be safer.
    This is what they're saying:  "Our customers are
    trying to be safer.  We know they're not safer.  We
    know 100 percent they're not safer.  We've done the
    studies.  But this is an alternative."
         This is, again, part of Dr. Burns's cycle of addiction.
         And what do they also know?  All the way
    through 2000, past 1982, what do they also know?
    Most cannot accomplish.  The people that they got at
    age 14, 15, 16, 20, what can't they accomplish?
    They're bringing this change.  You've heard the
    doctors talking about change in the brain, change in
    the receptors.  This isn't, you know, I need a
    Snickers bar.  This is your brain has changed, and
    my receptors need this drug.
         That's why, if they get them good enough and
    they spend enough of their own money so that they
    smoke lots and lots of cigarettes, money, again,
    going into these folks' pockets, they know full well
    there's not one thing they're going to accomplish:
    Stop smoking.  And that's good for them.  That's
    what they want.  They want people to keep smoking.
         And it was fair for Gloria to rely on the
    Benson & Hedges after 1982 as a safer alternative.
         Why was it reasonable?
         Why was it reasonable?  Because they say it's
    reasonable.  Even though they know they're killing
    her.
         Next slide.
         Lights.  They're doing a study about the reaction to their new part of the conspiracy.  And
    Gloria was one of the victims.  And that her
    reliance on this stuff behind the scenes, her
    reliance on what they showed publicly, was
    reasonable.
         Next slide.
         You heard this from Dr. Burns.  This was part
    of the history that he was using to come up, again,
    with his medical expert opinions.
         Ultralights, in 1994, six years before her
    death, she thinks she's safer.  Is it reasonable for
    her to think she's safer when they've hidden the
    fact -- it looks like it's safer?  What does your
    common sense tell you about what somebody would
    think if that was safer or not?
         Take your common sense back to the jury room.
    And what's your common sense going to tell you?  She
    was trying.  She had a -- why would somebody switch
    to ultralights?  Because it's safer.  Only they knew
    it wasn't.
         Next slide.
         So we get to, again, the burden on this issue
    of these four questions, which is the greater weight
    of the evidence.  So on Questions 3 and 4, because
    of the concealment after '82, the omissions after '82, you should answer all four of those questions
    "yes."
         It was a conspiracy.  They did it together.
    They couldn't get out of it without breaking a
    conspiracy.  That's what a conspiracy is.  They all
    do it together.  Whether it was Philip Morris or
    R.J.R., they all did it together.
         It was very telling when Dr. Proctor talked
    about the fact that they couldn't even make a safer
    cigarette because that would break the agreement.
    They all did it together.  They're all responsible.
         All right.  Next.
         There is a different burden of proof for
    another question that you're going to answer; and
    that is, punitive damages.
         And that burden of proof is clear and
    convincing evidence.  Use your common sense.  It has
    to be precise, explicit, beckoning confusion.  So
    what do we have?
         Next slide.
         First of all, this is Question 7; and, again,
    you should answer, "yes"; that punitive damages are
    warranted to both of these Defendants.
         Let me tell you a little bit about that
    process. First of all, we are still going to finish by
    Friday.  Okay?  If you answer "yes," Mr. McCarter
    and I have already talked about this, there will be
    three witnesses on Thursday.
         On -- and your -- if you answer "yes," you get
    to hear those three witnesses and then you decide if
    there should be or not, you can say after hearing
    that, zero punitive damages.  I will, again, have a
    suggestion for you if we get that far.  But it will
    be -- one thing that'll be interesting for you, if
    we get that far, there is going to be somebody here
    from Philip Morris --
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection, Your Honor, we're not
    in that phase yet.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. FOOTE:  We'll be done by Friday.
         Why punitive damages?  You've seen the
    instruction, but let me tell you why.
         My term is "reprehensible."
         What's reprehensible?  To me --
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  It will be stricken "to
    me," stricken.
         MR. FOOTE:  There is a term," reprehensible."
    And if something is reprehensible, there should be punitive damages.
         What's reprehensible?  A conspiracy to kill 20
    million people?
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection.  Harm to others.
    Based on the instruction on harm to others.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. FOOTE:  A conspiracy to kill Gloria Gore.
    A conspiracy that they knew when she was 14, they
    might kill her.  A conspiracy to keep from her a
    safe alternative.  A conspiracy to get her addicted.
         It is reprehensible that they targeted a
    14-year-old.  Of all things in this country, what
    are we supposed to protect?  What's the point of all
    this?  We protect our children.  What good is it all
    except for that?  We protect our children.  We
    protect the children.  They didn't.
         That's reprehensible.
         That's enough for you to think about Gloria
    Gore and whether or not punitive damages should be
    awarded.
         They state the filter.  That's reprehensible.
    I can't imagine doing that to someone --
         MR. McCARTER:  Objection.
         MR. FOOTE:  Telling her, here, smoke these.
    You won't be like your dad.  You'll be okay. And the next health scare, well, smoke these.
    Okay, now smoke these.  And she did it all along the
    way.  She did everything they asked of her.
         She even stayed on the coupons.
         The unfilter, the illusion of a filter to make
    money, to make enough money that they could spend
    $200 billion.
         Can you get the Elmo going for a second?  I
    just need a blank piece of paper.
         They use the money, in part, against Gloria
    Gore.
         Can you put up a piece on there and -- I'm so
    bad at this.  Do I write this way?  This way?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  Yeah.
         MR. FOOTE:  So I just want you to see the
    number.  I'll start over.  It's a hard number to
    write.  200 billion.  That's the number.
         When they went before Congress in order to keep
    their conspiracy going in '94, I'm in America.  I'm
    here in our nation's capital.  I swear to you,
    nicotine is not addictive.  That's what they said.
    That's reprehensible.
         Using -- go back to the...
         Using -- I talked about this a little bit
    before.  False science to keep people addicted, including Mrs. Gore, fake science, wrong science,
    that's reprehensible.
         Keeping it all secret, that's reprehensible.
    They were very careful because they couldn't violate
    their conspiracy.
         Next.
         If they didn't like it, if it was really bad,
    if it didn't lead them to something to help them,
    they threw it away.  That's reprehensible.
         Next slide.
         Setting up fake organizations -- I'm sorry.
         MR. CORR:  Do you know how to do this?  I know
    how to do it.
         MR. FOOTE:  Oh, I apologize.  Thanks, Steve.
         Fake organizations to act as shields and
    fronts.  Who paid for those fake organizations?
    Gloria.  Every pack of cigarettes she bought went to
    create a shield so they can make things happen at
    the Congressional hearings and as a front.
         I get you to pay -- I get you to pay me to hurt
    you.  That's reprehensible.
         Next.
         Why?  Greed.  Couldn't lose their jobs, didn't
    want to go out of business.
         They knew they were killing people.  That's reprehensible.
         Next.
         You saw this before.
                       (On video.)
                        * * * *
         MALE SPEAKER:  From CBS Washington, in color,
    Face the Nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed
    interview with Joseph Cullman, III, chairman and
    chief executive officer of Philip Morris,
    Incorporated, and chairman of the executive
    committee of the Tobacco Institute.
         MR. CULLMAN:  We have no problem that I know of
    to try to help people to stop smoking.  We do talk
    to the question of whether or not cigarettes are
    hazardous.  We do not believe cigarettes are
    hazardous.  We won't accept that.  Because when as
    and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is
    identified as being injurious to human health, we
    are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
         MALE SPEAKER:  Do you believe that cigarettes
    are safe?  Have they be proven to be safe,
    Mr. Cullman?
         MR. CULLMAN:  I believe they have not been
    proven to be unsafe.  I conclude as a matter of
    course that it's true that babies born from women who smoke are smaller, but they're just as healthy
    as the babies born from women who do not smoke.
         MALE SPEAKER:  What about higher --
         MR. CULLMAN:  And some women would prefer
    having smaller babies.
                   (Video concluded.)
                        * * * *
         MR. FOOTE:  I don't know what to say about
    that.
         So was their conduct reprehensible in this
    microburst here with respect to Gloria?  Was their
    conduct reprehensible such that in this place, you
    need to take a look at whether you should punish
    them or not?  And that's why you should answer "yes"
    to both those questions.
         Now, the other thing that you need to decide --
    and it's hard -- is compensation.  There is no easy
    rule for compensation.
         On the issue of compensation for Mr. Gore, we
    go back to the burden of proof.  It's only in
    punitives that there's a higher burden of proof,
    which I think is easily overcome.  But this, again,
    is more probably true than not true with respect to
    his compensation.  So let's go to the next slide.
         As the Court told you, you figure out what he lost.
         It's money.  Who made this about money?
         Who made all of this about money?
         It wasn't Mr. Gore.  He has no fault.
         You have to decide what he lost.  And that
    starts with Gloria, obviously.
         You've heard -- you saw the family.  They're
    here.  Some of the friends.  Vero Beach community.
    Was she a special person?  Was she a special person?
    She was.  Why was she special?  Well, you haven't
    heard a bad word about her.  She had lots of
    friends.  She knew everybody in the community.  She
    loved life.  She loved to dance.  She loved her
    family.  She loved her grandkids.
         She was special.  She was gregarious.  She was
    attractive.  No -- there's nobody saying anything
    else but this.  She was intelligent.  She was glue.
    She was glue for a whole clan because she was
    special.
         To put together a family of the type that you
    saw testify, you need to be special.  Those girls
    are great.  And that shows that she was a special
    person.
         And so what you're measuring is the loss of a
    special person for 23 years.  You can do the arithmetic about what would have happened had she
    not died prematurely.  He's got a life expectancy
    still.  It's about 12 years.  And had she not died,
    because of these folks, in 2000, she would have
    lived a lot longer and he would have had 23 more
    years with her.
         So we know she was a special person, and we
    know she's gone.  And we know that he will not have
    her for 23 years that he should have had her.
         And you have to figure out:  How do you put
    that into money?
         That's how our system works.  It's not easy.
         How do we know -- how do we know how truly
    special she was?  Well, you heard about her life,
    but you also heard what happened when she was gone.
         I suppose there may be people that, when they
    go, the -- the -- the hole isn't that big.  Well,
    the hole that she left behind -- this has got
    nothing to do with her smoking; it's got nothing to
    do with anything but what the loss is.  That's what
    you have to focus on.  It doesn't matter at this
    point, when you get to this -- it doesn't matter how
    she went.  It's just measuring the loss:  How big
    was the hole that was left when she was gone?
         And I think that you need to think about three or four things in terms of what hole was left.  One,
    because the glue was gone -- every family is
    different -- because the glue was gone, the family
    was not the same.  There were no more Christmas
    dinners; there was no more Halloween; there were no
    more pictures like we saw of her opening the stuff
    with grandkids with Bob there.  It changed the
    family.
         Which affected Bob.  He was so much in love
    with her -- and is today -- that it's hard for him
    to be here.  It's hard for him to go outside on the
    break and look at the church where they got married
    right over there (indicating).  It's hard for him to
    go to the Elk's Club.  It's hard for him to go the
    church they went to.  It's hard for him to go to the
    gas station because, again, he's reminded -- and I
    think you saw he's a character.  I think that's a
    good way to describe it.  But I think you saw,
    really inside of him, this is real.  He puts it
    inside of him and holds it inside.  And he lost
    those 23 years of one of the lucky ones -- I don't
    think there's that many of us that are that lucky --
    the lucky ones who found the one.  Who found the one
    that he wanted to be with every single minute that
    he wasn't working.  Every single minute, he wanted to be with the one and would have been with the one
    for 23 years.
         So the family's different.  That's part of the
    hole.  But what happens to him is pretty incredible.
    He has never gotten over it.  He's still on
    depressive medication after all these years.  He
    just wanted to die.
         That's the hole.
         And if it wasn't for his daughter sitting
    there, he would have died.  He would have died
    drinking a gallon of wine a day and back to smoking
    cartons of cigarettes.
         She saved him.  That's what a family's for.
    She saved him.
         And although it was hard, he was brought back,
    but he's not the same Bob Gore -- is this -- is this
    guy -- is this the guy you see sitting back there?
    No.  It's a different guy.  Happy man.
         Think of him, at the end of his mail route,
    looking so forward to going home to see the one.
    Every day.
         So it's not just what he said.  Okay?  We've
    got records.  Because you know what happened.  It
    got worse and worse and worse.
         And, finally, Indian River Medical Center records department.  You'll have all these.
         Now, in our final arguments, I can't read you
    the whole thing.  I can't read you the Surgeon
    General reports that are in evidence.  I can't read
    you this stock of -- stack of documents.  We'd be
    here just -- we'd be here longer to read everything.
         But it's all going to be available to you.
    We're not just trying to pick and choose here.
    Please take what you think is important and read it
    carefully when you go back there.  Everything's in
    evidence.  We want you to.
         But I want to go through a couple of things
    that are shown in these records.  It's going to be a
    little bit.  We've got to use the Elmo.
         And I'm going to need these records from the
    clerk, if that's okay.  Mr. -- (conferring with the
    clerk).
         Great.  Thanks.  Yes.
         And my great helper here, Baron, is going to
    help me show these to you.
         Baron, just start with that first page, if you
    wouldn't mind.  I know this is going to be a little
    bit awkward.  Maybe it won't be that awkward.
         Okay.  So you'll see that there's going to be
    193 pages.  Why am I showing this to you?  This shows you the hole that was in Mr. Gore after she
    died.
         One of these you've seen before.
         If you go to 425...
         What he had gone through -- and you'll have
    this page in a -- and you're free to write these
    down or not, but you'll have this page, 425, to
    examine as closely as you want.
         What had he gone through to get to this point?
    That's part of his loss.  Not being able to do his
    job because he needed to take off because she needed
    him.  He would do for her; she would do for him.
    And so when she lost her hair -- and you've heard
    this before -- he shaved his head.
         What does that say about the connection between
    those two people?
         And when she -- when she couldn't go to the
    bathroom by herself, there were nurses there.  Who
    was it that she needed to have do that for her?  It
    was him.  The one.
         And who was it that -- that eventually just
    carried her when she was 60 pounds?
         The one.
         And that's all part of his loss.
         Next, 426.  Diagnosis:  Major depressive disorder.  Initial episode, severe.  Major
    depressive disorder.
         Never happened before.  He was a happy man.
         427.  They were worried about him in there to
    the point where there were suicide checks.  This was
    a man who loved life.  Who has gone from loving life
    to suicide checks.
         432.  You'll see -- some of the notes, as you
    know, get typed up and some are handwritten.
         Depressed.  Wife died end of June.  Dependent
    on her.
         That's why it's hard to put numbers on these
    cases, because everybody's different.  Everybody's
    relationship is different.  But she was really
    everything to him.  And for him, there could be no
    greater loss.  That's -- you'll see if you -- if you
    want to look through the records, you will see there
    was more notes there like this.
         That's enough, Baron.  Thanks.
         So... what's a number for those -- starting
    when she got sick, through today, and into the
    future, what's a number that's fair for his life?
    This man who lost the one?  And I'm suggesting that,
    again, this is -- you don't worry about the
    comparative here.  You just put down what his loss. I'm suggesting it's $7 1/2 million.  That's for you
    to decide.
         So I just have a couple of more things to say
    to you and you can have your late lunch.  It's
    almost 2:00.
         It's really one of the worst stories of greed
    you could tell.  Worst stories of lies.  Some of the
    stuff you couldn't make up.  We're going to -- we're
    going to make children our next crop?  You couldn't
    make that up.  It's unbelievable.
         So I do have -- you're going to have a lot of
    documents, and I do have what I would call my
    "suggested reading list," and you don't have to pay
    any attention to it if you don't want.
         You'll see that it's divided in categories.
    All those documents are in there.
         This is a demonstrative exhibit; so this is not
    going to go back in the jury room with you.
         But as you go through these documents, you're
    going to remember seeing them and what was said.
    And please read them carefully.  And please be the
    micro-Surgeon General.  Be the micro-FTC.  Be the
    mic -- micro-President Kennedy and do what's fair
    here, and that is answer those questions "yes" and
    award Mr. Gore a fair amount for what he's gone through and will go through, which is $7 1/2
    million.
         And thank you, and after lunch, please give
    Mr. McCarter the same attention you've given me.
         Thank you.


MR. FOOTE:  Thank you, Judge.  
THE COURT:  Or Mr. Corr.
MR. FOOTE:  Well, I wasn't expecting to talk
very long, but it may be a little bit.
Let's set the stage for why we're here.  If
you go to 89, I think you called it.  In 1987
they never changed their position.  It's exactly
what they're doing with Mrs. Gore -- 3609
MR. MCCARTER:  Objection, Your Honor.
There's an order in limine on that.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. FOOTE:  You can read it.  You'll have it
in the jury room.
I'm going to go through some of the things
that counsel missed.  It may not be as organized
as usual, because I'm responding.
First of all, there is a stipulation which
you're going to see as part of the group of
documents, and the stipulation with respect to
Reynolds -- I just happen to have this on the
top -- says:  
"At all times during which Mrs. Gore's
alleged to have smoked Belair brand cigarettes,
they were manufactured by Brown & Williamson
Tobacco Corporation.  Reynolds is successor in
interest to Brown & Williamson Tobacco
Corporation's U.S. tobacco business.  At all
times when Mrs. Gore is alleged to have smoked
Kool brand cigarettes, they were manufactured by
Brown & Williamson."
Dr. Burns took all the information he could
get from everybody and the only person that
talked about this '63 to '70 period -- now, 3610
remember these gals were young.  He went around
and got all the information he could together and
he said -- and I hope that you wrote this down,
"From your review of all the depositions, did you
find evidence that Mrs. Gore smoked Kool and
Belair cigarettes from about 1963 to 1970?" 
And his answer was "yes."
Oh, we do have it.
Also, in terms of when she started smoking,
there's no doubt she started smoking in high
school.  Her high school friends were here.  They
smoked with her.  There's no doubt she started
smoking in high school.  There's no doubt she
smoked before she turned 18.
The evidence of the earliest time she would
have started smoking is 14.  You can decide it
was 15, you can decide it was 16.  It doesn't
matter.  They targeted youth in order to get
their replacement smokers.
90.  This is in 1978.  "Attitudes towards
Benson & Hedges.  Those who are currently smoking
lights do so because they are better for you than
full flavor cigarettes." 
That's what they knew people believed and
what Mrs. Gore believed.  Not only from that 3611
time, but forward past '82, and all the
concealment -- can you go to the verdict form for
three and four?  Let's start with three.
I was just trying to make it shorter for
you.  I was not trying to short-circuit this
question.  Take it back and read it.  
Misinformation -- I'm not going to repeat it
all.  You know about all the misinformation
before May 5, 1982 and you know -- and I'm going
to go through the Engle findings with you
a little bit later -- and you know that the
finding which you're going to be bound to is
because of course she was addicted.  Of course
the carotid was because of her addiction.
There's no doubt about that.
The finding is going to be that there was an
agreement that they do these things together and
that finding is something that you have to take
as 100 percent true.  It took another group of
people a long time to come to these findings --
and these are the findings and we'll go through
them -- these are the findings that you must
accept if you simply believe she was addicted;
and second, that the carotid was caused by her
smoking. 3612
Mr. McCarter, in my view, was playing
doctor.  Doctors get to testify about their
opinions and yes, doctors can be cross examined,
but the implication that Dr. Beckett is a liar
wasn't the implication.  It's just not true.
Dr. Beckett said that but for the smoking -- but
for the smoking she would not have the carotid
disease, but for.
He's from here, he's not a liar.  He's a
doctor.
Who are the liars?  Who are the liars?  When
they start talking about liars, it's hard for me
to believe.  Who are the liars is the question.
Now, to me -- if you go back to the verdict
form -- because the Engle finding that we'll go
through in a minute says:  "Each defendant
concealed -- each defendant concealed or omitted
material information not otherwise known or
available, knowing that the material was false
and misleading and failed to disclose a material
fact concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of cigarettes or both."
That's the answer to the question.  But we
have a lot more than that.
Also, each defendant entered into an 3613
agreement to conceal or omit information.  The
agreement is the conspiracy, the conspiracy means
they all did it together.  They're all
responsible for each other's conduct in the
conspiracy.
So it doesn't matter whether PM did this or
R.J. Reynolds did that.  They're all responsible
for each other's conduct because they entered
into this illegal conspiracy agreement.
But even further, with respect to both these
defendants, because they're coconspirators, what
did Mrs. Gore see -- they forgot the most
important piece of evidence.  What did she see
hundreds and hundreds of times after May of 1982?
The pack.  The pack is their best advertising,
the pack that says "light."  And as Dr. Proctor
told you, it's illegal today to call it light.
The pack is the best evidence of all the
advertising for all those years.
Then it turns out when -- because they had
tricked the Surgeon General, remember.  Once the
Surgeon General figured out they had been tricked
about light, they made it illegal to call
cigarettes light.
So the pack.  Besides the Engle findings, 3614
besides all the other things I've told you, the
pack itself is the statement and misinformation
that they conspired together to make sure that
the true health effects of these cigarettes that
had become their big sellers was not going to be
known to the public.
92.  I'm sorry, I'm skipping around.  Here's
Sandra, teenage smoking.
93.  Michaela Scott, she didn't want to
testify and you heard she didn't want to testify.
But here's her testimony as it related -- and
think about this.  Many, many years later she's
trying to reconstruct what she did at the time.
Now, is your memory better about something that
happened in 2000?  Is your memory better in 2000
or is it better today?
What she did in 2000 is what's important,
because in 2000, as of that time -- if we can go
to the next one -- "When you wrote that statement
in 2000, is that something you wrote within a
reasonable degree of medical probability?"
You didn't see that phrase in the questions
that they asked, because the proper phrase for a
question to a doctor has to go to a reasonable
degree of medical probability -- 3615
MR. MCCARTER:  Objection, Your Honor.
That's not the law.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. FOOTE:  So that was her opinion at the
time.  And she didn't want to testify, but in
fact she does tell you that she had lung cancer.
Next.  There it is.
Next.  97, I'm sorry.  That's what she says.  
Now, again, this idea about -- let's talk
about Bob Gore for a little bit.  I'm sure that
the first thing on people's minds when he was
carrying her to the washroom and he had shaved
his head was trying to figure out who they were
going to sue.  I'm sure that was really tops on
their mind at that time.
And this whole idea that this is something
made up by Mr. Gore is so wrong, because all
these documents were secret until she died.
People didn't know all this stuff.  She thought
that the lights were still safe.  Why would she
sue somebody if she thought she was doing the
right thing?  She didn't know they were lying to
her.
It was a long time after that.  Engle was
the one who made these findings you're going to 3616
need to abide by and the people found out they
were lying.  That's the basis of the lawsuit.
So when we talk about liars -- you got to
observe Bob Gore.  As I said, he's a character,
he's a lovable character.  They deposed him for
900 pages.  I think your common sense would tell
you if any person in their 80s is deposed for 900
pages who's got certain medical issues, you might
get a few different answers here and there.  His
memory might be a little bit different.  But none
of the things that Mr. McCarter talked about have
anything to do with this case.  
We're just trying to tell a story and he's
picking on little things.  He's not picking on
the medical records that showed that he went in
and what the medical records say, which I think
you should look at.  He's not picking on the fact
that Mr. Gore certainly drank a lot after his
wife died.  
He's not picking on the fact that the
important story was -- I didn't hear hardly
anything about how great Mrs. Gore was.  A couple
people said, yes, she was great.  That's not a
lie.  I don't have time to go through each of
those.  I'll go through a couple of them when I 3617
get to it.
But he didn't lie about things.  Yeah, maybe
he got confused about a couple of things.  His
daughters confirmed everything he said.  His
daughters confirmed, no, he wasn't drinking.
They were there.  His daughter confirmed his
exact story.  Yeah, he smoked maybe for about a
week when my mom yelled at him.
The patch, he was dipping, as he calls it.
You need the patch for dipping just like you need
the patch for smoking --
MR. MCCARTER:  Objection, no evidence.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. FOOTE:  So let's talk about what the
testimony was regarding Mr. and Mrs. Gore.  I
want to make sure I get the right ones here.
98, 99, 100.  The most telling thing
relating to her attempts to quit is this.  "I let
you down.  My partner, I let you down because I
couldn't quit."  And she couldn't quit because
she was a replacement smoker.  She was one of the
ones that that got addicted at such a young age.  
Dr. Burns says by at least age 23, that she
was one of the ones that their own documents say
some people can't quit.  She was one of the ones 3618
that couldn't quit.
This thing, they lied to her.  
Of course she enjoyed smoking.  That's an
addiction.  She loved to smoke.  Of course she
enjoyed smoking.  Of course it relaxed her.
That's an addiction.  Of course she was going to
say she did not want to quit smoking.
I'm going to go through all the testimony
about all the times she tried to quit.  Believed
that she should have the right to smoke
cigarettes.  Of course she said that, she was
addicted.  
She never blamed Philip Morris.  How could
she?  This is ridiculous.  How could she blame
them, when they hid everything until after she
died?
So let's go through -- and I may have to use
the -- here's the testimony.  Now, this talks
about hypnosis.  
Can you go to the next page, Baron?
Again, this is a man who's doing the best he
can in his 80s.  So he's remembering the best he
can.
Go down to the top.  Show the top.
You see there, '60s, '70s, that's what he 3619
thought.  That's what he remembered, '60s and
'70s, and he talked about all the other ways that
she tried to quit.  
But one thing we know for sure is -- that's
good, Baron -- one thing we know for sure is a
doctor in Vero Beach prescribed a controlled
substance to her, specifically for addicted
smokers.
Now, why would Dr. Beckett do that if she
wasn't an addicted smoker?  
I get back to this issue of the doctors.  We
have three doctors all saying she's addicted.
There is no one who says -- there's no doctor who
says the carotid artery was not caused by
smoking.
So where's their doctor?
MR. MCCARTER:  Objection, burden of proof.
THE COURT:  Sustained.  
You have ten minutes.
MR. FOOTE:  Pardon me?
THE COURT:  You have ten minutes.
MR. FOOTE:  Oh, thank you, Judge.
On the issue of punitives, one thing I
didn't talk about was broken promises.  That is
another place where what they did -- and you 3620
heard it from Dr. Proctor -- that's another place
where what they did was reprehensible.  They
said, "If we can't fix it, we'll stop selling
cigarettes."  
They couldn't fix it.  They broke their
promise.
On this issue of these supposed family
history things, the sister had kidney disease and
was diabetic.  They're not related.  They're not
in the same situation as Mrs. Gore.  
The two uncles were obese, the mother was 84
or 89.  Everyone had -- you heard that everyone
has some of this disease by the time they get to
that point in their life.  That doesn't mean she
had it when she was 60.
This whole family history thing is a
complete red herring, because what you heard from
the doctors who talked about it was that there is
no question that what caused the disease, carotid
artery disease, was the smoking, the four or five
million hits that she took over her life.
There's no evidence that she had high blood
pressure.  There's no evidence that her
cholesterol was really completely out of control.
Dr. Beckett never treated her for high 3621
cholesterol.  He didn't know whether that reading
was before or after fasting.  There's no evidence
about anything like that.
The evidence was that she was in good shape,
that she was vital, that she got a lot of
exercise in the sense that she was very
energetic.  She had no signs.  
And this DSM thing never came in.  There's
no need to go to this DSM, 11 things.  It's
doctors who treat people every day who decide
whether someone is addicted and what happened to
them because of the addiction, and that's what we
brought you.
The filtered cigarettes had an opportunity
to be safer.  Dr. Proctor said they ended up
being as dangerous or more dangerous.  Check your
notes.  And part of that was because of the fact
that people believed in it.
Now, they don't have to sell cigarettes, I
said this before, and they can make cigarettes
without nicotine.  They can take it out and they
can put it back in.  So unless you're trying to
get people addicted, why don't you make a
cigarette without nicotine?  No one would smoke
it.  Greed. 3622
Why don't you come up with a nicotine
delivery device and tell everybody what you're
really doing?  Conspiracy.  They could have done
that in the '80s easily, '70s.  Here is a
nicotine delivery device.  Any one of you people
out there that wants to become addicted to
nicotine, we're going to sell you this nicotine
delivery device and you may use it and become
addicted to nicotine.  You won't get lung cancer,
but you'll be addicted to nicotine.
That was their choice not to do that,
because they had to keep their conspiracy
together.
Because my time is short, I'm going to --
there's a couple of things.
I agree, Dr. Teague did a good job.  He
found everything there was to find out there, and
that's why it was important.  He found all the
stuff from all over the world.  That's why it was
important, because he delivered that to the
people in the Plaza in New York and they knew it
was coming --
MR. MCCARTER:  Objection, no evidence.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. FOOTE:  He delivered it to R.J. 3623
Reynolds, who attended the meeting in New York,
and that's why they knew they had a problem and
that's why they had to start the conspiracy.
Waxman, don't forget Waxman.  Talk about
liars.  Please don't forget Waxman, because the
study that Mr. Geise showed from I think it was
'62 in the magazine that he put in evidence that
talked about heavy smokers are addicted, well,
that was their study.  So how could it be 20, 30
years later?  
"We swear nicotine's not addictive."  How
could that happen?  Conspiracy.
So let's go through -- can you put the Engle
findings up, please.
So on the first question for which there is
no issue, there is no evidence opposite the fact
that she was addicted and that the addiction
caused her carotid problem, once you answer that
question "yes", all the rest of this is true,
100 percent true.  It is true for Gloria --
MR. MCCARTER:  Objection, the findings don't
address Mrs. Gore.
THE COURT:  Sustained.
MR. FOOTE:  It is true in this case that
smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer and 3624
cerebrovascular disease, including carotid artery
stenosis.
Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive.
Each defendant placed cigarettes on the
market that were defective and unreasonably
dangerous.
Each defendant was negligent.
Each defendant concealed or omitted material
information not otherwise known or available,
knowing that the material was false and
misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact
concerning the health effects or addictive nature
of cigarettes or both.
Each defendant entered into an agreement --
I've called it a conspiracy, this calls it an
agreement -- to conceal or omit information
regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking
or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes,
with the intention that their smokers and the
public would rely on this information to their
detriment.
For all these reasons you should answer
every question "yes".  You should award a fair
distribution of the fault.  
Who was the liar?  Was it Mr. Gore or was it 3625
all these gentlemen who hid things for 50 years?
Who's the liar?
Based on that, Mrs. Gore should only get
10 percent of the fault, and the two conspirators
that entered into an agreement to do these things
together should each bear 45 percent of the
fault.
In terms of what Mr. Gore lost, that is for
you to decide the compensation.  But this isn't
about earnings.  You can't replace a person with
earnings.  What is the value of losing the one?
That is a hard choice for you.  It's an important
choice.  
Like I said before, be the Surgeon General,
be the FTC, be President Kennedy.  Do what's
right here and award a substantial damage to
Mr. Gore of seven and a half million dollars and
then let's go see what happens in the punitive
phase.
Thank you.
