MR. COFER:
Counsel, Mr. Goveia, members of the 3620
jury, good afternoon.
I told you in opening statement that we believe
this case comes down to three pretty straightforward
questions:
Why did Mary Goveia smoke; why did she
wait so long to quit; and what, if anything, did the
defendants do wrong to cause Mrs. Goveia to smoke
and get sick?
You maybe remember from opening statement, I
told you that the evidence would be that Mary Goveia
smoked because her entire family smoked and she
liked to smoke.
And I told you the evidence would
be that she always had the ability to quit smoking
whenever she decided she wanted to quit and was
willing to work hard to quit.
I told you the evidence would be that nothing
the defendants did or not -- did or didn't do, said
or didn't say caused Mary Goveia to become a smoker.
You may remember I started my opening statement
by telling you the things that were not in dispute.
And I told you I was doing that so we could take
those off the table and focus on the real issues in
this case.
I want to start my closing argument doing the
same thing.
I want to talk about the facts that are
not in dispute.
I prepared a timeline that will 3621
hopefully help you follow along and listen during my
closing argument.
The top half of the timeline basically has
events for Mrs. Goveia's life, and the bottom half
has information that's been reported about the
dangers of smoking at various points in time.
I
don't have enough room to put both boards up at the
same time, so this is from 1920s to 1960s, and I
have another board that talks about events in
Mrs. Goveia's life and what was being reported about
the dangers of smoking from the 1970s on.
So let's start with Question 1.
Why did Mary
Goveia smoke?
Why did she become a cigarette
smoker?
You may remember Dr. Burns told you that
one of the most important factors in whether someone
becomes a smoker is whether their family smokes.
Dr. Burns was a senior reviewer of the 1995
Surgeon General Report, and he told you that the
Surgeon General found that the principal determinant
of whether an adolescent starts smoking is whether
her friends and family smoked.
He told you that if
a parent smokes or someone's brothers and sisters
smoke, it's more likely that they will become a
smoker too.
Mr. Mitnik said something that's really 3622
consistent with all our common sense.
He said young
people imitate behavior that they see.
And those of
us who are parents know that's true.
It's not -- do
as I say, you know, not as I do.
But we do know
kids imitate behavior they see in their families.
And it's undisputed, members of the jury, that
basically everyone in Mary Goveia's life smoked.
Her dad was a pipe smoker.
You heard that all of
her brothers and sisters were smokers.
Her husband,
John, was a cigar and pipe smoker for 40 years.
Do
you remember he testified he started in around 1946,
and he quit smoking pipes and cigars in the late
1980s after he heard on the news that a pipe could
cause lip cancer.
Now, I want you to think something else,
though, about Mr. Goveia, Mr. Goveia and his smoking
experiences.
He grew up in the same period that
Mr. Mitnik talked about.
You may remember when I
had the privilege of asking John Goveia questions, I
established his birthday was June 1st, 1924, and he
was actually born one month after his wife, May 1st,
1924.
Remember, it's May Day.
So he grew up in
this very same time period.
But he never was a
cigarette smoker.
And do you remember what the evidence was about 3623
the one time he tried it?
His wife, Mary, before
they were married, gave him a cigarette.
She wanted
him to try it.
Do you remember what he told you?
He said he took one puff and his eyes filled with
tears and he started coughing again, and that was
the last cigarette smoke he ever inhaled into his
lungs.
He grew up in the same period of time.
Same
advertisements, same town, same theaters in Boston.
People are different.
We do know, though, that the rest of
Mrs. Goveia's family smoked.
Both her son and
daughter smoked.
You remember that her son,
Michael, started smoking when he was 12 or 13 years
old in 1971 or 1972.
He smoked until he died in
2009, so he smoked for ten years after his mother
died.
You heard that Debbie is a smoker.
You may
remember that Debbie told you that her mother gave
her permission to smoke when she was 13, and she
told you she's been a regular smoker since she was
13 and she still smokes today.
Her husband, Clyde Nadeau, Jay, was a smoker as
is their son, Jamie.
Now, I want you to think about that for a 3624
second.
The whole Goveia family blames these
defendants for Mrs. Goveia's death.
In fact,
Mr. Goveia --
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor.
That's an
improper statement.
THE COURT:
Sustained.
MR. COFER:
Well, Mr. Goveia feels so strongly
about it that he brought this lawsuit to recover
money for his wife's decisions to begin and continue
smoking.
Mr. Mitnik suggested to you that the floor was
$5 million in his closing argument.
Yet Jamie
Nadeau, Mrs. Goveia's grandson and Debbie Goveia's
son, decided to start smoking after Mrs. Goveia was
already sick with COPD.
He didn't start smoking
until about 1995.
Now, clearly he understood when
he started smoking --
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor.
Relevance.
MR. COFER:
And this is predicate, Your Honor.
It's closing argument.
THE COURT:
I understand, but you're going to
have to approach it another way.
MR. COFER:
Okay.
Let -- well, let me; let me
set the predicate now.
Plaintiff argues that the reason that people 3625
smoke is because they are seduced by advertising
into smoking.
Plaintiff argues that the reason
people smoke is they don't understand that smoking
can be hard for you; can be hard to quit and can be
bad for you.
But if you just look at Mary Goveia's own
family, you can see that that's not true.
There are
people in her family who started smoking after
Mrs. Goveia was sick with COPD and people that
continued to smoke after Mrs. Goveia died from COPD.
The evidence was, members of the jury, that
smoking is just a way of life in the Goveia family.
The Goveia family has smoked for generations.
Mary
Goveia's family smoked before Mary got sick; they
smoked while she was sick; and they're still smoking
after she passed.
Is it any wonder that Mary Goveia was a smoker
too?
So that takes us to the next question:
Why did
she wait so long to quit smoking?
While it's true that smoking can be addictive,
it's undisputed that even addicted smokers can and
do quit smoking.
Both the plaintiff's expert
witnesses told you that.
Both Dr. Burns and
Dr. Henningfield told you that all smokers, 3626
including addicted smokers, have the ability to
quit.
They told you that just because someone is
addicted to nicotine does not mean that she can't
quit.
Dr. Burns told you that by the time of the 1990
Surgeon General's Report, almost half of the people
alive at the time that used to smoke had already
quit.
You heard evidence that by the time of
Mrs. Goveia's death in 1999, somewhere between 45
and 50 million Americans had quit smoking.
Today, 60 million Americans have quit smoking.
And both Dr. Burns and Dr. Henningfield told you it
was their opinion that the vast majority of those
people who quit were addicted.
They told you that
the vast majority of those people had changes to the
brain that Dr. Henningfield talked about.
The single-most important factor in quitting
smoking is motivation and persistence.
The bottom
line is you have to want to quit, and you have to
try to quit.
And, members of the jury, when you think about
the evidence, there's very little evidence that Mary
Goveia really wanted to quit or that she tried very
hard to quit.
You heard about the times when Mrs. Goveia 3627
tried to quit smoking.
You heard that in 1956,
after she had her daughter Debra, she may have quit
for a few hours or at most a day.
When she was pregnant with Michael in 1959, she
may not have tried to smoke for two or three hours.
If you can't see that, please raise your hand
and tell the Court.
I can put it on the overhead
too.
Mr. Goveia told us between 1960 and 1972, that
12-year period, she may have tried to quit cold
turkey two or three times.
And then remember the hypnotist.
Remember the
evidence about the hypnotist.
So the evidence was
that Mr. and Mrs. Goveia went to see a hypnotist.
It was a half-hour session.
And they walked into
the hypnotist's, and after the hypnotist did what he
did, Mrs. Goveia reached in her pocket, took out a
cigarette and lit it and laughed at him and refused
to pay.
Mr. Goveia told you that they laughed about
their experience in the car on their way home, and
they said the whole thing was ridiculous.
Mr. Prysock asked Mr. Goveia if his wife was
disappointed the hypnosis didn't work.
Do you
remember what Mr. Goveia said?
He said, Well, she
was in a way, but she didn't care one way or 3628
another.
Does that sound like someone who was distressed
about her smoking and was really committed to quit
smoking?
Sometime after the visit with the hypnotist,
Mrs. Goveia bought some phony cigarettes, but she
continued to smoke real cigarettes at the same time.
Then here, after 1985, after they moved to
Florida, she used the patch once and she may have
used nicotine gum.
But you heard the evidence was
that she never actually put her cigarettes down, she
never stopped smoking, and she never really quit.
It is undisputed that she never threw away her
cigarettes or her ashtrays or her lighters.
In
fact, until she went on oxygen, the longest that
Mrs. Goveia may ever have gone without a cigarette
was a day or two.
And Mr. Goveia wasn't even sure
about that.
You heard her daughter Debbie tell you she
doesn't remember her mother ever going a day without
a cigarette.
She never went to a stop-smoking clinic.
She
never asked a doctor for help in quitting.
There
are no pharmacy or medical records showing she was
ever given a prescription for any kind of 3629
stop-smoking aid.
And when she was diagnosed with COPD and
Dr. Fakih told her to quit smoking or you will die,
Mr. Goveia asked her to quit.
But she didn't quit.
Instead, she told her husband that she was going to
do what she wants and she was going to smoke whether
he liked it or not.
Mr. Goveia testified that his wife continued to
smoke until after she went on oxygen.
After that,
he said he never saw her smoke another cigarette.
You've heard about her going down to see Jacob
Bayorek.
You heard that was in '94 or 1995.
You
heard that was before she went on oxygen.
So please
don't be confused about that time.
When she went to see Jacob Bayorek and smoked
one cigarette every couple of days for a year
because she wasn't supposed to be smoking around her
husband, that was before she was on oxygen.
That
was 1994 or 1995.
So I want to make sure there's no
confusion about the time with that.
Now, let me be clear.
I am not suggesting for
a minute that it is easy for everyone to quit
smoking.
Some people are lucky and it is easy,
relatively easy.
Other people have to really try.
They have to try hard.
They have to try more than 3630
once.
But I'll tell you, members of the jury, it's
common sense if you don't make any sincere efforts
or any efforts to quit, you're not going to quit.
And if you don't really want to quit, you're not
going to quit.
And do you remember what Dr. Henningfield told
you on cross-examination?
He said, even today --
remember, I showed him that article that his friend
wrote, Michael Fiore, last month in The New England
Journal of Medicine.
He said, Even today, 70
percent of smokers tell their doctor they're not
ready to quit yet.
From the time Mrs. Goveia became a regular
smoker, it is not clear that she ever put her
cigarettes down for more than a single day.
So let me ask you something.
In 50 years of
smoking, if a person is not willing to put her
cigarettes down for more than a single day, don't
you have to ask yourself, how committed was she to
really trying to quit?
Dr. Burns told you that a smoker is able to
quit smoking when she can muster sufficient internal
resources and is provided with sufficient external
support.
What does that mean?
It means she has to
really want to quit and it's very helpful if her 3631
family and friends encourage her to quit and support
her efforts.
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT:
Overruled.
You can raise it again
if you think it's appropriate.
MR. COFER:
Dr. Burns told you, and this is a
quote from Dr. Burns, quote, "It is very clear from
the literature that family support is an important
aid in helping people successfully stay off
cigarettes."
Dr. Burns also told you -- and this is a
quote -- and I was very careful to read the question
so it would be very clear what he said -- "Dr. Burns
encourages people trying to quit to talk to their
family and draw support from their environment."
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor.
MR. COFER:
That was a direct --
THE COURT:
The objection is overruled.
Well,
let me just ask, what's the legal basis?
MR. MITNIK:
Well, the basis is relevance.
MR. COFER:
It goes to why she continued to
smoke, Your Honor.
THE COURT:
I'm not asking for a response at
this point.
MR. COFER:
I'm sorry. 3632
THE COURT:
Objection is overruled.
MR. MITNIK:
Prejudicial outweighed by
probative.
THE COURT:
Overruled.
MR. COFER:
Okay.
Just to back up so it's
clear where we are, Dr. Burns said it's very clear
from the literature that family support is an
important aid in helping people successfully stay
off cigarettes and that Dr. Burns himself encourages
people who are trying to quit to talk to their
family and draw support from their environment.
But, members of the jury, Mary Goveia never
asked anyone in her family for help in quitting
smoking.
Debbie said that, you know, she didn't weigh in
because her mother was an adult and it was her
mother's business to decide whether she wanted to
smoke.
In fact, I want you to think about the
evidence.
The evidence was that even after
Mrs. Goveia was sick with COPD -- in fact, even
after COPD was so bad that she was on oxygen, Debbie
kept smoking around her.
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor.
Sidebar.
THE COURT:
Sustained. 3633
MR. MITNIK:
Move to strike.
MR. COFER:
May I approach, Your Honor?
THE COURT:
You may approach.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the
hearing of the jury as follows:)
THE COURT:
The sentence that was objected to
was that the daughter continued to smoke around
Mrs. Goveia.
Go ahead.
MR. COFER:
And it's all in evidence in the
next line.
It's, in fact, she gave Mrs. Goveia
drags off her cigarettes.
This is in evidence.
The
jury has heard it.
Their own expert said that it's
an important reason why people are able to quit
smoking or they don't quit smoking.
This goes to
legal cause.
The Douglas opinion specifically says
we can argue there are other reasons why people
continue to smoke other than addiction.
They -- I said they could have a curative
instruction.
I said they could have an instruction
that -- you know, there's no place on the jury
verdict form to blame or allocate fault to the
family members, so I'm happy to tell the jury that
right now.
But the point is, this is my theory on class

membership.
It is in evidence, and it's a proper
line of argument.
This is closing argument.
MR. MITNIK:
He doesn't need -- there's -- to
be talking about what someone else did is going
straight to implying comparative fault.
THE COURT:
Okay.
MR. COFER:
Okay.
I'm --
THE COURT:
Sure.
Just a minute.
I agree with him.
All of this is in evidence;
okay?
The issue, then, is how it's being applied.
MR. COFER:
And -- I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
I
apologize.
THE COURT:
Okay.
I'm going to allow -- it is
in evidence, but it has to be clear that they cannot
consider that other people in any way contributed.
MR. COFER:
I'll address that right now.
I'll
make that crystal clear.
THE COURT:
Appreciate it.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held:)
MR. COFER:
Members of the jury, where we were
is that Dr. Burns told you that he encourages people
who are trying to quit to talk to their family and
draw support from their environment.
It's very
clear from the literature that family support is an 3635
important aid in helping people successfully stay
off cigarettes.
The evidence is Mrs. Goveia never asked anyone
in her family for help in quitting.
Debra Goveia
testified she never encouraged her mother to quit
because her mother was an adult and it was her
mother's business to decide whether she wanted to
smoke.
Even after Mrs. Goveia went on oxygen,
Debbie continued to smoke around her.
And, in fact,
the evidence was that she would occasionally give --
Debbie would occasionally give her mother drags off
Debbie's cigarettes.
Now, let me be very clear.
I am not suggesting
that Debbie Goveia has any fault for her mother's
decision to continue smoking.
I'm not suggesting
that John Goveia has any fault for his wife's
decision to continue smoking.
When you look at the
verdict form, there's no place on that to allocate
fault to either Debbie or John Goveia, and I'm not
suggesting that at all.
But the question is, why didn't she quit?
Why
did she keep smoking?
What were the circumstances
that affected her decisions?
Debbie Goveia told you that when her mother
wasn't smoking and would, quote, get really bitchy, 3636
her father would tell her, "Jesus Christ, Mary, why
don't you light up a cigarette?"
Or he would offer
to go to the store and buy her a pack.
Similarly, Mr. Goveia testified he would buy
her a pack of cigarettes just to keep her quiet.
And if you credit Mr. Goveia's testimony, he
had no reason to suggest that she quit until she got
COPD, because he told you that until the 1990s when
his wife got sick, they had no idea smoking could be
bad for them.
They had no idea cigarette smoking
could cause cancer or could cause emphysema.
Up
until then, the only reason his wife wanted to quit
was because she didn't like the smell.
So if you didn't know smoking could be bad, if
you never heard it could cause cancer, if you never
heard it could cause emphysema, why tell people to
quit?
Now, interestingly, back in the 1980s,
Mr. Goveia did tell you that he heard on the news
that smoking cigars and pipes could cause lip
cancer.
So what did he do?
He broke his pipes, he
threw all his cigars away, and he never smoked
again.
The plaintiff wants you to believe that he and
his wife missed all the news reports, public service 3637
announcements, and other information that cigarette
smoking causes disease.
Well, Dr. Burns told you that the 1964 Surgeon
General Report was one of the biggest public health
stories of the 20th century.
How did they miss it all?
Well, Mr. Mitnik
says it's Defendants' fault.
Mr. Mitnik said that
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris hid all the
information, and so Mrs. Goveia had no reason to
know that smoking could be dangerous.
So that takes us to Question 3:
What, if
anything, did the defendants do wrong that caused
Mrs. Goveia to smoke and get sick?
I told you in opening statement that the
evidence would be that Mrs. Goveia always had access
to the information she needed to make an informed
decision whether to smoke or quit smoking.
Members of the jury, not one single person ever
suggested that Mrs. Goveia was confused about the
risks of smoking.
Not one single person ever
suggested that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds
tricked her into becoming a smoker.
In fact, the
evidence was the opposite.
The evidence was -- the information was
available. 3638
And I want you to think about what you heard
during trial.
Dr. Burns told you that it has been known for a
very long time that smoking can be bad for you.
He
told you that a hundred years ago people were
referring to cigarettes as coffin nails and to
cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends.
You heard in
1899 the State of Florida actually banned the sale
of cigarettes in part because smoking could be bad
for you.
Here was a 1906 Florida Health Notes I showed
to Dr. Burns, so over a hundred years ago.
"Today,
the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the
very worst form of tobacco addiction."
That was
July of 1906 talking about cigarettes being the
worst form of addiction.
1912, Florida Health Notes, referred to
cigarettes as coffin nails.
"Every time you light a
cigarette, it's another nail in your coffin."
1938, TIME magazine -- this was when Mary
Goveia was 14 years old -- specifically had an
article referring to cigarettes as coffin nails.
Dr. Burns told you in the 1930s and 1940s and
1950s that Reader's Digest repetitively ran articles
on smoking and disease.
He told you that Reader's 3639
Digest was one of the most popular magazines in the
country.
Well, here's an article from 1941, the year
after John and Mary Goveia met.
It's written by
Gene Tunney, the former heavyweight boxing champion
of the world.
"Nicotine Knockout or the Slow Count:
The cause of most of the trouble is of course
nicotine.
The powerful poison is the source of all
the pleasure derived from smoking."
1941.
Here's one from two years after they were
married.
"Cancer by the carton.
Recent medical
researches on the relationship of smoking and lung
cancer."
As you can see, members of the jury, right
around the time that Mr. and Mrs. Goveia got
married, right here in 1950, studies were being
published that reported on the link between
cigarette smoking and lung cancer.
Remember I talked with Burns about the
epidemiological studies, both the retrospective ones
that looked backwards and prospective ones that
looked forward in 1950.
You heard about the 1953 mouse skin-painting
test.
That's where they shaved the backs of mice
and they painted tobacco tars on and they produced 3640
skin tumors.
It was recorded in a medical journal.
And here's how it was in LIFE magazine, an
oversized pictorial magazine, one of the most
popular magazines in the world.
"Smoke gets in the
news.
Doctor reports tobacco tar induces mouse
cancer, note rise in cigarette use and human lung
cancer."
And let me tell you, we know for a fact that
these studies were getting a lot of attention and
people were talking about them because in June of
1954, four years after the Goveias married, the
Gallup company conducted a national poll where they
asked the question:
Have you heard or read anything
recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be
a cause of cancer of the lungs?
Ninety percent said
yes.
How many questions can you ask, you know, a
group of people these days and get 90 percent to say
yes?
This was 1954 when Mary Goveia is 30 years
old.
Ten years later in 1964, the Surgeon General of
the United States published his landmark report
announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was a
proven cause of cancer in men.
The data for women,
though less extensive, points in the same direction.
Now, I want you to think about that.
Isn't 3641
that interesting?
Plaintiff tells you that by the 1950s, the
defendants should have known that cigarette smoking
causes every disease on the face of the earth.
Yet
in 1964, with the epidemiological studies, with the
mouse skin-painting studies, the Surgeon General
said the data wasn't extensive enough to even reach
the judgment that smoking causes lung cancer in
women.
Think about that.
Plaintiff's own experts told you this report
was a big deal and got a ton of publicity.
As I
mentioned, Dr. Burns told you it was one of the top
public health stories in the last 100 years.
It was
the lead story on nightly news; it was on the front
page of newspapers; it was on the cover of national
magazines.
People were talking about it and talking
about it big time
Some of you may remember that there were only
three television stations back then:
CBS, ABC, and
NBC
Here's how the story was covered on CBS news
with Harry Reasoner.
Queue it up.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the
court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) 3642
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:
This is a CBS News
Extra on smoking and health; the findings of the
Surgeon General's committee.
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:
Almost from the moment
that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked.
But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and
culminated in today's report by the Surgeon
General's committee.
"This, in summary, is what the committee says:
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in
men, and data on women smokers points the same way.
Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer
of the larynx and probably the most important cause
of chronic bronchitis.
Cigarette smoking may be
related to other lung diseases.
"Male smokers have a much higher death rate
from heart disease, although it's not proven that
smoking is the cause.
"On the question of filters, the committee said
there is no evidence they do any good, but it didn't
exclude the possibility that an effective filter
might be developed.
"In short, the committee said, 'If you smoke
cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying
early.
The sooner you start, the more you smoke, 3643
the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.'
"The Surgeon General's committee presented its
report at a news conference in Washington.
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:
After long and
exhaustive deliberations, the committee reached the
overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health
hazard of sufficient importance to the United States
to warrant remedial action.
"This overall judgment was supported by many
converging lines of evidence, as well as by data
indicating that cigarette smoking is related to
higher death rates in a number of disease
categories.
"More specifically, the committee states on
Page 61 of the report, and I quote, 'In view of the
continuing and mounting evidence from many sources,
it is a judgment of the committee that cigarette
smoking contributes substantially to mortality from
certain specific diseases and to the overall death
rate.'
"UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:
Cigarettes have been an
intimate and reassuring companion.
The familiar
slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of
our lives.
It's like being told that an old friend
had all along been betraying you.
In a case like 3644
that, you give the old friend every possible chance
before you finally decide to believe what you have
been told, and maybe even then, you give him a
chance to reform.
"In this kind of a country, it comes down to
you, whether you like it or not.
No one is going to
forbid an adult to smoke.
And it is now quite clear
that no one is going to tell him it's good for him
either.
The decision is his, the decision and the
health that may depend on it.
"This is Harry Reasoner.
Goodnight."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. COFER:
Throughout this case, Plaintiff has
told you Defendants said that smoking was not
addictive, was not an addiction.
Well, let's see
what the Surgeon General said in 1964.
The Surgeon General said that smoking was more
accurately characterized as a habit and not an
addiction.
And the reason why is, the definition at
the time -- the World Health Organization's
definition at the time required that the substance
be intoxicating.
And cigarette smoking, unlike
alcohol, cocaine, heroin, is not intoxicating.
And you heard it was not until 24 years later
in 1988 that the Surgeon General adopted a different 3645
definition, dropped the requirement of addiction,
and then said, okay, it's now an addiction.
But I want you to remember something else.
In
1964, when the Surgeon General called it a habit, he
was very clear to say:
Correctly designating the
chronic use of tobacco as habituation rather than
addiction carries with it no implication that the
habit may be broken easily.
No one was saying it is easy to quit smoking.
And it didn't matter whether you called it an
addiction or a habituation.
The point is the
definition, the medical definition at the time, the
Surgeon General said it's not an addiction.
What's more, Dr. Burns told you that even today
in 2014, mental health professionals don't like to
use the word "addiction" because of its uncertain
definition and its negative connotation.
Now, as a result of the Surgeon General's
Report, Congress got involved and the first warning
label went on the packs.
This was 1966.
Congress
told the companies exactly what the warning would
say, how big it would be, and where it would be
located on the cigarette pack.
Now, today that looks pretty mild.
But, you
know, to take a cue from Mr. Mitnik, if you put 3646
yourself back in time, there were no warnings on
coffee.
There were no warnings on soft drinks.
There were no warnings on alcohol.
This was a big
deal.
So this warning went on every pack of
cigarettes sold from January 1st, 1966.
Three years later in 1970, the warning label
changed, making it stronger.
The 1970 label said:
"Warning:
The Surgeon General has determined that
cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
For the next 15 years, every cigarette that
Mary Goveia smoked came from a package that had that
warning label on the pack.
Now, Dr. Burns admitted that in 1981, clear
back in 1981, Dr. Burns gave a speech to the
American Lung Association where he said 95 percent
of people were thoroughly aware of the risks of
smoking and 90 percent realized that their smoking
was harming their health.
But it's Plaintiff's
position that neither he nor his wife had any idea
smoking could be bad until a decade later, until the
1990s.
Members of the jury, I told you in opening
statement that the evidence would be that 1985 was a
very important year in this case.
The warning
changed. 3647
Now, in his closing argument, Mr. Mitnik said
that the companies continued to hide the fact that
if you quit smoking you reduce your risk.
He said
that was something they should have told Mary Goveia
so she would have known she could have quit.
Well, beginning October 12th, 1985, the warning
was on the pack that specifically said, "Quitting
smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your
health."
Right here, 1985, about the time that John
and Mary Goveia moved to Florida.
But the warning said something else too.
Didn't say may be harmful, didn't say is dangerous,
it said:
"Surgeon General's warning:
Smoking
causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and
may complicate pregnancy."
And Dr. Burns told you that emphysema is
synonymous with COPD.
It's the same thing.
So from 1985 through the rest of Mary Goveia's
life, there were warnings on packages that said two
things:
Quitting smoking now greatly reduces
serious risks to health and smoking causes the very
disease that she would later develop and die from.
And, members of the jury, the Surgeon General's
warnings was not the only information Mary Goveia
had in the mid-1980s that cigarette smoking could 3648
cause COPD, could harm the lungs.
Paul Downing, Mary Goveia's nephew, told you
that his mother, Kathleen, was Mary Goveia's older
sister and that Kathleen and Mary were close.
And
he told you that after his mother had COPD, Mary
came up to visit in about '86 or '87.
Remember, all of Mary Goveia's brothers and
sisters were smokers.
Do you really think that when
Mary Goveia went up to see her sister after her
sister was sick with COPD they didn't talk about her
COPD?
Kathleen was not the only member of Mary
Goveia's family who was experiencing lung problems
in the 1980s.
In 1987, Debbie Goveia moved to Florida.
She
left her husband, and she and her twin boys moved in
with her parents, with Mr. and Mrs. Goveia.
And
shortly after she arrived to Orlando in 1987, Mary
Goveia came down with pneumonia.
And, remember, she
told you it was really bad and she was admitted to
the Florida Hospital.
And she was treated by
Dr. Faisal Fakih, who's a local lung doctor.
Mr. Goveia told you that in 1987 was when he
and his wife first met Dr. Fakih.
They met him when
they were visiting their daughter, Debbie, in the 3649
hospital where she was being treated for emphysema.
Dr. Fakih later became Mrs. Goveia's
pulmonologist.
He was the doctor that took care of
her the rest of her life.
Debbie testified that Dr. Fakih saved her life
and she is sure he told her to quit smoking because,
quote, "Pulmonologists hate smoking."
Do you really think that when Mary Goveia
visited her husband -- visited her daughter in the
hospital in 1987 when she was being treated for
pneumonia by Dr. Fakih that she didn't know that the
doctor told her daughter to quit smoking because
smoking was harming her daughter's lungs?
And that was not the only information that
Mrs. Goveia had in the 1980s that smoking could be
dangerous.
Because you remember, Mr. Goveia read
somewhere or heard on the news that smoking a pipe
could cause lip cancer.
So he broke his pipes,
threw away his cigars, quit smoking in one second,
and never smoked again.
Why did he quit?
Because he didn't want to run
the risk of getting cancer from smoking.
Now, these warnings and these experiences are
critically important in this case, and here's why:
Because it is undisputed that if a smoker quits 3650
smoking before she gets significant COPD, she won't
go on to get it, at least not from smoking.
Remember, there's a chart from the 2010 Surgeon
General's Report that we showed you with Dr. Burns.
And what Dr. Burns told you was that the more a
person smokes and the longer she smokes, the worse
her COPD will get and the worse her symptoms will
get.
But when a person stops smoking, the
progression of her COPD slows and her loss of lung
function goes back to that of a never-smoker.
That's one of the reasons why doctors tell smokers
to quit.
And this is critical in this case.
If you look
at it, see the middle chart, if someone stops
smoking at age 50, look what happens to their lung
function.
They never get to the point where they
have disability or death from COPD.
Even if you
smoke all the way to 65 and you're disabled and
stop, it gets better and you get years back.
Mr. Mitnik [sic] told you that his wife had no
health problems until she was diagnosed with COPD.
Mr. Goveia testified that his wife's health was
perfect.
He said that it was perfect when she lived
in Massachusetts and that she was a healthy, healthy
woman right up until the 1990s. 3651
Well, if that's true -- and Dr. Burns told that
to you too -- and if they're right, then if
Mrs. Goveia would have quit smoking when the
warnings went on the pack in 1985 that said quitting
smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your
health and smoking causes emphysema, and when she
went and visited her sister Kathleen in
Massachusetts who was already suffering with COPD,
and when she visited her daughter in the hospital,
at Florida Hospital in 1987, when she was recovering
from very severe pneumonia, and when her husband
quit smoking cigars and pipes when he heard they
could cause lip cancer, if it's true that she didn't
have significant COPD at that point, had she quit
when she had that information, we wouldn't be here.
But as you know, she didn't quit.
In
fact, when her husband quit smoking, she didn't try
to quit.
Okay.
I want to talk to you a little bit about
some of the documents that you've seen throughout
this trial and that Mr. Mitnik showed you this
morning.
You may recall I told you in opening statement
that if you look back over the 60 years, the last 60
years at the millions of pages of documents written 3652
by the thousands of employees of Philip Morris and
other companies, I told you they said some dumb
things.
I told you they said things like smoking
wasn't a proven cause of disease and smoking wasn't
addictive.
I told you they hung their hats on too
many technical distinctions.
I told you they hung
on to those views for way too long.
But I want you to think about how Plaintiff
showed you those documents.
They literally took
snippets out of context from a series of documents
written 30 and 40 and 50 years ago.
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor.
I object
because of the comment about counsel.
THE COURT:
Sustained.
MR. COFER:
I apologize.
I apologize.
And
when I say "counsel," I mean Plaintiff.
Because
everyone knows the parties are represented by
counsel.
I have the privilege and responsibility of
representing my client, just like Mr. Prysock and
Mr. Mitnik have the privilege and responsibility of
representing their client.
So if I say "counsel," I
apologize.
I mean Plaintiff.
So I want you to think about how Plaintiff
showed you these documents.
They took snippets out
of context from documents that were written 30 and 3653
40 and 50 years ago and they strung them together
and they didn't even try to tie them in to decisions
that Mary Goveia made or to this case.
And they
didn't tell you the full story either.
And let me give you just a couple of examples.
Remember they showed you a 1961 Philip Morris R&D
memo that had a partial list of compounds in
cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens.
And
on direct examination, Plaintiff tried to leave you
with the impression that Philip Morris knew
something that the Surgeon General didn't.
Well, it wasn't until cross-examination that
you learned that these compounds came from the
public literature.
This information was available
to the Surgeon General, any scientist, anyone who
wanted to look.
But Plaintiff also tried to suggest
that Philip Morris did not share this information
with the Surgeon General.
And then I showed you that, actually, seven
months before the 1964 Surgeon General's Report,
Philip Morris sent them a list of the compounds and
the carcinogens in cigarette smoke.
Philip Morris
did not hide this information.
They said, Here's a
list of the constituents of cigarette smoke
including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, 3654
nitrosamines, ammonia, metals, arsenic.
What they
said is, We don't think they're present in large
enough amounts to be harmful.
You remember I talked with Dr. Henningfield
about something called dose/response.
And you
remember we told you there are carcinogens in the
air we breathe and we're breathing right now.
There's carcinogens in the water we drink.
There's
carcinogens in the food we eat.
But unless you
ingest enough of those carcinogens, they never cause
problems.
Here's another example.
On closing argument,
Mr. Mitnik said -- talked about the power of
nicotine addiction is the secret ingredient that the
companies kept secret.
He said that we were selling
a drug that was addictive and kills and didn't tell
anybody.
Well, frankly, that's just nonsense.
The 1906
Florida Health Notes referred to cigarette smoking
as the worst form of tobacco addiction.
Dr. Henningfield told you it has been known
since the early 1900s that smokers smoke for the
pharmacological effect of nicotine.
Mr. -- Dr. Burns, Mr. Prysock -- Mr. Mitnik, in
his closing, showed you excerpts from a few 3655
documents, and Plaintiff suggests that Philip Morris
was trying to hide the fact that people smoked for
nicotine.
And then I showed you the speech.
This was a public speech given by Bill Dunn, a
researcher at Philip Morris, where he said that
people smoke for nicotine.
This was 1972.
After
the speech, he gave an interview to the newspaper,
Sunday edition, where he said people smoke for
nicotine.
And then after the speech and after the
interview, he published a book that said people
smoke for nicotine.
If Philip Morris were trying to hide the fact
that nicotine is an important reason why people
smoke, they certainly chose an odd way to do it.
And, incidentally, Dr. Dunn's book has been
published by the Surgeon General in several cited --
not published.
Cited in several of the Surgeon
General Reports, including the 1988 Surgeon
General's Report that Dr. Henningfield edited on
nicotine addiction, which you didn't see, the
speech, the interview, or the book until
cross-examination.
Why not?
One last example.
Today in closing argument,
Mr. Mitnik referred to this document and he showed 3656
you this document during direct examination.
1964,
a couple weeks after the Surgeon General's Report,
George Weissman, employee of Philip Morris, says,
"However, at some point, reflecting the same
seriousness with which we met the report, we must in
the near future provide answers which will give
smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale
to continue smoking."
Well, that sounded really bad; right?
But what
you didn't learn until cross-examination is that
George Weissman did not make up the term
"psychological crutch."
It was in the 1964 Surgeon
General's Report under the beneficial effects of
tobacco.
Quote, "The drive to use tobacco being
fundamentally psychogenic in origin has the same
basis as other drug habits and in a large fraction
of the American population appears to satisfy the
total needs of the individual for a psychological
crutch."
And it wasn't until cross-examination that
you saw the last paragraph of Mr. Weissman's memo.
In closing, the main essence of the report and
the publicity to me is that it has still left
smoking on an individual basis, the individual's own
choice of the psychological benefit versus the
alleged hazard.
Anything that impinges on the right 3657
of the individual to make this choice is contrary to
our most basic traditions.
George Weissman did not invent the term
"psychological crutch," and he used the term to talk
about the psychological benefits, people weighing on
an individual basis the benefits of them to smoking
versus the risks of smoking.
You also saw some articles and some video clips
where employees of Philip Morris and Tobacco
Institute and other companies said they didn't
believe that smoking was a proven cause of lung
cancer.
But to put that in context, let's -- it's
important to know why they said that.
The companies never denied that smoking was
statistically associated with cigarette smoking.
Their position was, however, that statistics alone
can't prove causation.
And the reason why they took
that position is 80 percent of smokers never get
lung cancer and nonsmokers get lung cancer too.
So
smoking is not a necessary and sufficient cause of
lung cancer because you can get it if you never
smoked and 80 percent of people smoke and never get
it.
So the company said, Come on.
Something else
must be going on. 3658
Now, those are technical arguments.
I admit
they're technical arguments and they're not very
convincing.
And I'll tell you, looking back, you'll
see it and you go, "What were those guys saying?"
But here's the point:
Unless Plaintiff proves
that Mrs. Goveia saw or heard those statements and
they affected her decisions in some way, they have
absolutely nothing to do with this case.
The issue isn't whether the company said some
dumb things.
The issue is whether they said
something that fooled Mrs. Goveia or caused
Mrs. Goveia to begin and continue smoking.
And
where was the evidence at, members of the jury?
I want to talk about light cigarettes.
Mr. Mitnik talked about light cigarettes and filters
and argued they were a fraud because the companies
knew people could change the way they smoke to get
more nicotine.
Well, the fact that people could change the way
they smoke to get more nicotine has been well known
since the 1960s.
You remember I told you -- showed you the
statements that the companies made to the FTC when
the FTC was considering smoking machines.
And
remember Dr. Henningfield said, Well, the companies 3659
weren't telling us anything we didn't know.
We knew
people could change the way they smoke.
Compensation wasn't a secret.
You remember I showed you the Consumer Reports
article.
This is from May of 1976.
"Less tar, less
nicotine, is that good?"
Where it says, "Nicotine
is an addicting agent for most smokers.
When
cigarette smoke contains less nicotine than such
smokers are accustomed to, their bodies simply
contrive ways to get more smoke."
And they
described in detail the various ways that many
people compensate.
The 1979 and '81 Surgeon General Reports
specifically talked about compensation.
Yet even
knowing that, the Surgeon General said in 1971 and
1975 and 1979 and 1981 that if smokers were not
going to quit, they should smoke lower-tar
cigarettes.
And why did the public health community, the
Surgeon General say that?
Is because 50
epidemiological studies reported that people who
smoked filter and low-tar cigarettes had lower lung
cancer rates.
You remember I showed you the video of the
American Cancer Society that reported in 1975 based 3660
on a 12-year study of tens of thousands of smokers,
low tar and nicotine users had a 26 percent less
chance of getting lung cancer than those who smoked
high-tar cigarettes.
That's what the epidemiology
showed.
And why?
Why is that true?
Because not every
smoker compensates.
And compensation is not always
complete.
Dr. Henningfield told you that.
You remember I
asked him twice to make sure that it was clear.
I
said, "Dr. Henningfield, you believe that
compensation is not complete.
You believe it's
incomplete."
And he said, "Yes, I believe that."
He had a different opinion than Dr. Burns.
And you may also remember that I -- he talked
about IARC, the International Agency for Research on
Cancer.
We were comparing it to the National Cancer
Institute.
And what Dr. Henningfield told you was
in 2003, after he and Burns and the public health
community got all the tobacco company documents, in
2003, IARC published a monograph concluding that the
evidence establishes that filters are safer on a
population basis, and that's because people smoked
their cigarettes differently.
Some compensate and
some don't.
And Burns told you that if you actually 3661
get less tar and nicotine, that that's a good thing.
To be clear, members of the jury, while the
public health community was urging smokers to switch
to filtered and low-tar cigarettes, they never said
low-tar cigarettes were safe.
They always said they
were safer and they always emphasized that the only
way to avoid the risk completely was to not smoke at
all.
Mr. Mitnik argued that the defendants'
advertising fooled Mrs. Goveia into thinking light
cigarettes were safer.
He told you in closing
arguments that in the '80s and '90s, Mary Goveia
encouraged her daughter to smoke Lights because they
were supposed to be less damaging and harmful to
health.
Well, you may remember that Debbie Goveia
testified that at one point in the 1980s, her mother
told her that Marlboro Reds were too strong and she
suggested that Debbie smoke Marlboro Lights.
But
Debbie also testified she doesn't know where her
mother got that information about lights.
She
specifically said she doesn't know whether it came
from TV or family or friends.
Mr. Goveia told you he thinks his wife saw a TV
ad for Marlboro Lights and that's why she smoked 3662
them, but you know that could not possibly have
happened because all the cigarette ads went off TV
and radio on January 2nd, 1971, and Marlboro Lights
weren't even on the market at the time, so clearly
Mr. Goveia's memory was mistaken.
Members of the jury, there's no evidence that
Mrs. Goveia smoked a particular cigarette brand
because of an ad.
Debbie Goveia testified her
mother never told her she bought a particular
cigarette brand because of an ad.
Mr. Goveia never discussed any cigarette ads
with his wife; she never told him why she switched
brands; he doesn't know why she smoked any
particular cigarette.
So there's no evidence that
Mrs. Goveia ever said that she bought light
cigarettes or low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes
because of an ad.
But here's the kicker:
If you think about
Plaintiff's argument, it really doesn't make any
sense, because on the one hand, Plaintiff says that
Mary Goveia smoked light cigarettes because she
thought they were safer.
On the other hand -- and
she did that in the '70s and '80s.
On the other
hand, he said until the 1990s and she was diagnosed
with COPD, she had no idea that any type of 3663
cigarette was dangerous at all.
And if Mrs. Goveia didn't know that any type of
cigarette was dangerous until the '90s, why did she
possibly tell her daughter in the '80s that light
cigarettes were less dangerous?
Plaintiff can't have it both ways.
Either
Mrs. Goveia knew in the '70s and '80s that smoking
was addictive, that smoking was dangerous, or she
didn't.
There may be some people who smoked light
cigarettes because they were somehow confused about
the risks, but, members of the jury, there's
evidence that Mary Goveia wasn't one of them.
Okay.
Let's talk for just a few minutes about
you smoking.
Why is Plaintiff trying so hard to
convince you that it's Philip Morris and
R.J. Reynolds' fault that Mrs. Goveia began smoking
when she was young?
Well, because we know kids
shouldn't smoke, because we're protective of our
kids.
Because Plaintiff is asking for punitive
damages in this case.
And Plaintiff understands
that you smoking is an emotional issue and it pushes
people's buttons and it makes people mad.
But where's the evidence?
Where's the
evidence?
Because the only evidence there was with 3664
respect to Mary Goveia is that everyone in her
family smoked and, as Mr. Mitnik told you on closing
argument, kids imitate what they see.
With respect to Philip Morris, members of the
jury, there is no evidence that Mary Goveia
regularly smoked any Philip Morris brand until the
1980s when she switched to Marlboro Lights.
There's
no evidence whatsoever that she smoked Philip Morris
brands when she was a kid.
And there's simply no
evidence to support Plaintiff's argument that either
Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds caused Mary Goveia to
start smoking when she was a kid.
So let's talk about the burden of proof.
We
talked about that in voir dire and we talked about
it in opening statement.
And I told you in opening
statement that in this country, if someone thinks
they've been harmed by the actions of others, they
can file a lawsuit and they can ask a jury of their
peers to decide whether they're entitled to recover.
But they have the burden of proving their claim, and
they have to prove it through competent, persuasive
evidence.
In this case, it's Plaintiff's burden of proof.
So I want you to think about the evidence the
plaintiff has offered and the positions that he's 3665
taken.
I want you to know, they called no witness who
knew Mary Goveia before 1940.
I'm not blaming them
for that, but the fact is there's no evidence on
that.
And that's the period of time where Plaintiff
claims that his wife was already a lifelong
cigarette addict.
No one told you when she began
smoking or why she began smoking or who she was with
or what brand it was or when she became a regular
smoker.
There's just no evidence on that, and
that's Plaintiff's burden of proof.
The only witness who testified about Mary
Goveia's smoking decisions between 1940 and 1965 is
the plaintiff, Mr. Goveia himself.
And he testified that during that 32-year
period, up until the '80s, he worked two jobs.
He
was only home between 5:00 and 11:00 during the
week.
He was only home six hours a night, that's
Monday through Friday, during all that period.
For
32 years, Mr. Goveia had a very limited opportunity
to observe his wife's smoking.
He wasn't there
during the week when she woke up in the morning to
know whether she smoked a cigarette.
Plaintiff presented no other evidence to
corroborate that testimony. 3666
There were no medical records.
They didn't
identify a single doctor who ever treated
Mrs. Goveia before Dr. Fakih in the 1990s.
And this
lack of information is important because Plaintiff
has taken inconsistent positions about what
Mrs. Goveia knew about the risks of smoking.
THE COURT:
Mr. Cofer, one hour.
MR. COFER:
Thank you, Your Honor.
On the one hand, Mr. Goveia testified that
until his wife was diagnosed with COPD in the 1990s,
they had no idea smoking was bad.
On the other
hand, he argues in the '70s and '80s she told their
daughter to smoke light cigarettes because they were
better.
You can't have it both ways.
Plaintiff also argues that Mrs. Goveia had no
reason to know smoking was bad until the 1990s, but
her personal experiences show otherwise.
You heard about Paul Downing in 1986 or '87.
Mrs. Goveia went to Massachusetts to visit her
sister who had COPD.
The next year in 1987,
Mrs. Goveia went to the hospital to visit her
daughter who was recovering from pneumonia.
It's
inconceivable that Mary Goveia would not have known
that Dr. Fakih told her daughter, Debbie, that she
needed to stop smoking because it was harming her 3667
lungs.
And as you also know in the late 1980s,
Mr. Goveia quit smoking pipes and cigars.
Finally, members of the jury, the Goveia family
can't even agree on what year it was that
Mrs. Goveia was rushed to the hospital in an
ambulance because she was having trouble breathing.
In his deposition, Mr. Goveia said it happened
before he met Dr. Fakih in 1992.
At trial he said,
Well, no, actually, I now remember I met Dr. Fakih
in 1987, but the 911 incident didn't happen
until '95 or '96.
And Debbie Goveia testified to a specific date.
Do you remember?
She said it was December 26th,
1998.
It's a key fact in this case.
To this very
day, John and Debbie Goveia can't even tell you what
year it happened.
Finally, I want you to think about the two paid
expert witnesses the plaintiff did call:
Dr. Burns
and Dr. Henningfield.
Neither one knew Mrs. Goveia.
Neither one made any effort to investigate her life
or what she knew, other than just review the
materials the plaintiff sent them.
And both were
listed as experts who would give case-specific 3668
opinions two months before they ever heard Mary
Goveia's name.
You heard that Plaintiff paid Dr. Burns $4,800
a day for Monday, for Tuesday, for Wednesday, for
Thursday, for Friday, for Monday, and for Tuesday.
Dr. Burns got paid $33,600 just for flying in to
Orlando to attend a trial.
He's told you he's been
paid between 1 and 2 million dollars in the Engle
cases alone.
And in 30 years of testifying, neither
Dr. Burns or Dr. Henningfield have ever testified in
a court of law that it's their opinion that the
plaintiff was not addicted.
That's why Plaintiff
could name them two months in advance before they
ever heard of Mary Goveia because Plaintiff was
comfortable with what they were going to say, no
matter what the facts, because that's what they
always say.
Dr. Henningfield talked about design change in
the cigarettes and how they had made cigarettes more
addictive.
He talked about reconstituted tobacco
and expanded tobacco and ammonia and filters and
ventilation.
He talked about all those things, you
know, that made cigarettes worse or more dangerous.
Mr. Mitnik said, until they alter the product 3669
in laboratories to get it down into the lungs.
That's when it all started.
Said people are
particularly vulnerable when they're teenagers.
Do you remember one of the last things I asked
Dr. Henningfield on cross-examination?
Do you
remember I put that chart up from the Surgeon
General Report?
I said, "Dr. Henningfield, it's
your opinion that Mary Goveia was already addicted
by 1940.
That was before there was reconstituted
tobacco; right?
That was before there was expanded
tobacco; right?
That was before there was
ventilation; correct?
That was before there was
ammonia technology; right?
Those cigarettes didn't
have filters on them, did they?"
And he said, "Yeah."
So you heard -- and Dr. Henningfield is an
impressive witness.
And you heard about his work
and his opinions and heard about it more than a day,
but then he admitted it, that those design changes
and those design innovations he talked about had
nothing to do with Mary Goveia becoming addicted
because she smoked cigarettes that didn't have them.
He also told you that initially when these
design changes were being implemented, the public
health community thought they were a good thing 3670
because they would reduce the amount of tar and
nicotine, and everyone thought if you could decrease
what you're exposed to, you could decrease the risk.
You may remember in opening statement I
suggested to you that as you listen to the evidence,
you should ask yourself, What does any of this have
to do with Mary Goveia?
Well, what Dr. Henningfield
told you was all those design changes had nothing to
do with his opinion that she became addicted by 1940
because they weren't on cigarettes.
Okay.
Let's look at the verdict form.
Lee, could you put up the first one?
Okay.
So the first question you'll be asked to
decide was whether Mary Goveia was a member of the
Engle class, and there are really two questions
you'll have to decide.
The first is:
Was Mary Goveia, in fact,
addicted to nicotine, and, if so, was her addiction
a legal cause of her COPD?
It's Plaintiff's burden to prove both of these
things.
And if he fails to prove either, then the
case is over and we all go home.
So let's talk about the word "addiction."
Was
Mary Goveia addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes?
There's nothing in the jury instructions that 3671
defines that term for you.
That's something you're
going to have to decide yourself.
You heard the
definition's changed over time.
You heard until
1988 the Surgeon General said it was not addictive
because it was not intoxicating.
You heard the
Surgeon General uses a different definition now.
Dr. Burns told you that he defines addiction as
a loss of control and a chronic relapsing brain
disease.
Well, if that's the definition, does it
apply to Mary Goveia?
The evidence was that during the 50 years that
Mrs. Goveia smoked, she only made a handful of
attempts to quit smoking.
She may have quit for a
day in 1956; she may have gone a day or a few hours
over the next 40 years.
Is that evidence that she
lacked control and that she suffered from a chronic
relapsing brain disease, or is that evidence that
she really didn't want to quit?
Which is it?
Where
is the evidence that Mrs. Goveia was really trying
hard to quit smoking, but nicotine kept forcing her
to smoke?
Where was that evidence?
Basically, Plaintiff's argument is that
Mrs. Goveia continued to smoke until she got sick;
therefore, she was addicted.
But that's an
argument.
That's not evidence. 3672
But let me tell you something.
I'm not sure it
really matters whether you decide she was addicted,
because the real issue is whether it was a legal
cause.
Plaintiff has to prove more than that
Mrs. Goveia was, in fact, addicted.
He also has to
prove that Mrs. Goveia's addiction was a legal cause
of her COPD.
And the evidence is that it was not.
The evidence is that Mrs. Goveia smoked because she
liked to smoke and she didn't want to quit.
You remember in both voir dire and opening I
told you there's a difference between a cause in
fact and legal cause, and I gave you the example of
a guy that steps out in the street and gets run over
by a truck.
What's the cause in fact?
He got run
over by a truck.
But what's the legal cause?
You
need to know more.
You need to know why he got run
over by a truck.
Did he ignore the warning light?
Was he texting?
Was the truck speeding?
And so on.
I want you to make sure it's clear that you
understand the difference between a cause in fact
and legal cause.
And here's the definition in the jury
instruction:
"An addiction to cigarettes containing
nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or medical
condition if it directly and in a natural and 3673
continuous sequence produces or contributes
substantially to producing such disease or medical
condition so that it can reasonably be said that but
for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine,
such disease or medical condition would not have
been suffered.
In order for addiction to have been a legal
cause of Mrs. Goveia's COPD, Plaintiff has to prove
she was, in fact, addicted and that her addiction
was so strong and so substantial that it can be
reasonably said that but for her addiction, she
would not have smoked and she would not have gotten
sick.
In other words, Plaintiff has to prove that had
she not been addicted, she would have quit sooner
and she would not have gotten sick.
Where was the evidence of that?
Burns and
Henningfield told you all smokers, including
addicted smokers, have the ability to quit.
Sixty
million people in this country have already quit.
Burns and Henningfield told you that the vast
majority of those people, in their opinion, were
addicted and had brain changes.
Where is the
evidence that Mrs. Goveia was any different than the
60 million Americans who had quit? 3674
Members of the jury, there simply is none.
The
bottom line is addicted smokers can and do quit
smoking every day.
They quit when they decide it's
more important for them not to smoke than it is to
smoke.
When Mary Goveia was diagnosed with COPD and
Dr. Fakih told her to quit smoking or she would die,
she told Mr. Goveia she was going to do what she
wants and she was going to continue to smoke whether
he liked it or not.
Mr. Goveia told you his wife
was headstrong.
She just did what she wanted to do
and you couldn't tell her nothing.
Those were his
words.
Members of the jury, the evidence is
Mrs. Goveia always had the ability to quit whenever
she truly wanted to quit.
Mrs. Goveia smoked not
because she was a helpless addict; she didn't quit
because she didn't want to quit.
Dr. Henningfield told you even today 70 percent
of smokers tell their doctors they're not ready to
quit yet.
An addiction to nicotine did not prevent
Mrs. Goveia from quitting smoking earlier; she
wasn't ready.
Members of the jury, I respectfully suggest
that the answer to Question Number 1 is no, 3675
Plaintiff has not met his burden of proving that
addiction was a legal cause of Mrs. Goveia's COPD.
And if you agree, then you should check "No" to
Question 1 and you should knock on the door and tell
the deputy that you have your verdict.
If you disagree, you go to Question 2.
And
this asks:
"Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by
Reynolds" -- and a separate question, Philip
Morris -- "a legal cause of Mrs. Goveia's death?"
A
legal cause of Mrs. Goveia's death.
For the very same reasons that an addiction to
nicotine was not a cause of her death, I suggest the
answer to this question is "No" also.
Do you remember Dr. Koop's website where
Dr. Koop said a cigarette does not light itself and
jump into a smoker's mouth?
The legal cause was
that Mrs. Goveia chose to keep smoking and she chose
not to quit.
She chose to ignore all the warnings.
She chose to ignore her doctor's advice, and she
chose to continue to smoke.
And with respect to Philip Morris, the answer
is "No" for an additional reason.
And that is,
Mrs. Goveia did not regularly start smoking any
Philip Morris brand until the 1980s when she
switched to Marlboro Lights.
And Dr. Burns told you 3676
that it takes 30 to 40 to 50 years of smoking before
a person damages her lungs enough to die from COPD.
And Dr. Burns told you that Mrs. Goveia already had
severe COPD by 1992.
Plaintiff has offered no evidence that Philip
Morris's cigarettes were a substantial cause of
Mrs. Goveia's death, and I respectfully suggest that
the answer to both 2 and 3 is no.
Questions 4 and 5 ask, "Please state whether
Mrs. Goveia reasonably relied to her detriment on
any statement by R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris that
concealed or omitted material information concerning
the health effects and/or addictive nature of
smoking cigarettes, and, if so, whether such
reliance was a legal cause."
In order to prove this claim, Plaintiff has to
prove that Mrs. Goveia reasonably relied on
something Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds said or
didn't say.
Members of the jury, there is
absolutely no evidence of that.
Not a single
witness testified that she was confused about the
health risks.
John Goveia specifically testified that his
wife never told him she relied on anything any
tobacco company said or didn't say to start or 3677
continue smoking.
There's no evidence that she ever
heard of the Frank Statement or the Council for
Tobacco Research or the Tobacco Institute or TIRC or
that she was ever influenced by them.
Respectfully, I suggest the evidence shows the
answer to these questions are "No."
Also, I would ask both before May 5th and after
May 5th, 1982.
The answer to both those questions,
I respectfully suggest, members of the jury, is
"No."
If you think about after 1982 --
THE COURT:
Mr. Cofer, 45 minutes for the
defense.
MR. COFER:
Thank you, Your Honor.
If you think about after 1982, the warnings had
already been on cigarette packs for 16 years.
For
over a decade, the warning specifically said
cigarette smoking is dangerous.
Again, for all
those reasons, I suggest the answer to these
questions are "No."
The next questions asked whether Mrs. Goveia
reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement
that was made in furtherance of Reynolds' or Philip
Morris's agreement to conceal or omit material
information concerning the health effects and/or 3678
addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and whether
it was a legal cause.
For the very same reasons that the questions
to -- these questions before was "No," the question
to these -- the answer is "No" as well.
And that's
because, again, Mr. Goveia told you, she never said
she heard the Frank Statement, TI, CTR, or TIRC.
She never said that she relied on anything the
companies said or did in her decisions to smoke.
The next question is something called
comparative fault.
If you decide that both
Mrs. Goveia and the defendants are responsible for
causing Mrs. Goveia's death, this is where you
assign how much responsibility each party has.
And let me tell you something so there's no
confusion.
You never get to comparative fault
unless you decide that Mrs. Goveia was a class
member.
This is a completely separate question.
If
Plaintiff does not prove that Mrs. Goveia was a
class member, then the case is over and you never
get this far.
But if you do get this far, here's where you
have to decide how much Mary Goveia's responsible,
how much Philip Morris was responsible, and how much
Reynolds was responsible. 3679
Mr. Mitnik told you Plaintiff admits that
Mrs. Goveia was partially responsible for causing
her COPD.
So I want you to think for just a minute
about what that means.
It can only mean that
Mrs. Goveia knew and understood that her smoking was
dangerous and it can only mean that Mrs. Goveia had
the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid her
COPD.
Because if you think about it, if she didn't
know that smoking was dangerous and she didn't have
the ability to quit in time, how could she have any
fault?
The fact that they admit that she's
partially responsible is an admission that she knew
it was bad for her and she had the ability to quit
in time to avoid her risks.
So if you get this far, members of the jury, I
respectfully suggest that the answer is Mrs. Goveia
is 100 percent.
And the reason I think that is
because only Mary Goveia had the ability to decide
whether she was going to smoke and continue to
accept that risk or whether she was going to quit.
The next question is compensatory damages.
It
asks, "What is the total amount of any damages
sustained by John Goveia for the loss of his wife's
companionship and protections and for his pain and
suffering as a result of Mary Goveia's injury and 3680
death?"
I can't help you with this.
You know, you saw
Mr. Goveia.
He told you about his relationship with
his wife.
And if you get this far and you decide
that Mr. Goveia is entitled to recover damages, then
it's up to your collective judgment to decide what's
a fair amount to compensate him for his loss.
So that takes us to the last question, Question
10.
"Under the circumstances of this case, state
whether you find by clear and convincing evidence
that punitive damages are warranted against each
defendant."
Let me be clear on what you're being asked to
decide.
You're not -- as Mr. Mitnik told you,
you're not being asked to decide an amount.
That
will be a different phase.
The issue is whether by
clear and convincing evidence Plaintiff has shown
that he is entitled to punitive damages.
So don't
spend one moment thinking about an amount.
When you look at the instructions, you will see
that they have to prove punitive damages by
something called clear and convincing evidence, and
that's defined for you.
And it's a much higher
standard than the greater weight of the evidence.
With respect to punitive damages, you will see


the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in
confusion, and of such great...that it produces a
firm belief or conviction without a hesitation on
the matter at issue.
It's a much higher standard.
You have to be really, really convinced they're
appropriate.
And let me tell you something else:
You have
to decide, if you get this far, that punitive
damages are warranted based on the conduct that
injured Mary Goveia.
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor.
That's a
misstatement of law.
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
MR. COFER:
This is John Goveia's case.
This
is not a class action.
Other people who believe
they have been harmed have an opportunity to bring
their own lawsuits.
They have an opportunity to
have their own juries.
They have an opportunity to
have their own counsel.
So the question with respect to punitive
damages in this case is you may consider the harm
that...
MR. WEAVER:
22.
MR. COFER:
No, it's not.
Thank you.
And this is in your jury instructions, so I
want to make sure you know where it is.
"When considering whether to award punitive
damages, you may consider any harm Defendants'
conduct caused Mary Goveia."
Let me repeat that
again.
It's very important.
"When considering whether to award" -- "whether
to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm
Defendants' conduct caused Mary Goveia."
You may also consider similar harms suffered by
other persons not parties in assessing the 3692
reprehensibility, or how bad the conduct was.
But the first line, "When considering whether
to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm
Defendants' conduct caused Mary Goveia."
That's why from opening statement on, I said
this case is about Mary Goveia.
And as you listen
to the evidence in this case, you should ask
yourself, did it affect Mary Goveia?
Did it affect
Mary Goveia?
Did it cause Mary Goveia to smoke?
Did it confuse her in some way?
And so it's very important when you think about
this that you think about, did it impact her, did it
affect her, or did she have the information that she
needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke
or quit smoking?
And let me say one more thing about Philip
Morris.
Dr. Burns testified that Marlboro Light was
Mary Goveia's principal brand, Philip Morris brand.
It did not come on the market until 1971.
Debbie
Goveia testified that her mom didn't start smoking
Marlboro Light until the 1980s.
And you remember why her mom started smoking
Marlboro Lights?
Her mom ran out of cigarettes and
she borrowed one of Debbie's Marlboro Reds and she
liked the way it tasted, but she wanted a lighter 3693
cigarette.
Debbie told you, then, that Marlboro
Light was the brand that she preferred once she
tried it.
Debbie told you her mother was always
trying to find a different flavor.
The evidence was
that Mrs. Goveia smoked Marlboro Light, Philip
Morris brand, not because of something Philip Morris
said, not because of an advertisement, but she tried
her daughter's cigarette and she liked it.
There's no evidence in this case that anything
Philip Morris did or didn't do caused Mary Goveia to
smoke as a child.
There's no evidence that she
smoked Philip Morris cigarettes as a child.
The
only evidence is that she smoked Philip Morris
brands regularly when she was in her 50s or 60s when
she was an adult in the '80s.
And Plaintiff has failed to tie any of the
evidence he presented to Mrs. Goveia and her smoking
decisions.
And he clearly hasn't done it under the
clear and convincing standard.
And I respectfully suggest to you, members of
the jury, that if you get this far, the answer to
Question 10 is no.
Okay.
Basically, my time's up, and so let me
just say this:
This is my time to thank you for
your service in this case.
I told you clear back in 3694
voir dire that we have the best system of civil
justice any country has ever known.
And the reason we have it is because men and
women like you are willing to take time out of your
lives and come in and spend a couple weeks to help
parties to decide a dispute they couldn't decide on
their own.
And you have been incredibly patient and
incredibly diligent, and, on behalf of everybody, we
appreciate it very much.
I told you in opening statement that all I ever
really wanted, I just wanted a fair shot.
I asked
you to please listen and give us an opportunity to
ask our questions and to tell you our side of the
case.
I know that you've done that.
And, again, it's an important case to the
Goveia family.
It's an important case to
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris too.
And thank you
very, very much for your service and thank you for
agreeing to serve as jurors in this case and thank
you for listening to my closing argument.


MR. WEAVER:
Mr. Goveia, counsel.
Good afternoon.
Like anything in life, if you
want to get better at something, if you want to
attain a goal, there are certain standards you have
to meet, certain thresholds you have to pass.
If you want to learn a language, if you want to
learn Spanish or French, when it comes time for your
final exam, you can't go in and start speaking in
German to the teacher.
There has to be a
connection.
There has to be a connection between
what your goal is and what you use to achieve that
goal.
Number 1, please.
Put another way, Plaintiff has burdens of
proof.
And I told you about this in opening
statement.
They're like glasses.
They're not like
scales.
Because since the plaintiff has the burden
of proof in this case, on any claim, the plaintiff 3696
has to start with those burdens being completely
empty.
It's their burden to show you the evidence
that is convincing.
It's their burden to show you
the connections.
And they have to fill the glasses
up beyond halfway in order to prevail based on the
standard, the greater weight of the evidence.
Number 2, this is Mary Goveia's case, but
they're John Goveia's -- they're Mr. Goveia's
burdens; they're Mr. Goveia's glasses.
It's his
case about her decisions.
It's about her choice to
smoke; it's about her choice to continue smoking;
and it's about her ability to quit smoking.
Fifteen years ago in 1999, ladies and
gentlemen, unfortunately Mary Goveia died.
But in
looking at what has happened over her lifetime, in
looking at the facts and the evidence, the plaintiff
still bears the burden on all issues.
And,
generally, those burdens break down into three
issues.
Number 3, please.
Addiction, brands, and conduct.
In each of
these subjects, the plaintiff has to prove that an
addiction was a legal cause of Mrs. Goveia's death,
that Defendants' brands were a legal cause of the
death, and that there was wrongful conduct that was 3697
a legal cause of her disease and her death.
It's
the connection that the plaintiff has to make
between the facts and the evidence.
I also talked in opening about the verdict
form, and Mr. Cofer just finished going through it
with you.
And if you look at the first nine
questions, Mary Goveia's name appears in every one.
In the tenth question, it talks about under the
circumstances of this case.
This is the Goveias'
case.
Every question is about Mary Goveia.
Let's talk about addiction causation for a
minute.
First it was up to Mr. Goveia to show that
an addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes was a
legal cause of the COPD and the death.
Let's go to Number 5, please.
Mr. Mitnik talked about -- in opening about how
Mary Goveia was trapped, trapped in addiction.
You
didn't hear a lot about being trapped.
You heard
about being trapped in deceit, but you didn't hear
the same theme that you heard from Mr. Mitnik in
opening.
That's because the facts and the evidence
are such that Mary Goveia was not trapped in a cycle
of addiction.
And what we've heard from the
plaintiff experts is that Dr. Burns says any
addiction to any substance can be broken.
Every 3698
smoker has the ability to quit smoking.
Number 6, please.
And in this particular case, Mary Goveia smoked
because it helped relieve her stress and anxiety,
not because of an addiction to the nicotine in
cigarettes, because it was her coping mechanism.
The facts and the evidence show in this case,
ladies and gentlemen, that she made infrequent
attempts to quit smoking.
Let's look at Number 7.
Mary Goveia's quit attempts, I've tried to put
these down -- and I would encourage you to rely on
your own notes and your recollection of the
evidence.
But when we look at the quit attempts in
context and in certain periods, 1956, the evidence
is undisputed that because a newborn is delicate,
she attempted to quit smoking.
And you heard
Dr. Henningfield indicate that that was powerful
evidence that she was aware of the hazards of
smoking.
I asked him that question, powerful evidence.
Three or four attempts from '60 to '72.
And after '86, we don't know exactly when she
attempted to use the fake cigarette.
Dr. Fakih
tells her that she's going to die if she doesn't 3699
quit, but she doesn't choose to quit.
And she
bought patches and gums.
Well, if you take these
quit attempts and you put them on a calendar of Mary
Goveia's life --
Let's go to 8.
-- it looks like this:
Each of these white
dots would represent one of the quit attempts that I
laid out on the slide before.
When you look from
1940 to 1999, that doesn't look like they're the
quit attempts of a person that's trapped inside
addiction.
It looks like the quit attempts of
someone who does what she wants to do no matter
what.
There was nothing preventing Mary Goveia from
quitting smoking, and we know this because Plaintiff
admits it.
Plaintiff admits that Mrs. Goveia has some
responsibility.
So as Mr. Cofer pointed out, that
can only mean one thing:
She knew of the hazards
and that she had the ability to quit earlier, but
she didn't do it.
The evidence showed --
Number 9, please.
-- how motivated she was throughout her life.
She was headstrong, she was intelligent, she was
well read, she went to night school to get her 3700
beauty license.
She dealt with the uncertainty of a
son who had juvenile diabetes.
She went to a
world-renowned clinic and learned about medicine,
learned about how to take control of that on behalf
of her son.
She was the brains of the family
business.
Some people smoke, ladies and gentlemen,
because of enjoyment, anxiety, stress, or an
addiction.
But it was Plaintiff's burden to show
you that in lieu of an addiction -- that in lieu of
those other reasons that the addiction was the
substantial contributing factor and they did not do
that.
Let's look at 11, please.
The substantial contributing factor portion of
the addiction is what I want to focus on.
And what
we saw in this case, ladies and gentlemen, was
Dr. Burns and Dr. Henningfield, two public health
advocates, come in, but you didn't hear any evidence
from a treater that she was -- that she was
diagnosed as addicted.
You didn't hear any evidence
from a medical record that noted that she had an
addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes.
You didn't
hear any evidence that she received regular, ongoing
treatment. 3701
You had Drs. Burns and Henningfield come in and
say, We looked at the situation.
We read some of
the depositions, not all of them.
Dr. Burns said,
Well, I didn't do a family history.
That's his way
of saying, I only read what I needed to read, what I
felt was important.
Not the whole context of the
case, but just the facts and the evidence that
Plaintiff provided to me.
Let's look at 42, please.
So who says that Mary Goveia's addicted?
It's
just Dr. Burns and Dr. Henningfield.
And you heard
Dr. Burns say that when someone is addicted, that's
how you get into court.
So he knows what to say.
And in this particular case, the plaintiff knew he
would say that, even before he had picked up the
first deposition.
I want to go to 13 for a minute.
You know, Mr. Mitnik talked about the findings;
at some point, if you decide that she's a class
member, the findings will come down with a large
noise.
Plaintiffs would like that noise to scare
you into a verdict.
But, ladies and gentlemen, the
findings --
MR. MITNIK:
Objection, Your Honor, to that
comment. 3702
THE COURT:
Sustained.
MR. WEAVER:
The plaintiff would like you to
look at those findings and assume the worst.
They
want you to presume that those findings end up being
liability.
But the instructions, as the Court read to you,
indicate that the findings do not mean that there's
liability on behalf of the defense.
The findings do
not provide you with that connection of the facts
and the evidence to Mary Goveia.
That was the
plaintiff's burden.
And when we look at the plaintiff's burden of
proof, it's the question mark that the plaintiffs
have to fill in with facts and evidence.
They have
to complete those chains to show that there's
liability, and they haven't done that.
Mr. Mitnik talks about circumstantial evidence.
He talks about inferences.
That's another way of
asking you to guess.
When you look at the evidence in this case,
there is direct, competent evidence that Mary Goveia
knew about the hazards even before the warning
labels went on the packs in 1966.
That is direct
evidence, and we'll look at it before I'm done.
But what Mr. Mitnik and the plaintiff has to 3703
do --
Number 14, please.
-- is they have to use evidence to show a
direct, a natural, and a substantial connection
between all of the documents they showed you and
Mary Goveia.
The plaintiff's burden was to prove to you that
Reynolds and Philip Morris brands were each a
substantial contributing factor in the development
of Mrs. Goveia's injuries; they did not do that.
When you look at brands, ladies and gentlemen,
the second hurdle that they have to get over, the
evidence was very muddled.
We heard from Mr. Goveia
that brand-named cigarettes were very difficult to
get in the 1940s because of World War II.
And he admitted during my questioning that she
smoked multiple different brands.
He remembers
Camels and Lucky Strikes, but he doesn't remember
any Camels or Lucky Strikes after the 1940s.
And
remember in 1943, he went off to fight in the war,
service for which we're very grateful.
But he
wasn't around.
So to simply jump to the conclusion that Camel
and Lucky Strikes were smoked during the entire
decade is not supported by the evidence.
That's 3704
asking you to guess.
Debra testified that Mrs. Goveia smoked only
light cigarettes, but you may recall me asking
Dr. Henningfield about More cigarettes.
More
cigarettes were the brown-wrapped cigarettes that
were high nicotine and high tar that, according to
Debra Goveia, she smoked.
Well, if she only smoked
light cigarettes after a certain period of time, why
was she smoking More cigarettes?
Mr. Goveia told you that he just didn't pay
attention to the brands that she was smoking.
L&M and Lark were mentioned by Debra Goveia.
L&M and Lark are not manufactured by R.J. Reynolds
or by Philip Morris.
So when you look at the brand slide --
Number 15, please.
-- that the plaintiffs showed you in opening,
which they've changed from what they showed you in
closing, there are problems.
Salem and Kool, the menthol, you heard all of
the evidence that Mary Goveia was in perfect health.
If she was in perfect health, she never smoked those
cigarettes because those are the ones that, on the
one hand, Plaintiff would tell you she smoked when
she was sick.
You can't have it both ways. 3705
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, Plaintiff had to
show you that some wrongful conduct was responsible
and attributable to the defendants that directly
impacted Mary Goveia.
It can't be just the
manufacture, sale, and advertising of cigarettes.
It has to be something more.
But let's remember
what I asked you to do in opening.
16, please.
You have to look at the facts and the evidence
and ask yourself, what does it have to do with Mary
Goveia?
Dr. Burns, again, he came here and said, I
didn't do a family history.
His way of saying, I
didn't do all the work that was necessary of me.
I
only read certain depositions.
I only looked at a
portion of the evidence.
Number 18, please.
Dr. Burns and the plaintiff want you to be
angry at the defense.
And you bet I'm going to show
this, but not for the reason that Mr. Mitnik
indicates.
This is a slide that goes to the burden
of proof.
The plaintiffs had to prove that Mary
Goveia reasonably relied to her detriment on some
statement by the defense.
There's no evidence of
that in this case, ladies and gentlemen.
None. 3706
You'll have the definition.
There's none.
Fifteen days after you came in for jury
service, fifteen days, you still don't have anything
that makes a connection between Mary Goveia and the
documents that the plaintiffs want you to look at.
When we look at those documents, though, they
are snippets that the plaintiffs asked you to look
at.
And we know that --
Number 20, please.
-- because when the plaintiff talks about
regulating or controlling nicotine, this was one --
one document that the plaintiff, in talking to
Dr. Burns about, said, You're aware of these secret
internal documents.
And it wasn't until
cross-examination that I pointed out this was a 1935
letter sent by the American Tobacco Company to
people outside of the company.
And it talks about
rigid control of nicotine is an absolute
prerequisite for a cigarette.
Same way with the Tobacco Working Group.
Number 21, please.
They talked about manipulatory control of
nicotine, but this was in a public document
working -- the companies were working together with
the National Cancer Institute. 3707
Use of special tobacco.
Strains of the tobacco
plant.
Again, not a secret.
And in terms of whether or not it results in
disease, you remember I went back and recreated that
timeline with Dr. Burns.
Number 22, please.
With Dr. Rodgman, a highly respected scientist
inside R.J. Reynolds where we started with a
Reader's Digest in the 1950s that talks about
benzopyrene, a polycyclic hydrocarbon -- aromatic
hydrocarbon, going all the way down to 1959.
And
you recall Dr. Burns telling you that Reader's
Digest was one of those publications that would
repeat what had been published already from other
periodicals.
Dr. Henningfield told you, ladies and
gentlemen, that both Reynolds and Philip Morris made
efforts throughout the years to reduce the
carcinogens in cigarettes and they worked to make a
safer cigarette.
But there is no safer cigarette.
Marketing was also a big topic, and I don't
want to spend a lot of time on it, but if we could
just go to 24, remember what Dr. Burns told you.
Smart people don't come to him for marketing and
advertising advice, yet he was the one who sat in 3708
the courtroom on the 23rd floor and said, You need
to believe me when I say all of these ads are
targeting youth.
But look at 25.
Santa Claus, sports heroes,
movie stars.
They weren't used uniquely by tobacco
companies.
It was the exact same type of
advertising that was in a public domain.
A Reynolds
or Philip Morris ad was no different than an ad for
Mobil motor oil.
When you look at the evidence, ladies and
gentlemen, look at Exhibits 46 and 47.
Those are
the two 1920s memos from R.J. Reynolds that
Dr. Burns showed you that started his testimony
about youth marketing.
If you look at the whole
memo, it talks about trying to get men and women to
buy cigarettes, not boys and girls.
But look at the
evidence, 46 and 47.
Men and women.
That's what it
says.
I showed you on cross-examination --
Number 26, please.
-- that Reynolds from 1980 to 1990 and at all
points in time had a consistent policy that smoking
was an adult custom.
But for Dr. Burns and
Dr. Cunningham -- or Cummings, the gentleman who was
on the videotape near the end of the plaintiff's 3709
case, they both want you to think that there's no
advertising on earth that doesn't appeal in some
way, shape, or form to youth.
Advertising, like the sale of cigarettes,
ladies and gentlemen, in our society is legal.
It's
legal.
Dr. Burns told you that in his opinion the only
advertising that doesn't appeal to youth is for
Depends undergarments.
His positions are not only
unqualified, but they just don't make sense.
All of the company documents that the plaintiff
showed you were from when either Mary Goveia was an
infant or she was an adult.
In 1973, she was 49.
In 1984, during the period of time that Diane
Burrows was writing, she was 60.
And, lastly, Plaintiff's 53 is a single page ad
from a gentleman named Long to the CEO named
Horrigan.
And when Plaintiff showed you that
document, they only showed you the first page.
They
didn't even have it in their notebook in terms of
what was attached.
But I showed you in Tab 27 that the attachment
to that memo talked about adult smoker profile
tracking and that it was not to be used for
marketing strategy.
Why would Plaintiffs show you 3710
only the front page of that memorandum when the
attachment to the memorandum completely contradicts
the theory that they're trying to advance in this
case?
Plaintiffs want you to guess.
They want you to
assume that there's some connection.
They talk
about circumstantial evidence, they talk about
inferences, but all that means is that they don't
have evidence.
Let's look at 39, please.
This is the direct evidence that you have,
ladies and gentlemen, for Mary Goveia.
These are
her words provided to us by Mr. Goveia.
She'd say
she's going to do what she wants.
She's going to
keep smoking like -- whether I like it or not.
In the face of direct evidence like this,
there's no reason to look at circumstantial
evidence, even if that is circumstantial evidence.
These are Mary Goveia's words.
She did what she
wanted to when she wanted to and for the reasons
that she wanted to.
Briefly on cooperation --
Number 30, please.
-- Dr. Burns acknowledged all of these things,
Dr. Clarence Cook Little, a distinguished TIRC head, 3711
that in 1968, the CEO of Reynolds wanted its
scientists to push the tobacco and health work to
establish a rapport and relationship with the
government, that the Tobacco Working Group was
created and that they received letters from the
Tobacco Working Group and the department of HHS
thanking them for cooperating and getting involved.
And, finally --
Number 31, I think.
-- the five Tobacco Working Group reports that
were used published as a direct result of the
industry cooperating with the government.
Ladies and gentlemen --
Number 33, please.
-- there's no evidence in this case that Mary
Goveia's choices were impacted by any statement by
R.J. Reynolds or by Philip Morris; none.
Dr. Burns and Henningfield both feel that the
public health community was deceived, deceived about
light cigarettes, deceived about filters.
But
Dr. Burns just came in, he didn't tell you that all
of the 50 epidemiologic studies that were done have
all been retracted.
He just comes in here and he
looks at history and he says, That's not the way it
should have gone.
The evidence just doesn't support 3712
it.
And certainly the evidence doesn't support that
Mary Goveia was deceived.
Number 34, please.
Would it have been important?
Mary Goveia was
intelligent and informed.
But for Plaintiffs to say
that she takes responsibility, it clearly means that
she knew of the hazards, she could have quit, and
she chose to continue smoking.
When Mary Goveia was diagnosed, did you hear
anyone say that she said, "Cigarettes have killed
me"?
Did she say, "I thought that filters would
save me"?
Did she say, "I thought lights were
better so it wasn't a problem"?
No, you didn't hear
any of that.
You heard her described as
disappointed.
And she was disappointed, most
likely, because she knew that her choices had
resulted in her acquiring a disease.
She understood
that her choices were the cause.
Number 35, please.
With respect to Questions 4 through 7 on the
verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, I respectfully
request that "No" be put on every blank.
38, please.
THE COURT:
About two minutes.
MR. WEAVER:
We talked about our wishes, our 3713
inclinations, and our passions.
You have to decide
this case on the facts and the evidence, ladies and
gentlemen.
You may not like my client.
You may not
like Philip Morris.
You may not like tobacco
companies in general.
But if you allow your wishes,
your inclinations, or your passions to get in the
way of the facts and evidence, you're not making an
objective decision.
And, ladies and gentlemen --
39.
-- the direct evidence in this case is that
Mary Goveia was going to smoke.
She knew all the
way back to 1956, before the warnings were on, that
it was harmful, and she continued to smoke.
40, please.
And that's why, ladies and gentlemen, at this
point in time --
40, please.
-- there was nothing that Reynolds or Philip
Morris could have done to have prevented her death.
Only Mary Goveia had the ability to prevent her
death, and that she is 100 percent responsible for
the choices that she made.
The plaintiff has not given you any reason to
second-guess those decisions.
His wishes, his 3714
passions, his inclinations would like you to do
that, but the facts and the evidence just don't
support it.
So when you retire to the verdict room -- to
the jury room and you look at the facts and the
evidence, I would ask you to render a verdict for
the defense.
Thank you.