MS. LONDON:  Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning.  Again, my same is Sarah London.  We
met like this not so long ago.  May not feel that way for you.
And I'm here with Mr. Spragens again and Willow, and
Nina is taking care of business.  And our whole team --
Here she is.
THE COURT:  Come on up.
MS. LONDON:  Right on cue there.
(Thereupon, another easel was set up.) 
THE COURT:  All you need is for the lights to go out
in the middle of your closing; right, Miss London?  That would
be just perfect.
MS. LONDON:  Yeah.
Okay.  Where was I?
We are really proud to represent Mrs. Gray and be
here with her.  It's been a 20-year road trip for this family
to come here before you and officially seek membership in the
Engle class.  We're very grateful for your time, and for your
service, and we did everything we could to get this case to you 43
as quickly as possible, because we respect your time; but there
was, as I told you when we started, a really big story to tell.
And I brought you some witnesses that had a lot of
information about the tobacco companies, R.J. Reynolds, and
what they did; and I told you it might not seem obvious to you
right away why I brought some of my witnesses, especially those
that didn't know Mr. Gray, and didn't have specific information
about him.  But it's because, in order to judge R.J. Reynolds
and judge Mr. Gray and this family, you have to know the whole
story.  You need to go back in time and understand what was
happening in Mr. Gray's life, what these companies were doing,
and you have to see the big picture.
So I realize at times it may have seemed, I think the
Judge said, cumulative.  That certainly was not our intent.  It
was because we needed to give you as much information as we
thought you needed to get the job done.  We had a very limited
amount of time in this trial.  We had 18 hours to put on this
case.  And I'm proud of us.  I think we gave you more than you
need to do your job.
But please know that 18 hours is not long enough to
tell the whole story, forever and ever, about everything we
could have told you.  As you know, some of our witnesses surely
could have gone on and on and on.
You didn't hear absolutely everything you could hear.
We tried to edit this down and bring to you exactly what you 44
need to make your decision in this case.  And we counted on
these companies --
THE COURT:  Let me interrupt you for just a second,
Miss London.
Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence that you're to
decide this case from is the evidence that has been presented
in this courtroom.  So I appreciate what Miss London is saying
to you.  It's a complicated case.  You heard the witnesses.
This case could have gone on -- I suspect, possibly, you know,
both sides, you know that the defense didn't call any
witnesses -- both sides could have presented evidence and this
case could have gone on for a long, long time.
But you are not to speculate or to try to think
about, well, what else might have come out.  Okay?  Just to
make sure we understand each other, the evidence you're to
consider is the evidence that was presented here, and you're to
apply the instructions that I've given you.  Okay?
So, with that caveat, Miss London, if you wish to
proceed.  Okay?
MS. LONDON:  Exactly right.  And thank you, Your
Honor.
And that's why we gave you the evidence that we did,
and we showed you what we could in the time that we had.  And
that is what you will base your decision on, the evidence that
was presented to you in this courtroom, and your common sense. 45
And we'll go through some of that together.
And it's very hard for me to have a one-sided
conversation.  I can't anticipate what you're all thinking.
Frankly, you have all played pretty good poker.  It's hard for
me to read what's on your mind.  And I don't know what
questions you have, or what things you'd like to hear from me,
if anything.
So I'm doing the best I can to help you do your job.
And the job you have, you have three jobs.  One, you have to
decide the facts of the case.  You're the judge of the facts.
The second job is you have to follow the law as the
Judge has instructed you.  That's critically important.  You
have to follow the law.
And the third job, and this one may not be so obvious
to you, is that you have to discuss with each other how you
feel, how you feel about the evidence and how you feel about
the answers.  You have to deliberate and discuss.  That's what
makes this system work so well.  And it's on that issue that
I'm going to spend my time with you this morning.
I'm not going to rehash all the evidence.  I know you
were paying close and careful attention throughout this trial.
But I'm going to try to give you some tools for how to talk
about the evidence, and how it applies to the questions that
you have to answer.
I really -- look, I want to be respectful of your 46
time and your intelligence.  It is, and it was, okay to be
skeptical about what you heard in this trial.  It's hard to
believe what these companies did.  It's hard to believe the
evidence of this conspiracy, and its scale, and its scope, and
its impact, and that what the companies did happened underneath
our noses as Americans in this country for 50 years.  It's hard
to believe that.
And it's hard to believe that nicotine addiction is
as powerful as it is.  It's hard to believe that something as
ordinary, as common, as something you buy at the drugstore,
that the government lets you sell, it's hard to believe that
that is such a powerfully addictive, deadly, and dangerous
drug.  It's hard to believe that, I know.
It's not easy to digest this evidence and to make
sense of it in this world, the world that we want to believe,
and everything we hold true.  It's hard to accept that and
reconcile this evidence.  I get that.  And so it's okay for you
to have been skeptical, and at it's okay for you to be
skeptical.  It's why we brought you all this evidence.  
But that's exactly right, what His Honor said, that
you have to set aside anything you came into this courtroom
with, any notions, preconceived ideas, opinions, or beliefs,
about what you thought you knew about cigarettes, about the
companies, about smokers.  You have to set that aside and
decide this case based on the evidence that you saw in this 47
courtroom.
I don't envy you.
I'm an advocate.  It's my job to come in here and
advocate for my client.
It's your job, you have sworn an oath, and to do your
duty, you have to set aside your opinions, your passions,
everything you thought before you walked in the door, and
decide the case on the evidence; evidence that's hard to see,
hard to hear, frankly, hard for me to put on sometimes.
Because it shakes our faith.  It shakes our faith in companies,
it shakes our faith in the government, it shakes our faith in
who we are as Americans.
But you, as jurors, have a very powerful and
important role in this system.  This is an amazing company.
You have heard -- I'm sorry, country.  This is an amazing
country.  This is a place where Mrs. Gray, a person, just a
citizen, can come before you, a jury of her peers, and hold two
giant companies to account for what happened.  It's
extraordinary.  Without the government or anyone else getting
in the way.
THE COURT:  Miss London, just a second.  Just a
second.  You have one company.
MS. LONDON:  Pardon me.  You're right, Your Honor.
There is one company to be held to account at this point . . .
from here on out.  Thank you, Your Honor. 48
THE COURT:  That's okay.  I figured something like
that might happen sometime.  We all make mistakes.
MS. LONDON:  And I certainly expect to make more of
them.
THE COURT:  Me too.
MS. LONDON:  I didn't get much sleep last night, I'll
be honest with you.  I'm really trying to . . . to . . . to
figure out the right way to close this case and to argue this
case to you.  So I apologize in advance if my words get fumbled
up.  I'm doing my best.
Anyway, it's an amazing country, where Mrs. Gray can
come here and, without the government or anyone else
interfering with the conscience of the community, to hear these
claims, to see the evidence, and to administer justice.  It's
amazing.  And I'm so proud to be part of it.  And I hope you
have enjoyed this experience.  I hope you find it meaningful,
because it sure is meaningful to us.
You alone, you swore your oath, you are qualified to
decide these facts.  You, only you.  Only you have heard all
this evidence and the context of Mr. Gray's life and what these
companies did and how it hurt him.  Only you.  No other jury
has heard all this.  So this job is incredibly important.
Now, at the beginning of this case, I told you why we
sued.  We sued for three reasons.  We sued because
R.J. Reynolds broke the basic obligation we expect of all 49
companies, that you have to come clean about what you know
about the dangers in your product.  There's no debate about
whether it's okay to hide the truth.
RJR made a promise to Americans, and they made this
promise over and over and over again, not just RJR but also its
co-conspirators.  They made a promise that they would be frank
with Americans.  They made that promise.  They made that
promise they'd be frank, they would tell Americans the truth
because it was important for Americans to know the truth.  They
said that over and over and over again.  But they broke that
promise.  You saw that.  You saw that here in this courtroom.
How they broke that promise, because they didn't tell
Americans what they knew, long ago, about their products
causing cancer and how addictive they were; and particularly,
they did not tell Americans they could not take out the bad
stuff.  They knew that, and they didn't tell people that.
Instead, they conspired to deny it.  They provided
reassurance that they were looking, looking hard at that
question, and they would do something about it if they found
out.  And they kept promising they were studying the issue, and
they kept promising Americans and telling Americans, reassuring
them that they were the ones that knew the truth.
The second way they broke this is because they didn't
come clean and tell Americans how addictive their cigarettes
were, or what they were doing to them to make them -- to rig 50
them, to make them as hard as possible for their customers to
stop.  They didn't tell them.  They didn't come clean on that.
Instead, they denied it, they hid it, and they didn't
come clean about it.
And the third thing is, they did not come clean and
tell Americans, all along, that filter cigarettes, that menthol
cigarettes, and these light cigarettes that they were marketing
as safer, were no safer at all.  They never came clean about
that.
Instead, they capitalized on people's fear.  They
knew their customers were scared.  They knew their customers
were seeing reports in the newspaper.  They saw the sales
decline.  They capitalized on that fear by marketing products
they pretended were safer, knowing all the while they weren't,
just trying to hold on to that market as long as they could.
The proof of all of this came from their own records.
We made a board along the way with some of the highlights.  And
I'm not going to go through all of those with you this morning.
You heard evidence, you took notes, you were paying attention.
Reynolds should have followed their own promise, the
basic promise, the basic rule we expect of all manufacturers:
You have to come clean about the truth of your products when
you know it, not wait 50 years, and God knows, don't do
everything that they did to try to hide it.
If Reynolds had kept its promise, if Reynolds had 51
come clean about what they knew, when they knew it, this would
have made a difference for Mr. Gray, and millions of others
just like him.  He could have made an informed choice.  Right?
People can -- people make informed choices to do
risky things.  That's not an issue in this case.  You have to
understand, Reynolds was claiming that its product was not
risky.  That's what they were doing, they were claiming it
wasn't.  They kept that a matter of debate.  They should have
told the truth so that their customers could have made an
informed choice, knew what they were getting into, way back
when, when the companies knew.
The second reason we sued was because the companies
broke the basic obligation that you have to make your product
as reasonably safe as possible.  And there's no debate about
this one either.  Reynolds and all the other tobacco companies
put out a promise to Americans.  It said that the public health
is the paramount concern beyond anything in their business.
So they're not going to -- there's no dispute that
you have to make your product as safe as reasonably possible.
And they broke this promise by rigging the cigarettes to make
them as addictive as possible.  You saw the proof.  You saw the
evidence of what they did.  And they brought you nobody, no
witness at all, to deny it, to show you a different side of
that story.  Not one.
Now, making products as safe as reasonably possible, 52
that's not the government's job; right?  That's not the
American Cancer Society's job.  That's the job of the
manufacturer of the product.  And, in fact, that's what they
said.
You think I'd learned by now.  Thank you.
Remember Mr. Gentry?  We took his deposition, you saw
the video.  And he agreed, the manufacturer is the one with the
ultimate responsibility for its product.  It's not okay to put
that responsibility on somebody else, like, "It's not my fault,
the government should have come in and done something
different."  The manufacturer, that's why they're here, and
that's what -- that's why we sued the manufacturer.
The cigarette companies should not have made their
products as addictive as possible.  You heard they didn't have
to, that they take the nicotine out, put it back in, set at
exactly the level they need to keep it as addictive as
possible.  They didn't need to do that.  And you heard why they
shouldn't have.  Because you heard that nicotine addiction is
the key danger in the cigarettes.  It's the mechanism.  It's
the reason people get sick.  All right?
Because if you could put them down whenever you want
to, and just walk away, you wouldn't have 20 million people
with disease.  It's the reason people keep smoking.
And I think Mr. Gentry, we tried to pin him down on
that.  It seemed pretty clear, and we'll walk through some of 53
that chain of causation.  But ultimately, that's the reason
they shouldn't make their products as addictive as possible,
because it comes with a deadly dose of carcinogens.
If the cigarette companies had made their
cigarette -- not made them as addictive as possible, then
Mr. Gray could have walked away a lot sooner, a lot sooner
than -- well, it doesn't sound like he ever really did, for
good.  If he could have walked away, we wouldn't be here.
Finally, the third reason that we sued, as I told
you, was because these companies broke their obligation to
market a product responsibly.  We also talked about marketing
filters and low-tars and lights and menthols in a way they knew
customers would think were safer when they weren't.  
But also, they targeted young people.  You saw that
in their own records.  And they brought you no one, not one
witness, to tell you otherwise.  And they didn't ask one
question of any of our witnesses to try to explain that to you
or deny that.  That's not even in dispute.
Given what we know about these products, what these
companies knew about these products, they should not have
targeted these products at young people whose brains were
vulnerable.  And they knew what they were doing; right?
Because 20 -- 95 percent of smokers start before the age of 20.
They know that.  That's in the records.  You saw that.  They
know that.  That's the entry gates.  That's who's coming into 54
the market.  Critical for their business.  And you saw what
they put on TV back when Mr. Gray was young.  You saw all that.
They should not have done it because, when people
start smoking young, it dramatically increases their risk of
getting addicted and getting sick.  It's extra dangerous.  If
Reynolds had not done that, had not made young people the
base -- or the critical part of its business and targeted young
people, then young people like Mr. Gray wouldn't have started
so young, wouldn't have gotten in that market so early, and
wouldn't have had such a hard time getting out.
Now, I told you, at the beginning, that your main job
is going to be, in this trial, to decide how much
responsibility Reynolds bears for what happened to Mr. Gray.
And I want to be very clear.  We're not trying to recover money
for things that happened to other people.  You've heard there's
lots of other lawsuits for other people.  I'm not trying to put
that case on for you.  I had to give you a lot of context so
you could understand what happened to Mr. Gray, so you could
understand and compare him against these companies.  But let's
be clear, your job will be to decide how much responsibility
Reynolds has to Mr. Gray in this case.
So I want to talk about some of the instructions that
the Court gave you.  The first one is preponderance of the
evidence.  All right?  And I told you this earlier, that we
have the burden of proof.  The burden of proof is more likely 55
right than wrong.  See, "preponderance of the evidence" simply
means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that
the Plaintiff's claim is more likely true than not true.  Not
beyond a reasonable doubt.  Okay to have doubts.  More likely
right than wrong, that's our burden.  That's what we did.
Now, you don't have to be sure, you don't have to be
certain, just more likely right than wrong.
And if somebody says that while we are in
deliberations, remind them.  You know, if they say, "I'm not
sure, I'm not certain, I'm not a hundred percent," remind them
that's fine.  50.001 percent, that goes to Mr. Gray, and Mrs.
Gray.
All right.  Now, the first few questions on your
verdict form look like this.  And let me just step back for a
minute, actually.  
The first two questions you're going to answer are
about whether Mr. Gray is a member of the Engle class.  And
this is important, it's very important, because not everybody
gets to be part of the Engle class, and not everybody gets to
bring a lawsuit like this one.  There are limits.  There's only
a certain group of people that can bring this kind of case and
get their day in court.
So it's not anyone who ever smoked a cigarette.  It's
not people who just started smoking in the last few years, once
the industry has -- can no longer deny that their cigarettes 56
are addictive and cause disease.  It's not that kind of
lawsuit, and those kind of people can't bring a case like this.
You can't bring a case like this if you smoke just
for fun at parties, or just a cigarette here, there, or the
other place.
And you can't bring a lawsuit like this if you got
sick from something else; right?  So if there's an asbestos
exposure, or you got some kind of disease that doesn't have any
connection at all to smoking, you can't bring that kind of
lawsuit.  That's not an Engle case.
The Engle class is made up of people like Mr. Gray,
people who started smoking long ago; people who started smoking
before there were warnings; people who started smoking before
the -- long before the company admitted, at least some things;
people who got addicted; and people who got sick from that
addiction.  That's the kind of people that can bring this kind
of case.  And that's why we're here, and that's why we have to
prove to you Questions 1 and 2.  That's why they're important.
So let me put them back up and talk to you about them
briefly.
The first question is whether Mr. Gray was addicted
to cigarettes containing nicotine.  So obviously you heard a
lot of evidence about that.  That was a big issue in the case.
It's Question Number 1.
So let's look at what you heard about that.  And I'm 57
not going to marshal all the evidence.  But it seems like you
ought to know what addiction means.  So we brought you the man
who wrote, literally wrote the book on this topic,
Dr. Grunberg.  He explained to you that nicotine addiction is
defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is
characterized by compulsive use despite harmful consequences.
He explained to you this is what he teaches doctors
to use, this is the standard in the United States military,
this is accepted, published definition of addiction.  And all
the other medical doctors that came in to talk to you, they
agreed that when you assess somebody for addiction, it really
comes down to two things, this compulsive use, despite harm.
And again, you heard all the evidence on this.  I'm
not going to rehash it for you.  You heard how Mr. Gray's use
was compulsive; how he smoked morning, noon, and night; first
thing in the morning, last thing at night; 15, 20 minutes
between cigarettes; in the car.  You heard that he smoked -- he
had to leave sports games to go smoke.  You heard that his use
was compulsive.  It was all the time.
I mean, it's hard to get your head around smoking two
packs of cigarettes a day, and how much time that really is.
That's 40 cigarettes a day.  That's hours and hours a day of
consuming nicotine.  That's compulsive use, folks.
And you heard how he smoked despite harm.  You heard
that he kept smoking even after he was -- his mother got lung 58
cancer.  You heard he kept smoking even after he had his own
fear of lung cancer.  You heard how he kept smoking even after
he had lung cancer and COPD himself.
So we showed you that he smoked despite harm, no
question about it.  I don't think there's any dispute on their
side about that at all.
You even heard how his doctor wouldn't clear him to
go home because of that oxygen tank, the fear that he would
keep smoking despite harm.  That's a picture of addiction.
That would be Mr. Gray like on Wikipedia, next to nicotine
addiction.  
And that's what his doctor told you; right?
Dr. Slaton told you in his whole career, he's never seen
somebody so addicted.  Changed the way even Dr. Slaton thought
about addiction.  And he wrote it down in the medical records,
and you'll have all the records back there, and it says right
there in the records, and you saw it, history of cigarette
abuse, history of nicotine abuse.  That's nicotine addiction
diagnosis in the medical records.  Hard to contest that.  And
of course, they didn't bring you anyone, not one person on the
whole planet, to come in here and try to quibble with us on
this issue of addiction.
So, now, if during deliberations, if somebody says,
"Well, I think he may have stopped for a couple of years," and
maybe somebody -- from the evidence, that's what you take.
CLOSING ARGUMENT BY MS. LONDON
    59
Remind them, though, that every witness who came in here, who
talked about this, they said, whether somebody stops doesn't
matter if -- to whether they're addicted.  Everybody can
theoretically break an addiction.  These are separate issues.
And remind them, well -- and if somebody says, "I'm
not sure, I think he might have smoked for other reasons, could
have smoked because he enjoyed it or because he liked it,"
remind them what nicotine does to the brain.
And it's hard, I think, to really see what's going on
back in this . . . demonstrative that Dr. Grunberg wrote,
but -- or drew for you, but we talked about dopamine, and you
heard this from multiple witnesses, that what nicotine does to
the brain is it activates the pleasure sensation, brings you up
when you're down, down when you're up.  It's enjoyment.  It
looks like enjoyment.  Remind them of that.  That's what
nicotine does to the brain.
And remind them what Reynolds said in its own
documents, that nicotine is the primary reason why people
smoke.  These other reasons are secondary.
So the answer to Question 1, more likely right than
wrong, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?  The
answer to that is yes, more likely right than wrong.
Now, Question 2, more likely right than wrong, was an
addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of
Henry Gray's injuries? 60
And I'm going to break this one down because there's
some kind of a weird term in there.  It says, "legal cause."
So what does that mean?
Okay.  And no disrespect to His Honor, I think this
language is a little complicated, so I'm going to try to break
it down.
In order to prove that addiction containing nicotine
was a legal cause of Mr. Gray's injury, Plaintiff must prove by
a preponderance of the evidence that such addiction directly
and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed
substantially to producing Mr. Gray's injuries, so that
reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, his injuries
would not have occurred.
And this is key.  In order to be regarded as a legal
cause of injury, addiction need not be the only cause.
Addiction may be a legal cause of the injuries even though it
operates in combination with the act of another, some natural
cause, or some other cause, if the addiction contributes
substantially to producing such injury.
Lots and lots and lots of legalese and clauses there.
Okay?  But really, this just comes down to a basic chain of
causation.  That's really what it is.
And this issue of substantial, what does
"substantial" mean; right?  It's the opposite of insubstantial,
makes a difference, plays a role, actual. 61
Bottom line question here is did Mr. Gray's addiction
play a role in why he got sick?  Any of his diseases.
Now, we don't have to prove that addiction is the
only cause.  Addiction can work together with other causes.
And we're going to talk about that in a little while.  It just
has to be one of the reasons, just one of the reasons that he
got sick.  So . . . .  I made this chart that I think helps.
Maybe you disagree, but I think it helps.
Here is what we proved.  We proved how addiction
causes disease.  And it's basic chain of causation.  Addiction
to cigarettes containing nicotine causes repeated exposure to
cigarettes, which causes disease.  A causes B, B causes C,
A causes C.  Basic logic.
So we proved this by working our way through the
cause of -- the chain of causation.  We started with this first
one, whether nicotine addiction causes repeated exposure to
toxins in the brain.  You saw that.  You've heard tons of
evidence about that, that nicotine addiction causes changes in
the brain, that it causes a need to fill those nicotine
receptors over and over and over again to feel normal.  
And you heard about Mr. Gray.  You heard about when
he went without a cigarette, how he was irritable, he was edgy,
his nicotine receptors were depleting, and he needed more
nicotine to fill them back up, to function normally.  That's
what you heard.  That's what keeps people smoking, day in and 62
day out, to fill up those nicotine receptors with the most
powerful drug-delivery device.
Now, we know that, by the way . . . .  Mr. Gray,
right, we talked about withdrawal.  Why did we talk about that,
and that edginess and him being frustrated and all those
things?  Because that's not the kind of guy that Mr. Gray was.
Right?
You heard the evidence about the kind of guy Mr. Gray
was.  He was the sweetest in his high school.  He was a Boy
Scout, a Labrador, Mr. Magoo.  This was not a guy who was edgy
and irritable and fidgety and mean and frustrated.  That's not
who he was.  But that's who he was without cigarettes.  That is
why he kept smoking day after day, it's the tolerance, it's the
need to fill those nicotine receptors, day after today, year
after year.  It's at least one of the reasons why he kept
smoking.
All right.  Now, you also heard from Dr. Slaton
that . . . .  I think he put this pretty clearly.  Nicotine
addiction is why people who are smart, who are -- who want to
live, who care about their life, why they don't stop; why,
despite trying, they don't stop.  He explained that to you,
that people keep smoking despite all of these fears and all of
these diseases because of nicotine addiction.  That's what
caused people to keep getting the repetitive exposure.
And you heard -- this is the modern state of the 63
science; right?  That nicotine addiction --
JUROR 1:  Can we dim the lights a little, Your Honor?
MS. LONDON:  Yes.  Your Honor, may I have the lights
dimmed?  Thank you.  All right.
THE COURT:  Thank you, Hannah.
MS. LONDON:  And you heard the modern state of the
science on this point; right?  Nicotine addiction is the
fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco
products.  And this persistent tobacco use is what causes
disease.
You heard this -- you heard this over and over in
this trial, because I can't emphasize enough how important it
is.
And even Mr. Gentry from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company -- now, they didn't bring you a witness on this, but he
admitted it.  He said nicotine addiction is the fundamental
reason that people use tobacco products.  It's the reason that
people smoke.  It gets us from why Mr. Gray went from A to B.
His addiction caused him -- it was a cause, it was a reason
that he smoked so many cigarettes over so many years.  Right?
Now, let's go to the second part of this question,
whether all those cigarettes caused his disease.
And, honestly, I don't think Mr. Geise is going to
disagree too much about whether smoking cigarettes caused any
of Mr. Gray's diseases.  You all heard the evidence.  They 64
didn't bring you a medical doctor to contest that.  Right?  You
heard -- and I'm not going to rehash it here -- Mr. Gray's own
doctors, Dr. Feingold, the medical records.  Plain and clear
that he got lung cancer from smoking cigarettes, COPD from
smoking cigarettes, vascular diseases from smoking cigarettes.
At least it played a substantial role; right?
And you heard about some of the other medical
conditions Mr. Gray may have had, but there were no other risk
factors for lung cancer or COPD.  None at all.  And you heard
that the risk factor he had, the blood pressure, high blood
pressure, that that risk was multiplied by all of the toxins in
the cigarettes that he got.  And you heard over and over in
this trial how it is that smoking causes these diseases.  So I
think it's pretty well established that B causes C.
So then the only thing you have to put together,
folks, is whether A causes C in this case.  Did his addiction,
which caused him to keep smoking, cause the diseases caused by
lots and lots of smoking?  A plus B equals C.  Straightforward.
Now, if somebody during deliberations says, "Well,
wait a second, what about free choice?"  And we heard quite a
bit about choice in this trial.  And I'm not here to tell you
and I'm not going to argue to you that smokers have no choice.
That's not really a debate.  That's not the issue.  The
question is what choices are they going to make because of the
addiction?  What role does the addiction play in what somebody 65
does?
And you saw Dr. Grunberg explain this to you clearly.
Nicotine addiction interferes with the frontal cortex.  It
interferes with your decision-making abilities in your brain.
It plays a role.  It influences what you're going to do.
That's what nicotine addiction is.  It's a brain disease.  Not
the flu like you catch; one that comes from repeated exposure
to cigarettes.  Grows the nicotine addiction in your brain and
continues to keep you -- makes you keep smoking, keep choosing
to pick up that cigarette.
So whether or not Mr. Gray had a choice or not a
choice is not really the issue at all.  Doesn't have anything
to do with whether his addiction played a role in why he kept
smoking and why all that smoking caused his disease.
And you know what?  You can -- if you don't believe
that somebody gets addicted after one, two, or three
cigarettes, that's fine.  You don't have to believe that.
That's not what this case is about.
It's about whether Mr. Gray, who smoked 40 cigarettes
a day, day in and day out, whether that addiction played a role
in why he kept smoking and why he got sick.  And it's clear
from his medical records, even that alone, that he did.  
But even if you think choice played a role, it's fine
if you do.  Because we don't have to prove that nicotine
addiction is the only cause that he got sick.  Right?  You can 66
find lots of causes.  Because we're human beings.  And lots of
things cause -- things combine, things combine to cause.
And so I made this chart, this little picture here of
like a funnel of all the things that you can find were a cause
of Mr. Gray's diseases.  Nicotine addiction, surely.  But you
can find that his choice was a cause.
You can find -- and I think the evidence will show --
that the industry's campaign of doubt and their conspiracy and
the reassurance products they put on the market and their
advertising, you can find that all of those things played a
role.  They combined.  They worked together.
The only thing you have to decide for Question 2 is
whether nicotine addiction played a role.  Was it in this
funnel of things that caused?  And I think the answer to that,
quite clearly, is yes.
And on this point, if somebody says in deliberations,
"Well, I think he could have quit," and I'm -- I am a betting
person -- not really -- but I am betting that Mr. Geise will
get up and here and he will say, "Well, Dr. Feingold, he said
anybody could quit."  Again, that's not a -- that's not at
issue here.  We're not talking about if hypothetically, in the
air, anyone can quit, if people can break addictions.
Folks, that's not what this question is about.  It's
not what this case is about.  So remind them in deliberations
that the instructions say nothing about quitting, and certainly 67
not Question Number 2.
But even so, if Mr. Gray's failure to quit -- and
let's be clear.  If Mr. Gray had stopped smoking when he was
young, we wouldn't be here.  If the industry had done what they
said and promised, to take the cigarettes off the market when
they found out they didn't -- they couldn't take the bad stuff
out, well, then we wouldn't be here either; right?
So it's not a dispute that if Mr. Gray had stopped
smoking long ago, whether by his own efforts to quit or by the
industry's effort to quit selling them, either way, we wouldn't
be here.
But even if you feel like his -- and let's be clear.
Nicotine addiction, of course you heard, nicotine addiction
plays a huge role in whether people quit.  Right?  You heard
Mr. Gray tried over and over and over to quit and how nicotine
addiction interfered with his ability to be successful.  You
heard that over and over.  I'm not going to beat that horse.
But even if you think that his failure to quit, his
failure to try hard to quit was a cause, it goes in that funnel
too.  And it doesn't mean a nicotine addiction did not play a
role, was not substantial, was not a huge part in why he kept
smoking, why he didn't stop.  It's a cause.
So back to this.  And one more thing.  Mr. Gray's
efforts, what he did to try to stop, you know, what he believed
or what he didn't believe or the way he acted, that doesn't 68
come into this picture, by the way, in Question 1 and 2.  This
is about his fault.
And there's a whole separate place on the verdict
form, and we'll go through that, where you can put down how
much Mr. Gray's responsibility -- what percentage you attribute
to him.  And we were clear and up front that Mr. Gray, and
Mrs. Gray accepts on his behalf, some responsibility.  That
doesn't come into play here in Number 2.  That will come later
in the verdict form.  But I at least want you to be aware that
you will have a place to write that down.  That doesn't come
here.
So, again, basic chain of causation, A causes B
causes C, means that on Question 2, the answer more likely
right than wrong -- frankly, I think far beyond that -- but
more likely right than wrong, Mr. Gray's addiction to
cigarettes was a cause of his injuries.
And just to be clear, any injury -- this means any of
his injuries that we allege.  So if you find lung cancer, yes.
If you find only COPD, yes.  If you find only vascular disease,
yes.  Or if you find all of them, the answer is yes.  Just has
to be one.
All right.  I'm not going to spend a lot of time on
Question 3.  This question is whether smoking cigarettes caused
Mr. Gray's death.  On this question, you saw the evidence on
this.  You heard from Mr. Gray's doctors about what caused his 69
death, that smoking cigarettes substantially contributed.
But it can be up to you.  You can decide that all of
the diseases combined, that only one of those diseases
combined.  Or maybe you decide that it was the heart disease
only.  This question is really there to help you decide
questions later on.
So when you're back there and you're looking at the
medical records and considering the evidence, just whatever you
found was proven more likely right than wrong.
I would suggest to you that more likely right than
wrong, smoking cigarettes was a cause of his death.  But that
will be up to you.  That will be the evidence.  But you'll
proceed from there and keep answering questions regardless of
what you find.
All right.  And I need to spend a little time here on
these next questions.
These questions are on fraudulent concealment and
conspiracy.  And they're very tough questions.  The language, I
think, is kind of tough.
It says, "Please state whether Henry Gray relied to
his detriment on statements made by Defendant Reynolds that
concealed or omitted material information concerning the health
effects and/or addictive nature of cigarette smoking, and, if
so, whether Henry Gray's reliance was a legal cause of his
smoking injuries." 70
Okay.  So in order to answer these questions, you're
going to need to use the Engle findings because they're very
important to these questions.
And I realize, of course -- you know, I've never sat
on a jury.  But I can expect that it is awkward and strange to
rely on what another jury did.  You didn't see that evidence.
You didn't sit for a year.  You didn't hear all those witnesses
yourself.  But some other jury did so you wouldn't have to
decide everything.  And so you're going to accept these as
though I proved them to you.  And Mr. Spragens.  As if we
proved this to you here in this courtroom.  That's how strong
these Engle findings are.
And here is what they are on this question.
"Engle defendants, including R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company, concealed or omitted material information not
otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or
misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning
the health effects and/or addictive nature of cigarettes.  You
must accept that determination."
I want to point your attention to a few things here.
Okay.  First of all, what they concealed was not
otherwise known or available.  Okay?  So if in deliberations
somebody says, "Well, what about all those Reader's Digest
articles and the newspapers and what Aunt Betty said, and all
that stuff, you know, isn't that the end of the story?" 71
No.  No.  Not at all.  Because what this case is
about is what wasn't known, what wasn't available, what was
only available inside of these companies.  That's what this
case is about.
So -- and what does this word "material" mean?
Okay.  This is tough.  Material means something that
would have made a difference.  So we know, walking in here,
that Reynolds concealed information that would have made a
difference.  And they did that -- that was not otherwise known
or available.
So the only question for you is whether it would have
made a difference to Mr. Gray if somehow -- you know, if he was
like everybody else.  You know?  If you would have heard the
truth, would it have made a difference to him?
So what is it?  What is it that was concealed, that
was not otherwise known or available, that would have made a
difference?
Well, first, that the companies couldn't take out the
bad stuff.  Right?  That was only known inside the companies.
They did not share that with anybody else, what they knew.
Right?  They did not share with anybody else what they knew
inside about the power of addiction or what they were doing to
make their products as addictive as possible.
Remember, you heard from Dr. Grunberg, the company
was doing these studies 20 years before scientists were.  20 72
years.  These things were not otherwise known or available
outside the industry.
And it was not otherwise known what they were doing
to rig those filters and those menthols and low-tars and
lights.  Was not known.  Their studies showing they knew plain
and clear all along that those were never going to be safer and
weren't safer.  That was not otherwise known or available to
anyone, including Mr. Gray.  Certainly not the government and
definitely not to Mr. Gray.  So that's what this is about.
I wouldn't even stand up here and try to argue to you
that it was a secret that smoking could be bad for you or could
be hard to quit.  I think you'd just laugh at me.  And I
wouldn't even try.  Because that's not -- was -- that was
known.  That was available.
Here, we're talking about what's not known, what is
not available.  So let's keep our eye on that ball.
And here again you'll see this -- this question of
legal cause.  And this is so weird, I think, this language
about whether you rely to your detriment on a statement that
concealed information and whether that was a legal cause.
Folks, what this comes down to is if they had come
out and told the truth -- the whole truth, right? -- would that
have made a difference?  That's it.  That's what this question
comes down to.  Right?
And it doesn't have to be the only thing that would 73
have made a difference.  Right?  And I showed you that chart of
all the things I think would have made a difference to
Mr. Gray.  Just has to have played a role.  Has to have made a
difference to him if he would have heard the truth.
Well, now, I think an easier way to think about this
is what if they hadn't lied?  What if they had come clean with
what they knew when they knew it about all those things?  How
would the world be different?  How would that have made a
difference?
Don't you think it would have made a difference to
Mr. Gray?  The evidence you heard in this courtroom about who
he was.  He was a smart guy.  He had a lot to live for.  He had
a great life, I mean, a very blessed life.
Don't you think it would have made a difference to
him, to a smart man who had a lot to live for, with five
children, a lovely wife, that if he knew he was killing
himself, if he knew how bad these products were going to be for
him and that he would have such a hard time stopping, don't you
think it would have made a difference to him?
I think that's the most appropriate inference from
this evidence.  Otherwise, frankly, you have to believe he had
a death wish.  You have to believe that he just didn't care
about his life or his health.  Right?  That's what you have to
believe if you think it wouldn't have made a difference to him.
You know he switched to those low-tars and lights -- 74
I'm sorry -- the filters and the menthols.  You know why he did
that.  He told his doctor.  He told his wife.  They'd be better
for him.  This was not a guy with a death wish.  This is not a
guy who was out there saying, "Hey, screw you, I'm going to go
smoke, whatever the consequences."  He was careful.  He was
cautious.  That's the kind of man he was.  That's what you
heard.
And I think if you believe it wouldn't have made a
difference, I think that's pretty cynical, honestly.  I think
that means . . . I think that means that you have to believe
that the companies have no responsibility at all to tell the
truth.  That you shouldn't -- we shouldn't expect companies to
put out -- to tell people everything they know on their
website, that you shouldn't be able to rely on what companies
say.
You know, that as long as a company says, "Oh, well,
somebody out there is going to tell people.  We're going to
rely on the Cousin Betties of the world to tell people about
our products and how dangerous they are.  We're going to rely
on somebody else.  And as long as those people are out there,
don't sue us."
I think that's a pretty cynical world to live in,
folks, if we believe it wouldn't make a difference for
companies to tell the truth, for these companies to have come
clean about what they knew.  It's a pretty cynical world I 75
wouldn't want to live in.
You know, imagine -- I mean, just imagine if all
companies did this.  Really?  I mean, imagine if you couldn't
go to a website for a product like baby formula and get the
truth from that company about whether it would be safe for your
baby.  Imagine if you had to rely on your cousins or people who
didn't know, who weren't inside that company.  Imagine if that
was the kind of world that was okay.
It's not.  Honest companies come out and come clean,
and tell people and let them make an honest choice so that
people can protect themselves.  Because we all want to protect
ourselves.  That's who we are.  And we need that information
from the source.  From the company.  That's whose job it is to
tell us.
So there's no confusion, there's no debate.  And you
do not have to rely on, you know, blogs or hearsay or other
things.  That's not the world we live in.
We know the industry thought their conspiracy made a
difference.  We know they spent billions of dollars to keep it
up.  We know they spent billions of dollars advertising and
marketing filters.  You saw from the FTC that the company --
that even the government concluded that these companies were
marketing these products in a misleading way and that people
believed them.  And you saw from their own documents they knew
people were relying on them.  Mr. Heimann said it.  He admitted 76
it.  "We expect customers to rely on what we say."
We know they thought it was successful.  We know they
thought it was intercepting people from quitting.  It was
keeping the exit gates closed.  We know they thought it made a
difference.  That's why they celebrated themselves.  You saw
that all throughout the documents.
And how do we know?  How do we know the world would
have been different if these companies would have told the
truth?  If they would have come clean, it would have made a
difference to people like Mr. Gray?
Well, we know because now these companies can no
longer deny that their products cause cancer and are addictive.
And the rates of smoking have plummeted.  New people are not
starting to smoke today.  It would have made a difference.  It
would have made a difference to Mr. Gray.
So the answer -- and that's the question on
fraudulent concealment.  And I think that goes right alongside
with this issue of conspiracy.  They work together.
So it wouldn't really have worked that well if just
Reynolds had lied, had concealed the truth.  That wouldn't have
worked as well.  Right?  Because if the other companies said,
"Oh, you know what?  Actually, let me show you our own files,
and we'll be honest."
Wouldn't have worked.  The gig would have been up.
But they worked together.  And that's why it worked.  And 77
there's an Engle finding that matters here.
And that's this one, Instruction 14.  It says,
"Another Engle finding was that the Engle defendants, including
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, agreed to conceal or omit
information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their
addictive nature" -- and here is key -- "with the intention
that smokers and the public would rely on this information to
their detriment.  And you must accept that determination."
These companies agreed together to conceal
information with the intention that smokers would do exactly
what Mr. Gray did, buy one cigarette or buy one pack, smoke
every cigarette in that pack and buy another pack.  You heard
from Mr. Heimann himself, that's what they wanted people to do.
That's why they hid the truth.  They wanted people to rely, and
they knew it would make a difference.
And there's nothing special or different -- I mean,
Mr. Gray was a lovely, wonderful person.  But there's nothing
super special about him in this regard.  You'd have to believe
that it would have made a difference to everyone else but him.
That he was somehow careless, callous, indifferent about his
life.  And that's just not the evidence you heard.
And just specifically on this question of how we know
Mr. Gray relied on statements from these companies.  You heard
about the menthols and the filters and why he smoked them.  You
heard that from two witnesses and you heard nobody to 78
contradict that.
And you know and you saw how these companies marketed
those products.  You saw some of the ads, and you saw what the
FTC said.  And you know that the companies knew that people
believed they were safer.  And you know all of that.  And, of
course, I couldn't bring you Mr. Gray to say where he got that
information from.
And I expect Mr. Geise to point that out.  He'll say,
"Well, we don't know.  We can't prove that he relied on some
statement that Reynolds made."
Well, remember, I talked to you about the umbrellas
and the forecast and the wet hair as a way to prove the rain;
right?  And the Judge gave you this instruction, just like I
thought he would, that you can consider "both direct and
circumstantial evidence, and you may make deductions and reach
conclusions which reason and common sense lead you to make."
And "circumstantial evidence is a proof of a chain of
facts and circumstances tending to prove or disprove any fact
in dispute.  The law makes no distinction between the weight
you may give to either direct or circumstantial evidence."
So using your common sense, using the pieces of the
puzzle that we gave you, you can reasonably infer that Mr. Gray
got this idea that filters and menthols and lights would be
safer for him from Reynolds and from their co-conspirators in
the other cigarette companies.  You can find that. 79
Now, if somebody in deliberation says, "Well, he
could have heard about that from the government," right,
because the government was telling people that, remind them
that the industry outspent the government 365 to 1.  That's the
proof.
The industry advertised over and over and over again,
in all the things that Mr. Gray read, Sports Illustrated, Time
magazine.  You heard all that evidence.  More likely right than
wrong, he saw something from these companies -- excuse me --
from Reynolds that assured him that these products would be
safer.
I showed you a document about Kools, the product that
he smoked the most of throughout his life.  You saw where they
marketed that, how often they marketed that, the billions of
dollars they put behind that.  I think more likely right than
wrong, you can certainly infer that he saw that.
And also remind them, right, that what the
government -- the information the companies had, they concealed
that from the government too.  Right?  So if he's relying on
just what the government said and not on what the company said,
the companies are still responsible for that.
Because we know what the public health community
would have done if they knew what the companies knew back in
the '70s.  They would not have recommended them.  And how do we
know that?  Because that's what they did.  As soon as they 80
found out the studies and the research that the industry had,
they stopped recommending them.  We know it would have made a
difference in terms of what the public health community would
have told people.
So, frankly, it doesn't matter.  I think it would be
virtually impossible for Mr. Gray to have missed these ads over
all this time about filters and low-tars with how often they
were marketed.  But even if he did and he just relied on the
one out of 365 messages that came from the government on this
question, that's still on them.  That's still on Reynolds.
So the answer to these questions, Question 5 and
Question 6 -- I'm sorry -- Question 4 and Question 6, these are
yes and yes.
You're going to have to answer some questions about
timing.  And these are for legal reasons about why -- don't
speculate about why it matters before or after 1982.  That's
something that the lawyers and the judges have to fuss over.
You guys have to decide the facts.
So the question here is whether Mr. Gray relied,
before May 5th, 1982, on or after May 5th, 1982, or both.
And I brought this, you know, table out here for you
to see just to remind you that the companies relying and
concealing all the way, all the way through, before that date,
after that date.  Never stopped until after Mr. Gray died.  And
he kept buying those cigarettes, he kept buying filters, he 81
kept buying menthols all the way through that time.
So the answer to this question, more likely right
than wrong, is before and after May 5th, 1982.  The Defendants
didn't bring you any evidence to the contrary of that.
All right.  I'm going to skip over Question 8 for a
moment, and I want to talk about damages.  Because I told you
your main job was to figure out how much responsibility these
companies have.  But we're really in this room to fix, to help,
and to make up for.  And we're going to get to this question of
how much responsibility after we talk about damages.
I told you at the beginning of the case that in order
for you to determine how much the verdict would be, I'd have to
show you the harms and the losses.  Not for sympathy; that time
is over.  We can't bring Mr. Gray back.  We can't give
Ellen Gray back the life that they had, the life that they
hoped to have together.
But healing requires justice.  And in our system, as
amazing as it is, we cannot resuscitate people and bring them
back to life.  So it requires a verdict in damages, in dollars.
That's how we do it.  And so that's what we're asking for.
Now, the instruction says that you have to assess the
full amount.  "In considering the issues of damages, you are
instructed you should assess the full amount you find to be
justified by a preponderance of the evidence as full, just,
reasonable compensation for all damages for Mr. Gray's injuries 82
and death."
No more, and, of course, no less.
And a lot of the damages we're asking for here,
folks, these are not what we call, you know, tangible damages.
So we didn't put on evidence with medical bills, have you pull
out a calculator and add that all up.  And we're not asking you
to think about or speculate about how much money he would have
made over his life as lawyer.  You heard he had some financial
difficulties at the end of his life.  So we're not going to ask
you to try to even go there.
This case is really about the intangibles, the harms
and the losses of losing someone's life, or for Mr. Gray losing
out on his life.
Compensatory damages are not restricted to the actual
loss of time or money.  They cover both the mental and physical
aspects of injury, tangible and intangible.  Thus, no evidence
of the value of such intangible things as pain and suffering or
loss has been or need be introduced.  In that respect, it is
not the value you are trying to determine, but an amount that
will fairly compensate Plaintiff for her damage from Mr. Gray's
death.  There is no exact standard to be applied, and any such
award should be fair and just in light of the evidence.
So I'm going to give you a way to think about that,
because there is no perfect standard for figuring this out.
You need to consider the harm.  How bad was it, how 83
long was it, and how much did it interfere with?
And we're talking about -- now, let me give you an
example.  So if a spouse breaks their arm, and you see them
hurt, and it lasts for weeks at a time, and you lose out on
them being able to go out and throw a football around or
something like that, that's hard.  That's an injury.  That's
worth something.  That's probably worth something in the low
thousands of dollars, if somebody caused that harm.
But then there's like a mid-level loss; right?
So let's say a spouse goes into a coma for four
years.  Now, that's a much worse kind of harm.  You lose their
comfort, their protection, their ability to be with you, to
listen to your day, to be there with you through the good times
and bad, to help around the house, to help with the kids.
That's a pretty significant harm, four years.  That's the kind
of harm -- now we're talking in the hundreds of thousands if
not low millions of dollars.
And then there's this kind of harm, the worst kind of
harm, where you take somebody away for the rest of their life,
where you lose a spouse -- and you saw it, and you'll be
instructed -- about 17 years of life taken away, 17 years of
companionship with your first love, with the person you spent
nearly 38 years of your life with, building your dream home
together, planning out your retirement, delighting in your
grandchildren, everything you'd worked so hard for for all 84
those years, gone forever.  That's the worst kind of harm.
That's the kind of harm that reaches into the bigger millions
of dollars. 
And that's why I have to ask you in this case, I
think -- it's up to you, but -- how you think evidence -- what
it showed about the kind of life they had together and what she
missed out on.  I'm not going to rehash that for you.  You
heard that.
I suggest to you that, when you consider that kind of
harm over that period of time, you're looking at half a million
dollars for every year they lost and I think another half a
million dollars for going through the death of your child
without the father of that child.  You heard how painful that
was.  You heard what that was to her.
Now, that's on Question Number 5 -- I'm sorry -- 9.
And you're going to reach that question only if you decide that
Mr. Gray died from something caused by smoking; right?  That's
the question that you'll answer.
But if, in your deliberations, you decide that none
of the smoking-related injuries actually caused his death, then
you're going to make that same kind of determination not for
Mrs. Gray's loss, but for Mr. Gray's loss, for what -- for how
it felt for him to go through the lung surgeries, to go through
the fear, to go through the decline.  
And you heard what the smoking did to his body, what 85
the injuries did to his body, and looking out at his sea of
friends and his loved ones, and what that was like for him to
go through.
And he got sick in '93.  That's what the medical
records show.  That's when he really started feeling the
effects of his injuries.
So I submit to you that -- if you get to Question 10,
if you find that none of his injuries actually caused his
death, I would submit to you that a fair and just reasonable
compensation for what he went through for those last two years
would be $1 million per year, $2 million.  That's up to you.
These are intangibles.  You have to bring your sense of what
that life and that value is worth.
Now, if somebody in deliberation says -- and this is
really important.  If somebody in deliberation says, "You know,
I just don't think money is appropriate.  We can't bring him
back," or if somebody says, "It seems like too much money for
one person," or "I think this will encourage more lawsuits, and
it will be bad for our economy if, we as a jury, award this
money" -- and I'm not saying there's anything wrong with
feeling that way.  I think we all come in here with feelings.
But you swore an oath, and it's incredibly important
that those feelings and those attitudes and opinions -- they
don't come in here.  You cannot -- the Judge has instructed
you:  You cannot be guided by passion or public opinion or 86
these outside influences.
On this question, the issue is harms and losses, and
it may be hard for you to put a dollar amount here.  I get
that.  But that's your job, and no one said your job was going
to be easy.
Now, also, if someone in deliberation says -- and,
you know, "Mrs. Gray has done her best to move on, you know?
It seems like this was a long time ago.  What good would the
money do now?  It seems like she's okay."  
Now, the Judge has instructed you that you're not
allowed to take into account her relationships.  That's the
law.  You can't.
But I'll also submit this to you.  You heard this
case started very, very long ago.  Mrs. Gray has been waiting a
very, very long time for her turn, patiently, to have her day
in court, like this, with a jury like you.  It takes time to
get here, a long time.
And Mrs. Gray, she did what she could to move on with
her life.  She was in her 50s when her husband died.  It wasn't
easy.  Not her preference, of course.
But if somebody says that in deliberations, remind
them you can't replace -- and it's not fair to ask Mrs. Gray to
wait all these years and not even try to move on with her life,
and it doesn't change the harm, and it doesn't change the loss.
You don't just replace people like that. 87
And if somebody -- if somebody can't follow that
law -- if somebody cannot follow the law that you need to set
aside these outside reasons, then you need to knock on the door
and tell the Judge.  It's that important.
Each of you have the right to be on a jury that
follows the law and to come to a fair and reasonable verdict.
That is -- you have a right to that.  And, in fact, the Judge
has instructed you, you have that obligation to ensure that
others do as well.
All right.  The very last -- well, there's two last
issues, and I'll wrap up here.
And I promised you you would get a chance to allocate
fault and responsibility, your main job.  And that's what this
case was about for the most part.
In addition to -- and you do need two Engle findings
to help you with this one, though.  So I'm going to show them
to you.
I don't think it's quite obvious from the
instructions, but these ones you need to take into account to
answer this question.
So in addition to the Engle finding that these
companies -- that -- I'm sorry -- that Reynolds fraudulently
concealed and conspired, there's also these findings that you
must accept and that you need to answer this question.
One of the Engle findings was that R.J. Reynolds was 88
negligent with respect to the manufacture and sale of
cigarettes, and you must accept that determination.
And one of the Engle findings was that R.J. Reynolds
placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and
unreasonably dangerous, and you must accept that determination
too.
So we know that Reynolds put unreasonably dangerous
and addictive products on the market.  Those were the ones that
Mr. Gray smoked.  That's in the stipulations of fact.  Reynolds
manufactured Kools, and we know that's the main brand that
Mr. Gray smoked.
We know they were defective and unreasonably
dangerous.  We know the company was negligent.  That's what
this finding said.
And actually you even heard more about Kools.  You
heard they were the highest nicotine delivery.  You saw that
evidence.  We showed that to you.  These were highly addictive
cigarettes and unreasonably dangerous.
And each one of these cigarettes that the companies
put on the market put thousands of chemicals into his body
every time he took a puff on a cigarette.  Those chemicals,
over time, accumulated to cause his disease.  And you heard how
it worked its way through every one of his body -- every aspect
of his body.  And they brought you no witness to say anything
different. 89
So how do you figure out how much fault goes on these
companies versus Mr. Gray?
Well, we know what Mr. Heimann told us in the video.
He said, "You wouldn't blame a smoker for smoking two packs a
day for 40 years."  
Well, that's Mr. Gray; right?  They wouldn't blame
him, although I don't think that's what you'll hear from
Mr. Geise.
And we know, as Mr. Gentry said, it's not
unreasonable for a smoker to smoke as much as Mr. Gray.  That's
not unusual.  They certainly don't tell people not to.  No
instructions telling people how much is okay or too little to
smoke, certainly not when Mr. Gray was alive.
So how do you figure this one out?
Well, this, of course, is a question that the
Defendant -- that Reynolds has its burden on.  So they have to
prove to you how much Mr. Gray acted unreasonably and how much
of that was -- what happened to him was on him versus them.
It's actually their burden to prove this.  So you are going to
have to figure that out.
And, of course, when we talk about reasonable, what
did -- Mr. Gray did that -- if he acted unreasonably and to
what extent.  You have to measure him against an ordinary
person, not a doctor, not a scientist, not somebody in their
company, just an ordinary person, what is average. 90
So you will have to decide whether he exercised
ordinary care over himself and to what extent his own failure
to do that was a cause of what happened to him and to what
extent.
And we told you up front we admit you should judge
Mr. Gray up against these companies.  Put them side by side.
He's got nothing to hide.
So let's look at what -- versus what Reynolds did,
was Mr. Gray reasonable.  And I think you could start this
question at 50/50.  You could say Reynolds made a defective and
dangerous product and didn't tell people how bad they were.
And on the other side, Mr. Gray, he smoked them, even though
some of his family members and some people out there were
telling him they could be bad for him.
So you could say that's 50/50.  They both are to
blame.  Kind of like -- I think a good way to explain this is
if a pedestrian walks into the middle of the road, doesn't look
both ways, isn't taking ordinary care of themselves, and at the
same time a driver is coming down the road and is texting, not
taking reasonable and ordinary care for others, and the
truck -- or the -- the truck driver, who's texting, hits the
passenger -- or the pedestrian.  Because the pedestrian wasn't
looking, the truck driver was texting, 50/50.  If either one of
them had not been doing that unreasonable thing, the injury
wouldn't have happened.  That's 50/50. 91
But what if the driver knows a lot more about that
road, and knows it's particularly dangerous, and knows the
people crossing that road are more vulnerable?  Starts to get a
little bit less like 50/50, if that driver texts anyway on that
road.  Starts to look a little more like 60/40 on the truck
driver.  
And then imagine if the truck driver knows that, when
it texts as it goes down that road, one out of two or three
people -- it will hit one out of two or three people and texts
anyway, and the person who's crossing they know is vulnerable
and doesn't have all the information available.  In that
circumstance, you're going to be a little more like 75 percent
on the bus driver [sic] and 25 percent on the pedestrian that
walks out in the middle of the road.
And that's not even close to as bad as what the
industry did in terms of enticing young people to start, come
into that intersection, with the full knowledge and awareness
they had about how dangerous it was with a pedestrian who's
impaired, who's got the addiction blinders on and can't see,
because of what they did to the product.  I mean, it's just not
the same.
I mean, we're talking now more like 90 percent of
fault on this truck driver, 90 percent fault on these
companies, 10 percent on Mr. Gray, in light of all he knew, in
light of all the information he had, in light of the addiction 92
that was happening to his brain.
And you heard it all -- and I'm not going to rehash
all that they did when you compare it against him, how they set
him up to fail, how they enticed him, kept him like a Pavlov's
dog, pushing the lever, with the reassurance products, all of
that stuff, and then look at him.
Now, could he have not ignored his wife?  Sure.
Could he have listened to Cousin Betty?  Sure.
Could he have tried harder to quit?  Sure.
I mean, you heard a whole lot about what he did to
try to quit.  That's in your notes.  They brought no evidence
on that.
But I think, when you weigh all that these companies
did with the knowledge they had versus what Mr. Gray did and
the knowledge he had, I think you get to 90 and 10 percent, but
that will be up to you.
Because, of course, who could have stopped this
collision from happening?  Perhaps both of them could; right?
Just like the pedestrian couldn't have walked in the street and
the truck driver couldn't have been texting.
But you have to think about who had more knowledge,
who had more power over that situation.  Was it the
manufacturer who knew everything about what they were doing to
the product, knew everything about how they were marketing
them, and knew what would happen if they did it, versus 93
Mr. Gray and the limited information that he had and the
control that was impaired by addiction.
All right.  Very, very last issue, and that is
punitive damages.  That's the last question.
And this is where I have to prove to you -- and I
told you this one has a higher burden, because we don't just go
around punishing companies willy-nilly.  This one is very
serious.  This is whether, by clear and convincing evidence,
punitive damages are warranted in this kind of case.
And the Judge has already instructed you on punitive
damages and what I have to show you, and it really comes down
to this:  Did the companies know what they were doing was
wrong?  Did they act intentionally?  And is what they did a
serious public wrong?
I think this evidence is quite clear on all of those
things.
Did they act knowing --
But I want to be very clear about this.  We're not
punishing them in the air.  I'm not asking you to punish them
for what they did out there in the world that could have hurt
everybody.
Mrs. Gray is seeking punishment for what happened to
her, what happened to Mr. Gray.
And did Reynolds know that people like Mr. Gray could
get hurt?  You betcha.  Sure as I'm standing here, they knew 94
their cigarettes would kill their customers.  They saw it in
the studies, in all those reports.  Whether it was available
scientific literature or whether it was the literature in their
own files, it doesn't matter.  These companies knew how many
people were dying.  They saw it.  They saw the death and
destruction and the disease.  They saw it.  Couldn't have
missed it.
These are real people.  These are Americans.  These
are veterans.  These are grandparents and mothers and fathers
and sisters and brothers.  These companies saw that.  They saw
actors -- they showed you these videos -- Yul Brynner,
Bill Talman.
You think the companies didn't see these public
service announcements?  You think they didn't get it, the human
suffering of what they were doing?
I don't think they could have missed it, folks.  I
think they knew exactly what they were doing.  Nothing stopped
these companies.  Nothing stopped them from seeing the death
and the destruction.
What kind of moral and decent company goes on and
does what they did with that knowledge?  What kind of company
does that?
I think the evidence will show you that these
companies -- they didn't intend to kill their customers.  I'm
not going to argue that to you.  I don't think the evidence 95
shows that.
I think what happened is that something took over.
The fear of going out of business and profit overcame the
paramount concern of public health, clouded their judgment,
drove Reynolds to forget its promise and to lose its way.
I think they saw death as an unpleasant side effect
in pursuit of profit that came from the powerful addictive
effects of nicotine, and people like Henry Gray were just
caught up in it.
This question is really about whether punishment is
appropriate, punishment and deterrence.
They didn't bring you any witness to explain it.
They didn't tell you, "Hey, we're a changed company now."  
No.  I think what you saw, in fact -- and you saw
this from Mr. Gentry, and he said nicotine addiction is not a
public health problem.  And I think you saw why they say that,
because that means they'd have to do something about it.  And
they haven't.  They have not done anything about the mechanism
that causes all this disease and suffering, that caused
Mr. Gray's death.  They haven't done anything about it.  Don't
plan to.  Don't even have anyone on their staff who's dedicated
to that position.
Punitive damages are important.  They're not just to
punish.  They're also to deter.  They're required in this kind
of circumstance when a company needs to be deterred so it never 96
happens again, this cloud of judgment, this pursuit of profits
over health.
But it's not just for these companies -- I'm sorry --
for Reynolds.  It's also for any company out there, so we don't
live in that kind of world, the kind of world where you can't
trust what a company says.  We don't want to live in that kind
of world.  It's not right.
So I want you to be plain and clear.  The evidence, I
think, was clear and convincing on this.
The answer to Question 11 is yes.
And I assure you I know that many of you have
sacrificed a lot to be here.  I know that, and I thank you.
It's not easy to serve.
And if we get to a Phase 2, meaning you come back and
you give an amount of money to punish them, I promise you I
will put on that proof quick, we'll get you in and out, you can
see what you need to see, and you can make your verdict.  This
will not prolong things at all, and you're not that kind of
jury.  I know you'll take this seriously.
So thank you.  Thank you for your time and your
attention.  I know it may have seemed like I brought you really
fancy experts that made a lot of money and just go around and
around and do this; that this doesn't matter for them or for
anybody.
I brought you people here that knew what they were 97
talking about, that could bring this case to you as efficiently
as possible, could show you the truth, so you can make your
decision.  I think I did that, and I thank you.


MS. LONDON:  Thank you.  Good morning, again.
I know I stand ten minutes between you and lunch, I
think, but this is important, and I just want to make a few
final comments.
Mr. Geise suggested to you that this was all just a
big coincidence, that all the money that the industry spent,
billions of dollars to market their products, billions of
dollars on the campaign of doubt and denial and conspiracy, the
pure white filters, the billions of dollars spent marketing
those filter cigarettes, what they did to the cigarettes, the
manipulation, all that didn't have anything to do with Mr. Gray
at all.  He missed it.  He was like in those GEICO commercials,
the guy living under a rock, just missed it.
This is the campaign that their own document said was
brilliantly conceived.  They would have been in a deplorable
position had they not acted the way they did.
I told you at the beginning of this case that you
would hear two versions from Reynolds:  One story when they're 157
here being called to account, and one story when they thought
no one was looking.
You will have the documents back there.  Of course,
you don't have the 60 million pages available on the Internet
to you, but you have enough to see what these -- what this
industry was saying behind closed doors.  And I encourage you
to look at those, and you'll see what these companies knew,
when they knew it, and their view about why their products were
selling the way they were.
You'll see, one, based on the studies they did, those
products were highly, powerfully addictive; that they
understood better than anyone that they sold those deadly,
dangerous products because they were powerfully addictive.  The
addiction drove their sales.
It's baffling to me the argument somehow that
addiction had nothing to do with why Mr. Gray smoked.  It's
absolutely astonishing to me to make that argument.
They know full well, and those documents show
exactly, why people bought those products.  It's because of
that addiction.
You know, Mr. Geise, he suggested to you that they
are not challenging the findings and that I was up here arguing
a bunch of things that they don't dispute.  But I've got to
tell you I think the case that they put on before you and the
arguments I just heard suggested to you they didn't do anything 158
wrong at all.
"Oh, we tried hard.  We tried to make our product
safer.  Oh, nothing was a secret from anybody.  Oh, we gave
everybody all our research.  We opened our files up, and we
shared everything all along the way.  We cooperated.  We
cooperated.  All those times we went out and we attacked the
Surgeon General?  Never mind about that.  We cooperated."
I don't know what to say about them challenging what
the Engle findings are.  The Judge has instructed you that you
have to accept those.  That's the truth in this case.  So I'm
not really sure what to do with all that.  Certainly you can
disregard that.  It's not the law.
Mr. Geise also reminded us -- and it's true --
cigarettes are a legal product.  He's right.  It's currently
legal to sell cigarettes, and it's currently legal to buy them,
if you're over 18, in Florida.
But it's also legal to sell cars.  It's legal to
drive.  But a car company that makes a faulty air bag and
ignition switches doesn't tell people they're responsible for
the harm.
There's no law saying that these companies had to
sell a needlessly addictive product.  No law saying they had to
market them with pure white filters and be misleading about it.
There's no law that makes them make billions of dollars of
profits and spend billions of dollars on advertising.  There is 159
no law that says they have to do that.
The law allows cases like this because we have to put
limits on companies.  When they are responsible for the harm,
somebody who gets hurt gets to come in here and they get to go
to you.
So I don't know what this business about it being a
legal product has to do with anything, nothing at all.  Being
legal doesn't make it right.
I can't spend all day going after and reexplaining
why those cherry-picked things don't matter at all.  I mean,
really, R.J. Reynolds telling you that you should believe a
document that they wrote to a regulator saying, "Oh, look.  We
didn't do anything wrong"?  A document that I showed you that
public health authorities had reviewed and wrote a
peer-reviewed paper on, that said, "Oh, no.  These companies
sure knew that pH affected sales."  
I'm surprised they are suggesting that to you as
something that we overlooked in our case.  Obviously it's not
credible.
And then -- that's okay.
You know, we brought you witnesses that knew what
they were talking about.  They're professional, no question
about it.  They know what they're talking about.
If these -- these companies have ample resources.  If
there was one person on this planet, one, that they could bring 160
in here to tell you anything that we put on was wrong --
MR. GEISE:  Your Honor, I object to their comment
about our resources.
THE COURT:  Ladies and gentlemen, you're instructed
to listen to the evidence that is -- that has been presented to
you -- the evidence that has been presented to you.  Okay?
MS. LONDON:  Thank you.
That's right.  You couldn't consider any evidence
from them.  They didn't bring you anybody to help you
understand, put any of this in context.
Mr. Geise tried this case, amply so, but what he says
to you is not evidence.
So, for example, he commented to you, I think, for a
while about Mr. Gray's motivation, that he knows better than
Mr. Gray's doctor and Mrs. Gray herself about how hard he
wanted to quit, what he did, how he tried, how he cried in a
psychiatrist's office.
Come on.  The last person on this planet that can
come up here and challenge Mr. Gray's motivation to get off a
product is the manufacturer of that product that certainly did
nothing, nothing at all, to help keep him motivated.
And there's nothing on that verdict form that says
"motivation."
Can I have the ELMO, please.
Thank you. 161
I'm glad Mr. Geise said he wasn't going to say
Mr. Gray was unreasonable.
We showed you this evidence.  This is how many men
were being just like Mr. Gray.  Born in 1930 -- and you see the
slope up here?  That's nearly 80 percent of men of Mr. Gray's
generation are smoking when he smoked.  He's not unusual.  He's
not rare.  He wasn't crazy.  And he wasn't just seeing all this
stuff and saying, "Oh, screw you."  
It was a culture of smoking perpetuated by
R.J. Reynolds.  It wasn't unusual at all. 
And actually, if you look at this, all the way out
till 1990, basically, even 50 percent of men in his generation,
born when he was born, still smoking.  That's extraordinary,
extraordinary.  And he's extraordinarily common, unfortunately.
All right.  Finally, Mr. Geise said we need to
respect Mr. Gray's choices.
You know what?  I actually do agree with him on that.
Mr. Gray, starting back from the '70s, wanted to stop
smoking, didn't want to end up prematurely dead like his mom.
He tried.  He wanted to.  He made a choice to try over and over
and over and over and over again.
And you know from the evidence how likely it was each
time he was going to succeed because of the addictive nature of
these products.  You saw this evidence.  Nothing challenged
this at all. 162
Three percent.  That's what he was up against.
That's how powerful this is.  Wanting to stop, trying to stop
over and over and over again?  That's what it takes, because
people almost always fail.  That's what happened.
And as far as whether he quit or didn't quit, after
1993 -- ladies and gentlemen, you heard the testimony, right?
I mean, you know what you heard -- his wife said he didn't.
His doctor wouldn't know, wasn't playing golf when his legs
were all cramped up and he couldn't walk a block.
And even so, he had lung cancer and vascular diseases
and all those diseases in '93.  So whether he picked up a
cigarette or not or quit after that, the damage was done,
folks.  The damage was done.  It was a legal cause of his
disease.  That's a distraction, and that's irrelevant.
And finally, how does a company show respect for
their customers' choices?  Right?  Because if we're going to
respect his choices, we should have respected his choices to
quit.
Does a company hide the truth about the dangers in
their products?  Do they rig them to make them more addictive?
Do they treat them like Pavlov's dog, like animals, rats in a
cage?  Do they keep exit doors closed, knowing that most of
their customers would quit if they could?  Is that what a
company does who respects their customers' choices?  Calls them
"replacement smokers"? 163
No kind of respect.
And I'll end as I began, two kind of stories:  One
when they come in here being held to account, and one back when
no one was looking.
And what did they say about this whole idea about
free choice back when no one was looking?
They said, "The entire matter of addiction is the
most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung
cancer case.  We can't defend continued smoking as free choice
if the person was addicted."
And that is what Mr. Gray was, and that's why we're
here.  
And we thank you for your time, and I ask you for a
verdict in Mrs. Gray's favor.
Thank you.