MR. MIGLIORI: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURORS: Good morning.
MR. MIGLIORI: I thank you. Thank you for taking the
time to listen. This is a process that we have in this country
that doesn't exist anywhere else. And I know it's a burden on
your personal lives, and I know that this has been something
you didn't schedule into your June, but we really appreciate
your attentiveness and your consideration.
So on behalf of Mr. Griffin and the lawyers and team
that's here to help present this case to you, again, thank you
very much.
Now, I want to try to go through a lot of the
evidence, but not all. And I plan to save about 15 minutes to
come back and talk to you again at the end. But this is my
last chance to talk directly with you, so I want to make sure
that we sort of go back and take a big-picture look at all the
things that happened and the reasons why we're here.
And I need for you to focus on the first basic idea
that this is not a typical case. We're not asking -- I'm going
to step in front of that all day. We're not asking you to find
whether or not Philip Morris did something wrong. This is a
unique case, because that's been done. There's another jury
that's already decided that.
The question in this case is only does Mr. Griffin
7-8 get the benefit of what another jury has already decided. So
this is very unique. It's unique in almost every respect.
But Philip Morris was already found to have been
negligent. They were already found to have concealed
information from the smoker. The question that we're asking
you to decide is, does Mr. Griffin get the benefit of that
finding by proving the basic elements of the Engle questions.
So we started with this, and this is where we're
going to ask you to proceed.
To be entitled to the findings that Philip Morris was
wrong, we have to go through this roadmap. The first two
points, there is absolutely no dispute about. In fact, I'm
going to show you that in some other points, there's no
dispute. But Mr. Griffin was at all times relevant -- a
resident of Florida. Being a resident of Florida is an
important element of proving that he's part of the class.
Did he have COPD? There was only testimony here that
he suffered from emphysema and COPD. There was no testimony to
the contrary. There was no witness to suggest otherwise. The
treating physicians in this case are so critically important on
so many issues, but you saw Dr. Cornwell's deposition early in
the case, and the term he used was "undoubtedly caused by
smoking." And I'm going to show you what the burden of proof
is in a minute, but there's no question that Mr. Griffin had
COPD.
7-9 So here is where the real battle is, and I want to go
through the verdict form. You'll get a piece of paper that
you'll go through the questions to answer each one, and it will
follow this procedure, this sort of outline.
Did Mr. Griffin's COPD or emphysema manifest during
the time frame?
Now, I had a board up where I drew on the board and
we showed that the -- from '91 through '96, the chronic
exertional dyspnea or the prolonged shortness of breath when he
did some exertion was growing in the time frame.
No. 3, there was no testimony to the contrary. There
was never even an effort to say that that wasn't true. There
was never a question asked to demonstrate that wasn't true. I
don't think that's a disputed point at all, not in the record.
The next question: Was his addiction to cigarettes
containing nicotine? This is the battleground. This is where
we're going to spend a lot of time going through the evidence
and helping you come up with what we believe is the right
answer to that, and we think that is, of course, yes.
Then the last question is sort of the catchall. Was
his addiction to Philip Morris cigarettes the cause or a
substantial cause -- you'll see the language; the judge will
give you the actual law -- was it a substantial cause of his
emphysema. And we'll show you how that works, but, again, we
have undisputed testimony that he had COPD, and we have the
7-10 linkage between that and his addiction.
So while Dr. Cornwell said it was undoubted, beyond a
reasonable doubt, in his mind, that smoking caused the COPD,
that's a standard that's different from what you'll be
instructed in this case.
In criminal trials, you have to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt to put somebody in prison for life or for a
sentence because of the loss of liberty.
Here in a civil context, the law has a different
standard. It doesn't mean he didn't prove it, but the standard
that you're going to be applying is, is it more likely true
than not? There can be some component part of variability.
Maybe somebody believes it's 80 percent true; maybe somebody
believes it's 100 percent true; maybe somebody believes it's 52
percent true, but in all three of those examples, that means
that the plaintiff, Mr. Griffin, sustained his burden if it's
more likely true, if the scales tip more likely true than not
that we've proven each of these different questions, okay?
So on behalf of Florida smokers, the jury made
certain findings that apply to all, and if you determine that
Mr. Griffin is part of that class, what you're saying is he's
not left out of those findings. He's not one of the Florida
smokers who does not get the benefit of the earlier jury's
findings that Philip Morris was negligent, knowingly concealed
or omitted material information, entered into an agreement with
7-11 other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit material
information.
That jury already found nicotine is addictive, that
smoking cigarettes causes Mr. Griffin's disease, COPD, and that
Philip Morris placed those cigarettes on the market that were
defective and unreasonably dangerous. Those are findings that
you're bound to if you find Mr. Griffin is a member of the
class.
So, again, we're here to decide does he get the
benefit of what's already been decided? You do not have to
find any of these component parts in your deliberations.
So if you find that he's a member of the class, one
of the questions you're going to be asked is was he fully and
fairly compensated; that is, can you come up with a way of
fully and fairly compensating Mr. Griffin for Philip Morris's
responsibility based on those findings?
Now, there's going to be a lot of discussion about
what's Mr. Griffin's responsibility in this. Philip Morris has
the same burden that we have, to prove that Mr. Griffin acted
unreasonably, that he did something wrong, that he wasn't
reasonable --
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Mr. Migliori, there was a change.
MR. MIGLIORI: In this case, you'll have to decide
7-12 what responsibility Mr. Griffin has, and I'll help you go
through that process and what we think is the right way to
decide it.
In the end, you'll have the opportunity, in addition
to compensation, to deliberate on the question of should Philip
Morris be punished for it. Should Philip Morris, in addition
to compensating Mr. Griffin, suffer a punishment for concealing
information, its negligence, putting a defective product on the
market, acting in a way that caused harm to Mr. Griffin.
So let's go through the questions. The very first
question that we anticipate on the verdict form is: Did
Mr. Patrick Griffin's COPD first manifest itself on or before
November 21st, 1996?
Dr. Burns came here. You saw his credentials.
Dr. Burns participated in every single Surgeon General's Report
since 1975. He's here as an expert. He testifies in many of
these cases. He's here to talk about the smoking health
consequences. And in this case, after looking at all of
Mr. Griffin's medical records, he said there's no question that
between 1990 and 1996, Mr. Griffin's COPD manifested itself.
The symptoms of it began to appear. We'll go through some of
those.
In '91 there's the scuba event. He goes to take a
scuba lesson, recognizes he's got tremendous shortness of
breath. It scares him. He starts the process of wanting to
7-13 try to quit.
1995, he has a job, has a hard time keeping up
physically with the job. He ends up losing his job because he
can't carry things that are heavy because upon exertion, he
can't keep his breath.
Same year, he becomes a taxi driver because he
doesn't have that heavy lifting job anymore, and he suffers
shortness of breath during the tasks of lifting bags.
He goes to his doctor in October. He complains about
it. Talks about walks on the beach that cause him to --
actually described as actually scaring him.
He ends up going to the VA outpatient in November of
the next year, still within the class period, complaining of
shortness of breath or the dyspnea ongoing for the past year,
and he continues to try to quit smoking.
Two weeks, three weeks outside of the class period,
then we have a medical note from the VA where -- or, I'm sorry,
from his treating physician, where he says in the record -- the
doctor says in the record that he has chronic exertional
dyspnea ongoing for the past year, manifestation going back for
the past year. During that whole time, it was very much
appreciated that it was related to his smoking for Mr. Griffin.
So we believe the first question, did he manifest,
the answer is yes. There's no evidence to the contrary.
The second question is: Was Mr. Griffin or was the
7-14 plaintiff addicted to smoking cigarettes?
Now, ladies and gentlemen, you've heard experts here.
In fact, you've heard experts being paid a large amount of
money to go to each one of these cases, sometimes multiple
cases in the same week, you heard, go to each one of these
cases and testify. They're honest people. They're doing their
best.
But the thing that's most telling, in my mind, about
the quality of evidence is what you see from the treating
physicians, the people that were actually there at the time
treating Mr. Griffin for the purpose of making him better.
Those doctors are the ones that we see the most amount of
information about what he went through, why he went through it,
and what he was experiencing.
From his testimony, from his medical treating
physicians, from the Surgeon General's Reports and definitions,
from the National Institute of Health definitions, from
Dr. DiFranza's expert testimony, the answer to No. 2 is yes.
Why?
Let's go to the medical records. It's not accidental
that there is an ICD-9 billing code with a diagnosis. That is
put into the computer. That is put into the system because it
is treating a disease in the hospital. Hospitals don't
carelessly handle information about diagnoses of patients.
You heard yesterday Dr. Kaplan say that he trained in
7-15 a VA years ago, not on tobacco, but he trained in the VA long
ago, and this was just put in the computer; they always do that
at smoking cessation clinics. That's not true. That's not
true, ladies and gentlemen. This ICD-9 code, that is actually
out of the DSM-IV that Dr. Kaplan uses, and the ICD-9 code, the
305.1 says nicotine dependence, nicotine use disorder.
Dr. Kaplan, their expert, admitted that's addiction.
So is that in the record? It's absolutely in the record. This
is the VA clinic for smoking cessation. You see that there's
the ICD-9 code for nicotine dependence, tobacco use disorder.
What's also important about this, ladies and
gentlemen, is he's going to a cessation clinic after he quit.
He's not smoking while he's going here.
Why would a person who's not addicted to cigarettes,
who can just quit, just non -- without help, quit, why would he
go to smoking cessation clinics multiple times after quitting
if it were that easy?
In the VA records, you've got DSM-5 criteria where --
I'll show you the DSM-5 is what's in effect as of May of last
year. Now they use the term tobacco use disorder. Well, in
the VA records, that very term, history of tobacco use
disorder, August 2013, when the DSM-5 is in effect. History
of.
Back to 2002, it's not just the billing code that
says it, the staff takes the time to say under A, under
7-16 assessment or diagnosis, "Mr. Griffin has nicotine dependence."
Dr. Kaplan tells you that that is equivalent to
addiction. This is a medical record in 2002 at the time by
people trying to help him quit.
These aren't experts. These aren't forensic people.
These aren't people that are trying to convince or help a jury
understand one view or another. These are people trying to
take care of a human being, and they assessed him as nicotine
dependent. That should have a high weight.
This is a person who is an addiction therapist,
specializing in addiction. And on multiple occasions -- this
is the second visit, this is the third visit, all with nicotine
dependence.
By the fourth visit, there's even a representation
that he's getting better; that he's actually trying and it's
actually working. You heard about the withdrawal and how it
takes time and it takes days, but you start to get better. And
Dr. Kaplan just sort of waved all that off, all the anxieties
lasted forever, all the symptoms lasted forever.
Here's a comment in the medical record in 2002 saying
"This patient, although still smokeless, has stopped smoking,
is dependent, but he's getting better."
You wonder if withdrawal is not, in fact, part of
Mr. Griffin's recovery from smoking.
Then you heard that, well, that can't be true because
7-17 that's not a doctor, it's just an addiction therapist at a
smoking cessation clinic that defendants were critical of
Mr. Griffin for not doing earlier. Now that he's done it and
the smoking cessation clinic says he's nicotine dependent,
they're saying, "Oh, that clinic. That clinic just put that in
there. They didn't know what they were writing when they
called him addicted."
Well, here are some doctors' notes, if the addiction
specialists aren't enough. You saw this report yesterday.
Final report of St. Vincent's Medical Center. This is in 2013.
It's not nursing. It's not addiction therapists. It's an
attending physician, that's a doctor, that's a medical doctor,
consulting with a pulmonary doctor and an infectious disease
doctor and a nephrologist, and they're looking at his entire
complex as a human being. These are the different diagnoses of
a human being. This is what he's going through.
History of tobacco use disorder. That's not a
careless word. That's not a word that's not precise. That's
not doctors just sticking something in the record. That's a
very specific term.
Why is it a specific term and why is it repeated
twice? On the second page, they talk about the history of COPD
and history of tobacco use disorder. Why is it repeated twice?
Because that's what's -- and why do they use the term? It's
because that is the term of DSM-5, tobacco use disorder, which
7-18 is addiction.
So let's talk about the experts on this topic.
Dr. DiFranza, who testified very early in the trial, wrote
chapters in the '89 and '94 U.S. Surgeon General's Report.
He's cited in the United States Surgeon General's Reports 20
times. He's cited by Philip Morris in pamphlets that Philip
Morris is putting out to the public.
He's an invited speaker by the FDA. He wrote a book
on smoking cessation. He wrote book chapters on addictions.
He teaches at universities and medical schools about
addictions. Over 30 research grants to study addiction, and
wrote 116 peer-reviewed articles related to smoking and
addiction.
Remember, peer-reviewed means it's not my opinion
only. It's that this is good science based on the other
scientists in my field who reviewed this before it was allowed
to be published. 116 peer-reviewed articles.
I won't go through all of them, but for Dr. Kaplan,
he didn't publish in any of those areas. He became a smoking
addiction expert when, in 1997, he serendipitously met up with
Mr. Reilly on a plane and became an expert in this litigation.
Even today, 1 to 2 percent of his practice has to do with
smoking cessation.
When the Surgeon General changed its definition in
1988 to take intoxication out of the definition of addiction so
7-19 that smokers could be properly diagnosed, in the Surgeon
General's opinion, with addiction, he kept it in his. Although
he was still in school, still a resident, he never accepted
that smokers could be addicted until 2000, after he became an
expert, and also, as you heard from Mr. Jupe, after the Philip
Morris announcement to the world in 1999, finally, that smoking
is addictive.
You remember in 1994 they even got up in front of
Congress. They raised their hand and said, "Smoking is not
addictive."
He maintained that if you were a smoker and a patient
of his in 1995, he would have said, under the definition that's
not used by the Surgeon General, "You're not addicted under any
circumstance because cigarettes don't cause intoxication."
So to be right, Dr. Kaplan has to establish that all
these other folks are wrong. Remember, we showed you the NIDA
definition for addiction? He doesn't agree with that. The
U.S. Surgeon General's definition of addiction in '88, he
doesn't agree with that. The Veterans Administration diagnoses
that I just showed you, doesn't agree with those.
St. Vincent's Medical Center, the doctors, the team
of doctors worrying about Mr. Griffin's care who diagnose him
as having a history of tobacco use disorder, they're wrong.
And, of course, the expert who came here to explain
it to you with the scales and how people go on and off and
7-20 relapse and fit the definition, the NIDA definition, the
National Institutes of Health definition, the Surgeon General's
definition. Dr. DiFranza came to tell you that, yes, in fact,
Mr. Griffin was addicted to the nicotine in Philip Morris
cigarettes.
We can go through all the checklists. I don't have a
lot of time, but we can go through the checklists of the DSM-5.
It's not the only criteria. It's the one that Dr. Kaplan
chooses to use. Dr. Kaplan gives you three. We actually had
Dr. DiFranza show you how eight of them apply.
You heard the testimony. You heard the testimony of
how things are different than what Mr. Kaplan -- or Dr. Kaplan
suggested. Dr. Kaplan always had a reason why some piece of
evidence didn't fit.
But you can look at any of these tools. You can take
the most basic one that Dr. DiFranza used as a clinician called
HONC. You can discard it if you want, but he said that all ten
things that are examples of addiction for people he treats were
present in Mr. Griffin.
The Fagerstrom is not a diagnostic test. It doesn't
say whether you are addicted or not. It says being addicted,
how severely addicted are you? So this isn't just about
whether he's addicted. This is how severe of an addiction
Mr. Griffin had.
Dr. Kaplan never bothered to take that approach, but
7-21 Dr. DiFranza did, and he found that Mr. Kaplan -- I'm sorry,
that Mr. Griffin was not only addicted, but he was severely
addicted.
And then the DSM-5, applying the criteria that both
people said. Again, I'm going to leave it to you. I'm going
to leave it to you.
Dr. DiFranza testified that 60 cigarettes a day,
based on the scientific literature, 100 percent of smokers who
smoke this many cigarettes in a day every day, or on some days
only 20, but if you're between 20 and 60 cigarettes a day, 100
percent of those people are addicted. And he supports that
using three different tools and two different definitions, not
limiting himself to one and then restricting his view of the
evidence to fit.
Under the NIDA definition alone, you can find that
Mr. Griffin was addicted, and that's as simple as this.
"Addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease
that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use,
despite harmful consequences."
He used it chronically. 70 pack-years, according to
Dr. Kaplan. He relapsed. Very importantly, this is a brain
disease. This isn't an issue of choice at this stage. We'll
talk about choice when we talk about fault later.
Addiction. If he's addicted, it's a brain disease.
It's a yes or no. It's not a percentage. It's a brain disease
7-22 by compulsive drug seeking and use despite its harmful
consequences. The warning on the side of the pack and
continuing to smoke. Classically, Mr. Griffin fits this
definition.
And you saw studies that actually show this isn't
just a choice. This isn't willpower. Addiction is a brain
disease. If he's addicted, it's because his brain has been
affected by the insult of chemicals. And to undo that,
Mr. Griffin went through several different aids to help him
stop feeling and stop having the compulsion to continue to have
the next cigarette, and you heard the testimony about those
various forms of treatment.
And Dr. Burns came in here and said very clearly that
former smokers are at an increased risk of relapse for a period
of five years. So whether he quit for one month, three months,
one year, or two years, your brain doesn't just stop being
sick. He still talks about leaving his building and walking
through the gauntlet of smokers who smoke outside his building
and having that need, feeling that compulsion to want to smoke
again.
But now that he's out of it, and now that his
compromised lung is so bad, he fights that every day. But to
get there, to break the addiction, he had to go through it
multiple times over a period of ten years.
How do we know he was interested? How do we know he
7-23 wanted to quit? Again, please put the time into these medical
records. These are people that are looking at him as a human
being, as a patient, not as a person in a courtroom.
1995, the medical records say he is very interested
in stopping smoking. 1998: "Patrick seems very motivated to
stop tobacco -- his tobacco." Wants Zyban. A telephone
message. He calls in and says he wants Zyban.
2000: "Hasn't been able to quit on his own." 2000:
"Quit smoking times one year ago -- two years ago for one year
with help of three months of Zyban." He needed the aid to
quit. It's not just about choice for Mr. Griffin.
"Has some Wellbutrin left over from when he
temporarily quit two years ago." Another example of using aids
to quit but relapsing. Classic definition of addiction.
States that he desires to stop smoking in 2001, just
before, ultimately, at the end of that year, he finally does
quit. Why? Because he almost died. He spent be more than
three weeks in a coma, found by a relative in his apartment
alone, and he realized at that point he can't continue. He
can't. And so after ten years of struggling, the classic
definition, he finally quit.
Dr. Kaplan talked about all the withdrawal symptoms
he felt, the frustrations, the anxieties. Blew them all off
though because he said, well, he felt those too long. Those
aren't classic withdrawal symptoms. Then he tells you all
7-24 these reasons why he did quit, but Dr. Kaplan agreed and
admitted that all of these feelings of enjoyment and happiness
and relief from stress, all of those feelings are feelings that
people who are addicted can feel because of the
neurotransmitters that make you feel that way.
These aren't reasons why he chose to smoke. These
are the impact of what cigarettes and nicotine in cigarettes
give the smoker. And the industry knew that, and we'll go over
why they knew that.
Don't forget, each one of these things -- don't
forget, the tobacco industry -- or Dr. Kaplan said 50 percent
of people who smoke are addicted. 50 percent of people who
smoke are addicted. 100 percent of people who smoke this much,
60 cigarettes in a day, are addicted.
So we'll go through this quickly, but the Surgeon
General talks about it at length: "Cigarettes and other forms
of tobacco are addicting and nicotine is the drug that causes
the addiction."
This is important. In talking to doctors, the
Surgeon General said, "Recognizing tobacco use as an addiction
is critical, both for treating the tobacco user and for
understanding why people continue to use tobacco despite the
known health risks.
You're going to see today, and you've seen in this
case, Reader's Digest from before Mr. Griffin was even born,
7-25 never mind before he started smoking, where the defendants will
say, "That is why he knew better, and he chose to smoke. This
was something he just wanted to do," a bunch of articles in
Reader's Digest, before he even was born.
The Surgeon General, who is focused on the health of
smokers, says that addiction is the reason why some people
smoke even though there are known risks that are being talked
about in the public.
So we get to the third question: Was the addiction
to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his
COPD?
Now, a legal cause is just a phrase that means was it
a substantial cause of his disease. Was it a -- not the only.
Was it a substantial cause leading to the disease?
We actually have this, I think, as clearly as the
evidence could possibly be. Dr. Burns testifies to it,
Dr. Cornwell, the treating physician, testifies to it,
Mr. Griffin's testimony, the records themselves, and
Dr. DiFranza.
Remember, in 1959, before Philip Morris was ever
purchased -- before any cigarette was ever purchased by
Mr. Griffin, in 1959 Philip Morris knew that its cigarettes had
components that led to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. 1963,
I'm sorry.
Internal documents. They knew before he picked up
7-26 his first cigarette that it caused the disease that he ended up
suffering. Not only that, they knew that a number of experts
have predicted that the cigarette industry ultimately may be in
greater trouble in this area, that is, in emphysema, than in
lung cancer.
In 1963, Philip Morris realized that the disease that
Mr. Griffin has actually may be a bigger problem in terms of
health effects than cancer. They knew that before he started
smoking cigarettes.
So Dr. Burns will tell you the COPD caused -- was
caused by Philip Morris cigarettes, and he actually said that
but for -- that is, without Philip Morris cigarettes, he would
not have gotten it. But for smoking Philip Morris cigarettes,
Mr. Griffin would not have developed COPD.
And despite the fact that I wanted this slide
changed, it's a cumulative injury. It's an injury that keeps
happening. Every puff is another exposure to tar. Every puff
is another exposure to nicotine. They make you come back for
more. The more the nicotine, the more the toxins, the more the
disease.
Mr. Griffin's severe COPD was undoubtedly caused by
his smoking, and smoking, according to the Surgeon General, is
a result of behavioral and pharmacologic factors that lead to
highly controlled or compulsive use of cigarettes.
You've heard Mr. Reilly talk at length about control.
7-27 Mr. Griffin told you, "I didn't control the cigarettes. I feel
like they controlled me," and that is the classic definition of
addiction.
So Richard Jupe on video testified that tar and
nicotine go hand in hand. You can't separate tar and nicotine
in the Philip Morris cigarette. So when you're taking in all
of these exposures to tar, you're taking in all these exposures
to nicotine. The two of them work together.
Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that
individuals persist in using tobacco products --
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor. This is not in
evidence.
MR. MIGLIORI: Absolutely.
THE COURT: This is the 2010 Surgeon General Report.
It is not in evidence.
MR. MIGLIORI: It's not in evidence. It was a
demonstrative used with the last witness.
MR. REILLY: It was taken out. It wasn't shown.
THE COURT: Take it down. The jury will disregard.
MR. MIGLIORI: That's not -- Your Honor, we'll move
on. We'll show the reference later.
This is the legal cause component. Nicotine
addiction causes smokers to continue to smoke. You're
addicted, you take another smoke. You take another smoke, not
only do you get more nicotine, you get more tar, you get more
7-28 danger. That is what leads to COPD.
That's all -- that is all legal cause is. Is this
process of nicotine addiction a substantial cause of the COPD
in Mr. Griffin? And the answer to that, we believe, is yes.
So if you answer yes to the first three questions,
then the way this works is that the Engle findings then become
applicable to Mr. Griffin. Philip Morris was negligent. They
concealed information. And Philip Morris starts at complete
fault. That's where they start.
Now, what is Mr. Griffin's fault? How do we
calculate, if any, what fault Mr. Griffin has? On Question 4,
this is where you'll have to decide. How much choice did
Mr. Griffin have? At what point was choice taken from him?
Does Philip Morris's concealment of information get a pass? Do
they not hold any responsibility for what happened to
Mr. Griffin, for the COPD and the lung transplant?
This is where you get to decide. If you think that
Mr. Griffin completely had choice, completely had the ability
to quit, had no addiction, didn't fight, didn't struggle,
didn't express a desire to quit, didn't try to quit using aids,
if you find all of that to be true, then Mr. Griffin's 100
percent at fault, but that's not the evidence, ladies and
gentlemen.
Philip Morris is 100 percent at fault until you can
show that Mr. Griffin bears some responsibility, and that's
7-29 where you have to decide. When someone gets addicted -- and
the testimony here is that he was addicted within the first
year of smoking, from the 1960s -- what percentage of fault do
you put on the smoker who then becomes addicted and can't get
out of the cycle?
We're going to talk about the doubt and controversy
campaign and how tobacco actually used the process of creating
doubt in the smoker's mind as a way of keeping them smoking
that next cigarette, creating that psychological crutch to
continue smoking.
But it is about responsibility and control, but it's
about Philip Morris's responsibility and control. Tobacco
Institute in 1980, the same institute that Philip Morris
belonged to, wrote: "We can't defend continued smoking as free
choice if the person was addicted. It's not about choice
anymore when a smoker is addicted."
You can't defend that. That's not my words. That's
not our expert's words. That's the Tobacco Institute's view.
If the smoker's addicted, you can't defend this as choice.
Philip Morris created the environment where it was
the social norm to smoke cigarettes. You heard that from
Dr. Proctor. Philip Morris created a product, a mass marketed
product, that's highly addictive. They knew that going back to
the '50s. They engineered their cigarettes in a way to sustain
addiction. It wasn't just enough to get the smoker addicted.
7-30 It was about getting the smoker addicted and keeping the smoker
addicted.
Philip Morris did not disclose its knowledge that
cigarettes are addictive and difficult to quit. They got
before Congress and said it wasn't, when internally they had
known since the '50s it was. Do they get a pass for that?
In 1999, Jupe said they finally admitted that it
caused COPD. In 1999, they finally admitted what they knew
back in the '60s and '50s, that it was addictive. Do they get
a pass for that? Do they get 100 percent freedom of
responsibility or liability to Mr. Griffin when they
intentionally engaged in that campaign to keep him and sustain
him as a smoker?
Philip Morris created an environment where there was
doubt and controversy about health hazards. They didn't do
anything to help people quit. And as a member of an industry,
it knew that its product -- every year they had this doubt and
controversy campaign, every year, they knew that its product
was killing more than 400,000 Americans a day -- I'm sorry, a
year.
How did they do it? Well, you heard from Dr. Proctor
the technology changed. Really, the 1900s was the growth of
cigarette smoking. You're going to see the chart of
consumption. Well, it's exactly the same chart as the
information was made available. But the Bonsack machine is
7-31 what made it a mass marketable product.
You heard about flue curing and how that actually
allowed for cigarettes to be more easily inhaled, that it's
brought deeper into the lungs, which causes more profound
disease like the COPD Dr. Burns described with that stocking.
Mass marketing was the effort to actually steamroll
over any kind of effort to get the word out, whether it be
Reader's Digest from the '40s or the Surgeon General Reports.
The mass marketing is what got the message out that it was
acceptable, it was okay, and that it wasn't harmful.
And there was an article that you saw about the
pervasiveness of it. There was nothing larger in our society,
in our history, than the nationwide campaign of the tobacco
industry to promote its product.
You heard and saw these PSAs. The very last thing
you heard in the trial was a public service announcement. I
think that was from the American Cancer Institute.
Just to understand perspective, one year of spending
on public service announcements was the equivalent of one day
of the tobacco industry spending on advertising its cigarettes
as pleasurable. 360 times more money was spent by the tobacco
industry steamrolling their message about cigarettes and their
social acceptability than public service announcements of
cowboys coughing in a saloon.
$250 billion over 60 years was spent on advertising,
7-32 and you'll see that the growth of consumption peaks almost
exactly where? Mr. Griffin started smoking. What better
evidence than you show the consumption of cigarettes, and
Mr. Griffin entering into the consumption history right at the
peak, right when it was most socially acceptable, right when
the tobacco industry was at its peak of getting smokers to
start and keeping them smoking.
It's sensitive. Sorry.
This is now the FTC, Federal Trade Commission, 1967.
The important thing to pull out of this is that there is no
indication in any of that -- all of that spending and
advertising that a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a
while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him but
becomes a matter of need. Nowhere in the advertisement do they
suggest anything about the compulsive needs of a person who's
addicted to cigarettes, the regular smoker.
The dominant themes are that smoking is youthful;
vigor; good health; good looks; personal, social, and
professional acceptance and success; compatible with a wide
range of athletic and healthful activities.
Interestingly, these Benson & Hedges cigarettes that
he smoked in the '60s, when he was starting, there was a
concern by the FTC that there's a trend towards using the
Benson & Hedges extra long cigarettes in 1966, the very year he
started smoking. This trend is of a serious and disturbing
7-33 nature since these extra long cigarettes are also -- also
expose the smoker to greater amounts of tar and nicotine,
making them potentially more hazardous than the shorter length
cigarettes. That's not conveyed to Mr. Griffin.
The attitude of men we must directly deal with in the
industry is that once -- interesting and important for us to
understand -- one of the men said, "It's fortunate for us that
cigarettes are a habit they can't break."
Hill & Knowlton is that advertising agency, that PR
agency, that helped the industry with the Frank Statement to
create a message about their commitment to the public health.
And when they interviewed executives from the tobacco industry,
they reported that they understood that it was fortunate that
cigarettes were a habit that smokers can't break. They
appreciated the addictive nature of their product.
In 1959 -- now, you saw a big chart from Mr. Reilly
about why Mr. Griffin smoked. Not once did he put the word
addiction on there. Not once did you see addiction.
Philip Morris, in 1959, why do people smoke,
underlined "do," why do they smoke? Physiological reasons.
Addiction. That was appreciated seven years before Mr. Griffin
started smoking in internal Philip Morris documents. They
don't admit it in '94 to Congress. They don't admit it until
1999, after Mr. Griffin gets COPD.
In 1959 you also see other examples. This isn't just
7-34 one random internal document. This is another example of
Philip Morris understanding why people smoke.
"One of the main reasons people smoke is to
experience the physiological effects of nicotine on the human
system."
1972, Philip Morris: "Motives and incentives in
cigarette smoking. No one has ever become a cigarette smoker
by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. Most of the
physiological responses to inhaled smoke have been shown to be
nicotine related. Despite many low-nicotine brand entries into
the marketplace, none of them have captured a substantial
segment of the market."
They understand that nicotine is their product. They
understand that addiction is the way they keep the smoker
smoking.
Same document: "The cigarette should be conceived
not as a product but as a package. The product is nicotine.
The cigarette is but one of many layers. There is the carton,
which contains the pack, which contains the cigarette, which
contains the smoke. The smoke is the final package. The
smoker must strip all of these package layers to get that which
he seeks. Nicotine."
In 1978, again, Philip Morris, internal document.
This is very important. "We think that most smokers can be
considered nicotine seekers for the pharmacological effect of
7-35 nicotine is one of the rewards that comes from smoking. When
the smoker quits, he foregoes his accustomed nicotine. The
change is very noticeable. He misses the reward, and he
returns to smoking."
Philip Morris, in 1978, understood relapse,
understood the balances of scales that Dr. DiFranza showed you
of getting up and getting off and coming back and needing more.
He called it the homeostasis.
They understood in '78. They understood that keeping
the smoker smoking is what continued to sell their product.
In the psychology program review in '77, there are
some distinctive features about the cigarette market. "We sell
a product that is bought often be and used from 10 to 60 times
a day." In Mr. Griffin, 60 times a day, day in, day out. "We
provide a product that is essentially a commodity in a habitual
act. It is inevitable, therefore, that we focus on habit
formation and habit maintenance."
Let me say that differently: We focus on getting the
smoker smoking, habit formation, and keeping the smoker
smoking, habit maintenance. That's addiction.
Philip Morris internal memoranda, 1980: "Nicotine is
a powerful pharmacological agent which multiple sites of action
may be the most important component of cigarette smoke."
"Nicotine and understanding its properties are
important to the continued well-being of our cigarette
7-36 business. This alkaloid has been cited often as the reason for
smoking and the theories have been advanced for nicotine
penetration."
It's why smokers smoke.
I have to go a little bit faster now, but my
reason -- and this is, again, an internal document in the '80s:
"My reason for this high priority is that I believe that the
thing we sell most is nicotine."
The responsibility and the control was in Philip
Morris's hands to control what it was that they were taking in,
that smokers were taking in, and how much of it they were
taking in.
Philip Morris had control of the design. They knew
that nicotine is addictive since the '50s. Philip Morris has
had the resources to develop a nonaddictive cigarette, and
Philip Morris has had no project to develop a nonaddictive
cigarette. Instead, they go before Congress and they tell them
it's not addictive as late as 1994.
So what is doubt and controversy? Well, doubt and
controversy, as you heard from Dr. Proctor, is the effort to
keep the smoker smoking. You create the doubt in the smoker's
mind. You get up -- every time somebody says something about
smoking being bad, you get up and say, "It has not been
proven." The net effect, the smoker that smokes continues to
smoke.
7-37 That's not my description of it. That's the Tobacco
Institute's description of it.
This document here, Philip Morris in 1964. This is
before Mr. Griffin starts to smoke. "The restraint and unity
of the industry has been very effective in this period.
Opponents have had their inning. The industry has demonstrated
its seriousness and responsibility in saying that we would
study the report. However, at some point, reflecting the same
seriousness with which we met the report, meaning the Surgeon
General's Report in '64, we must in the near future provide
some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and
self-rationale to continue smoking."
Keep the smoker smoking. Philip Morris completely
denies it causes disease through 1999. The consensus was
linking COPD and emphysema back in the '60s. They publicly
denied it through the Tobacco Institute in the '70s and in
the '80s.
The doubt and controversy campaign by the Tobacco
Institute that by their own admission, Philip Morris is a
member: "Our basic position on the cigarette controversy is
subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we
are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale
of cigarettes.
Smokers must perceive and understand and believe in
evidence to sustain their opinions that smoking may not be the
7-38 causal factor."
This is about keeping doubt in the smoker's mind so
they continue to smoke. And when it comes to this campaign to
create the CTR, in order to tell the public in 1954 that health
was their paramount concern, in reality, they admit what the
CTR was for. It wasn't for real research.
"We are interested in evidence which we believe
denies the allegations that smoking causes disease."
They were interested only in creating further doubt
and controversy about whether smoking causes these diseases.
They actually applauded and congratulated themselves.
"For nearly 20 years, this industry, the tobacco
industry, has employed a single strategy to defend itself on
three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion.
While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over
the years, helping us win important battles, it's only fair to
say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for
victory. On the contrary, it has always been a holding
strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge
without actually denying it."
1972, on the Roper proposal, the tobacco industry
tells you what their strategy was and how for 20 years at that
point it was brilliantly conceived and carried out to keep the
smoker smoking.
And the FTC points out how it was successful.
7-39 Millions of smokers in 1981 still do not know that smoke is a
harmful habit.
Dr. Proctor talks about throughout the decades how it
wasn't fully appreciated. The documents you saw demonstrate
that it wasn't fully appreciated.
In 1906 you saw the Florida Health Notes that
Mr. Reilly showed you talk about today the cigarette is looked
upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco
addiction, as if somehow that is a public truism that everybody
should be held to.
And yet almost a hundred years later, 88 years later,
they're still getting up in front of Congress and saying it's
not true. They want Mr. Griffin to be held to the standard of
knowing Reader's Digest articles from before he's born, but
they get up in front of Congress in '94 to say it's not.
Why? Why did all these news stories come out? Why
are all these publications coming out? Because it's news.
Why is it news? Because the message wasn't getting
through to the smoker. Why wasn't it getting through? Because
of the marketing and the doubt and controversy.
And how does one know the message wasn't getting
through? Look at the evidence. Look at the FTC reports. Look
at the evidence.
Philip Morris doesn't own up to it until 1999. They
don't own up to cancer, emphysema, or addiction. They even
7-40 argue with companies that come out, like Dow Chemical, with
aids to help people quit.
You saw evidence that they had an interaction with
Dow Chemical, who had been developing the Nicorette Gum and a
program to help people quit. Philip Morris didn't embrace
them. "Through a series of meetings over a few years, Dow has
been repeatedly advised of our displeasure over the antismoking
nature of Dow Merrell's program." Yet, they promised to stop
selling cigarettes if they ever found anything in them to be
harmful. You saw those clips with Dr. Proctor. They never did
that.
Philip Morris hurt Mr. Griffin by making the choices
it made. Mr. Griffin became a smoker in the Navy in 1966
because of the social norm Philip Morris helped to create.
They created a highly addictive product and mass marketed it,
and Mr. Griffin became addicted.
And he remained addicted as a result of the sustained
doubt and controversy and because he had smoked so much that he
had become controlled by the cigarette.
He started smoking without knowing of the addictive
nature of cigarettes or its harmful effects. And he struggled
to quit. He struggled to quit for ten years.
His COPD is so bad that he ultimately had to get his
lung transplanted.
Suppose everyone just smoked one less cigarette a
7-41 day. Why would the tobacco industry do this? It's simple.
One less cigarette a day -- in one of the documents you saw it.
Back in 1954 dollars, if everyone smoked one less cigarette,
that would be $700,000 a day of loss. Every next cigarette
that you'll say, well, I'll just have one more, that's the
value of it to the industry.
All right. I'm going to do this part very, very
quickly. But did the plaintiffs rely to their detriment? They
did. Understand here, did Mr. Griffin rely to his detriment on
the concealment? Understand, you're talking about relying on
something that he didn't know about. He didn't know about all
the things that Philip Morris knew. He didn't know about them.
He told you that.
He didn't know about the '54 memo. He didn't know
about the '59 memo. Did he rely to his detriment on what was
omitted, on what was kept from him? Of course he did. He kept
smoking through that entire period.
Did he rely on the concealment or omission of
material information concerning the health effects? Same
thing. He relied on it. He relied on what they didn't admit
or own up to through '99.
And he relied on things that were said publicly. He
relied on what was out there. We think you should check "yes"
for both of those reliance questions. And that information
spans from the '50s through '94, when they get before Congress
7-42 and say it's not addictive, through '99 when they finally admit
that it causes emphysema.
Reliance. Philip Morris never admitted any of those
things until it was too late.
Has plaintiff proved his reliance on the concealment
made in furtherance of defendant's agreement with other
cigarette manufacturers? This is another way of saying not
just Philip Morris, but in the group of tobacco companies like
the Tobacco Institute where all the companies participated, did
Mr. Griffin rely on their omissions, on the things they had hid
from Mr. Griffin? We think the answer to that is also yes; and
we think that that spans the entire span of his smoking
history.
So this is the compensatory. So this is what you're
going to do. At this point, if you get to this stage in the
questions, there's one line for what the compensation is for
Mr. Griffin. Now, that one line, however, you'll hear from the
instructions, has multiple component parts. It is undisputed
that the lost earnings in this case are $100,000. Both sides
have stipulated to it. We read it to you. It's undisputed
that the medical bills in this case are $584,200.
Now, what's important about this is that if you find
him to be a member and if you find that Philip Morris bears a
percentage of fault, the number that you put here is not the
percentage number. You put the full amount of what you believe
7-43 it to be. Even though both sides agree that it's 100,000, if
you decide that it's 100,000 based on undisputed evidence, the
number you put in here should be 100,000 for lost earnings.
If there's a percentage applied to that, you don't do
that here. You put the full amount here of what the damage is.
This isn't where you reduce the amount based on percentages of
fault. That's done completely separately.
That's important, because if you find that we've
proven our case and you believe that these are the economic
losses of earnings and medical bills and you accept what both
parties have put here as stipulated amounts, this total amount
would be $684,253 on this line just for the economic losses.
The percentages get applied totally separately.
The pain and suffering is the component that you're
going to get an instruction about, and this is where you get to
decide what, if anything, Mr. Griffin is entitled to for all of
those years of trying to quit, not being able to quit, losing
his jobs, losing his relationships, getting to a point where
his lung was working at 16 percent of what it should be,
passing out, being found by a relative, being in a hospital in
a coma for 21 days.
This is where the pain and suffering component is
added. So whatever number you put for this value of pain and
suffering, you would add it to these others and put a total
number of those in this one line. And the apportionment, the
7-44 percentage of fault that you give to Mr. Griffin, that's
handled later. Don't apply the percentages of fault in this if
you accept the numbers.
He had a life of COPD. He endured a lung transplant,
diminished lung capacity. He has to use oxygen now just to get
around. His life expectancy is diminished. You heard
Dr. Cornwell, his treating doctor, say that he's got a 25
percent chance of living five more years. One lung is actually
impinging on the other lung. The medications needed to keep
that lung there are causing further toxic damage to his body.
This is life with COPD. He's gone through hundreds
of doctors appointments. He's lost his livelihood. You saw
what it was like to go through that surgery. But I don't want
you to have -- this isn't about empathy or sympathy or pity.
This is about responsibility for actions.
Dr. Cornwell, in addition to these survival
statistics, said something very, very important. He said to
get a transplant, he had to be a good person, he had to have
good health, he had to have good social structure, he had to
have good family and friends. They wouldn't have given him a
lung if he didn't have all of those qualities beforehand
because lungs are too precious.
Mr. Griffin has a desire to live. He has a desire to
be in a relationship. He has a desire to work. Cornwell tells
you that. This isn't a man who's asking for your pity. He's
7-45 asking for you to be a part of a finding that a jury came to
many years ago. He asked to be included in a group of people
that have already found -- have already been included to have
the benefit of a finding that Philip Morris did something
wrong, and they need to take responsibility for it.
Then you're going to be asked whether or not they
should be punished. They should be punished. You get to
decide how. The standard's higher. It's closer to criminal.
It's not criminal. The judge will explain what that is. But
in addition to what he should recover as compensatory damages
for his pain and suffering and for his loss of economics, they
should be punished, and you get to decide what that amount is.
Philip Morris gave Mr. Griffin the psychological
crutch to keep going. Philip Morris put a product on the
market that it knew, before Mr. Griffin smoked his first
cigarette, was addictive and caused the disease that he has.
I want to thank you so much for your time. I want to
thank you for your consideration. On behalf of Mr. Griffin, we
hope that you go back and take your time to go through the
evidence, to look at the medical records, to appreciate what
the treaters really said about this man, and return a verdict
for Mr. Griffin for what you think is fair, and we think that
you should return it where you accept and acknowledge and find
that Philip Morris bears a responsibility to this man as well.
Thank you so much.
7-46 Thank you, Your Honor.


MR. MIGLIORI: Thank you, Your Honor. Okay. I don't
have an hour. I have probably ten minutes. But there are a
few things that I just want to clarify.
You know, this whole case seems to be defended on the
idea to create doubt about Mr. Griffin's credibility.
MR. REILLY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Just a minute. I'm sorry, Mr. Reilly.
MR. REILLY: The whole case is predicated on the
concept of creating doubt.
THE COURT: It's argument, Mr. Reilly. Overruled.
MR. MIGLIORI: Thank you, Your Honor. Do I get that
time back?
THE COURT: It was three-and-a-half seconds.
MR. MIGLIORI: Okay. It's predicated upon creating
doubt in your minds, but think about -- I think Mr. Reilly took
a shot saying that I was glossing over the medical records. In
the 120 slides I showed you, I don't think I glossed. I think
I tried to cover what our burden is, that is proving to you
some things, but I want to show you some things. I'll slow
down for him on a couple points.
The manifestation, the law that he showed you, he
7-90 made it sound like it's when a doctor associates the shortness
of breath with his condition, and that's not the law. That's
not the law. The manifestation issue is decided by when
Mr. Griffin associates the symptoms -- he agrees, Mr. Reilly
agrees, that he had COPD.
But the symptoms of COPD, the chronic exertional
dyspnea that we see in the medical records, it's when
Mr. Griffin appreciates that those symptoms are associated with
smoking that matter on the first question of manifestation.
So when does Mr. Griffin put the two together, that
his shortness of breath is smoking related? 1991, you see it
in the scuba record. He showed it to you. I'm not going to
gloss over it. I'm just not going to show it to you again.
In 1995, again, Mr. Griffin associates that with
smoking. It's also true of the taxi driver.
But I am going to show you this one October of 1995
medical record that Mr. Reilly did show you because it's in the
record. It's not just Mr. Griffin's testimony. The
manifestation issue is when Mr. Griffin puts the two together.
Apparently he was walking on the beach with his
girlfriend and he really got winded, and that's when it really
struck him that he probably needed to do something about it.
Do something about what? "He has quit at one time in
the past but started back up. He will sometimes smoke as many
as three packs a day."
7-91 It was his complete awareness that his smoking was
related to -- his shortness of breath was related to smoking
that is the manifestation issue that you're going to have to
decide. Doctors question etiology because their job is to find
out the diagnosis, but that's not the law. And you'll see in
the instructions it's not when he's diagnosed, it's when
Mr. Griffin appreciates that his shortness of breath is
associated with smoking, and it's right there plain as day in
the class period.
So the first question should be dispensed of easily.
But if you go back to that original slide -- Gina --
and, of course, on the -- in 1996 in December, it's very clear
that that's been a complaint for the past year, going back into
the period. But these are the other bits of evidence about
Mr. Griffin, Mr. Griffin's association of shortness of breath
with his smoking.
Now, there's another confusion created in this in how
Philip Morris defends this case, because it talks about the
importance of the medical records but yet not once did
Mr. Reilly ever talk to you about the diagnoses of Mr. Griffin
by his treating physicians with addiction.
He didn't put those slides up. He didn't put a board
up. He never once tried to deal with it. He didn't show that
record when he put Dr. Kaplan on the stand to explain that
addiction was diagnosed by his own treating doctors. That's
7-92 part of the doubt.
If you only look at some things, you will get the
result that you're looking for, and that's how this case is
defended.
There's discussion about when Mr. Reilly -- I'm
sorry, Mr. Griffin finally got so sick that he became
unconscious and went into a coma. Please look at that record.
There are 8,000 pages, I regret, of medical records, over half
a million dollars worth of medical care. I wish I never had to
put that into evidence for you, but that's my burden,
representing and giving voice to this man.
But if you actually look in December of 2001, what
happened to him when he was in a coma for three weeks or more,
all over the records you'll see respiratory failure.
You heard testimony that his lungs were functioning
at 16 percent. There is no question why he was in the hospital
at that time. His addiction caused him to smoke so much that
he got so much exposure to tars in cigarettes, in Philip Morris
cigarettes, that he had his lung function down to 16 percent in
a form called COPD. That's legal cause.
Legal cause is not clear and convincing evidence,
like the punitive damage standard. It's did we more likely
prove, or not, that he was addicted and that addiction cause
his smoking-related disease.
We've proved more than just barely, or I think the
7-93 term Mr. Reilly used was scintilla of evidence. All the work
done on this case to present this to you, you didn't receive a
scintilla of evidence from us; you received, as he put it,
truckloads of evidence from us.
This is an unfortunate outcome for a man who did what
Philip Morris marketed him to do, and now they have -- use
whatever adjective you want. Now they come here and they blame
it on his psychiatric condition. Well, he was depressed
anyway. All these depressive issues had nothing to do with his
health; it's about girlfriends and other issues.
Let's look at the actual medical records that
Mr. Reilly didn't show you in his closing.
Can you go to the rebuttal slides?
Here's a May 25th psychology record, 2005. In his
history by a Ph.D. psychologist: His formal treatment started
approximately five years ago on an outpatient basis following a
hospitalization for emphysema. He reports at that time that
his health had deteriorated and he had suffered financial
setbacks secondary to an inability to maintain employment and
he sought outpatient care for depression.
Mr. Reilly has painstakingly removed smoking and the
impact of Mr. Griffin's smoking on his health from his equation
of why he was depressed. You can't do that in a human being.
You can't take out the health consequences that this man
suffered. This isn't whiplash. This man had a lung removed
7-94 and replaced.
His depression was related to his health and the
effects of his health on his ability to maintain relationships,
his ability to work. And I'm not asking you to compensate
him -- I never asked, ever, for you to compensate him for
losing a relationship. I'm asking you to see that the impact
of this COPD had an impact on every phase of his life, and you
cannot separate out the impact on his health from what was
causing him his depression.
But here's another psychologist's note. This is in
2004: He has never had any psychiatric hospitalizations,
however, he states he has had a low-grade depression for most
of his life. Patient is also concerned about his present
medical condition related to his lungs.
He's telling the people that are worrying about him
for his mental wellness that he's concerned because he is sick.
It's not just about financial -- I think the battery just died.
Of course.
It's not just about the financial implications of
losing a job. It's about his health and how it is intertwined
in a human being's life, how it affects every aspect of his
life.
And if you do find that we've satisfied the burden of
answering the first three questions, you do have to account for
the fact that this man's depression was, in fact, a consequence
7-95 of his smoking and the results of his smoking and the health
effects of smoking.
He had in front of him -- his doctors have told him
that they are looking at three options which include a possible
lung transplant, lung volume reduction surgery, or a shunt. He
went on to state, One good bout of pneumonia could put me in
the hospital or kill me.
His depression is not about girlfriends; his
depression is about the state of his life, the addiction he
suffered started in the '60s.
And so when all this information starts to come
out -- when Mr. Reilly talks about Dr. Burns saying more people
know about the health effects of smoking than the president,
you heard Dr. Burns, you heard what he said. He said, "It was
enough talk. We in the public health community have to start
helping the addicted stop smoking." It's not about the words,
it's about getting smokers to quit. How do we equip people
like Mr. Griffin with the tools to quit?
The words are enough. You can say it all you want
and people might know the words more than they know the
president, but that's not where the help is needed. The help
is needed in getting people like Mr. Griffin out of the cycle
of smoking, out of the addiction that causes the cumulative
injury to the lungs.
I'm going to finally show you two more things. Why
7-96 does it matter? Mr. Reilly asked the question, Where does
Philip Morris fit in Mr. Griffin's story? Well, I can tell you
every day Philip Morris had 60 different roles in Mr. Griffin's
life, but Philip Morris played other roles in Mr. Griffin's
life.
Let's first do the Reader's Digest.
You heard testimony about the Reader's Digest and all
of these dates prior to his even birth. You heard testimony
from Dr. Proctor there were 30 articles out of 12,000 that
dealt with this issue, most of them before Mr. Griffin was
born.
And now Philip Morris is telling you not to hold them
responsible for its design of cigarettes to keep the smoker
smoking, when less than .25 percent of the articles from that
very periodical even had anything to do with it, in a magazine
that he didn't even read.
Next.
Why does it matter? Exhibit 260.
Philip Morris actively tried to keep him and all
smokers from believing in the health effects. You heard this
during the trial.
(From video:)
"Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. It
may not be. We just don't know."
"I don't know. Frankly I think that smoking may be
7-97 hazardous. It may not be."
"Smoking may be hazardous. It may not be. No one,
including TV 7, knows for certain."
"It may be or it may not be. We don't know."
"I don't know if cigarettes are bad or they're not bad."
"We don't know what causes the ailments that have been
attributed to cigarette smoking."
"I'm saying that the science to date and over $100 million
in our industry indicates that there is no causal link."
"I'm not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be
a risk factor involved with some people."
"What do we know? If a rabbit runs through a briar patch,
it's really hard to look back and see which briar stuck him."
(Video stopped.)
MR. MIGLIORI: They don't know through the '60s,
through the '70s, through the '80s. Why? Because they set out
on a campaign to make sure smokers had doubt. Doubt. It's how
it's defended here. Doubt is how they got smokers to keep
smoking.
The next one, this is Helmut Wakeham, Philip Morris.
(From video:)
"I think that if the company as a whole believed that
cigarettes were really harmful, we would not be in the
business. We're a very moralistic company. I think the
management of Philip Morris is sincere in this position. I
7-98 think there's a great deal of doubt as to whether or not
cigarettes are harmful. If you read both sides, not only the
point of view of the people who are -- who have missionary zeal
to make the world stop smoking, but the people who are trying
to be objective with respect to this question, you will
discover there's a great deal of doubt with regard to whether
or not smoking causes all these diseases which are alleged to
be caused by smoking."
(Video stopped.)
MR. MIGLIORI: It is not an accident that you hear
the word doubt over and over and over. And that does get to
Dr. Burns' point. You can talk about the message all you want,
but getting the smoker to get out of the cycle of addiction
requires breaking down that doubt and giving that smoker the
tools to quit, and it took ten years, medications.
The prescriptions, by the way, I challenge you to
find the prescriptions from over 10, 11, 12 years ago in the
records. Not all the records are there. The lack of a
prescription from the medical record doesn't mean he didn't
take it. He testified he took it. You saw records that he
took those medications. There are records that he took six --
three months worth of Wellbutrin, and there's no prescription
in the record to support it. The record supports it.
This is a campaign to make you doubt Mr. Griffin, but
it's not anything you can doubt. In fact, the word that Mr. --
7-99 that Dr. Cornwell used in his own testimony, in his own words,
and not as a person being paid, was that this was undoubtedly
caused by smoking and what caused him to smoke was his
addiction.
Finally, Gina, the last.
So the case comes down to addiction. Now, if you
answer the first three questions, and you don't answer any
other -- if you answer the first three questions that he
belongs to the class, then you do fill out the percentage of
fault, and you do fill out the compensatory damage. It doesn't
matter what you say about punitives or the like.
So the question really is, as I started my closing
with, is he a member? Should Mr. Griffin get the benefit of
the findings of the prior jury because Philip Morris has
already been found to conceal information from smokers?
So it comes down not to manifestation, not COPD,
which Mr. Reilly concedes, but to addiction.
Gina?
THE COURT: Mr. Migliori, you're getting very
close --
MR. MIGLIORI: 30 seconds.
THE COURT: -- to time.
MR. MIGLIORI: People who are not addicted don't
smoke 40 to 60 cigarettes per day. They don't smoke a
cigarette every 20 minutes. They don't buy multiple cartons of
7-100 cigarettes at a time and suffer physical withdrawal symptoms
without cigarettes.
People who aren't addicted don't smoke when they're
taking nicotine in the form of a nicotine patch. They don't
smoke while they're on Zyban. They don't smoke while they're
taking Wellbutrin.
People who are addicted don't lock cigarettes in the
car to keep from smoking them. They don't smoke while also
being on portable oxygen. They don't take smoking cessation
classes after they've already quit smoking, and they don't
crave cigarettes even 13 years after being smoke-free.
Mr. Griffin served our country in the Navy at the
same time as when he started this horrific habit and became
addicted. We're asking you to put him as a member of this
class. We're asking you to go through the questions carefully.
We're particularly asking you to focus on the fact that Philip
Morris controlled the design of the cigarette and how it was
sold and how it kept smokers smoking, and that's a
responsibility that they have to share. And I think they
equally share it or greater, but that's a decision for you.
I'm not going to ask you for enormous sums of money.
I'm not going to take from you what's your job. But in
addition to the $600,000-plus in actual economic costs, please
think about what Mr. Griffin has gone through.
When you give that pain and suffering component to
7-101 the award, give the full amount. What is it to go through
that? And then the percentages, if any, will be applied to
that number. Don't discount that pain and suffering number
beforehand, just take him for his damage.
And if he's responsible for 50 percent of that
damage, that will be handled later, but give him full
consideration of what it must be like for a man to have
suffered what he has suffered.
Please accept our absolute, complete appreciation for
everything you've done in sitting through this for seven days
with us. We've tried to bring it to you as concisely as we
can, and we hope we've lived up to that promise.
It's been an honor representing Mr. Griffin. It's
been an honor presenting this case to you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Your Honor.
