MR. REILLY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good morning, everybody.
THE JURORS: Good morning.
7-47 MR. REILLY: I want to start my closing argument the
same way I ended -- I guess I opened my opening statement, and
that was by thanking you for your service as well.
THE COURT: Please use the mike.
MR. REILLY: Sorry, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you.
MR. REILLY: A little far away.
We've been together now for -- this is our seventh
day, right? Not that you're not counting them, but, you know,
as Mr. Migliori said, it's inconvenient. I know that, but you
guys are the backbone of our civil judicial system, so I just
want to start out by saying thank you for your service.
All right. Now, when I finished my opening
statement, I said to you guys that when I got up here in my
closing argument, I expected that I'd be using many of the very
same boards -- and I know I've got a bunch of them here -- many
of my very same boards in my closing argument because I was
confident that what I was showing you on those boards was
actually going to be the evidence that occurred in this case.
And sure enough, that's exactly what the evidence
turned out to be, so as I promised, I'm going to show you, much
more quickly I hope than I did in my opening statement, the
same boards, same timeline because that's exactly what the
evidence turned out to be.
And remember, I started with this board, and I said,
7-48 "This case" -- and Judge Lisi has been kind enough to give us a
draft of the instructions she's going to give you after the
closing arguments are done.
So I now know that, just as I predicted, there's
going to be pages of legal instructions, and there's lots of
legal terms filling those instructions.
But you really could and can condense all of that
down into what this case really turned out to be about, and you
guys sat here and you listened to all of the evidence in the
case. So now you know that there was an enormous amount of
information communicated on the topics of control and
responsibility.
This isn't a class action. You know, you now know,
having sat through this evidence, that this case is about one
smoker and one smoker only. And who's that? Mr. Griffin, and
the decisions that he made in connection with his smoking.
And so the question became one of control of
Mr. Griffin's decisions about smoking, to begin to smoke, to
continue to smoke, to become a regular smoker, to continue to
enjoy smoking until what -- until his midlife crisis in the
early '90s when he decided, I want to change my lifestyle, and
then Mr. Griffin's decisions about quitting smoking and his
ultimate decision to quit for good.
And the question of control included, where did
Philip Morris fit in any of that -- in any of those decisions?
7-49 And then the question became one of responsibility. What
responsibility did Mr. Griffin have for the decisions that he
made? Not some class, not some -- not the American public, but
one smoker and one smoker only.
And then what, if any, responsibility, in light of
Mr. Griffin's life, what, if any, did Philip Morris have in
this case? And I said that control and responsibility wouldn't
appear on the instructions or the verdict form. Well, in fact,
I was a little wrong about that, because while "control"
doesn't appear, "responsibility" does. And I'll show you that
when we get to it in -- as I go through the rest of these
boards.
Now, I suggested to you that the only way you would
know the answers to these questions of control and
responsibility in this case would be to know how Mr. Griffin
lived his life. And Mr. Griffin came here and testified about
his own life, right, and you remember his testimony. You
remember how he was on the stand. You remember his demeanor.
You remember all of that.
And so I just want to walk through now exactly what I
told you was going to happen and did happen in terms of his
life story, and I'm going to use the same timeline that I used
in my opening statement. But you know what? I'm going to make
it briefer because you now know that Mr. Griffin, born in '45,
had absolutely no connection with cigarettes or smoking until
7-50 high school when he tried, what, a cigarette or so? He had no
interest even in high school to being a cigarette smoker, and
you now know that. Undisputed that's the evidence in the case.
But you also know that in this case, Mr. Griffin
revealed that while he was in what he called secondary school,
which is high school, that that's when he saw the warnings
about smoking in the news. The warnings raised his
consciousness of the health hazards of smoking, and a little
later, he remembered seeing the warnings on the packs.
Now, throughout high school, college, seminary, and
before entering the Navy, Mr. Griffin was a nonsmoker, right?
Didn't have any interest in smoking. He's a nonsmoker till age
21. So throughout -- and what's he talking about regarding the
warnings? Well, you know, you heard from Dr. Proctor that
Florida schools taught about the health risks of smoking, that
they were very aggressive about that.
Mr. Griffin couldn't remember it because it was too
long ago, but you -- you saw the coverage of the '64 Surgeon
General's Report in January of '64, when Mr. Griffin is midway
through his senior year of high school.
So how old is he when he's, by his own statement,
seeing the warnings about smoking in the news and having his
consciousness of the health hazards of smoking raised? 15, 16,
17, 18? That's how old you are in high school, right, and
that's when he said he did it.
7-51 So now in high school he's an informed smoker about
the health risks. What does the Surgeon General say in '64?
Smoking causes lung cancer.
You saw on the screen the news coverage from CBS,
special report. That was just an example, just an example of
the news coverage. And what did you see Harry Reasoner -- what
did you hear Harry Reasoner say? He said, okay, ladies and
gentlemen of the American public, it's up to you now to decide
for yourselves. Nobody's going to tell you that smoking's good
for you. Nobody's going to tell you, you can't smoke. Now
it's up to you to decide whether you're going to take the risk
of developing illness if you smoke.
Now, I have to digress for just a minute and say
Mr. Migliori just showed you a bunch of internal documents from
Philip Morris in which folks at Philip Morris reported things,
said things about nicotine being in cigarettes and nicotine
being the reason why people smoke.
You remember -- the reason why I showed you and
walked -- went through it with their expert, Dr. Proctor, and
he agreed with everything I asked him. You know, he never
disputed a thing I asked him. People have known for 150 years
that nicotine is in tobacco; nicotine is why people smoke.
It's like saying, you know what? Why do people drink whiskey
or gin or whatever. Why do they do that? Duh. It's because
there's alcohol in it, right?
7-52 Why do people smoke cigarettes? It's because there's
nicotine in cigarettes. That's why people do it. Is that some
surprise?
So what does Mr. Griffin know before he ever picks up
a cigarette when he's enlisted in the -- when he's a sailor in
the Navy? He tells you himself he's had his consciousness of
the health hazards of smoking raised by the warnings he sees
and by the warnings on the packs, which are there on every pack
of cigarettes before he even gets in the Navy and before he
ever accepts a cigarette from another sailor who offers him one
sometime after boot camp. Maybe it's in boot camp.
But even then, Mr. Griffin doesn't become a regular
smoker, does he? No. He doesn't become a regular smoker until
after boot camp, sometimes -- sometime later in the Navy.
And at that point, we have the one and only
connection between Philip Morris and Mr. Griffin and his
decisions about smoking that ever occurred in this whole trial,
and what was that? Mr. Griffin decided that he is going to
smoke Philip Morris manufactured cigarettes. What brand?
Benson & Hedges.
Now, Mr. Griffin acknowledged in this trial -- I
asked him: "Mr. Griffin, aren't you the only person that
decided to smoke your first cigarette in the Navy?"
He said, "Yeah, I'm the only person who decided to
smoke my first cigarette in the Navy."
7-53 Why does he choose Benson & Hedges cigarettes?
This is what he told you. He said, "I chose Benson &
Hedges cigarettes because other sailors were smoking them" and
because he saw a cute advertisement. Remember the ad where
somebody was sitting in a car or something like that and they'd
turn their head and they'd break the cigarette because it's a
little longer?
Here's Mr. Griffin in the Navy, a 21-year-old man.
You know, it's been legal for him to buy cigarettes and smoke
them for three years now. We here in the state of Florida have
decided that at age 18, you're old enough to make the adult
decision for yourself whether you're going to smoke or not.
And so for three years, before he even smokes a
cigarette as a sailor, Mr. Griffin has had the right and the
responsibility to decide for himself whether he's going to
smoke or not, and he's decided he's going to. And he's the one
who decides whether he's going to go to the store and buy a
pack of cigarettes.
Now, did Mr. Griffin say, at any point during the
trial of this case, that in 1966 or '7, when he goes to the
store and buys his first pack of cigarettes, that he doesn't
know that what he's doing comes with a health risk? No, of
course not. How could he? He's already acknowledged that in
high school he had an awareness. He's already got a warning on
every pack. He's a 21-year-old man.
7-54 So did he ever say to you, during this whole trial, I
didn't know that I was taking a health risk when I started
smoking? I didn't know I was taking a health risk when I
decided to buy my first pack of cigarettes or any other pack of
cigarettes after that? No, he never did. How could he?
Did he ever say to you, you know what, I relied on
something that Philip Morris said? Or I was waiting to hear
from Philip Morris, something else? Did he ever say that in
this trial?
You guys get to look at your notes. You get to reel
back your memory. Did he ever do that? No, he never did. How
could he, so he never did.
You saw all the things that Mr. Migliori is talking
about that were put in front of you by Dr. Proctor, every one
of them. Did he ever get up on the stand and say, I was misled
by anything that Philip Morris ever said, that I made a
decision because of something Philip Morris said or failed to
say? Did he ever say that? No, he never did.
All right. You saw the public service announcements
that ran. Now, Mr. Migliori said something about the cost of
those ads was outweighed tremendously by advertising for
cigarettes. What you guys heard from Dr. Proctor was that 1300
of those public service ads ran in one year alone right here in
the '60s, when Mr. Griffin is deciding for himself whether or
not he's going to smoke, become a regular smoker, and you saw
7-55 the ads.
You saw Bill Talman, the guy that fought against
Perry Mason and always lost, and you saw the dramatic -- the
dramatic ad that said, "I'm dying of lung cancer. If you don't
smoke, don't start. If you smoke, quit. Don't get lung cancer
like me."
You can't miss 1300 of them in a year. Can't be
missed. Does that cause Mr. Griffin to change his mind and to
not start or to not continue to smoke? He's 21 years old.
He's making an adult decision, an informed, adult decision.
By this point in time, you heard Dr. Proctor say that
something like -- I think it was like 26 million Americans have
quit smoking by the end of the '60s.
Let's go to the '70s. When Mr. Griffin returns --
before Mr. Griffin returns to the United States, there's
already been a change on the packs of cigarettes in terms of
the warning. Now it says, "Warning: The Surgeon General has
determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous for your
health."
And Mr. Griffin said, You know what? I didn't even
observe that the warning had changed because I already knew the
warning was there. I didn't bother to look at it.
That's okay. That's a decision you get to make, but
it's a decision you've made. Philip Morris didn't tell him
don't look at the warning.
7-56 Those ads on television that Mr. Migliori was
complaining about? You know, they're gone as of 1970 --
January of 1971, but the public service announcements remain.
I showed you public service announcements from every decade.
1972, this warning went on every -- if there was an
ad in a magazine, an ad on a billboard, warnings on every ad.
I won't go through his work history, but you heard
Dr. Proctor -- this is kind of interesting. You heard
Dr. Proctor say that their last witness, Dr. Burns, as a public
health figure, was saying to the American public, in 1975, more
folks know that smoking is dangerous than can name the
president of the United States. Than can name the president of
the United States.
Is there any reason to believe, in light of the
testimony by Mr. Griffin and the testimony by Dr. Proctor about
Dr. Burns's own opinions, that Mr. Griffin doesn't fall into
the category of a person who would have known that smoking was
dangerous? No way.
College education. Working for Dale Carnegie.
Looking at the paper every day. Some of -- you know what?
I've put a lot of documents, a lot of Reader's Digests,
newspaper articles, magazine articles, that sort of thing --
and, yes, many of them go back before Mr. Griffin was born --
just to show you what I talked to Dr. Proctor about. And that
is, look, the idea that smoking was called an addiction or a
7-57 habit or a habituation or that it could be difficult to quit
was known a hundred years before Mr. Griffin ever smoked his
first cigarette. That's the point.
It isn't like -- you know, it's like alcohol. You
don't have to be told every day that if you drink alcohol, you
run a chance that you might become addicted or that there's
alcohol in scotch or there's alcohol in beer. You don't need
to be told that every day.
And the American public didn't need to be told every
day that if you begin to smoke, you run the chance that you
could be become addicted or that, addicted or not, it could
become difficult for you to quit. Because it's what? It's
pleasurable to smoke.
Everybody that came here that talked about it said,
look, smoking is pleasurable. That's why people do it.
All right. He's reading the newspaper every day. We
gave you copies of The Wall Street Journal, The Atlanta
Constitution, the Savannah paper just to show you the kind of
articles that Mr. Griffin has access to. If he's reading the
paper every day, these are the articles that talk about the
health risks of smoking.
Now, Mr. Griffin can jump over them if he wants to or
he can read them if he wants to. He may feel it's not
necessary to read them because he already knows what they say,
that the thing he's doing -- and here he is in the '70s -- the
7-58 thing he's doing is pleasurable. Now, there he's actually
smoking a little cigar, right? But is this something he hates
doing? No. This is something -- he acknowledged this was
something that was pleasurable for him that he did as an adult
activity, and that throughout the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and
into the early '90s, he has no desire to quit, none.
Did Mr. Griffin enjoy smoking? This is what he said.
This is about Mr. Griffin and his decisions about smoking and
his enjoyment of smoking. He said he very much enjoyed
smoking. He felt more relaxed when he smoked. Smoking
relieved stress and anxiety. He enjoyed social aspects of
smoking and taking a break while smoking.
Remember, he told me, you know what, I did enjoy
going to the bars with other sailors and having cigarettes and
beers. He enjoyed having coffee and cigarettes in the morning.
He enjoyed -- I mean, smoking is pleasurable.
Smoking helped him focus while working, and smoking
helped him feel more energized. Those are all things that he
reported. By the end of 1979, 30 million Americans have quit
smoking. That's the decision they made, but that's not the
decision that Mr. Griffin made in that time frame.
How much of this did Mr. Migliori tell you in his
closing argument? 1981, he talked about the Federal Trade
Commission report, but I showed you, through Dr. Proctor, the
actual survey data.
7-59 I don't know if you'll remember this or not, but I
showed you with Dr. Proctor the actual survey for the attitudes
of white, college-educated, Catholic men, that they were that
refined in their survey.
And what did it say? It said that, what was it, 82
or 83 percent of those people that were surveyed either knew or
thought that smoking caused lung cancer.
And I said, Dr. Proctor, is there -- is there any way
that you get 100 percent? I mean, just to show you what the
scaling is here.
He said, Oh, no, you could never get 100 percent.
You couldn't get 100 percent of people to name the president of
the United States.
So I asked Dr. Proctor, Isn't that a huge percentage?
Huge percentage.
Any reason to believe that Mr. Griffin isn't in that
83 percent?
No, no reason. He's already acknowledged he is. He
already acknowledged he is.
And that's as of 1982. But does he have an interest
in quitting smoking at this point? No, he doesn't. He hasn't
had that, what is it, middle age crisis? I don't know. But he
hasn't come to the conclusion that he wants to quit smoking at
this point.
1985, we know the warnings changed. 1985, the
7-60 warnings changed and now they explicitly say that smoking
causes lung cancer, emphysema, heart disease. And they have
rotating warnings that talk about quitting smoking now greatly
reduces serious risk to your health, cigarette smoking contains
carbon monoxide and cigarette smoking by pregnant women may
result in fetal injury, premature birth, and low birth weight.
Now, this was the only moment in time when
Mr. Griffin reported anything about seeing anything to the
contrary about the health risks of smoking, and this is what he
said. He said he saw the ads relating to the '85 pack warnings
reporting on health hazards. Then he said he heard some
scientists claim they were not accurate, and he tended to
believe them.
Now, Mr. Griffin sat here throughout the entire
testimony of Dr. Proctor. He listened to his counsel give his
opening statement, and yet when he took the stand, did he say
anybody that he was listening to was related in any way to the
cigarette industry? That this was a statement made by somebody
by Philip Morris or -- no, nobody.
Did he even tell you what it was that the scientists
were talking about? No. No. And that becomes extremely
important when you get to the questions that you're being asked
to answer in this case.
So that is the sum total of any -- any kind of
question that Mr. Griffin ever had. That's as close as he got
7-61 to having a question.
By 1989, 38 million Americans have quit smoking.
1990, '91. 1991, that's when Mr. Griffin has his
scuba diving course. That's when he doesn't perform as well as
he thought he should have, thinking back to the days when he
swam as a lifeguard, and so he decides he's going to have an
evaluation of his lifestyle.
He felt short of breath when he couldn't swim as many
laps as he felt he should and he couldn't do the lifesaving
carry as well as he thought he should, so he decided he needed
to evaluate his lifestyle and quit smoking. He didn't describe
what other lifestyle modifications he decided he would make at
that time, but that's a -- who made that decision?
Mr. Griffin. Did Philip Morris play any role in his decision
to change his lifestyle in 1991 or '2? Nope.
Next time we see Mr. Griffin, it's in October of
1995. He says at that point -- you know, he said he tried many
different ways to quit smoking. Remember, he said he tried the
patch; he tried the gum. Dr. Kaplan asked him specifically,
"When did you use gum?"
And he said 1993. And that's impossible because you
had to have a prescription to have the gum in 1993, and he
didn't have a prescription.
He said he went to hypnosis. What did he tell Dr.
Norenburg? Mr. Migliori said, "You really need to pay close
7-62 attention to these medical records," and I agree, because these
people created these records without any consideration of a
lawsuit in which Mr. Griffin would be asking for money against
Philip Morris in 2014.
So what did he say? He said he quit one time in the
past but started back up. And he reports he was walking on the
beach, got out of breath, talked to Dr. Norenburg about the
patch. Did he get the patch? There's no indication.
Dr. Kaplan said you had to have a prescription. There's no
indication he got a prescription for the patch.
You'll have all these medical records. I've tried to
separate them out so that they're easier for you guys to
access. You know, there's 8,000 pages of medical records, and
I didn't want you to have to comb through 8,000 pages of
medical records to find this stuff, so I think that there's a
more concise exhibit that will contain these specifically.
This is November of 1996. He quit smoking for eight
months. How'd he do it? He just quit smoking. If there's any
question as to whether or not he'd quit for eight months, three
weeks later he tells Dr. Fralicker, "I quit eight months ago."
And if there's any question about that, he tells Dr. Fralicker
in July of 1998 that he quit for two years.
Now, you heard from Dr. Kaplan. You heard from their
expert, Dr. DiFranza that within 24, 48 hours, the nicotine's
out of your system. If -- if you're going to have -- not
7-63 everybody has withdrawal symptoms, but if you're going to have
them, they are -- what did he say? They are sort of like the
same level as having the flu, and then he said -- both of them
said, you know what? They're gone in about a week. They
dissipate and then they're gone.
Now, relapse, if you're going to relapse because
you're missing nicotine, how long is that going to last? Well,
both of them said, you know, the relapse period for almost
anybody is three months. Can Mr. Griffin stay quit if he wants
to stay quit? Yeah, he stays quit for two years.
Now, I know that Mr. Griffin said, "No, I never did
that. These medical records are all wrong. I never said that
to people. I never said that to Dr. Fralicker. I never said
that to" -- I know he said that. And I know that he said --
where is it?
I know that ultimately -- you know, at first he said,
"I could never quit for longer than six weeks, and I could only
do that once." I understand all that.
And then you saw him on the stand finally say that
between 1995 and 1998, he spent more time not smoking than he
did smoking, but what he told all these doctors was that he'd
quit for two years.
And then in 2000, May of 2000, he told his
psychiatrist, Dr. Brockunier, that he quit for another year
starting immediately. Literally at the time he was in
7-64 Dr. Fralicker's office in July of 1998, he quits for another
year.
Can Mr. Griffin quit when he wants to quit? Does he
have the ability to do that? He -- obviously, he demonstrated
it. He demonstrated it to the doctors who were caring for him.
If he wants to quit, can he quit, and can he stay
quit? To whose satisfaction did he demonstrate that? To the
doctors who were caring for him.
Let's go to the 2000s. You see on this -- we'll go
through more of the medical records in a little bit, but he
goes to see Dr. Brockunier in 2000. Why does he go to
Dr. Brockunier? Again, you know that he indicated that the
medical records were wrong, that he didn't go -- didn't request
a psychiatric consultation in 2000, but you saw the medical
records where he did. He did at his mother's suggestion.
Why was he depressed? You'll have the -- again, I've
separated these out so that you can have easier access to them.
What was troubling him? It was the failure of his business
going all the way back to 1991, and then his lack of a social
life.
I just heard plaintiff's counsel indicate in his
closing argument that you should compensate Mr. Griffin for a
lack of a social life. If you look at these psychiatric
records, you're going to see the troubles that Mr. Griffin has
had with social life for his whole life.
7-65 I hadn't intended to even talk about it, and I'm not
going to talk about it very much because frankly, if you take
the time to look at that, you will see what the problems have
been. But to compensate him for the fact that he had poor
relationships with women over the years is just -- that's
crazy.
When he goes to see Dr. Brockunier, he's been in a
debilitating depression. He's not taking care of himself, and
Dr. Brockunier talks to him about it. Neglect of medical
problems. That's his mental state, and it doesn't have
anything to do with his smoking, but he does talk to
Dr. Brockunier about quitting smoking.
Dr. Brockunier tells him you should stop smoking, but
they're going to wait. He says, "Okay. Wait until your
depression has stabilized."
This is July -- I'm sorry, June of 2000. Mr. Griffin
declines class. More specifically, a year later, he's going to
specifically say, "I'm not interested in quitting smoking."
Why? Because he doesn't want to work on it now. Because he's
depressed. He wants to work on his depression.
Now, as his depression gets better, he begins to
decide, "Yes, I'd like to quit," and he signs up for a smoking
cessation class that's going to happen in January of 2002, but
he doesn't go to that because he collapses at home.
Again, Mr. Migliori said, "You ought to compensate
7-66 him for his collapse and his hospitalization for three weeks."
Nobody connects that with his smoking. Nobody did. No doctor
came here and said that was related to his smoking. So why did
he ask you to compensate him for it?
When he is released from the hospital -- as a matter
of fact, there are medical records that suggest, in connection
with that hospitalization, that they think it might be an
alcohol withdrawal. I'm not claiming that.
MR. MIGLIORI: Objection, Your Honor. That's in
limine.
THE COURT: Excuse me?
MR. MIGLIORI: That was an in limine.
MR. REILLY: No, it's not.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. REILLY: The bottom line is the doctors were
speculating why in the world did Mr. Griffin have this collapse
and this problem in December, late December, of 2001 and these
hallucinations that he had in 2002, and they never really came
to an explanation why it happened.
But he gets released from the hospital. I think
there's also an indication from his psychiatrist that it may
have been a result from withdrawing from the medication he was
on for his depression, Nardil. I think you can find that in
the medical records, if you're really interested in it.
But the bottom line is that when he gets out of the
7-67 hospital, what does he do? He doesn't want to smoke ever
again, and he doesn't smoke ever again. Never smokes ever
again.
Can he control whether he smokes? Sure. He has.
Yeah. He may -- he may remember the enjoyment, the pleasure of
smoking a cigarette, but does he smoke again? No, he doesn't
smoke.
So now Mr. Migliori says, "Well, you ought to take a
look at the medical record" -- well, let me stop there because
I'll get to it in a little bit.
That's it. That's the end of his smoking history.
Where in that history did Philip Morris appear? Where in that
history? You know they made the Benson & Hedges that he
smoked, and if he changed brands to a lady's cigarette in the
early '90s, to Virginia Slims -- they made Virginia Slims too,
but did they have anything to do with his switch to Virginia
Slims? Nobody ever claimed that.
Of course, there's a question as to whether that ever
happened. You know, I walked you through with him all the
changes he made to the reports he had as to what brands he
smoked.
All right. So now let's go to what the verdict form
actually asks you to address because that's -- that's the
evidence about how Mr. Griffin lived his life.
All right. The first question you're going to get
7-68 asked in it -- I don't have the actual verdict form. These are
similar, I believe, to the questions, how they're going to
posed by Judge Lisi.
The first question's going to be, "Did Patrick
Griffin's COPD first manifest itself on or before November
21st, 1996, yes or no?"
Now, Mr. Migliori said this is -- this is cut and
dry, easy stuff. Judge Lisi's going to give you a whole
instruction on how you determine this manifestation question.
MR. MIGLIORI: Your Honor.
THE COURT: Excuse me?
MR. MIGLIORI: This is I believe to be part of the
instruction. We were told not to present the instruction.
THE COURT: You weren't there yesterday,
Mr. Migliori.
MR. MIGLIORI: Your instructions are posted right
now.
MR. REILLY: That's not a problem.
THE COURT: That's okay.
MR. REILLY: Again, we were given a draft. It may be
worded slightly differently, but I don't think so.
So what is this manifestation instruction going to
tell you? This manifestation instruction is going to tell you,
"In order to determine whether or not Mr. Griffin's COPD first
manifested, the critical event is not when the plaintiff was
7-69 actually diagnosed by a physician with COPD."
Well, we know when that is. That doesn't happen
until 1998, so that clearly didn't happen before November 21st,
1996.
But when he knew or should have known that there was
a reasonable probability that his COPD was caused by cigarette
smoking -- that his COPD was caused by cigarette smoking.
"Plaintiff knew or should have known of such a probability if
the COPD manifested itself in such a way that supplied evidence
of a causal relationship."
These are all key terms not to be overlooked. Judge
Lisi doesn't have an extra word in her instructions. These are
all keywords.
"Experiencing symptoms or effects of a disease is not
sufficient evidence -- not sufficient evidence -- unless the
symptoms or effects actually disclose a reasonable probability
that the disease -- the disease -- was caused by cigarette
smoking. Not the symptoms, the disease.
So, now, let's take a look at what the actual
evidence is.
I'll put this one up.
Yes, Mr. Griffin found himself a little short of
breath -- actually, I don't know if it was short of breath so
much as --
THE COURT: Mr. Reilly, you've got a pen in one hand
7-70 and a mike in the other. Don't talk into the pen.
MR. REILLY: Right.
So what's going on in 1991? Well, here's the only
medical record we have, and it says he had a normal physical
examination. Is anybody connecting -- is anybody connecting
the fact that he can't swim as far as he thought he should with
the disease being caused by cigarette smoking, COPD? No.
The next record we have -- better put it up over
here. If I put it down here, can everybody see this?
No.
The next record we have is from October 11th, 1995,
and there he says he's walking on the beach. He's winded.
Does anybody say "you have COPD" or that "you have a lung
disease"? No.
But let's get more specific, because this is one of
the very few questions -- so that's Dr. Norenburg in '95. This
is the only other medical record we have before November 21st,
1996, and let's see whether or not a doctor actually connects
Mr. Griffin's dyspnea -- and what did -- what did you hear
dyspnea was? Dyspnea was shortness of breath on exertion.
So did any -- then he's being treated by
Dr. Brockunier -- I'm sorry, Dr. Baumgarten. This is at the
VA. And this is the question I asked Dr. Burns. I said,
"Dr. Burns, what does etiology mean?"
And he said "cause. Dyspnea, cause, question mark."
7-71 Did Dr. Baumgarten connect his dyspnea with COPD or
even cigarette smoking? No. He writes exactly what he thinks.
That's why these records are so important. You can't gloss
over it like Mr. Migliori did.
So what does this say? This says, "You've got
shortness of breath, but I don't know why." And I'll show you
in just a minute why he didn't know why. But let's go to --
and this is even after November 21st, 1996. Let's go to
Dr. Fralicker, December 6, 1996. What's he say?
He says, "Patient quit smoking approximately eight
months ago but has not noted significant improvement in his
exertional dyspnea." That leads you away from smoking.
But let's see if Dr. Fralicker is led away. What
does he say? He says, "Look, I looked at his oxygen
saturation. It's 97.2. He denies any chest pain, denies any
kind of cough or productive cough. The lungs are clear to
auscultation." You're going to see in just a minute that
that's what was done at the VA as well. Percussion and
auscultation, that's when they thump on your back and have you
take deep breaths and they listen with the stethoscope to your
lungs. Nothing wrong there.
And at the VA, you're going to see in the medical
records that they did a chest x-ray, a chest x-ray to see
whether or not there was any indication of COPD or anything
else going on in his lungs, and you'll see in the medical
7-72 records that the chest x-ray came back normal. Normal.
All right. So now Dr. Fralicker tells you what he's
thinking about. What's he say? He says "plan" -- that's what
P stands for -- "recommended scheduling a treadmill stress
test." That's for your heart, not your lungs.
Why is he doing that? It's because Mr. Griffin --
that's because Mr. Griffin has very high blood pressure values.
150 over 98, 124 over 90 on a repeat. How do we know that
Dr. Fralicker's concerned about that? Because he says so. He
says, I want you to go get a treadmill stress test. If the
treadmill stress test is normal -- that's an if -- then I will
consider a pulmonary referral.
And what's he say? He says, "Patient is to follow up
within two weeks and is to record several blood pressure
readings during this period of time."
Now, what's he thinking about? You guys can tell.
Is he thinking this gentleman has COPD caused by smoking and
that those -- that's why he's having this exertional shortness
of breath? Clearly not.
Now, who has the burden of proof in this case on this
issue? The plaintiff does.
So here are all the findings by Drs. Baumgarten and
Fralicker. Dr. Baumgarten, on 11/12/96: "No chest pain.
Chest clear to percussion and auscultation. The oxygen level
was normal. Chest x-ray normal. Dyspnea, etiology," question
7-73 mark.
Here's Dr. Fralicker three weeks later: "Quit
smoking eight months ago but no improvement in dyspnea. No
chest pain. No chronic or productive cough. Chest x-ray was
unremarkable at the VA. Oxygen level's 97 percent and lungs
are clear to auscultation."
That's why it's important to read the instructions
that go along with the questions so that you understand what
Judge Lisi is requiring that you consider when you answer this
question.
So what is that -- now that you know that that's what
the medical records show and now that you know that that's the
question, then what's the answer? And if you think that the
answer is no, you check no, and then you deliberate no further,
sign the verdict form, and notify the clerk you have a verdict,
and that's that.
Now, I don't know -- I think that, you know, that's
the evidence, so you guys have to answer that first question
before you do anything else.
Now, if unanimously you guys conclude that no, the
answer to that question is yes, then you have to go on to the
second question. What's the second question?
The second question says: Was he addicted? And,
yes -- by the way, you will not get an instruction from Judge
Lisi telling you how to decide whether someone is addicted.
7-74 You're not going to get a definition of addiction. You're not
going to get a test for determining if someone is addicted.
That is not in her instructions. It's entirely up to you guys.
In this room, you've heard a variety of tests.
You've heard Dr. Kaplan, and he's told you about the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual that the American Psychiatric
Association publishes. He walked you through that. He
explained to you how he assessed each of the criteria in
connection with Mr. Griffin's smoking.
You heard from their expert, Dr. DiFranza. I'll talk
about that in just a minute.
But let's take a minute and ask ourselves, okay,
well, who did the most thorough job of assessing this whole
situation? You know that Dr. DiFranza talked to Mr. Griffin on
the phone for 25 minutes. Dr. Kaplan talked to him in person
with plaintiff's counsel present for three, three-and-a-half
hours.
You know that to both of these folks Mr. Griffin
indicated that he enjoyed smoking.
Dr. DiFranza didn't get all the medical records. You
remember how surprising it was when I asked Dr. DiFranza
whether he had the psychiatric records, and he said no, I
wasn't given those? So he didn't even have the psychiatric
records where Dr. Brockunier talks to him about his smoking and
does he want to smoke and does he not want to smoke and his
7-75 quit for a year. He didn't even get those records. Wasn't
that surprising?
But Dr. Kaplan had all the medical records.
Dr. DiFranza didn't even ask him about his quitting
history, and Dr. Kaplan, of course, did, although Mr. Griffin
didn't tell him -- he didn't tell him even what he told you
guys on the stand. He didn't tell him about going from 1995 to
1998 not smoking more days than he smoked. Didn't even say
that. That he revealed for the first time in cross-examination
in front of you guys.
Dr. DiFranza didn't even ask him about his
depression, but, of course, Dr. Kaplan did. And Dr. DiFranza
didn't even know about it because he didn't have the
psychiatric record.
And for some reason Mr. Migliori, in his closing
argument, just said that Dr. Kaplan only sees patients about 1
or 1 1/2 percent of the time, 1 or 2 percent of his patients
come to him and he deals with smoking issues. That's not
right.
Both Dr. DiFranza and Dr. Kaplan said, Look, we
rarely have a patient come to us solely for the purpose of
dealing with quitting smoking.
Yeah, why is that? Because 90 percent of all folks
quit on their own without any assistance whatsoever, cold
turkey.
7-76 So I don't know why he said that. But the truth is
that both Dr. DiFranza and Dr. Kaplan generally see these folks
because they've come to them for something else. And during
the course of the visit, they talk about, Do you smoke? And
the difference was that Dr. DiFranza doesn't make an
assessment. He just -- he just goes on. Dr. Kaplan, on the
other hand, makes an actual assessment as to whether or not
they meet the criteria for determining whether they're nicotine
dependent or not.
And he told you he's done that with thousands of
patients, and he told you -- in spite of what Mr. Migliori
said, he told you that he has set up two smoking cessation
tracks at two different hospitals.
And, of course, Dr. Kaplan doesn't just treat folks
who only have -- only have a desire to quit smoking. He treats
all kinds of addictions. And he's a board-certified
psychiatrist. He's a board-certified -- he's board-certified
in medical forensics.
You know that he testifies in state cases involving
questions of whether or not someone is truly addicted in a
variety of settings.
And then Dr. Kaplan walked you through the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual, and he explained to you that
Mr. Griffin did not show even the overarching criteria of
significant impairment and distress, and then he explained to
7-77 you an example of that in connection with Mr. Griffin's
depression.
And then he walked you through these criteria, and he
explained to you that, yes, he met three, but you've got to
meet seven in order to satisfy not just tobacco use disorder
but, instead, to satisfy the subset of this, which is nicotine
dependence or addiction.
You're not being asked to decide whether or not
Mr. Griffin had tobacco use disorder. You're being asked to
decide whether or not he was addicted.
Dr. DiFranza. Yes, Dr. DiFranza has a significant --
significantly more liberal approach to determining whether
someone's addicted. If you smoke one cigarette a day, he said
two-thirds of you are addicted. If you smoke two or three
cigarettes a day, he said you're all addicted, everybody.
That's a pretty liberal approach to determining
whether or not someone is addicted.
He did create the HONC test, and what did -- you
remember I asked him, If you answer one of these questions yes,
you're addicted?
Yes.
If you say you think you're addicted, you're
addicted?
Yes.
If you say you'd like a cigarette, you're addicted?
7-78 Yes.
That's a pretty liberal test. So you guys have to
decide for yourselves do you really think that's the right way
to determine whether someone's really addicted or not, I mean
really addicted?
And he doesn't use the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual ever unless he's in court.
And by the way, you know, Mr. Migliori's right. If
you testify a number of times, you will -- because it's the
natural course of things, you will earn an amount of money.
But I -- I told you right up front how much money
Dr. Kaplan has earned during this -- what Dr. Kaplan did. But
I had to drag it out of Dr. DiFranza. You remember he said,
Well, I've been paid $14,000.
And I said, Well, wait a minute now. You've
testified 18, 19 -- he's testified in as many cases as
Dr. Kaplan.
And then he said, Well, maybe I've made $100,000, and
then he said maybe it's $200,000.
And then I said, Doctor, isn't it at least 300- or
400,000? You remember that? I had to drag it out.
All right. So what's the answer to this question?
You guys have to decide for yourselves. With a smoking history
like Mr. Griffin's, are you convinced that he was addicted?
And all of you have to be convinced of that. Were you
7-79 convinced he was addicted?
If you don't think you've been persuaded, because the
burden of proof, again, rests on the shoulders of the
plaintiff, then you answer that question no, and, again, you
don't deliberate any further. You sign the verdict form, and
your work is done.
If all of you agree that you've been convinced that
the plaintiff has carried his burden of proof, then you have to
answer this next question which was: Is plaintiff's addiction
to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his COPD?
Legal cause. That is a big hurdle.
There's a lot of legal language in here, and I think
my marker has run out of ink. Maybe somebody could give me
one.
Thank you very much, Michael.
But what this basically requires -- this is a lot of
legal terminology. He has to prove that smoking -- thank you
very much.
That smoking cigarettes directly and in natural and
continuous sequence -- addiction, not just smoking cigarettes.
It isn't just a question of whether or not smoking cigarettes
caused his COPD. I told you that. I told you that in my
opening statement. Why they put Dr. Burns on to tell you that
his COPD was caused by his smoking, I have no idea, because I
said that to you in my opening statement.
7-80 But that's not what they have to prove. What they
have to prove is that addiction was a legal cause of why he
developed his COPD.
Mr. Migliori can stand up here all day and say we've
proved that smoking caused his COPD. That doesn't get the job
done, ladies and gentlemen. What he has to prove is that
addiction to smoking cigarettes directly and in a natural and
continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to
producing his COPD so that it can reasonably be said that but
for his addiction -- not his smoking, his addiction to smoking
cigarettes -- his COPD would not have occurred.
All right. What does that mean? That means that
they have to have proved to your satisfaction that his
addiction was so strong that it kept him smoking to the point
that he got COPD, that it wasn't the pleasure, it wasn't the
enjoyment, it was addiction that caused him to go on and on and
on, which is interesting because Dr. -- we had Dr. Burns say
all the way back before he even wanted to quit smoking, before
he made that lifestyle change decision in the early '90s, that
he already had symptoms of COPD.
So how can it be that addiction pushed him on? How
can that be? So if you don't believe that the plaintiff has
satisfied their burden of proving that his addiction satisfied
this but for this involuntary smoking, then your answer to that
question is no, and, again, you deliberate no further. Your
7-81 work is done.
All right. Now, if unanimously you think that the
answer to that question is yes, then you have to go on to this
question, and that is: What percentage of responsibility that
was a legal cause of plaintiff's COPD do you allocate to each
of the parties?
And, again, there's that term legal cause. And some
things you need to know before you even get there --
THE COURT: That's a problem, Mr. Reilly.
MR. REILLY: Yes, Your Honor. I understand.
Before you even get there, you have to know what
legal cause requires. And let me show you that little diagram
that I showed you in my opening statement.
In order for something that Philip Morris did to be a
legal cause of Mr. Griffin's COPD, it has to have had a direct
connection with Mr. Griffin and the decisions he makes about
smoking.
How -- more than that, it also has to have had -- in
other words, he has to have seen it, heard it, has to have had
a direct connection. In addition to that, it has to have had a
substantial impact. How substantial? So substantial that
without having seen it or heard it, it wouldn't have happened.
Mr. Griffin would have not smoked, not begun smoking, not
continued to smoke.
Was there any evidence of that in this case at all?
7-82 None.
In light of the story you know about Mr. Griffin's
decisions, I mean, this is only one person's case. This is
only one smoker's personal history, so I ask you, in light of
that, was there anybody else making the decisions that
Mr. Griffin made? Anybody else participating in that any step
along the way, really?
If the answer is no, there's nobody else, then that's
100 percent, and you have to ask yourself, in light of this
smoking history where Mr. Griffin begins as a 21-,
21-and-a-half-year-old man who's already known for, what,
three, four, five years as a high schooler about the warnings
of smoking that are coming out and the Surgeon General's Report
and all of that, sees the warnings on the packs -- this is a
guy who starts smoking after the warnings are on the pack. I
leave this up to you, but that's the story.
If you get this far in the questions in the verdict
form, you have to answer the next question: Did plaintiff rely
to his detriment on the defendant's concealment or omission of
material information concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes?
Well, there's an instruction that goes along with
that. What's the operative word?
I think it's me. These things simply don't want to
write.
7-83 Rely. Rely to his detriment. That means did he make
a decision about smoking, to begin smoking, to become a regular
smoker, to continue smoking, to quit or not quit? Did he make
any of those decisions based on anything that Philip Morris
said or did? And you know the answer to that, because there is
no evidence of that in this case, none. Absolutely none.
So what's the answer to this question? This question
must be no, based on the evidence in the case. And if you
answer this question no, then you don't go on to this
Question 6.
Only if you answered question -- this question yes do
you go on to answer the additional requirement of determining
whether or not this reliance was a legal cause of his COPD.
And that's that same test I showed you just a minute ago. He
has to have heard it, seen it. It has to have had a
substantial impact on his decisions about smoking, and, again,
there's no evidence of that.
So if you answer this question no, you skip 6, and
you go to 8. But if you've -- and the judge may have numbered
these differently, but you get the idea.
If you answered that question -- those two questions
yes, then you have to answer so when, before or after May
of '82? In light of the fact that Mr. Griffin has already
acknowledged that he was aware of the warnings, that he was
aware of the health risks of smoking in high school, I don't
7-84 know how it could possibly be before or after 1982, but it sure
as heck can't be after 1982.
But let's go to Question 8. I think I'm out of
space.
Question 8 is very similar to Question 5. Did the
plaintiff rely to his detriment -- again, these keywords -- on
the concealment or omission of any information?
Was there ever any time when Mr. Griffin, on the
stand, said to you, you know what? I would have made a
different decision if I'd heard something else. I was waiting
to hear from Philip Morris or somebody connected with Philip
Morris. Did he ever say that? Never did.
And this -- as I said, this is a case about one
smoker and one smoker only. So the answer to this question --
this is: Did plaintiff rely to his detriment on the
concealment information that the
defendant made in furtherance of defendant's agreement with
others, other cigarette manufacturers, to conceal or omit
material information?
There's just no evidence of that at all in this case.
So if you get this far in the verdict form, the answer here is
no. You skip this. And frankly, here's the same set of
questions about timing. You skip that too.
But then you have to get to this question of if you
get this far, if you ever get this far, you have to go to
7-85 damages, right, compensatory damages.
And Mr. Migliori said -- and I already talked about
this a little bit -- that he wants to be compensated for lack
of a social relationship and he wants to be compensated for the
hospitalizations that have nothing to do with his smoking, and
that's just --
Now, did I agree? Yeah, I agreed that from the date
that he became totally disabled to age 65, that a lost wage
calculation I would stipulate to was $100,000. Okay. And,
yeah, his lung transplant, the bill for that was 500 and
whatever the number is. I'm not disputing those two figures.
But you don't have to award either one of those
figures. That's entirely up to you.
Now, Mr. Migliori didn't tell you how much money he
wants in -- in pain and suffering damages, and he gets to get
back up again. My guess is he's going to get back up again and
give you an enormous figure. That's my guess. But that's
entirely up to you.
This last question says: "Please state whether you
find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are
warranted against Philip Morris under the circumstances, the
circumstances of this case."
That's Mr. Griffin's case. This is about
Mr. Griffin, a connection between Mr. Griffin and should Philip
Morris be punished for punitive damages.
7-86 In light of this case and the lack of involvement of
Philip Morris and the fact that they can't satisfy their burden
of by a greater weight or the greater preponderance of the
evidence -- you know, let me just explain that for just a
second because Mr. Migliori said, "All I've got to do is tip
the scales."
What that really means is he has to come with a
bigger truckload of evidence than I did, and I've just been
walking you through the evidence that I brought. That's what
he has to do. He has to tip the scale beyond what I did. He
doesn't just have to come in with a scintilla of evidence, just
a little tiny bit of evidence. No, no, no, no.
He's got to come in with more evidence, more
persuasive evidence, than I did, and I've just walked you
through what the evidence is in this case. That's their
burden.
But here on this issue, their burden -- let me just
show you the burden. Their burden is to show you by clear and
convincing evidence rather than just a preponderance of the
evidence that you ought to award punitive damages.
What does clear and convincing require? Clear and
convincing evidence is evidence that is more compelling and
persuasive. It is evidence which is precise, explicit, lacking
in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief
or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue.
7-87 What's the matter in issue? Under the circumstances
of this case, Mr. Griffin's case, whether punitive damages
should be awarded.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, there is no precise,
explicit, lacking in confusion evidence about Philip Morris's
involvement in Mr. Griffin's decisions about smoking other than
what? That he saw an ad for -- a funny ad for Benson & Hedges
cigarettes. There were other sailors that were offering him
Benson & Hedges cigarettes, so when he bought his first pack,
that's what he bought. When he continued to buy cigarettes,
that's what he bought. That's it. That's it.
And that also is the end of my closing argument. I
appreciate you guys have given me -- I've been looking at each
of you as I've been giving my closing argument. You've been
greatly attentive. I greatly appreciate it. I look forward to
your verdict.
And now I don't know how much time Mr. Migliori still
has. I think it's in the nature of 10 or 15 minutes, something
like that.
MR. MIGLIORI: About an hour.
THE COURT: I don't think so.
MR. REILLY: Oh, my goodness. Well, you're in for a
treat.
Bottom line, because he has the burden of proof, he
gets to get back up again, and he gets to try one more time,
7-88 another bite at the apple, to try to convince you that what
I've been telling you is wrong, that that's not Mr. Griffin's
life.
But you sat here and you saw it. You know that's
Mr. Griffin's life. And so I would just ask -- since I don't
get to get back up again, I just ask that you guys ask
yourselves, whatever he's talking about, just ask yourself,
where does that fit in Mr. Griffin's life?
Thank you very much.
