MR. BIERSTEKER: May it please the Court, counsel, Mr. Grossman, Jessica, Steve.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I, together with Randy Baringer, Gordon James, Margot Beach, are proud to be here on behalf of the working men and women of the RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. We appreciate your attention, we appreciate your commitment.
Jury service, as everybody here has said, is an important civic duty; and I know that jury service can be a burden when it interferes even with your daily activities. And I know it's an even greater burden for some of you here who had events occur during the course of this trial that placed upon you demands above and beyond your daily obligations. And, so, let me just say on behalf of everybody, we appreciate it.
Secondly, you've performed your duty pretty well, at least as far as I can tell.
You have listened, you have paid attention, you've taken a bunch of notes, I saw the pencils moving, and you asked questions, good questions, that show that you had listened and that you had thought about the evidence. And you have our appreciation for that, too.
As I commented in my opening statement,
there's a number of things that this case is not about. One of them is whether it should be a legal product to make, as RJ Reynolds does and did; the other is whether or not it should be a legal product to sell, as the Grossmans did.
Nor is this a case about whether cigarettes should have different warning labels on them. Congress determined what those warnings should say, and those warnings have been on the packs of cigarettes that Mrs. Grossman smoked from the very beginning.
Ana this phase of the case is not about whether the choices that Mrs. Grossman made were good or bad choices, about how to live her life, a life that everyone here will agree ended too soon.
And in light of Mr. Hammer's closing, I also wanted to remind you that this case is not about sympathy, it's not about passion. This case, and, for that matter, justice, are about the law and the evidence.
All right. So, let's focus on the question that you're going to be asked to resolve right now. I think Mr. Hammer showed
it to you at the end of his opening, and it's the verdict form that you're going to receive, and that's the question you must answer.
And I thought about it, and I kind of, for purposes of my closing argument, wanted to break it down into a couple of parts. So, if we could have the next slide, please.
All right. And I think there's sort of a medical side of the case, which is Number 1, and there's an addiction side of the case, which is Number 2.
So, did Laura Grossman have a primary cancer; and, if so, was it caused by her smoking cigarettes?
And second, was she addicted to cigarettes that contain nicotine; and, if so, did her addiction cause her disease?
Now, the Court will instruct you that plaintiff here has the burden of proof. And that means he's got to prove this case by the greater weight of the evidence; and the Court will instruct you as to what that means.
Mr. Hammer, in his opening statement, seemed to suggest that everybody kind of starts out even and all he's got to do is have a
little bit of evidence to tip the scales; but that's not true, that's not what the Court will say.
The plaintiff starts at zero, starts in the basement. He's got to climb the evidentiary stair, and he's got to bring you with him.
And, so, let me respond, also, to some of Mr. Hammer's rhetoric in his argument. I think he said to you in his opening statement, dozens of times -- he said it during his closing statement -- RJ Reynolds is all about doubt. That's what he said, and that's not right.
RJ Reynolds is all about proof. Courts are about proof, too, and his burden to prove the facts of this case. It's his burden to prove his case. His argument is not evidence, his rhetoric is not evidence. Your judgment must be based on the evidence in this case, consistent with the Court's instructions regarding the law.
Okay. Let's talk a little bit about awareness and warnings. Since 1970, before
anybody says Laura Grossman started smoking -And, as I said in my opening and as I
think the evidence here shows, it's a little hard to tell exactly when Laura Grossman started smoking. It was probably about 1973 or 1974. You heard it from her sister, Margaret Lynn Thornton; and she's the only witness you heard from who knew Laura Grossman before 1982.
So, since 1970, before Laura Grossman picked up her first cigarette, this is the warning that appeared on cigarette packs. This is what Congress determined the warning should be. Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
It couldn't be more clear. That warning was on every pack of cigarettes that Laura Grossman bought up until 1985.
And at that time, Congress decided to change the warnings, and they went to a series of four rotating warnings that you've seen before, and these were on -- the warnings that were on every pack of cigarettes Mrs. Grossman chose to smoke after 1985; they were the warnings that were on every pack that Mr. and Mrs. Grossman sold to people in their store in New York, at a clip of about 2500 a week. And
you recall Mr. Grossman testifying that there were ads in the windows of his store. These warnings were on every ad, too.
But these warnings on every pack of cigarettes that Mrs. Grossman ever smoked or sold, and that were on every ad, were not the only source of information she had about the health risks of smoking.
Now, Dr. Schaller came in here. And he painted a vivid historical picture of the informational environment to which Mrs. Grossman was exposed as she was growing up in the 1960's and the 1970's in New York, including all the stuff from school and every place.
And he came in here and he showed you evidence of the widespread attention that smoking and health matters got in the media.
He showed you that the link between smoking and health -- between smoking and health and especially lung cancer, was pretty prominent.
And then Professor Dickie came.
Could I have the next slide, please?
And Professor Dickie came in here, and he showed you the impact of the informational
environment, sources on people in the community.
And he talked about two different things. He talked about the public awareness of the health risks of smoking, and he talked about the public's belief that smoking could cause lung cancer.
And he showed you that 90 percent of the
public, or more, were aware of the risks o lung cancer and the dangers of smoking; and he showed you that over 90 percent of them believed it, too, even teenagers who were teenagers at the same time that Laura Grossman was, were aware and believed that smoking was dangerous.
And Professor Dickie's testimony is important, because the impact that he talked about is the result of all of the information that was out there in the informational environment, what he called "divergent information," including statements by the tobacco industry and by my client.
So, no matter what Mr. Hammer tells you about Reynolds disagreeing or disputing these issues, the net effect -- the net effect, as
shown in the polls, was an overwhelming awareness and an overwhelming belief among adults and among teenagers at the time Laura Grossman was a teenager that they were aware of and believed that smoking was dangerous and could cause lung cancer.
But you don't have to speculate about what Laura Grossman knew. You don't have to speculate that at all. You don't even have to infer from all of this data that you were presented, because you heard her sister, Lynn Thornton.
She told you that Laura Grossman's mom told them when they were growing up, don't smoke, smoking is bad. She tola you that Laura Grossman was aware of the warnings. She told you that Laura Grossman knew the risks of smoking, but smoked anyway because she wanted to and because she enjoyed it.
Any suggestion in this case that Laura Grossman lacked information about the health risks of smoking is wrong.
All right. Let's turn to the medical issues, the first family of issues; and, again, as I said, I think there really are two
distinct issues. Sorry.
Did Laura Grossman have primary lung cancer, and did her smoking cause her primary lung cancer?
First things first, did she have a primary lung cancer? We'll talk about that in some detail, but while it's still fresh in our memories from yesterday, remember what Dr. Khan said.
You know, he's the guy who looked at the pathology from the adrenal gland, and he came in here as plaintiff's last witness, in rebuttal, and he said that the cells he found in Mrs. Grossman's adrenal gland were consistent with her having a GI or a gastrointestinal tract primary. Dr. Khan, the only pathologist that plaintiff brought in here to testify, said that.
Okay. So, let's talk about whether Laura
Grossman had a primary lung cancer. She was diagnosed with cancer at age 36, and that is an extraordinary rarity.
Dr. Kalman told you, in his medical practice, his lung cancer patients on average are 65 years of age or older, not 36; and if
Laura Grossman had lung cancer, she would have been the only female lung cancer patient that he has had under the age of 40. And Dr. Feingold, he sort of said the same thing.
And, as Dr. Kalman testified, when Laura Grossman walked into his office, an event that you've heard about a number of times, all bets were off. Those were his words.
So, for some people, for reasons that we can't answer, they develop cancer at a young age, and it's troubling and it's frustrating; but when all bets were off, as Dr. Kalman put it, how do you determine what was seen in Laura Grossman's chest, whether it was cancer or not, and whether it was in her lung?
And we all know the answer to that now. The answer, importantly, depends on pathology. And the key pathology that we have in this case did not come from Laura Grossman's lung, it came from the lymph nodes in her neck.
Nobody took any tissue from her lung, it doesn't exist. Nobody ever looked in her lung to see if there was cancer there, and you cannot speculate about evidence that doesn't exist.
Dr. Dollinger testified, in fact, lung pathology would be good evidence as to whether cancer arose in the lung, but he said, quote, we don't have tissue there.
Okay. So, that leaves us with, basically, three -- three sources of evidence I want to talk about. We've got the radiology, we've got the pathology, and we've got the clinical course that plaintiffs talked about a lot.
All right. Let's start with the radiology and the CT scans; and the radiology just doesn't solve this case for plaintiffs.
You may remember, and as Dr. Dollinger testified when he was up on the video screen for quite some time, that you can't diagnose cancer from radiology alone. No one really disputes that.
And second, there's the March 11th, 1994, CT scan from Dr. Hughes. You've heard a lot about that report. And it never says -- it never says that there's a mass in Laura Grossman's lung or in her bronchus. It just doesn't say it.
And, so, when you go back into the jury
room, I would invite you to pull out that March 11th, 1994, report that you've seen a number of times, and look at it. It never says that there's a mass in Laura Grossman's lung,
it never says that there's a mass in Laura Grossman's airway.
And, so, as Dr. Mamus explained with this diagram -You know, the mass is reported in this report in the mediastinal or hilar area. And that's a big area in your chest. It does encompass the bronchus, that's part of it, but it encompasses all those little white spots, the lymph nodes, and we know -- we know that Laura Grossman had cancer in those lymph nodes.
How do we know that? Because that's how it got to the lymph nodes in her neck. That's how it moved, it moved through the lymph system.
And, so, what Dr. Mamus is saying, yeah, she had cancer in that area, there was a mass in that area, but it was the lymph nodes. There's no evidence that it was actually in the airway or in the lung.
And the third thing about radiology -And I heard Dr. -- Mr. Hammer, rather, don't want to convert him into a doctor -- I heard Mr. Hammer say in his closing argument that, you know, this was the classic picture of lung cancer, this March 11th, 1994, radiology -- CT scan, and that they were absolutely sure, 98 percent.
I don't remember anybody testifying they were absolutely sure, 98 percent, but it s kind of interesting when you look at what the plaintiff's medical experts during the course of this case said when they testified.
They could not agree. They could not agree on what they saw, they could not agree on where they saw the supposedly massive tumor described by Mr. Hammer in Laura Grossman's lung.
All right. Let's first talk about Dr. Hughes. He was the radiologist who was involved in Mrs. Grossman's treatment back in March of 1994, and he said the mass was probably -- probably in the center of her bronchus, even though, as Dr. Dollinger testified, adenocarcinoma, the kind of cancer Laura Grossman has, arises in the periphery of
the lung, not in the center of the lung.
Okay. And then we got Dr. Kalman, and Dr. Kalman came in and he testified that, you know, he really wasn't sure. It was either in or adjacent to the lung, and we did not know if it was in the bronchus. The bronchus is the airway where Dr. Hughes said it probably was.
And then Dr. Feingold came in, and he said he couldn't tell wnere Laura Grossman's cancer was in her lung. He said, well, it might have been in the center, and it might have been in the periphery. You know, he didn't know.
And, then, like Dr. Feingold,
Dr. Dollinger, the oncologist -- again, not a
ologist -- testified that the cancer was either here, in the center, or out here in the side, and he couldn't -- he couldn't decide either, and let's actually watch a brief clip from Dr. Dollinger's testimony.
(Whereupon, an excerpt of the videotape deposition of Malin Dollinger, M.D., was played to the jury as follows:)
This is an early x-ray taken, which shows two abnormal areas. There is this fluffy
infiltrate in the edge of the lung here, that is the characteristic place where adenocarcinoma appears more often; although, it can begin anywhere in the lung, but this is more often in the peripheral area.
This is an abnormal shadow in the center of the lung called the hilum, where the lymph nodes are, where cancer anywhere in the lung will drain.
So, we don't know for sure if this is the primary here, which would be a typical place for adenocarcinoma; and it drains to these nodes, which is the way that it will drain, and these are enlarged because the cancer in them, or if there was a primary near this same area, and this shadow represents both the primary cancer and the lymph node next to it, and this may represent simply a collapse of lung tissue -- we call it atelectasis -- because the tumor blocks the airway and you get collapse of lung. We don't know for sure because we don't have that particular piece of tissue.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Well, Dr. Dollinger can't say for sure, either; and, you know, you had to watch -- I think it was about a
four-and-a-half-hour video of Dr. Dollinger, but I think that that one minute captures it all.
And, so, we've got all these witnesses. We've got Dr. Hughes, we've got Dr. Kalman, we've got Dr. Feingold, and we've got Dr. Dollinger. And they can't agree. They can't agree. They can't tell us where this mass was in Laura Grossman's lung, or even if it was in the lung.
Does that give you confidence? It shouldn't. And it certainly doesn't satisfy the plaintiff's burden of proof in this case.
And it's not Dr. Dollinger's fault that there's no tissue from the lung to look at, but it is plaintiff's burden of proof; and the failure to have this tissue is a failure of proof.
The pieces of the plaintiff's case don't fit together because the witnesses don't agree with one another on the most basic fact in the case, where was this allegedly massive tumor in Laura Grossman's lung.
Now let's turn to the pathology. It's the real evidence in this case about whether
Laura Grossman had cancer, and it's important evidence as to where it started.
Laura Grossman's treating pathologist in 1994, Dr. Tapia -- and I know I'm going to butcher this, and I apologize to him -Dr. Muro-Cacho -- you saw their records. Here they are again. You saw them a lot during the course of this trial. And they were never really questioned.
But you never heard Dr. Tapia or Dr. Muro-Cacho testify here. You also never heard from plaintiff's expert pathologist,
Dr. Wright. He was on the witness list, they didn't call him.
In fact, the plaintiff never presented a single pathologist during the entire case in chief. Was that just an accident?
If this case is so easy and so obvious, where were they? The only pathologist they offered, again, Dr. Khan, just yesterday.
Well, he didn't diagnose Laura Grossman's lung cancer.
I mean, we keep talking about the big stack of medical records and the list of 41 doctors, who all, I think Mr. Hammer said,
diagnosed Laura Grossman with lung cancer.
Well, Dr. Khan was on that list, and he didn't diagnose Laura Grossman with lung cancer. He came in and he said, yeah, I said it was consistent with the diagnosis I had been given.
And then in response to questioning from me, and also from you, he said, you know, but the tissue was also consistent with lung cancer that started someplace else.
Instead, they put up four doctors --Drs. Kalman, Hughes, Dollinger, and Feingold -to talk about the key pathology specimen in this case, the tissue from Laura Grossman's neck.
And, you know, to a person, they all admitted on cross-examination, well, you know, you really need a pathologist to diagnose cancer, and none of them were pathologists.
In fact, Dr. Feingold admitted precisely that he was doing something in this courtroom that he couldn't do at his own hospital. If he was seeing a patient, Dr. Feingold would not be permitted to do what he did in this court, plain and simple.
And you probably wondered why you had to wait till the defense case to hear from a pathologist, Dr. Stonesifer, who I don't think Mr. Hammer mentioned in his closing. He's the Board-certified pathologist from University Community Hospital in Tampa.
And, you know, the reason you now know why you didn't hear from a pathologist in the plaintiff's case is that the pathology undermines the plaintiff's claims here.
Dr. Tapia, Dr. Muro-Cacho both saw
something very unusual under the microscope. What did they see? Well, Dr. Stonesifer actually showed it to you.
Can I have the next slide, please?
Signet ring cells. The blowup on the left is the -- from the touch panel that Dr. Stonesifer talked about, it's a signet ring cell, and you've seen it before.
The one next to it is Dr. Feingold's photomicrograph. And, again, there were signet ring cells in there, as well as Dr. Stonesifer, and, indeed, Dr. Feingold testified.
The next slide shows the same thing, only from the tissue in the adrenal glands.
Remember, Dr. Khan didn't remember whether there were signet ring cells in there, and I don't blame him, it's been 15 or 16 years; but there are signet ring cells in there, too, as you heard.
And, as I said, this pathology undermines the plaintiff's case, and here's why: All three pathologists in this case who looked at the tissue from Laura Grossman's lymph node in her neck said the same thing, adenocarcinoma with signet ring features.
And as Dr. Stonesifer explained, and I think he testified, this means that the cancer most likely -- most likely, more probably than not -- arose in Laura Grossman's gastrointestinal tract.
Plaintiff's counsel didn't touch Dr. Stonesifer on cross-examination on that point; and I'm not faulting him for that, because the science is the science. Let's talk about what that was.
And, again, even Dr. Khan yesterday gets up on the stand, doesn't remember that there's signet cells in there, and he says, in response to one of your questions, that, you know, if he
didn't have that information about the prior diagnosis that he was provided, you know, he would have suspected a gastrointestinal tract cancer as well as a lung cancer. And he identified at least two different sites in the gastrointestinal tract, the stomach and the large bowel.
So, as Dr. Stonesifer explained when he testified, you know, the signet ring cells are also -- although, less likely -- consistent with a breast cancer; and then what he said, which is least likely, the least likely place where this cancer could have arisen was in Laura Grossman's lung. I think the word he used was "rarely." "Rarely" may occur in the lung. And, again, the plaintiff really didn't touch that on cross.
Ladies and gentlemen, "rarely" does not satisfy the plaintiff's burden of proof in this case. More likely than not this cancer did not arise in her lung.
In fact, I don't know if you remember,
but Dr. Feingold testified that, you know, there are only about 20 cases reported in the medical literature of a signet ring cell
adenocarcinoma that started in the lung, ever, ever.
It's so unusual that when people come across it, they write about it. Guess what I saw? It goes into the literature. And he said there are about 160,000 lung cancer deaths each year in the United States.
So, I mean, forget about the rest of the world, and let's assume that all 20 of these cases that got reported in the literature were ones that occurred in a single year -- they didn't, they occurred over time -- but just to illustrate the point, if you do the math, the odds are, at best, one in about 8,000 that a signet ring cell carcinoma would start in the lung. That's the evidence. I don't think the plaintiff can carry his burden of proof with odds like that.
So, the treating pathologist told Dr. Kalman first in March of 1994, and then again in October, I think, about eight months later, that he needed to rule out a gastric primary. And what Mr. Hammer said in his closing was he did everything. Did he? Did he?
Do you remember when I asked him in front of here -- in front of you here in the courtroom whether he had done anything to rule out a gastric primary and he gave like a three-minute answer?
And that's when I impeached him with his deposition. And I took out his deposition, and his answer in his deposition was one word,
"no." He didn't do it. He didn't do it.
And, so, I had to follow up with Dr. Kalman here in this courtroom, and I went through a list because I wasn't expecting him to disagree with me based upon what he said in his deposition.
And he said, well, okay, I never referred her for a gastrointestinal consultation. No, I never looked in her gastrointestinal tract with an endoscopy or a sigmoidoscopy or a colonoscopy; I didn't do that, either.
And there's been some talk about, well, gosh, it was important to treat this patient. Yeah, that's true, it was important to treat her, she had Stage III, Stage IV cancer, it was important to do the chemotherapy; but there's no reason why you couldn't have done those
tests at some point.
And, as Dr. Mamus testified, a bunch of the tests could have been done, wouldn't have interfered with the treatment at all, like a simple blood test.
Anyway, I went on down the list. Never had an upper GI series, never had a lower GI
series, no special stains were applied to the tissue samples that were taken from the cancer in her neck.
And, you know, plaintiff is suggesting, I guess, that Dr. Kalman ruled out a gastrointestinal tract cancer, because he did the abdominal CT scan.
Well, you don't need to look any further than Dr. Kalman's own words -- own words, to see that that wasn't sufficient. In his words, the abdominal CT scan looked only in part -- in part, at her stomach and some of the intestinal organs. Ladies and gentlemen, it wasn't ruled out. Those are the facts.
Okay. Let's quickly turn to Laura Grossman's clinical course. And, again, you heard Dr. Kalman and others say that this was kind of important to their conclusions, and
there are four main points I want to talk about.
First, symptoms. And, in fact, the first symptom I want to talk about is coughing up blood. Okay. These are color-coded. I know it's kind of busy; but we went through the medical records, and we tried to identify every single reference to a cough, every single one.
And the ones that are bracketed in blue up there report a dry cough. The ones that are in green are instances when Laura Grossman went to her doctors and she was asked, do you have a cough, and she said, no, don't have one. And the one in red -- the one in red, is from March 11th, 1994.
And as you've heard, more than once during the course of this trial, she reported then occasional blood streaks. I think the words were "occasional hemoptysis" -- that's blood -- for approximately a month.
But you look, that was March 11th. On March 2nd, dry cough. March 8th, dry cough. March 9th, dry cough. None of these other medical records report Laura Grossman as coughing up blood at the time when they talked
to her.
All right. And as Dr. Mamus testified before you, if Laura Grossman had lung cancer, coughing up blood and all the other symptoms that plaintiffs kept referring to that existed in March of 1994, that went away and never recurred, should have recurred.
You've got the patient walking around with supposedly a primary lung cancer, who, for the next year and half, basically, doesn't have pulmonary symptoms.
And plaintiff kind of wants to have it both ways. On the one hand, they want to convince you that Laura Grossman just couldn't possibly have had a cancer in her gastrointestinal tract because she never had significant gastrointestinal tract symptoms.
And then, on the other hand, they're
asking you to turn your eyes away from the fact that for a year and a half Laura Grossman walked this earth with a supposedly massive tumor in her lung and never had any pulmonary symptoms.
Plaintiff cannot have it both ways. And, again, it is particularly true here where
Dr. Mamus explained to you and he addressed the issue -- he's the only one who did, he's the only one who talked about it -- and he testified, you know, it's pretty common for a gastrointestinal tract cancer to be asymptomatic over the course of treatment.
In fact, symptoms, I think he testified, for gastrointestinal tract cancers oftentimes show up not in the gastro -- gastrointestinal tract, but after the gastrointestinal cancer has spread to some other part of the body and you start getting symptoms there.
And he said it would be unusual, in contrast, for a patient with lung cancer to have no further pulmonary symptoms for the next year and a half.
Now, Mr. Hammer picked on Dr. Mamus in his closing argument; and one of the things he picked on is he didn't really answer one of the questions you guys asked. And you know what?
He really didn t. But his testimony made the answer pretty clear.
He testified very clearly during the course of his testimony on the stand that Laura Grossman didn't have lung cancer.
He testified very clearly during the course of his testimony on the stand that if he were choosing which chemotherapy treatments to give to Mrs. Grossman, he might have made some different decisions than Dr. Kalman did.
But the question you guys asked -- and I think you know the reason why maybe Dr. Mamus didn't answer it -- was specifically related to whether Dr. Kalman misdiagnosed, whether Dr. Kalman gave the wrong treatments, and I hope you'll understand that this is not a malpractice case.
All right. Let's talk about the next sort of clinical course of symptoms, and that's the CEA levels. You heard about CEA levels, it's a protein in the blood.
And, sure, it's used primarily to assess whether or not somebody's responding to treatment. So, if you've got cancer, particularly gastrointestinal tract cancer, and they treat you, and they want to know, did it work, you know, they look at that protein. That's -- that's one of its primary uses, but -And you heard this from Dr. Mamus, you
heard it from a bunch of witnesses. You know, lung cancer cases present with relatively low CEA levels. I think Dr. Mamus testified in his
experience they re about 50 to 100.
And in gastrointestinal tract cases, the CEA levels can be off the charts. It's a tumor marker that is higher for gastrointestinal tract than it is for lung cancer. Not really a dispute about that.
Nor is there a dispute that Laura Grossman's CEA levels literally were off the chart. Normal is zero to five; normal lung cancer, as I said, in the range of 50 to a hundred; and hers went up, as you can see in the bottom there, to over 16,000.
Nobody had had that. I don't remember a single witness coming in here and testifying that they had a case of cancer -- lung cancer with CEA levels that high.
So, as far as the CEA levels go, it's entirely consistent with a gastrointestinal tract primary, it's consistent with the pathology that we discussed before, and it's not consistent with lung cancer.
Let's just briefly touch on breast
cancer. This, too, was inconsistent with lung cancer. Let me tell you why. Laura Grossman s lymph nodes under her armpits became enlarged in about January of 1995. It is common for breast cancer to spread to those lymph nodes. It's a classic -- classic sign, you heard that. It's uncommon for lung cancer to go there. It just doesn't do it.
All right. By September of 1985, the swelling under the lymph nodes in her arms had become so severe that Mrs. Grossman was having trouble raising her right arm more than 90 degrees; and then in October, the radiation oncologist discovers what he described as a sizeable mass behind her right breast.
A couple of points on treatment, and I think we've already touched on some of this.
Dr. Kalman testified -And I think Mr. Hammer asserted in his closing here today, if I heard him correctly, that Laura Grossman's response to her first round of chemotherapy confirmed -- confirmed that she had lung cancer. That's just not accurate. You heard the testimony.
You heard the testimony from both
Dr. Feingold and Dr. Mamus that VP-16 and Platinol or Cisplatinol -- a couple of different names -- is used with many cancers.
You heard that it is approved by the FDA for the use of a cancer of unknown primary. It is that general in terms of its effectiveness. It can work with lots and lots of cancers.
The fact that Laura Grossman responded to that treatment teaches us nothing about whether she had lung cancer or not. It doesn't tell us a thing.
Second, Dr. Kalman testified that he gave Laura Grossman treatments that are not for lung cancer, such as Tamoxifen, which is used almost
entirely to treat breast cancer.
Third, something that came up just in closing argument, pericardial effusion, it went away. The only time it was seen at all, if it was real, was on that March 11th, 1994, CAT scan. And it was never specifically treated.
It went away. Was it real?
If this was such an easy case, ask yourself this question: Why have you repeatedly seen Laura Grossman's death certificate?
If this is such an easy case, why do plaintiffs bring in Dr. Sutton to testify that she signed the death certificate and put metastatic cancer of the lung or metastatic lung cancer -- I can't remember -- but had lung cancer down there? Why did they do that?
It's misleading. It's misleading. You heard from her when she was there on the stand. She didn't independently diagnose Laura Grossman with lung cancer. She did nothing of the kind.
She treated her for her pain, that's all she did; and she took two minutes to fill out that death certificate based upon the records that she saw. Yeah, she saw the records and she wrote down what was in the records. She -That death certificate doesn't do anything more than say, yeah, that's what Dr. Kalman said in his records.
And you know what? When you go through that list of 41 doctors, Dr. Sutton's on that one, too. You know, she didn't diagnose Laura Grossman with lung cancer. She didn't do it.
Karen Fields, same thing, you heard about her this morning. Laura Grossman went to see
Karen Fields because she was going to try to get the bone marrow removed from her bones, so she could get high-dose chemotherapy, and ordinarily people can't withstand that, and then they want it to -- so that you could re-inject the bone marrow, so that you could tolerate it. That's what she was there for.
And Dr. Fields never treated Laura Grossman, she never got enrolled in that program because she didn't respond to the chemotherapy that she had to respond to in order to get into it.
Dr. Fields did not independently diagnose Laura Grossman with cancer; and I'm willing to bet almost every single one of the 41 physicians you saw up there on that slide from the plaintiffs didn't do it either. They were involved in her treatment, sure; they wrote "lung cancer" in the records, sure. Where did it come from? It came from Dr. Kalman.
If this was such an easy case, why did Mr. Hammer show you this demonstrative in his opening? I didn't see it in his closing, but we certainly saw it during the course of the trial.
And one of the references there -- I know it's really hard to read -- is right mass in the lung. And it sounds pretty important, doesn't it?
In fact, it was written before the CT scan was done in March of 1994. It was written after an x-ray was taken in early -- earlier in March that did not identify any mass, and it was from Dr. Marema.
Now, who was he? He didn't come in here, did he? No, you didn't hear from him. He's the guy who was treating her and who helped take the lymph node out of her neck. That's what he did.
And you need to ask yourself, why does plaintiff resort to that sort of presentation? Why do they do that? What can you rely on?
All right. As I mentioned at the outset, the medical issue really kind of has two components, and we've now gotten down to talking about primary lung cancer.
Let's talk about the second component of the medical issue, and that is whether Mrs. Grossman's primary lung cancer, if you guys find that she had it, was caused by her
smoking cigarettes.
And I noticed that Mr. Hammer in his closing argument spent about maybe a minute on this topic, and that's pretty much what they did during the course of the trial, too. You didn't hear a whole lot about the second part of this issue, whether her smoking caused her lung cancer.
And, here again, I think plaintiff faces some pretty major hurdles. I don't think they've carried their burden, and let's talk about that.
First there was Dr. Feingold. And, as Mr. Hammer reminded us here today, he started off talking about the history of science and how science has started to explore whether smoking causes lung cancer, and the parallel rise of cigarette smoking and lung cancer, and that was all epidemiology. Epidemiology played a huge role in finally enabling scientists to reach the conclusion that smoking caused lung cancer.
Okay. Epidemiology, as you may remember, looks at big groups of people, takes records about their habits -- you know, do they smoke,
do they drink, all sorts of things -- follows them over time, or looks backwards in time, and says, you know, what diseases do they get, are there correlations, are we seeing more smokers getting lung cancer than nonsmokers?
That's the sort of thing that was done. That's epidemiology in a nutshell. And Dr. Feingold told you that epidemiology is one of the pillars of pulmonary practice.
Okay. Well, where was that same
evidence, where was that epidemioiogica evidence that bears specifically on people like Laura Grossman? You didn't hear it from plaintiff. You had to wait till my cross-examination of Dr. Feingold.
And on cross he said, well, you know, there's the biggest epidemiological study ever done, the American Cancer Society's Cancer Prevention Survey Number Two, that started in 1982, pretty recent; and it's ongoing still today, studied over a million people.
And in that study there was no measurable increased risk for a woman at Laura Grossman's age for getting lung cancer. Nobody under the age of 40 who smoked had an elevated risk of
lung cancer compared to people who did not smoke. Remember there was one lung cancer in a never smoker, one lung cancer in a smoker in that study.
And then we also talked -- I also talked with Dr. Feingold about the Nurses' Health Study. That's the big study that was primarily, in the press at least, used to address hormone replacement therapy for women, another big study.
And it found no increased risk for adenocarcinoma of the lung, the cancer that Laura Grossman supposedly had, adenocarcinoma of the lung. No increased risk of adenocarcinoma of the lung among women who smoked for less than 30 years. You didn't see it. Didn't see it. Laura Grossman smoked for about 20 years.
And, by the way, did you recall that Dr. Dollinger testified that his patients who have lung cancer typically have smoked for 40 or 50 years?
All right. Yeah, sure, plaintiffs, during the course of their case in chief, had some witnesses, like Dr. Feingold and I think
maybe Dr. Dollinger, testify that Laura Grossman's cancer was caused by her smoking, despite the fact that adenocarcinoma of the lung is the most common kind of lung cancer in women who have never smoked; but at the end of the day, they didn't really have much to back it up with. And it was also a little bit inconsistent with Dr. Kalman.
You remember Dr. Kalman. He didn't testify that Laura Grossman's cancer more likely than not was caused by smoking. Here's what he said. He said: My opinion is that more likely than not smoking did contribute to her lung cancer.
Now, the Court will instruct you on what a legal cause is; but to be a legal cause of Laura Grossman's lung cancer and death, you have to find that her injuries would not have occurred but for her smoking.
And Dr. Kalman didn't testify that but for Laura Grossman's cigarette smoking, Laura
Grossman would not have gotten cancer. He didn't even say that smoking substantially contributed, he just said it contributed.
Well, why? You know, at the time of his
deposition, Dr. Kalman didn't know about Laura Grossman's heavy marijuana use.
And you heard Dr. Feingold testify that marijuana smoke contains carcinogens; marijuana smoke contains 50 to 70 percent more carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons than cigarette smoke does; that the particulates or tar from marijuana smoke are delivered to the respiratory tract at a concentration that's about four times greater than when you're smoking a cigarette. You heard him testify it is biologically plausible that marijuana smoke can cause lung cancer, and I ask you to use your common sense.
Now, here's the key point: Because after Dr. Kalman testified about contribute, I asked him the "but for" question. I asked him the "but for" question on cross-examination; and he admitted that he could not say -- he could not say that if Laura Grossman had never smoked cigarettes she would have avoided her lung cancer. He couldn't say.
All right. So, let me wrap up on the medical issues. There are two questions. And the plaintiff really has kind of focused only
on one of them. They focused on whether or not Laura Grossman had a primary lung cancer.
And I think given the signet ring cells, given the odds that this cancer started in Laura Grossman's lung, that they're extremely small, less than one in 8,000, the plaintiff hasn't proved this.
On the second question of causation, again, there was some testimony from Dr. Feingold and others, but they really kind of offered only say-so; and when you scratch the surface of that testimony, and you start thinking about Laura Grossman's age, if you start thinking about the epidemiology, the very epidemiology that has indicted smoking as a cause of lung cancer generally, and you try to apply it here, you don't see much.
You start thinking about the marijuana, and it becomes clear that plaintiff has presented no concrete evidence to support the opinions that Dr. Feingold and others gave that smoking caused her lung cancer. Search your memory. There was nothing.
Okay. Let's talk about addiction. This is the second question that you need to
address: Was Laura Grossman addicted to cigarettes that contain nicotine; and, if so, did addiction cause her disease. Two questions again. Was she addicted, and did addiction cause her cancer and death. Two steps.
Okay. So, was Laura Grossman addicted?
To answer that question, you're going to need to settle on what it means to be addicted. And the Court is not going to tell you what that means. You need to decide, it's up to you.
I think your common sense suggests an answer. I think the answer is it's something that prevents somebody who wants to change their behavior from doing so. I think that's a pretty commonsense definition. You guys might have a different one, but let's work with that for a minute.
The experts here in the case said, you know, addiction is the loss of control. Well, they don't mean that literally, because people can and do quit. Loss of control really means it can be hard to quit.
And regardless of the definition, am I standing up here telling you that nobody's addicted to smoking? No, I'm not saying that.
Sure, they can be, absolutely.
Is everyone who smokes addicted, so they can't quit if they want to? Absolutely not. I think you heard from every witness in this case that anybody can quit smoking.
Dr. Benowitz confirmed that. Yeah, he said 1.3 million people quit smoking every year. Sixty million had had enough control to quit over the course of time.
There's sixty million former smokers in this country alive today. Ninety percent had enough control so that they could quit without any assistance, no nicotine gum, no patches, no hypnosis, they just quit cold turkey, just like Laura Grossman did back in 1984.
And you heard a lot about nicotine impacting the brain, you heard about receptors and you heard about dopamine, and I think you'll be thankful to know that I'm not going to address all of that, because the simple fact is that notwithstanding that, millions have quit, 90 percent without assistance -assistance of any kind, and that's the bottom line.
The bottom line -- this is from
Dr. Benowitz. If we could skip to 165, please, Margot.
Yeah, this was from Dr. Benowitz, who you heard on video, the guy who was involved in the 1988 Surgeon General's report, who testified on behalf of plaintiff. And he was asked -You know, he even agrees. He says:
Well, smoking cigarettes does not cause a smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions.
And, so, in order to find that Mrs. Grossman was addicted, you would have to find that her addiction was in control, that she was not in control. That's what I submit.
And there are people out there who meet that standard. Again, I'm not telling you otherwise. It could have been Laura Grossman's
parents. You remember them, the testimony from Margaret Lynn Thornton, they smoked three to four packs a day; but there's no evidence before you that Laura Grossman was one of those people who was controlled by an addiction, and it certainly isn't the greater weight of the evidence.
And I've summarized that on a
demonstrative. It's a little busy, but I want to talk about it. It's sort of a time line. It's got little breaks in it, but -And, again, let's start -It begins in 1974, when Laura Grossman -that's the year she turned 17, and that's the year that her sister, Margaret Lynn Thornton, says, yeah, I remember her smoking. That's -that's her earliest memory.
And the benefit of the doubt, I mean, Margaret Lynn Thornton said she smoked less than a pack a day, but let's just -- a pack, pack and a half, all right? That's what she smoked from 1974 to about 1984.
And the testimony in the latter period of time, it's about a pack, pack and a half, too, same time period, 1984 to 1994 or so.
And that's consistent with what Dr. Chacko said. Laura Grossman didn't escalate her smoking. She didn't become one of those smokers who, like her parents, were smoking three to four packs a day.
Now, understandably, you heard from all of the Grossman family members, and they all got up on the stand and they testified that
they never saw her without a cigarette. But the overall facts really don't add up.
A few members of the family said, well, maybe she smoked two packs per day, but Mr. Grossman never said that. And I submit he would have a better memory of what his wife was smoking than young children would have.
Mr. Grossman said, no, it was about a pack, pack and a half a day. That was his testimony.
And it's indisputably clear that Laura Grossman, nobody is saying this, smoked three to four packs a day like her parents did.
That's the type of smoker, a three- to four-pack-a-day smoker, who would be smoking pretty much all the time.
Laura Grossman smoked for sure -- I mean, no one's disputing that -- but don't be swayed by inconsistent messages.
Okay. It is remarkable to me that just like Dr. Seely, when he testified on direct examination, Mr. Hammer, in his closing argument, never talked about the fact that in 1984, Laura Grossman quit smoking. Never talked about it.
And whatever influence -- I have
"nicotine influence" at the top. Whatever nicotine influence there was in Laura
Grossman's life over her smoking, during that period from 1974 to 1984, it didn't prevent her from stopping smoking when she became pregnant with Jessica in 1984.
And, so, there in 1984, where the blue line is, Laura Grossman quit smoking for at least nine months. Mr. Grossman says she started pretty quickly after they returned from the hospital when Jessica was born, Lynn Thornton said it was a couple of months, but it was at least after the birth. But it was at least nine months that she quit smoking. And a person who stops smoking for nine months cannot have lost control to addiction.
This is the most basic and commonsense fact in this entire case, except to Dr. Seely. Dr. Seely was up on the stand, he was plaintiff's addiction expert, as you may remember, and he talked about the Fagerstrom test. I don't know if you remember that, but he did.
And you saw on cross-examination how he said, well, you know, yeah, a person could
smoke three cigarettes a day -- which he says is not addicted -- could smoke three cigarettes a day and get about the same score, about the same category of dependence that Mrs. Grossman had.
In fact, if you look at his test, you could be a never smoker. Somebody who never smoked a cigarette in your entire life, you would get a zero on the test. But what does zero mean? Using that test, you would be dependent. Using that test, you would be dependent. Doesn't sound like a very reliable test to me.
And, in any event, this case and the evidence here isn't about test scores, it's about human behavior, it's about control.
Laura Grossman had control, she quit.
She overcame whatever effects nicotine were having on her from 1974 to 1984, she quit. She never complained to anybody about it.
And, at the time, she didn't experience any of the nicotine withdrawal symptoms. She wasn't irritable, she didn't have trouble sleeping, she wasn't constipated, she didn't lose her concentration, there was no evidence
of any of that, she just plain quit cold turkey without a problem. That's what happened.
Now, when she quit -Let's talk about nicotine. Nicotine was out of her system, according to Dr. Benowitz, plaintiff's expert, in about 72 hours or three days of quitting. It's basically gone.
Okay. Well, how about withdrawal symptoms? Well, the acute symptoms, the irritability, anger, anxiety, none of which there's any evidence Laura Grossman ever had, are gone after two to three days or maybe one to two weeks. That was Dr. Benowitz's
testimony.
And all of the addiction experts you heard from testified that changes in nicotine receptors in the brain go back to normal levels.
Okay. So, that's how, when I get to this time line, I put "absence of nicotine," and the end of any withdrawal. Again, there's no evidence she had any withdrawal; but, if she did, it ended pretty soon during that nine-month period.
And, so, then in late 1984, after
Jessica's born, or maybe early 1985, if you believe Margaret Lynn Thornton, Mrs. Grossman made the choice to start smoking again. There was no nicotine in her body at that time, it was long gone.
She perfectly understood that whatever nicotine influence had on her from 1974 to 1984, she knew what that was, she knew personally how hard or how easy it was for her to quit smoking because she did it for nine months. She had that information, and she made a decision, a decision to start smoking, plain and simple.
There was no nicotine addiction driving that decision, it was all gone, any effects of nicotine were all gone, and she decided to start again.
Now, Dr. Seely, again, who didn't really talk about this 1994 -- '84 episode in his direct examination, told you that Laura Grossman was under the influence of a lifelong mental obsession that drove her back to smoking after Jessica was born.
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you that Laura Grossman was no more driven to smoke
against her will than the 60 million Americans who are walking around, who are former smokers, and who now outnumber the number of current smokers in this country.
Dr. Seely tried another novel argument, and he said, well, Laura Grossman was able to quit smoking in 1984 because she was pregnant, and she had all these hormones. Pregnancy hormones, that's what made it easy.
And Dr. Chacko took the stand and he said, you know, there's no scientific evidence to support that theory; and, indeed, you didn't see any when Mr. Gdanski crossed Dr. Chacko.
And, you know, plaintiff picked on Dr. Chacko in his closing. And let me just see if you remember one thing that Dr. Chacko said. There was a suggestion made that he made lots of money, he wants to keep on making money, so he's going to say whatever the defense wants to hear.
Do you remember that Dr. Chacko said that he reviewed four cases, and in two of them he thought the person was not addicted, and in two of them he did? I don't know if you remember
, again, I think it was a cheap s
All right. But let's say -- let's say Dr. Seely's right, let's say pregnancy hormones somehow make it easy to quit. Let's say that's true. No evidence to support it, but let's say that's true. That's a big problem for the plaintiff, big problem. Why is that?
Well, why didn't Laura Grossman take advantage of the same hormonal situation that she had when she was pregnant with Steven? If it was so easy to quit when you're pregnant, why didn't she do it when she was pregnant with Steven? And the answer is simple, she chose not to. She chose to keep smoking.
All right. Let's talk a little bit about the rest of the time line, from about 1984 or 5 to 1994. Over that time, Laura Grossman smoked about the same amount -- again, it didn't escalate -- and she retained the exact same control that she had before. Again, she could have quit if she wanted to, and she knew that since she had quit smoking in 1984.
How much more control can a person possibly have? All of this is perfectly consistent with the image of Laura Grossman that emerged during the course of this trial,
and this is how the people who knew her described her.
She wasn't a pushover, she wasn't a victim. When she made up her mind about something, she was pretty strong. She was strong-willed, someone you wouldn't want to mess with, said Harvey.
A pretty tough person, very strong-willed, did what she wanted to, boss of the household, strong personality, I was scared of her.
Laura Grossman was in charge. She was in charge of her drinking, she was in charge of her marijuana, she was in charge of her family, she was in charge of her home, and she was in charge of her smoking. She did what she wanted. Everybody said the same things about her, nobody said anything different.
So, we know that Laura Grossman succeeded quitting in 1984. What about the other so-called attempts you heard about during the course of the trial?
Well, there weren't any that were really serious. And if we could pull up the next demonstrative, please. Plaintiff's expert,
Dr. Benowitz, here defined a serious or sincere quit attempt as one that lasts for 24 hours and the person doesn't smoke; and I think you heard the same thing from Dr. Seely and Dr. Chacko, too.
Laura Grossman's other attempts, if they were truly attempts to quit smoking, never really lasted that long, none of them.
And let's talk about each one. The
hypnosis was one hour. One hour. One hour.
She went in, came out to the car, you've heard it, said it was bull.
Okay. And you know what? If she was really interested in quitting smoking, and she thought the hypnosis session was bull, why didn't she turn around and try something else? No evidence that she did that.
We heard about nicotine gum that supposedly came from the store. Couldn't have happened. Couldn't have happened.
You heard from Dr. Seely and Dr. Green that nicotine gum wasn't available over the counter until 1996. The episode with the gum supposedly occurred back in 1985 to 1990, because the gum came from the shelf in the
store.
J-Mart was not a pharmacy, could not have carried nicotine gum. There's reason -significant reason to be skeptical that Laura Grossman used nicotine gum from 1985 to 1990; and, in any event, whatever she used, she didn't quit for 24 hours then, either.
The plastic cigarette, the testimony was she never stopped smoking with the plastic cigarette. You know, she used it, I think Jan said, to stall the next cigarette when she was working in the store.
If you don't try to stop, it stands to reason that it's not a quit attempt. It was nothing more than a convenient thing to stall the next cigarette.
Let's talk about what Laura Grossman did not do from 1985 to 1990 to try to quit smoking. There's no evidence that she said during that time period that she wanted to quit. None.
She never said to anybody, "I can't quit." No evidence of that from 1985 to 1990. She never said, "I'm addicted." You never heard that.
In fact, you heard Mr. Grossman testify on the stand she never said, you know, smoking is a habit I want to give up; or that she wanted to give up any habit, for that matter.
She never went to a doctor. You can go through the medical records. Did any doctor diagnose and treat Laura Grossman for addiction to the nicotine? Not from 1985 to 1990. I don't think it's in there. You can look. She never tried the nicotine patch.
Okay. And then we come to 1990 to 1994, the Grossmans moved down here to Florida, and the testimony is clear, she never tried. She never tried, at least until after her diagnosis.
And, you know, one of you asked a question of Mr. Grossman at the end of his testimony, and the question was: Did Laura Grossman's strong personality dissuade you from exhorting her about smoking?
And at first he said, you know, I don't know, I don't know; but what I found interesting about the rest of this answer was, Mr. Grossman never said Laura -- Laura and I, we didn't know about the health risks of
smoking, he didn't say that. He didn't say, you know, Laura Grossman was so addicted, it would have been futile, why would I bother to ask her? He didn't say that, either. No. Instead he said, we were young and healthy, it doesn't happen to us.
That's a choice. That's a choice, that's not addiction. It's a choice that Mrs. Grossman was entitled to make, and it's a choice that we here should not second-guess.
Okay. Remember, there are two questions on addiction. First one, was she addicted. I don't think plaintiffs have proven that.
Next issue, that's the second question, and that is -- and it's a critical one because that's whether or not her addiction caused her disease.
And you can find for only -- you can find for plaintiff only if you believe, based on the evidence that you have heard here, that Laura Grossman had a loss of control over her nicotine that compelled her to smoke long enough to cause what they say is lung cancer.
Okay. And the point is, you could decide that Laura Grossman was addicted, but that
addiction did not cause her death.
The key here is her ability to quit. If she had quit for good in 1984, she never would have accumulated the minimum amount of smoking that Dr. Feingold told you causes lung cancer.
Remember, all of the addiction experts agreed, addicted smokers can and do quit, and Laura Grossman was no different. Her choices about smoking, not her addiction, are the reason she smoked for so long.
Okay. A few comments about my client, RJ Reynolds. It sold a legal product. The Grossmans sold that same product. Reynolds never did anything to interfere with the choices that Laura Grossman made.
And you might be saying, well -- you know, you didn't hear about this in closing -but what about those sales representatives from the tobacco companies that came to the Grossman's store up in New York and supposedly told Mr. and Mrs. Grossman that some cigarettes were safer than others? That testimony just doesn't add up for a bunch of reasons, and let me tell you why.
The testimony was that they provided free
samples because they knew that Mrs. Grossman smoked, and they gave them to her and they said, hey, try these, these are safer because they've got a filter or whatever.
But what did Mrs. Grossman do when the
samples ran out? She returned to her normal, regular brand, Vantage. That's what Mr. Grossman said.
So, according to Mr. Grossman, his wife deliberately chose less safe brands when the samples ran out. Does that make any sense to you?
Okay. What else? Mr. Grossman told you that when Laura visited her mother, she smoked her mother's unfiltered cigarettes. Well, does that make any sense?
If she was really being told that a filter was safer, and if she really believed that, why would she go smoke the unfiltered ones?
Mr. Grossman also said that Laura Grossman would tear off the filters from some of those cigarettes that she was given to sample; and does that make any sense?
Here she's being told, allegedly, that
filters are safer by these unidentified sales representatives from 25 years ago, and what does she do, she tears the filter off?
And then Mr. Grossman testified that he would go to the Indian reservation here in Florida and buy the cheap cigarettes for his wife, not the ones, apparently, that the sales representative back in the 80's told them were safer. Does that make any sense? Really?
And there's more. Mr. Grossman even told you here in this courtroom that at this time, in the mid-1980's to 1990, he couldn't say that smoking caused disease. What?
I mean, his son, Jared -- his son, Jared, who was ten to 15 years old at that time, from 1985 to 1990, saw the warnings on the cartons of cigarettes when he was stacking them in the -- stocking them in the store, Jared told you that, but Mr. Grossman told you he had no idea? If that's true, then he should have said to these sales reps -And I asked him that. I said, look, when you heard that, did you say, safer, what are you talking about, is that what you said to them? He said, no. I really don't know what's
going on here, but this story doesn't hang together.
Now, Mr. Hammer has repeatedly made a big deal about Reynolds first acknowledging that smoking is addictive in 1999. And I want to address that briefly. A couple of points.
First, Dr. Benowitz, plaintiff's expert, told you it's been well known for hundreds of years that smoking can be difficult to quit.
He told you it's been known for more than a hundred years that nicotine is a drug in tobacco. He told you that it's been known for more than a hundred years that nicotine has pharmacological effects, which is a fancy word for saying it affects the central nervous system.
He testified that no one had admitted to anything for the Surgeon -- no one had to admit to anything for the Surgeon General in 1988 to conclude that nicotine is addictive. It wasn't any big admission from anybody. What happened is the definition changed.
You've heard that lots of times, the three components, you know, the -- the intoxication, the socially deviant behavior,
and the withdrawal symptoms. The definition changed, that's what happened. Between 1964 and 1988, the definition of "addiction" changed.
And when Dr. Benowitz was asked about it, he said, had the new definition that they came up with in 1988 been applied to what they knew back in 1964, cigarettes would have been addictive then, too. It was a definition change.
And, so, when Mr. Hammer got up here in his closing and he started saying, well, Reynolds was saying, you know, all sorts of stuff -And let me just address that. RJ Reynolds never denied that it can be hard to quit smoking. I challenge you to find a statement that says that. And RJ Reynolds certainly didn't say, with respect to addiction, more research is needed, the science is inconclusive.
No, no, the fight that occurred, the statements that Reynolds made after 1988, were because they disagreed with the change in the definition. It wasn't --
MR. HAMMER: Objection, Judge, there's no evidence to support that.
THE COURT: That's what re -- your restatement will be. Go ahead.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Remember those messages they showed you from RJ Reynolds, 1985? They showed you some in opening and they showed you some with Dr. Feingold.
And I asked Dr. Feingold, whose idea was it, whose idea was it to put those messages up and to talk about them? He said, well,
Mr. Hammer and I, we talked about it, it was a mutual decision.
And neither one of them bothered to check, had it actually ran, was it actually published. And you'll remember when I asked Dr. Feingold about this on cross, he said, well, I don't have any evidence that they were published.
And I said, you know, they don't have a copyright; and he said, yeah, no, they don't have a copyright. Then he said, well, I'm still not sure, and so I had to pull out the document, the ledger from the advertising agency that showed what Reynolds had actually
published and which they hadn't, and the
statements, they weren t on there. They weren't on that schedule.
More importantly, Dr. Feingold admitted on cross-examination that there's no evidence that Laura Grossman gave a hoot about any tobacco company statements. You never heard it.
And if that's the case, why in the world are we hearing about this? There's no evidence to tie it to Laura Grossman, that it mattered to her at all. Same thing about cigarette ads, same kind of story.
Dr. Feingold admitted on cross that he didn't try to find out evidence about when or where the ads that you were shown ran. He admitted on cross he had no evidence that Mrs. Grossman paid any attention to cigarette ads at all.
And, so, again, ask yourself why would counsel and a witness put this in front of you, claim that it's significant on the basis of no evidence? Do the facts just not matter? It should.
The evidence in this case -- there's no
evidence at all to suggest that Laura Grossman cared one way or another what RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company said. And that didn't stop Mr. Hammer from saying repeatedly -- I don't know how many times, I've lost count -Reynolds is all about doubt.
And, indeed, Dr. Feingold admitted on cross-examination that he doesn't have any evidence that the CEO of RJ Reynolds, when the statements were made, actually thought they were false.
Okay. Let me wrap it up. You've seen the lady with the scales of justice, the statue of justice, and it's critically important in every case. She stands first for propositions. She stands for the proposition that ours is a nation of laws, and that everybody should be treated equally and fairly. We know that you will do that.
The plaintiff in this case has not carried his burden of proof. Plaintiff has not proved that Laura Grossman had a primary lung cancer by the greater weight of the evidence. There's a lot of evidence to conclude that she did not.
And, frankly, in this case, the truth is, the tests that could have been done to identify the primary source of her cancer weren't done. Nor has plaintiff proved that Laura Grossman's cancer was caused by smoking.
Again, the only epidemiological evidence that is relevant to people like her does not show an elevated risk of lung cancer from smoking. That's true for lung cancer generally, and it's specifically true for adenocarcinoma.
And as Dr. Kalman admitted in my last
question to him, he couldn't say that if Laura Grossman had never smoked cigarettes she would have avoided getting lung cancer at age 36. He couldn't say it.
In terms of addiction, we know that the one time Laura Grossman seriously tried to quit, she did it, no problem, cold turkey. On that record, nobody can say Laura Grossman had lost control to nicotine. She knew she could quit if she wanted to. She just didn't want to.
And, again, I return to Jan's statement. We were young, we were healthy, we didn't think
it was going to happen to us. That's not addiction, that's a choice.
Thank you for your time, thank you for your attention, thank you for your service. Thanks a bunch.
