MR. BIERSTEKER: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
Counsel, Mr. Grossman, Jessica and Steven, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
We have finally come to the end of a long process, and before I discuss the evidence and the issues on behalf of myself, Carrie Hogan, and especially on behalf of R.J. Reynolds, I want to thank you once again for your service.
It was certainly not convenient for any of you week after week with us here in this courtroom. And for some of you, I know it has been difficult.
You have paid careful attention. I saw you listening, I saw you taking notes, a fair number of them. You asked good questions, and you have fulfilled your civic duty.
You have played an essential role in ensuring that our society's commitment to a just legal system is met. And so you have our gratitude and our respect, and I thank you for that.
I told you weeks ago at the start of this case that the case was all about Laura Grossman and the choices that she made. And it still is.
She made a number of choices: The choice
to start smoking; the choice to continue once she tried that first cigarette and become a smoker and not to quit; the choice to quit smoking in 1984 when she was pregnant with Jessica; the choice after Jessica was born in about 1985 to start smoking again; and the choice to continue smoking after that, instead of quitting.
Since then, you have heard days of testimony. You've seen a lot of documents.
And I want to talk about what the evidence has been. Because that, not the book 1984, not songs that occurred to Mr. Schlesinger, not other books, that is the story of this case.
The story of this case is the evidence that you have heard, and that's what I want to talk about. And it is now up to you to decide how all of that testimony and all of those documents relate to Laura Grossman's choices.
And there are four big issues I want to talk to you about. I put them in a little different order than Mr. Schlesinger did. But they are basically reliance, responsibility, compensatory damages, and punitive damages.
Let's talk about them. Let's start with
reliance.
There was a lot of talk about concealment by the tobacco industry. You heard a bunch about that during the course of this case, and it is vitally important that you understand at the outset that it is not your job to decide if the tobacco industry concealed information from the American public about the health risks or the addictive nature of cigarettes. That's what the findings say.
If that were enough for the plaintiffs to win this case, we would not be here. There would be no need for this trial.
So it's critically important that you keep in mind that this case is still about Laura Grossman. And what you must decide is reliance and causation, legal cause.
Did Laura Grossman make her personal choice to smoke and ultimately get lung cancer because she reasonably relied on the tobacco industry to provide information about the health risks of smoking or its addictive nature that was not forthcoming?
And here are the first two questions on the verdict form. Mr. Schlesinger reviewed
them briefly with you, and I want to do the same thing.
You are going to be asked to answer these questions.
Did Laura Grossman reasonably rely, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Laura Grossman's lung cancer and death?
And then there is a parallel question that deals with the agreement to conceal. The first one is about R.J. Reynolds.
But what does it mean to say that plaintiff must prove reasonable reliance by Laura Grossman that was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?
Now the Court has instructed you on the law, and I know that those instructions are dense. They are dense. But they are the roadmap to filling out the verdict form. It's the roadmap you must follow. You must follow the law as the Judge has given it to you.
So let's take a look at the Court's instructions on page 10 and 11. I don't believe Mr. Schlesinger reviewed these with you.
It requires that the plaintiff prove that
but for the concealment of information about the health risks or addictiveness of smoking,
Mrs. Grossman's lung cancer and death would n( have occurred.
Concealment or omission of a material fact regarding the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes is a legal cause of Laura Grossman's lung cancer and death if, but for the concealment or omission of that fact, Laura Grossman's lung cancer and death would not have occurred.
At bottom, what that means is you must determine what all of those documents had to do with Laura Grossman's choices about her smoking.
Would she have quit in time so she would not have gotten lung cancer in 1994?
Now, I talked about the railroad tracks in my opening. Mr. Schlesinger alluded to them in his closing here today. And about how they are parallel, and they never intersect.
And the evidence in this case is that the train tracks remain parallel. They don't intersect.
Plaintiff has not carried his burden of
proving with evidence -- evidence in this courtroom that Mrs. Grossman decided to smoke and ultimately got lung cancer and died because she reasonably relied on any statement by the tobacco industry that concealed information about the health risks or addictive nature of smoking.
Why? Well, Mr. Schlesinger was kind of all over the map when he discussed this question with you.
I want to discuss the evidence, and I want to try to do it in an orderly way.
The first thing is that plaintiff brought in Dr. Proctor, and over the course of three days he showed you a lot of internal documents, some from R.J. Reynolds, some from Brown & Williamson and American Tobacco that later became part of R.J. Reynolds, documents from the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, the Tobacco Institute, the Council for Tobacco Research, and even from the files of other tobacco companies.
But he didn't talk about Laura Grossman.
He couldn't. Dr. Proctor admitted that he knew nothing about Laura Grossman's personal choice
regarding her smoking. He never made the link between all of those internal documents and Laura Grossman, and he admitted that he could not do it.
Now I'll return to Dr. Proctor later.
But here's the point. Nothing Dr. Proctor said, absolutely nothing, establishes reliance and made the link to Laura Grossman and her smoking and her death from lung cancer. Nothing.
And, you know, it was -- it was kind of interesting to me -- Will, if I could have 115, please. I don't know if you guys -- 115.
I don't know if you guys remember when Dr. Proctor was on the stand and I asked him:
Is there an obesity epidemic in this country?
And he said: Yeah, there is.
And I asked him what caused it.
I said: You're not telling the ladies and gentlemen of the jury, are you, that when we do things that we know are not good for us -- super size me -- that advertising somehow makes us forget that?
And his answer was: Yeah, I am. Yeah, I
am.
And that's their theory. That's the theory that plaintiffs, even in their closing argument before you, have embraced. Because they know they can't establish the link otherwise.
They want you to think -- Mr. Schlesinger displayed all those products on the shelf in front of you. He said they're all advertised.
They are all normal goods. Basically their theory is Laura Grossman somehow forgot becai there was advertising. Somehow forgot.
And as His Honor already told you, it's legal to advertise cigarettes in this country.
That may not be a choice that you agree with, but that is the choice that we have made.
All right.
So, for plaintiffs to really establish this link, to marry up Laura Grossman's smoking decisions to anything that the internal documents discussed, they have to bring Mr. Grossman in. They know that.
So we'll come back to Mr. Proctor later.
I want to talk -- he couldn't do it.
And remarkably, though, Mr. Grossman didn't really know anything about his wife's
smoking decisions either. There was no real need in his view to talk to his wife about smoking, and he didn't.
Except for his testimony about the Vantage Ultra Lights and the sales representatives, which Mr. Schlesinger barely touched on in his closing argument, except for that, there isn't a single shred of evidence in this record, not a shred of it, that was presented by the plaintiff that linked up to the plaintiff and those internal documents, in this entire trial.
So let's talk about the sales representatives.
Mr. Grossman's story about the R.J. Reynolds sales representatives talking to Laura Grossman about Vantage Ultra Lights b safer and her alleged switch to Vantage Ultra Lights isn't credible.
Mr. Grossman's testimony has not been consistent on this point and others, and I would like to play a clip from his deposition.
Before I do, I want to remind you that you are the sole judge of the credibility of every witness who came in here and testified.
So I want you to watch Mr. Grossman's body language and his unequivocal dismissal ol the idea that any sales representative ever told him or Laura anything about the health risks of smoking.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Judge, I would object to playing a depo. The depo was not played in the trial.
MR. BIERSTEKER: It was played, Judge.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Well, I have a -THE COURT: Come sidebar.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. SCHLESINGER: It would be two-fold.
I don't know -- I don't think it was played during the trial. I think it was read,
Your Honor.
And if it was played during the trial,
I've had this objection sustained before, that playing the video testimony played during trial gives undue emphasis to it over the live witnesses, so it would be two-fold.
Number one, was it read. And if it was read, it has to be read.
Number two, they shouldn't replay video testimony. Gives undue emphasis to it.
MR. BIERSTEKER: It was in our case in chief, Judge. Remember we played two short excerpts from Mr. Grossman's deposition testimony. And we called him live to the stand to ask him a couple questions.
The one I want to play is a one question and one answer. It's not giving undue emphasi to it. If Your Honor wants to give the jurors instruction on that point, go ahead and do it.
It's not undue emphasis. I think it's entirely proper.
THE COURT: I just want to make sure the video was played.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Absolutely, Judge. THE COURT: Okay. Thank you.
Based on your representation, the objection is overruled.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
MR. BIERSTEKER: Let's take a look at Mr. Grossman's deposition testimony.
(The video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as
follows:)
Q. When you said salespeople for the cigarette manufacturers would come into your stc did you ever hear Laura talk to any of them about health risks of cigarette smoking?
A. No. There was never a discussion, as far as I know.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BIERSTEKER: But in front of you fine folks, Mr. Grossman got up on the stand and he tried to dance around that testimony from his deposition.
The words uttered from the sales representatives weren't a discussion. They were a pitch, a sales pitch, not a discussion, a distinction he didn't make the first time when he testified about this in his deposition and he was asked.
And even though he characterized it as a sales pitch and not a discussion when he was in front of you, on direct examination in this very trial with Mr. Hammer, he had no problem calling it a conversation.
A conversation that he initially told you in response to a question not from me, but from
Mr. Hammer was, you know -- he was talking about these conversations -- you know, I don't know if it really mattered for us to have the conversation. We were interested in selling the product.
Even more incredibly, Mr. Grossman told you that the purported statement that Vantage Ultra Lights were safer that he now remembers -- that now remembers -- would not have been about the health risks of smoking.
He claimed that saying that a cigarette is healthier or better for you isn't about the health effects of smoking.
Did the salespeople tell your wife, Laura Grossman, in your presence anything about the health effects of smoking different cigarette brands?
I wouldn't believe that they said "health." They said it was healthier or better for her.
Well, if someone says something to you something is healthier, aren't they talking about the health effects of smoking?
I -- no, I wouldn't think so.
Well, come on. Think about that.
I submit the deposition testimony is more credible. The 2009 deposition was closer to
the events when they occurred. And it also
occurred before the earlier trial. That was sort of a dress rehearsal for this one, in which the plaintiffs figured out the weaknesses in their case.
Now Mr. Grossman sat on the witness stand and told you that Laura switched to Vantage Ultra Lights after the sales representatives supposedly told her that they were safer.
But in 2010, Mr. Grossman testified that he could not recall Laura Grossman ever smoking Vantage Ultra Lights.
Mr. Grossman -- this is the testimony that he had before you:
Mr. Grossman, Laura never smoked the Vantage Ultra Lights, did she?
I believe she did.
This is from the earlier trial.
QUESTION: Laura never smoked the Vantagf Ultra Lights, did she?
Not that I can recall.
Not that I can recall.
And Mr. Hammer tried to make it sound as
though Mr. Grossman learned new information in
this trial referred to -- and he referred to
his testimony in April of 2010 as a deposition.
It wasn't.
His testimony in 2010 was from the last trial in this case. It occurred right here in this same courtroom before jurors who were sitting exactly where you are sitting now, and during the course of which Mr. Grossman saw am heard the exact same testimony from the depositions of Harvey, Jared and Keri Grossman, as well as Margaret Thornton. There was no change.
Mr. Grossman previously testified that his wife never paid any attention -- that he never paid any attention, rather, to the brands that Laura Grossman smoked.
Here, he said he did. But you remember his responses under oath to those written interrogatories that the Judge has instructed you on a couple times now.
And on April 28, 2008, Mr. Grossman listed several brands that his wife smoked: Marlboro, Merit, Virginia Slims, True Green,
True Blue, Kent, and L&M.
A month and a half later, plaintiff provided so-called better answers to the written questions he had to answer, but he listed the exact same seven brands, although this time he added at the bottom, this is all the plaintiff can recall.
And not until over a year later did Mr. Grossman finally remember that she also smoked Pall Mall, Vantage, and Salem. And nowhere in any of those responses were Vanta< Ultra Lights ever identified.
Mr. Grossman told you unequivocally that at the time he thought that Vantage Ultra Lights were safer than the Vantage regular cigarettes that his wife was smoking.
But when he was asked that same question in 2010 in the earlier trial, here is what he told the jury: Do you think Vantage Ultra Lights were safer than the regular Vantage cigarettes your wife was smoking?
I don't know. I don't know.
And at the same time that he would have you believe that he thought in the 1980s that Vantage Ultra Lights were safer, he also asks you oddly to believe that he had no idea that
smoking was dangerous. No idea.
At the time these conversations with the sales representatives were taking place, isn't it true that you had no idea whether cigarettes were dangerous or not?
That's true. That's true, he said.
Think about that. No idea, even though you sold 2500 packs of cigarettes a week in his store. He remembers that every one of them had the warnings.
Even though he remembers that every cigarette ad that was up in his store had the warnings.
Even though you heard from his son Jared by videotape, and he testified, you know, hey,
I was working in the store and I saw the warnings, and accordingly I knew at age 11 that cigarette smoking was dangerous.
And even though Mr. Grossman also testified that when they were living in New York, he threw Laura Grossman's cigarettes in the toilet, why would he do that if he had no idea they were dangerous?
Unfazed, Mr. Grossman told Mr. Hammer on redirect last week that his testimony this
time, this time around, is the accurate and the true version.
I submit that the earlier testimony he gave, both in his deposition in 2009, and in the prior trial in this case about the sales representatives and Vantage Ultra Lights, before plaintiff saw the weaknesses in their case, is more credible.
Here is where I think the testimony you heard about the Gateway computer sweepstakes is important.
No matter how many times his lawyers insisted on having a sidebar and we had to talk things over with the Judge, the undisputed facts are -MR. SCHLESINGER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BIERSTEKER: The undisputed facts are and what Mr. Grossman -MR. SCHLESINGER: I would move to strike references to objections and sidebars,
Your Honor, and ask for a curative instruction.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, disregard the last comments by counsel. All right?
Proceed.
MR. BIERSTEKER: What Mr. Grossman ultimately admitted in his testimony here before you was that he falsely certified he was a smoker to enter a sweepstakes to win a computer.
Would you agree with me that the -- that the certification that you provided, that you were a smoker was false? Yep.
And in doing so, he agreed to receive promotional materials from a tobacco company.
Now I'll concede it didn't say it was going to be R.J. Reynolds, but a tobacco company.
So why is this material? Why is this important? I'll tell you why. It shows that Mr. Grossman will be untruthful to win something of value.
He was willing to say he was a smoker and to say he wanted to receive promotional materials from a tobacco company after his wife had died from lung cancer from smoking in order to have a chance to win a free computer.
There's a lot more at stake here.
Not really knowing what to do with this
fact, plaintiff claims moral outrage, that R.J. Reynolds would put him on its mailing list.
Okay. I said this before. I concede that the sweepstakes form did not say that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company was the tobacci company from which promotional materials would come.
But is Mr. Grossman trying to tell you that it would have been okay to receive promotional materials from cigarettes from Lorillard or Philip Morris or anyone else?
And when he signed up to receive promotional materials from a tobacco company, didn't he understand that he was going to go on some tobacco company's mailing list? How else would he get the materials? How else would he get them?
And despite his claimed outrage at being put on my client's mailing list of smokers, he testified he never remembers ever receiving anything from R.J. Reynolds.
I would suggest to you that the claimed outrage is simply an attempt to distract you from the incredible fact that Mr. Grossman
admitted he was untruthful, simply to have the chance to win the computer.
Anyway, apart from the inconsistencies with Mr. Grossman's own testimony in this trial and in prior trials and his deposition about the Vantage Ultra Lights and the sales representatives, Mr. Grossman's testimony in this trial about the evidence he gave to you about Vantage Ultra Lights doesn't make a whole lot of sense in the context of the other evidence you've heard, not from Mr. Grossman.
First, Mr. Grossman pointed out there was a photograph of his wife Laura smoking a cigarette with a white filter, with white paper wrapped around the filter instead of brown.
And, yes, Vantage regular cigarettes have brown paper wrapped around the filter. And, yes, Vantage Ultra Lights had white paper wrapped around the filter. But lots of other cigarettes have white paper wrapped around the filter too.
And we know that Laura Grossman smoked whatever she could lay her hands on. She tried everything.
And while Mr. Grossman disagreed with
that too, even though he himself in those interrogatory responses listed ten different brands of cigarettes that she smoked.
You also had Jessica testify unequivocally that she remembers that the filters in the ashtray from her mother were brown and not white. That's the sort of thing a young kid would remember, her mother smokin and brown filters.
Finally, there is no photograph of Mrs. Grossman with a pack of Vantage Ultra Lights, but there is a photograph of her with a pack of regular Vantage, and there's also a photograph of her -- this must be from New York, given how old everybody looks in the picture. And there's an ashtray full of cigarette butts with brown filters.
All right. Let's get back to Mrs. Grossman. Her conduct doesn't suggest that safety was her concern. You know that Laura and Mr. Grossman's attitude was we were young, we were healthy, we just didn't think lung cancer would happen to us.
You heard testimony that Mrs. Grossman tore the filters off of cigarettes. If she
thought cigarettes with lower FTC tar and nicotine yields were safer, why didn't she smoke cigarettes that were on the market that had lower tar and nicotine yields than either Vantage or Vantage Ultra Light?
You heard Dr. Figlar talk about Carlton and Now. Cigarettes that R.J. Reynolds or its predecessor companies made starting in the 1960s, that were among the lowest of the low.
And in the 1990s, when the Grossman family moved to Florida, Mrs. Grossman switched to Salem regulars; full flavor, high tar, high nicotine in the green pack. There is no dispute about that.
The Salem regulars had much higher FTC tar and nicotine. This is from the FTC report that is in evidence in this case for about the year -- I think it's 1990, the year the Grossmans moved to Florida.
Salem had 16 milligrams of FTC tar and over 1 milligram of nicotine.
Vantage, 8 milligrams of tar and .7 milligrams of nicotine.
And Vantage Ultra Lights, 5 milligrams of tar and .4 milligrams of nicotine.
So if Mrs. Grossman thought lower FTC yields were safer and she was looking for a safer cigarette, why would she switch to the Salem?
Why would she switch to the Salem?
Even Mr. Grossman doesn't claim any sales representatives made any representations about the relative safety of Salem.
And finally, in an earlier trial of this case, Mr. Grossman testified that price was the most important consideration when Laura Grossman's cigarettes were purchased.
Here, the story changed. Here, whatever cigarettes Laura wanted were the ones that were purchased.
I submit that the testimony you heard from Mr. Grossman about the Vantage Ultra Lights and the sales representatives isn't credible.
But even if you credit Mr. Grossman's most recent version, his testimony in this trial about the sales representatives, about the alleged statements that Vantage Ultra Lights were safer, and that Mrs. Grossman switched to Vantage Ultra Light as her regular
brand for some unknown length of time -- could have been one year, could have been four years between 1985 and 1989, because when she cam down to Florida, she switched to Salem -- even if you credit all of that, plaintiff still will not have established liability on either one of his concealment claims.
Why? Why? Well, there's been zero testimony in this case, none, that Mrs. Grossman switched to Vantage Ultra Lights instead of quitting.
And that if she had quit for good in the late 1980s, she wouldn't have gotten her lung cancer in 1994.
And that's what plaintiff has to prove.
That's what he's got to prove.
We talked earlier about the jury instructions, and again I showed it to you.
They have to show that but for the concealment -- could I have demonstrative 26, please?
But for the concealment or omission,
Laura Grossman's lung cancer and death would not have occurred.
There is no evidence that but for
concealment, that lower-tar cigarettes like Vantage Ultra Light do not, as Dr. Proctor testified, offer significant reductions in risk, Laura Grossman would have quit and would not have gotten her lung cancer.
Plaintiffs haven't proved either reliance or that but for, that any reliance was a but-for cause of Laura Grossman's decision to smoke and ultimately to get lung cancer and die.
Mr. Grossman tried with the story about the sales representatives and the Vantage Ultra Lights, but for all the reasons I've just discussed that doesn't do it, and they have no other evidence, other than draw an inference.
Believe Dr. Proctor, ads make you forget the things that we sometimes do are dangerous.
And then back, remember the cross-examination of Dr. Proctor, the whole first part was to establish very clearly that he knew nothing about Laura Grossman's smokir decisions, absolutely nothing.
I'll talk about Dr. Proctor later and the documents.
But the evidence just doesn't prove any
reliance by Laura Grossman, much less reliance that was a but-for cause of her decision to smoke that ultimately led to her lung cancer and death.
So I submit you should answer no to the first two questions on the verdict form about this issue. Did she rely, and was that reliance a but-for cause of her lung cancer and death.
Now, this case is harder than most in some ways because there were those earlier trials.
So even if you answer questions 1 and 2 no, as I propose, the Grossmans are still going to get some money, and that's because of those earlier trials.
So you don't have to answer questions 1 and 2 on the verdict form yes in order to give plaintiffs damages.
Let's talk about another issue you have to decide, and that is responsibility. Laura Grossman's responsibility for her choices about her smoking.
And that's something that Mr. Schlesinger didn't really talk much about. One decision
that you'll have to make on the verdict form -and he did show you this -- is who bears responsibility for Laura Grossman's smoking choices and by what percentages. Laura Grossman or R.J. Reynolds and what are the percentages.
And before we talk about what the evidence has been here, I want to make sure something is clear to you guys.
Plaintiff -- and you heard this from Mr. Schlesinger, you heard it from Mr. Grossman when he was up on the stand -- accept some responsibility.
And I think that what you need to appreciate and what's in the Judge's instructions but wasn't clear from the argument that Mr. Schlesinger made is this, plaintiff's damages only get reduced for Laura Grossman's responsibility if you answer no to the first two questions on the verdict form.
Only if you answer no.
So if you think Laura Grossman should bear some responsibility for her choices, something that Mr. Grossman admits and you answer yes to the first two questions on the
verdict form, then your award will not be reduced for Laura Grossman's responsibility.
Responsibility in short is irrelevant to the first two claims, the concealment claims, the first two questions.
Okay. So what has the evidence been about Laura Grossman's smoking decisions?
Well, again, I showed you this earlier, in a different form, but she made several choices over time.
There was her choice to start smoking, the choice to become a smoker and not quit; her choice to quit when she was pregnant with Jessica in 1984; the choice to start again in early 1985; and the choice never to quit for good or even after 1984, even to make a serious attempt.
And let's make no mistake about this.
All of those were choices that Laura Grossman made, not R.J. Reynolds.
They were her personal choices.
Mr. Grossman agreed with that.
Sure, once you start smoking, it can be hard to quit. A fact my client has never ever denied.
In that sense, I suppose, addicted smokers may not have a completely free choice. They may not be able to quit just like that.
It can be hard. It can be hard.
But all of these choices that were made by Laura Grossman were her personal choices, s a number of Surgeon Generals have recognized.
Dr. Koop: No matter how much you have smoked or how much you smoke, the choice to light up is always yours.
The Surgeon General's report from 1977 to '78: Cigarette smoking represents a category of health problems that can be called personal choice health behavior.
And the Surgeon General in 1986:
Cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior.
Again, Mr. Grossman agreed that Laura could have tried harder to quit after she became addicted. And with the ability to make those choices came a responsibility, a responsibility that belonged to Laura Grossman, not to R.J. Reynolds.
And let me talk about what Dr. Benowitz
said. But before we do, I would just note Dr. Benowitz is an expert. As Mr. Schlesinger,
I think, told you in opening, he's a very big public health expert.
He was the senior scientific editor of the 1988 Surgeon General's report on addiction. He's got hundreds of peer-reviewed articles on nicotine and cigarette smoking.
He was an expert retained by the plaintiff in this case, not R.J. Reynolds, but you had to wait to hear from him until the defense case.
And I know that playing the videotape of his deposition took forever. Plaintiff designated much of that testimony.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BIERSTEKER: You heard testimony about receptors, hormones, tests for determining whether or not somebody was addicted, even though the issue in this case about Mrs. Grossman's addiction has already been decided.
In any event, I hope that the length of the video did not make you miss the key points
for the issues that you do have to decide, and this is one of them.
Dr. Benowitz: Cigarette smoking does not cause a person to lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions?
And he said: Correct.
Okay. Let's talk about Laura Grossman's decisions about her smoking, her personal choices, and what the evidence, not speculation, tells you about each and every one of them.
Let's start at the beginning. As I said in opening and I think the evidence here showed, we don't know the precise date when Laura Grossman started to smoke.
Her sister, Margaret Thornton, also a -it was her sister, a witness you had to wait to hear from until the defense case.
Anyway, her sister, Margaret Thornton, told you that Laura Grossman started smoking when Margaret was about 9 or 10, which would have been in about 1974.
And plaintiff in their closing argument pulled out one of the medical records that suggest that she started smoking at age 15,
which would have been November of 1972 to November of 1973.
But there are boxes and boxes of medical records in evidence in this case. Most of the medical records suggest that Laura Grossman started smoking in 1974, consistent with her sister's memory.
Let me show you a couple.
This is when she was admitted on March 8, 1994, and says she is a smoker and uses approximately one pack and has done so for 2C years.
Mr. Schlesinger said: Well, you gotta do math.
It's not that hard. Subtract 20 years from 1994, the date of the record, and you get 1974.
Next record, same thing. She's a smoker. It's kind of written in doctor's handwriting and hard to read and it's got abbreviations in it, but it says: Smoker one pack per day -that's what PPD means -- 20 years.
So, again, 1994 record puts it back at 1974.
Next one, this is one from October of
1994. She smoked cigarettes, one and a half packs per day for the past 20 years. Again,
1974.
There's even a medical record that suggests she started smoking later, in 1979,
when she would have been 22.
So this one is also from 1994, smoked one and a half packs per day for approximately 15 years.
Here is what I'm trying to say. I can't tell you exactly when Laura Grossman started to smoke, but the weight of the evidence, including the only witness who knew her at the time from whom you heard, her sister, suggests it was 1974.
But whether it was 1972 or 1973 or 1974 or 1975, or even 1979, at the time, the warning mandated by the United States Congress on every pack of cigarettes that was sold by R.J. Reynolds and in every ad that was run by R.J. Reynolds had the warning: Cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
And, you know, Mr. Schlesinger tried to minimize that, said it was the fine print. But it was a big deal.
You heard from Professor Schaller when he was on the stand that cigarettes were one of the first products ever to have a warning right on the package about the health consequences of using them, and how much publicity that garnered at the time.
Not only that, her parents had told Laura that smoking was no good and dangerous.
According to Professor Schaller, the New York public schools were required to teach students about the health risks of smoking when they attended.
And we know that she discussed the warnings with her family.
There is no evidence in this record that Laura Grossman started smoking in 1974 because of any ad. None.
There's no evidence from anyone that she ever paid any attention to advertising, just like she apparently ignored the warnings and her parents' advice.
And, in fact, Dr. Benowitz and Dr. Proctor admitted that most people start smoking for what they call psychosocial reasons. You know, you want to rebel, you want
to look older.
And even Dr. Proctor largely conceded that Vantage, which was the brand after all that her sister told us she was smoking way back when, when she started, conceded that Vantage was not targeted to youth.
He quibbled a little bit, he said not necessarily.
But look at the ads, and you be the judge. Those ads were not targeted to kids.
In short, there is no evidence whatsoever that anything R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company ever said or did made Laura Grossman try cigarettes.
You know, after she tried them, Laura Grossman made another choice, and that was the choice whether to continue to try them and to become a smoker. That's a choice every smoker must make.
Laura Grossman didn't become addicted the first day she tried a cigarette, and there's certainly no evidence that R.J. Reynolds forced her to continue. She had the ability to decide to do that.
And the evidence was that she chose to
continue to smoke. And there was no evidence that she chose to continue to smoke because of anything, any statement she heard from any tobacco company, whether it's from R.J. Reynolds or anybody else, from the Tobacco Institute or anybody associated with the tobacco industry.
There's no evidence that she made any effort to quit before 1984.
According to her sister, in 1978 or '79,
Laura Grossman moved out of the house and -out of her parents' house, and at that time she was smoking about a pack a week. Which, as Dr. Benowitz told you, means it would have been much easier for her to quit.
The only evidence that was presented to you during the course of this entire trial about why Laura Grossman chose to continue to smoke before 1982 is from her sister.
It's clear that Laura Grossman knew the risks. She discussed the warnings with her sister.
We knew that it was a warning, but like I said, we wanted to do it. We knew the consequences, and we still smoked our
cigarettes.
And Laura Grossman, according to her sister, said that she knew it was bad, she said we shouldn't smoke, but she still smoked.
And according to her sister, Laura Grossman knew that smoking causes lung cancer.
There's no evidence that any ad caused her to forget that.
Her sister was unequivocal: Despite knowing all of this, Laura herself said that she smoked because she enjoyed it.
And that's not a surprise. You know,
Mr. Schlesinger would have you believe that the only reason people smoke is because they are addicted.
But you heard from Dr. Benowitz, smoking is enjoyable. He testified that smoking and nicotine relaxes people. It's a social activity. It helps people concentrate, it improves their memory and so forth.
And I want to be clear, I want to be clear about this, you cannot find my client responsible just because it makes, advertises and sells cigarettes. That's legal in this country. It's protected by federal law.
Okay. Let's talk about Laura Grossman's next choice. That was the choice in 1984, when she was pregnant with Jessica to quit.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Judge, I have a motion to make.
THE COURT: Come sidebar.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. SCHLESINGER: There's an instruction in there about being legal. But he can't say it's protected by federal law.
THE COURT: Anything else?
Overruled.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
MR. BIERSTEKER: All right. Next choice she made, the choice to quit when she was pregnant with Jessica. And there is no dispute that that was Laura Grossman's choice.
You know, she quit, she never discussed it with anybody, she just did it. Mr. Grossman didn't notice she quit smoking until he noticed she didn't have a cigarette.
And, in fact, oddly she never really discussed smoking with anyone who testified
here, other than her sister, Margaret.
None of the plaintiff's witnesses asked her why she started to smoke. None of the plaintiff's witnesses asked her why she smoked. None of the plaintiff's witnesses asked her why she quit when she was pregnant. None of the plaintiff's witnesses asked her why she started again after Jessica was born. And none of the plaintiff's witnesses asked her why she smoked Vantage, or later Salem.
But we do know some things about her choice to quit in 1984. We know how she quit. She just stopped smoking cold turkey.
There was no gum, no plastic cigarettes, no hypnosis, no stop smoking clinics, which by the way, you heard from Professor Schaller were commonplace even back as early as the 1970s, and certainly the 1980s.
No evidence that she sought help from her doctor or she got any aid or assistance from any kind. She just quit.
We know how long she quit. She quit for the length of her pregnancy, no dispute about that.
In fact, the testimony from her sister
was that she started smoking about two months after she had Jessica, which would have been in early 1985, about.
We also know why she quit. It was because she was pregnant. Because she knew the risks to her unborn child.
And we also know that Laura Grossman never reported any withdrawal symptoms when she quit in 1984.
Now, sure, Mr. Grossman said on the stand he thought she was more irritable. But he couldn't say that was because she quit smoking or because of pregnancy or something else.
The point is, nobody noticed any change in Laura Grossman that they can say was due to her quitting in 1984, and she certainly didn't report any.
Laura had the ability to quit, and she did for the better part of a year.
The next choice she made after Jessica was born was to start smoking again. Why?
Well, it could not have been addiction.
We know from Dr. Benowitz and his testimony that the nicotine was gone from her body within 48 to 72 hours after she quit, so
it wasn't that.
We know from Dr. Benowitz that her withdrawal, if any, was over within a few weeks or a month of quitting, so it wasn't that.
We know from Dr. Benowitz that after a few weeks or maybe a month, those nicotine receptors in the brain, they go back to normal.
We know that Laura Grossman knew exactly how hard or how easy it was for her to quit.
She did it in 1984. That's just common sense.
So she knew exactly what she would face if she started smoking again. She was no less well-aware of the dangers of cigarette smoking than she had been before.
In fact, by this time she had been working in Mr. Grossman's variety store for about a year, at least a year, selling cigarettes.
Every single cigarette she put on the shelf, every single pack she sold to a customer, every single pack she smoked had the warning on it.
And her sister, again, testified explicitly that Laura Grossman knew that smoking causes lung cancer.
And there is no evidence in this record, none, that she heard some tobacco industry statement that made her start again.
There was no evidence that she saw some new ad that made her start again.
There is no evidence that she thought smoking was safe.
There is no evidence that some R.J. Reynolds sales representative came to the store and handed her a cigarette and said it was safe for her to start smoking again.
In fact, even Mr. Grossman says that didn't happen.
I think the evidence is pretty clear when you kind of put it together. Laura Grossman quit smoking in 1984 because she was pregnan with Jessica for the health of the unborn baby, and she started again after Jessica was born because that wasn't an issue anymore.
And when she decided to start again, it was because armed with all of the knowledge that she had all along and the knowledge, the new knowledge that she had about how hard it was for her personally to quit, she picked up the next cigarette and she lit it.
Now, the earlier jury found that Laura Grossman became addicted. What about that? Plaintiffs argue that basically once she became addicted, all bets are off. She had no choice but to keep smoking, apparently to suggest that Mrs. Grossman somehow became ferocious when didn't have her cigarettes.
Plaintiffs told you about exactly two incidents: The bagel trip late at night in the snowstorm, and the glass plate of meat that came downstairs. Two episodes that happened in 16 years.
I want to talk briefly about both of those. You heard Jared on the bagel trip. He testified it was sort of a family practice, kind of their thing, to go out and get warm bagels.
And he said they did it at midnight or 1 in the morning. He was abundantly clear.
These trips occurred in the middle of the night. Not at 9 or 10 in the morning, as Mr. Grossman testified.
Jared further said that on those trips they always bought bagels and cigarettes. And he couldn't say even on the night of the
blizzard that the main purpose of the trip was to buy cigarettes.
Let's talk about the plate of meat.
Plaintiff would have you believe that Mrs. Grossman, who after all the evidence has been, was a strong, confident, independent, grown woman. Ran out of cigarettes. And she decided rather than get in her car and go out and get some more for herself, she decided no, I'm not going to do that. Instead I'm going to throw a glass plate of meat down the stairs as a signal to Mr. Grossman to go out and get me more cigarettes.
There just had to be something else going
on.
These two isolated incidents over a
16-year period, I don't think are credible. Especially in light of Jessica's testimony that she never recalls her mother being anxious or stressed out.
Now, plaintiffs -- you heard from Dr. Benowitz, and you heard testimony about the adolescent brain.
I think Mr. Schlesinger tried to suggest in his closing that whether Laura started at
age 15 or 16 or 17 or even 20, that she was somehow different or more addicted than other smokers.
Again, we had all that testimony about the adolescent brain and neuroscience.
But smokers, including smokers who start under the age of 20 and have adolescent brains because that's how they define it, even smokers who start at 20 or below can quit.
Let's explore the uncontroverted evidence -- uncontroverted evidence in this case, and it came from the plaintiff's expert largely, Dr. Benowitz. He was the only addiction expert you heard from.
And he could not have been clearer.
Every smoker, even heavily addicted smokers, can quit. That's what he told you.
It's a stubborn fact in this case.
Not only that, not only can every smoker quit, but 90 percent of people who become daily smokers do so before the age of 20.
90 percent of all smokers in that group become addicted.
But there are over 60 million former smokers in this country who have quit
permanently.
There are more ex-smokers than there are current smokers, and the vast majority, over 90 percent, of the former smokers who quit did so without any assistance or aid, no patch, no gum, nothing like that. Just quit cold turkey, just as Laura Grossman did in 1984.
What is the point of all this? The point of all this is almost all of the 60 million former smokers in this country who quit permanently are just like Laura Grossman. Most of them started before the age of 20.
The evidence is overwhelming, I submit, that Laura Grossman had the ability to quit.
She was described as strong-willed, tough, confident, capable, intelligent, the boss of the house, and even somebody you wouldn't wan to mess with.
And that's important. That's important.
As Dr. Benowitz explained to you, being motivated to quit successfully is essential to quitting smoking.
And he also said the two biggest factors are determination or motivation and persistence.
Anyway, you don't have to draw this theoretical inference here from Dr. Benowitz or anybody else, Laura Grossman could quit.
The first and only time she made a serious attempt to quit, she did, and that's when she was pregnant with Jessica. And then she made the choice to start again.
And after that, Laura Grossman never made a serious attempt, one that Dr. Benowitz said is one that lasts for 24 hours.
Didn't happen.
And during this period from 1985 on,
Laura Grossman continued to ignore the warnings that were on every pack and every ad. You've seen them before. They're up there. They are specific warnings about specific diseases, including lung cancer, and specific warnings telling her that quitting now would reduce her risk.
There's no testimony that she saw or read something from the tobacco industry that caused her to ignore those warnings.
There's no testimony that an R.J. Reynolds sales representative told her to ignore the warning and to continue smoking.
And we know that no sales representative ever told her that smoking was safe.
In sort, Laura Grossman bears responsibility for her own personal smoking decisions. Decisions that she made in the face of warnings that were on every pack and every ad before she even started.
Before she even started.
And in the face of the massive public information that was all around her linking smoking to lung cancer and telling folks it could be hard to quit.
And that she tragically died at lung cancer at a young age does not lessen that responsibility.
People are free to take risks. We do it all the time. Smokers are well-aware of the risks of smoking, and Laura Grossman was aware of them, too.
The responsibility for taking that risk cannot be relieved by adopting an attitude that long cancer just won't happen to us. I'll be lucky.
Mr. Grossman testified, Mr. Schlesinger said that Laura Grossman bears some
responsibility. And in his closing argument,
Mr. Schlesinger argued it should be pretty insignificant, 12 and a half percent.
But ask yourself this. Who had the best opportunity to avoid this tragedy? No one forced Laura Grossman to start or to continue smoking.
No one forced Laura Grossman to continue smoking in the face of the warnings and all of the information that was available to her.
There's no evidence that advertising got her to start smoking or compelled her to smoke thereafter.
There's no evidence that anything R.J. Reynolds said or did influenced her choice to smoke.
And the evidence is clear that even once she was addicted, she had the ability to quit.
And as, again, Dr. Benowitz and others have said, with that ability came a responsibility. Laura Grossman had the most direct ability to prevent her lung cancer.
She bears the greatest responsibility for failing to do so. She should bear the greatest allocation of responsibility when you fill out
the verdict form. We think it should be 100 percent.
Any responsibility for my client should be very small. And, you know, there was some talk about the Frank Statement.
The Frank Statement is not to the contrary. It appeared in newspapers for one day in 1954. And among other things, it said that the signatory tobacco companies, including tobacco merchants and growers, accepted an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility.
But as Dr. Proctor conceded when I asked him, the signatories to the Frank Statement said they were going to discharge that responsibility by conducting research through which later became known as the Council for Tobacco Research or CTR.
And they did conduct the research, research that was peer-reviewed in peer-reviewed literature. Research that was often co-funded by the National Cancer Institute and others. Research that was cited hundreds of times in the Surgeon General's reports.
Plaintiff's argument doesn't hold water.
They would have you believe, even though there's no evidence to support it, that the signatories to the Frank Statement agreed in 1954 in an ad that ran for one day to accept responsibility for damages claimed in a lawsuit like this one in 2013, 59 years later.
The bottom line is this. Allocating all or virtually all of the responsibility here to Laura Grossman is simply an acknowledgment of the personal responsibility we all bear for the personal choices we make when we know the risks.
You know, we live in a society where people do what they want and then sometimes if things don't turn out so great, they want to blame somebody else for their choices. You see it every day.
Here are the stubborn facts of this case.
Laura Grossman knew cigarette smoking was bad for her, she knew it could cause lung cancer, she knew it could kill her.
She quit because she was pregnant, and it was no real big problem for her.
She chose never to quit again.
There is no evidence that she's one of those smokers who tries and tries and tries again and fails and fails and fails.
And the evidence is she quit that once -one time when she was pregnant and never reall tried again.
And the information about the dangers of smoking was flooding in all around her every day, every single day on every pack, on every ad.
And make no mistake about it, 90 percent of people knew that smoking was harmful and caused lung cancer well before Laura Grossman ever started.
And Mr. Schlesinger said in his closing argument: She didn't have a chance to quit.
Nothing could be more at odds with the evidence in this case. After all, she quit in 1984.
And every time she picked up a cigarette, and every time she put it in her mouth and lit it, that was a choice, a choice that people who have never smoked, like many of you on the jury, you never made that choice.
A choice that 60 million former smokers
in this country stopped making for their health and their safety.
But Laura Grossman did not make those choices. She rolled the dice, and now her family is here asking you for money.
And of course, plaintiff needs to try to convince you that her choices were not her own But don't believe it. The evidence in this case simply does not support it.
Okay. Let's tackle Dr. Proctor. He talked about a bunch of stuff. He talked about denials of addiction, manipulation of nicotine, so-called filter fraud, lower-tar cigarettes aren't any better, company statements that's not proven that smoking causes disease. He talked about youth marketing. He talked about movie placements.
He was here to make you mad. He was not here to show you that any of this mattered to Laura Grossman.
Again, he was incapable of saying that Laura Grossman relied on any of that when she made her personal choices about smoking.
He was incapable of saying that but for any of this conduct, Laura Grossman wouldn't
have smoked and would not have died of lung cancer.
And nobody else could do it either.
Jessica and Steven were too young, and Mr. Grossman couldn't make the link. He saw no reason to talk to his wife about smoking, and they just doesn't do it.
Again, the only option available to them was to have Mr. Grossman come in and testify about the story about the sales representatives that I don't think is credible.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that there's no connection between anything that Dr. Proctor talked to you about over the course of three days and Laura Grossman's choices, I want to address that testimony.
So what about all that evidence, all those documents, the three days of testimony?
I'm not going to go through all the documents. I couldn't do that. After all, it took them three days to do it when Dr. Proctor was here.
But I want to talk about some of them. I want to make some observations about Dr. Proctor and the internal documents
generally.
You know, Mr. Gdanski asked in his cross-examination, I believe it was of Professor Dickie, that it's important for experts to be unbiased, fair and impartial, and not to present one side of the facts.
And, you know, all of the experts in this case have been paid a lot of money. That includes Dr. Proctor, over a million dollars, $275,000 so far just in the first six months of this year.
But that's not surprising. After all, this is -- stems from the Engle class actions, and you heard from Dr. Figlar that there are many of these lawsuits in Florida, and no one wants to use an expert, a new expert for each case, start from scratch. It would just cost too much money. So the experts tend to testify a lot.
But leaving money aside, Dr. Proctor is a little different. He was not unbiased. He provocatively titled his book the Golden Holocaust, a book by the way that he wrote after becoming an expert for plaintiffs.
He testified that the Surgeon Generals,
three of them, who said that they had no criticism of anybody who said that it had not been proven that smoking causes lung cancer a other diseases prior to 1964 were wrong.
Apparently the Surgeon Generals are right only when they support his opinions.
He thinks that cigarettes should be abolished. He views his testimony in these cases as a way of increasing the cost of doing business, increasing the price of cigarettes, and thereby reducing smoking. He's rooting for the plaintiffs to win.
You saw in his email, victory with one exclamation point, and he testified on the stand I would put two there now.
Okay. So what about the documents? I'm not going to tell you that the tobacco industry never made a mistake or that it did not conceal information about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. After all, there are the findings, and they are binding.
I would submit to you it's kind of easy to find a statement here and a statement there from a handful of the millions of documents written by individual employees of the tobacco
industry over the course of half a century starting back in the 1950s.
It's easy to knit those isolated statements together in a way that presents a very unflattering portrait.
And that's exactly what the plaintiff has done through Dr. Proctor to arouse your passions, your emotions.
You know, I don't -- I'm not a big fan of sports analogies, and I don't mean to trivialize anything about this case, but let me try to do an analogy and see if it makes sense to you.
If you took all the clips of LeBron James, every shot he missed, every foul, every travel, every shot of his that got blocked, every errant pass and you strung them all together in a videotape, you might come away with the impression that he's not a very good basketball player.
And, of course, we all know that that would be wrong. He's one of the best.
Likewise with the tobacco industry internal documents, I would argue that they require context and thought.
Ask yourself as you think about the documents, please, because I can't review them all, a series of questions.
Was the document merely a suggestion or a proposal by one of the thousands of employees without any evidence that anything ever happened as a result of it?
There was Claude Teague's proposal to have filters change color that you heard about from Dr. Proctor, something that everybody agrees never was acted upon. It was not a very good idea.
There was Frank Colby's proposal to make a throwback cigarette with high FTC tar and high FTC nicotine; and as Dr. Figlar told you, nothing happened with that either.
There was the alleged agreement not to do biological research in the United States.
Well, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company did biological research in the United States, both in its own labs and had a division called the biological research division.
And by contracting with others, it started doing that in the 1960s, and it continues through today.
You know, why? When plaintiffs had access to all of the documents, not just the ones they showed you, all of the documents, why would they do that?
Why would they do that?
I submit they're trying to mislead you.
They're trying to arouse your emotions.
Ask yourself another question. When there was subsequent action based upon an internal document, what was the action and why did it occur?
For example, Dr. Proctor showed you documents in which Reynolds researched ways to increase nicotine and reduce tar, or at least keep it low.
But you later learn from Dr. Proctor on cross-examination and from Dr. Figlar, too, that the public health community, the National Cancer Institute, Surgeon General's reports,
Dr. Russell in England had suggested that this might be a way to make a safer cigarette.
And the idea was this: People smoke for nicotine. It's the tar that causes health problems. So increasing the nicotine but low tar might be a way to make a safer cigarette,
because the smoker could get the given level of nicotine with less tar than they could from the other cigarettes that were already on the market.
So, yes, Reynolds investigated the idea as a way to help people, not addict them. But it never marketed a product with high nicotine and low tar, because the test products just weren't acceptable to consumers.
You could make the safest cigarette in the world, but if nobody buys it, it doesn't do anybody any good.
Another question you might ask yourself: What was the company's real policy?
Dr. Proctor showed you a document by Claude Teague, and it featured prominently in Mr. Schlesinger's closing. He called it chilling.
And he was trying to tell you that Claude Teague there discussed the youth market. And he suggested that Reynolds was trying to convince nonsmokers to start.
But if you look at that document in the very first sentence, Dr. Teague is actually complaining about it. He's protesting about
the company's policy that prohibited the company from doing exactly that.
And there was no evidence, as even Dr. Proctor conceded to you on cross-examination, that anything was done as a result of Dr. Teague's memo.
Another question you might ask: Does this have anything to do with the public's overwhelming awareness and belief about the health risks of smoking?
Another question: Was there ever a statement -- you didn't see any -- disputing that it can be hard for smokers to quit?
And most important, and this is the critical bit about it, it is a question that you are being asked to answer on the verdict form.
What does any of this have to do with Laura Grossman's personal choices regarding h smoking that ultimately led to her lung cancer and death?
And I -- the answer, I submit, is nothing. There is no evidence that any of this mattered to Laura Grossman's decisions.
Bottom line, nothing that Dr. Proctor
said about any of the internal documents, nothing, can prove either that Laura Grossman relied on the concealment of information about the health risks or addictiveness of smoking, much less than any reliance by Laura Grossma caused her to smoke and get lung cancer.
Okay. Let's briefly review some of the documents in evidence as they relate to those specific issues that Dr. Proctor talked about, and let's start with addiction.
Let me first remind you about what Dr. Benowitz said, again the only addiction expert who testified before you, and I hope that the length of the videotape didn't cause you to miss some of the key points that relate to the issues you are going to have to decide.
Dr. Benowitz told you that the fact that it can be hard to quit smoking once somebody starts has been well-known by the public for over 100 years. That was no secret.
And remember that plaintiff produced no evidence that R.J. Reynolds or anybody else ever denied that fact.
Nor was there any evidence that R.J. Reynolds ever disputed the findings of the
1964 Surgeon General's report that nicotine is what makes it hard for smokers to quit.
Dr. Benowitz also told you that the pharmacological properties of nicotine have been known for over 100 years.
That was also not a secret, and there was no evidence that R.J. Reynolds ever denied that either.
Now plaintiff spent time again with another document from Claude Teague talking to Dr. Proctor about nicotine and smoking. Made it sound like Dr. Teague had some secret information about nicotine that was otherwise unknown.
And I want you to take a close look at what Dr. Teague said and compare that to the literature and what it said about nicotine and smoking many years before.
Take a look at the 1942 paper, for example, by Lennox Johnson. Johnson had exactly the same theory 30 years before Dr. Teague ever wrote his think piece.
And Johnson was far from the first to write about it, the compulsive use of nicotine and drawing analogies to smoking opium.
That theory appeared not only in the scientific literature, but it also appeared in the popular press long before Dr. Teague ever sat down and put pen to paper in 1972.
And though the Surgeon General in 1964 termed smoking an habituation instead of an addiction, the report noted the role of nicotine. And Dr. Teague, like the Surgeon General years earlier in 1964, termed smoking an habituation in his paper.
And I think there are three key points that you need to remember when you look at al the documents that relate to addiction.
Let me tell you what they are.
The first is it was a changing definition. Cigarette smoking and nicotine were declared addictive in 1988 because of a change in the definition of addiction.
Dr. Benowitz very clearly testified it was a definitional issue, and he walked through it, starting in 1988. Addictive substances no longer had to be intoxicating.
Starting in 1988, addictive substances no longer had to be associated with severe withdrawal symptoms.
Starting in 1988, addictive substances no longer had to reflect sort of socially -anti-social behavior.
And the real point is this. Whether cigarettes and nicotine were addictive just wasn't a big issue before 1988 when the definition changed.
You weren't shown any tobacco industry denials of addiction until after 1988.
My client and the other cigarette manufacturers disagreed with the change in definition that labeled cigarette smoking and nicotine, along with caffeine, an addiction just like heroin. And understandably so.
Dr. Benowitz told you that using the term "addiction" was meant to be pejorative, meant to be provocative. And for that reason, the tobacco industry denied it.
Second, declaring nicotine an addiction in 1988 was not delayed by any concealment. I-Dr. Benowitz explained, if everything that is known today -- today -- including from all the internal tobacco company documents had been known in 1964, nicotine would still have been classified as an habituation, not an addiction,
using that classic definition.
Let's flip it around. By the same token, if you take the 1988 definition of addiction and apply it to what science already knew in 1964, cigarette smoking and nicotine wouldn't have been addictive.
Again, it was a definitional change.
And Dr. Benowitz was very specific about R.J. Reynolds.
He was asked: You have seen nothing from the company's files that if the Surgeon General had seen it in 1964, it would have changed the classification of smoking at that time from habit to addiction?
He said: Nope, didn't see that.
Third thing I want you to keep in mind about the addiction issue. The post-1988 denials of addiction simply could not have mattered to Laura Grossman.
She already knew how easy or hard it was for her to quit smoking, because she had done it four years earlier in 1984.
And as even Dr. Proctor allowed, denying that smoking was an addiction after 1988 often made the tobacco industry look foolish.
And as he testified with respect to the 1994 Congressional hearing, it must have increased quitting.
Okay. Let's talk about nicotine manipulation. You sat through hours of testimony about Dr. Proctor about pH, the relative acidic or basic nature of cigarette smoke. And he had kind of a darned if you do and darned if you don't theory.
On the one hand, he said: Gee, using flue-cured tobacco might lower the pH of the cigarette smoke and make the cigarette smoke more inhalable.
And then he turned around later in his testimony and said: You know, the use of ammonia compounds as an additive to cigarett might increase the pH, and that increases the free or unbound nicotine in the smoke.
I submit to you that the cross-examination of Dr. Proctor established key points that I think will resolve this issue and put it aside.
First, cigarettes that use the flue-cured tobacco in place of the Turkish tobacco -remember, that substitution occurred during
World War I when it was hard to get Turkish tobacco -- are no more inhalable.
And the pH of commercial cigarettes, whether they had ammonia in them or not is under 6.5, and they have next to no free nicotine or unbound nicotine in them.
And Dr. Figlar told you that R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes are right in that range. They have next to no free nicotine in the smoke.
And Dr. Figlar told you that R.J. Reynolds tests its additives prior to using them. It's been supplying the government with a list of all the additives used in its cigarettes since the 1980s.
More recently, it has provided test results with respect to additives to the FDA, and not once in the last quarter-century has the government ever said don't use that additive.
Hasn't happened.
And while we're talking about additives, why did Mr. Hammer march Dr. Figlar through that long list of additives used in every tobacco product that the company makes?
And he pointed out that there were additives in there like chocolate or licorice.
And I suppose he was trying to imply that the tobacco products were intended to appeal to kids.
But as Dr. Figlar testified, the levels at which chocolate or vanilla or other flavorants are used in cigarettes as additives to cigarettes are very, very low.
And certainly at those trace amounts, it doesn't make the cigarette taste anything like vanilla or chocolate or anything else.
Okay. Let me talk about lower tar. And this is an area, you know, Mr. Schlesinger said in his opening statement to you guys: Watch out for presentism. And he defined it.
Dr. Proctor defined it too. But it basically means don't judge the past by what we know today.
And plaintiffs say that the tobacco industry fooled everybody into creating a smoking machine and requiring FTC tar and nicotine yields in cigarette ads, and I don't think that's true.
The evidence that you've heard is that
the tobacco industry told the Federal Trade Commission that the smoking machine could never actually reflect what any individual smoker was going to get out of a cigarette.
You can take more puffs, you can take bigger puffs, you can smoke it further down.
And they actually told the FTC at the time in 1967 that even the same smoker's intake could vary from cigarette to cigarette.
But the FTC went ahead and did it anyway, noting that no two human smokers smoke in the same way, no individual smokers always smoke in the same fashion, the speed at which one smokes varies among smokers, and usually also varies within the same individual under different circumstances.
So basically variations in tar and nicotine from the cigarettes, as measured by the machine, were to be expected.
But why did the government go ahead and do this anyway?
Because as Dr. Proctor told you, smokers of filtered cigarettes got less lung cancer in those epidemiological studies than the smokers of unfiltered cigarettes.
So the government not only adopted the machine method that the FTC used, but encouraged competition on that basis. And the tobacco industry went ahead and engaged in th: competition and lowered tar and nicotine.
And all the general techniques that were used that Dr. Figlar talked about to reduce overall tar and nicotine yields, filters, porous paper, filtered vents, expanded tobacco, reconstituted tobacco, all of those that reduce FTC tar and nicotine were shared with the National Cancer Institute's less hazardous cigarette program starting in 1968 and were tested over a ten-year period.
And even though the internal tobacco company documents that plaintiffs would have you believe made all the difference became available in 1998, the FTC didn't rescind its method or the requirement that FTC tar and nicotine yields appear in ads until ten years later in 2008.
And so, sure, there are scientists who think today that lower-tar cigarettes, that filters did not, as Dr. Proctor testified, significantly reduce the risk of cigarettes.
And even though smokers of filtered cigarettes still get less lung cancer in the epidemiological studies, even though autopsies of smokers of filtered cigarettes show fewer changes in the lung than autopsies of smokers of unfiltered cigarettes, as Dr. Proctor testified, and even though the National Cancer Institute found that the same amount of tar that is derived from cigarettes using the general reduction techniques that were employed produces fewer tumors on the backs of mice than the same amount of tar from a higher-tar cigarette, even though all of that is true, it doesn't matter really.
It doesn't matter whether or not people today -- people today -- think that lower-tar cigarettes or filters were effective.
You can't project the beliefs of today back to the 1960s and the 1970s. It's the poster child of what has been called "presentism."
Here's the point. You didn't see a single document from the files of R.J. Reynolds that said filters are just a gimmick.
In fact, as Dr. Proctor testified on
cross-examination, the internal documents from Reynolds at the time indicated that the company, along with the government, thought that lower-tar cigarettes reduced risk.
Okay. Let's talk about another aspect of filter design.
Mr. Schlesinger mentioned this in his closing argument and said, oh, they knew that selective filtration -- remember, Dr. Figlar talked about that.
That's when you try to prevent the formation of only one chemical or a group of chemicals in cigarette smoke. You don't try to reduce all the smoke, you just cherry-pick those compounds in the smoke that are thought to be a problem for health.
And Mr. Schlesinger made it sound like, oh, the tobacco industry knew it was a document not from R.J. Reynolds, they knew back in 1961 that selective filtration wouldn't work.
Selective removal wouldn't work.
Well, you heard Dr. Figlar, it was a significant effort by the company over a long period of time. It is an avenue of design that is still being pursued today.
And although it's very tough, and although it hasn't been -- there have not been a huge number of successes, there have been some.
You heard Dr. Figlar talk about reduction of tobacco-specific nitrosamines because of a change in the way that the tobacco farmers cure the tobacco in the barns. They were originally letting the exhaust gases into the barns.
That was creating more nitrogen compounds, more tobacco-specific nitrosamines in the tobacco itself as a result of curing that way, and how R.J. Reynolds discovered that, encouraged the farmers to switch to heat exchange so they wouldn't have those exhaust gases in the barn, and how the tobacco-specific nitrosamines in tobacco was reduced by 80 or 90 percent as a result.
Okay. So there were some successes. But the point is, it's still an effort that's being pursued today.
Let's talk about smoking and health. You know, Dr. Proctor discussed a memo that was written by Allen Rodgman in 1956 called, The Analysis of Cigarette Smoke Condensate, I.
And he testified on direct examination with Mr. Gdanski that R.J. Reynolds did not share Dr. Rodgman's work with the public, suggesting that nobody knew the possible link between polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzopyrene and lung cancer.
And then came cross-examination, and you learned that Dr. Rodgman didn't finish his work until 1964. I can't remember what number it was, but it was Cigarette Smoke Condensate 30 something, was the exhibit I put up on the Elmo.
Dr. Rodgman's results prior to 1964 were shared with the Surgeon General's Advisory Committee and were included in the 1964 Surgeon General report.
Dr. Rodgman's results were also discussed with other scientists at conferences. His methods were published too, so that other scientists could use his methods to identify more smoke constituents.
And I believe that when Dr. Figlar was on the stand, he testified that somewhere between a third and a half or a third and two-thirds of all the known constituents in cigarette smoke
were first identified by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and published.
And in any event, the presence of suspected carcinogens in cigarette smoke was hardly a secret from the public at large.
Reader's Digest published articles on benzo(a)pyrene and other suspected carcinogens in cigarette smoke starting in the early 1950s, and the 1964 Surgeon General's report using information in part from Dr. Rodgman brought that information up to date.
Why did plaintiff try to make an issue of that?
Let's talk about Ames testing for mutagenicity.
Initially Dr. Rodgman did tell Dr. Lee not to do it in 1978. But then you learned on cross-examination that later that same year,
1978, Dr. Lee started to do Ames testing within Reynolds. It continued for years, and the results were published.
End of story.
Why did you have to listen to that? What about company statements that it had not been proven that smoking causes lung cancer and
other diseases?
Another presentism is issued. Again, you can't judge the non-proven statements by the standards of today. Let me explain.
Epidemiology, statistical studies of large groups of people, was in its infancy back in the 1950s and '60s. In fact, epidemiology cut its teeth on smoking and lung cancer.
And the scientific and public health communities accept epidemiology now, but back then, doctors and medical investigators did not.
Before 1964, the tobacco company had some pretty -- tobacco companies had some pretty good company in believing that smoking had not been proven to be a cause of lung cancer.
I think Dr. Proctor conceded that what he called stragglers included well-known and extremely well-credentialed scientists who thought it was not proven at that time.
As you heard Dr. Proctor admit, and as you can go and read in the Surgeon General's report from 1964, there was a vigorous debate among the authors of that report about what cause meant.
And there were the three Surgeon Generals who wouldn't have any criticisms of anybody who said not proven before 1964.
Why? Because the epidemiology, the statistical studies weren't enough for many scientists. And, indeed, I think the '64 report even said that statistical studies alone were not sufficient.
You saw that in an article written in 1962 by Dr. Robbins. Now, Dr. Robbins at the time was the chief of cancer control for the United States government. He said scientists want to know the mechanism. How exactly does cause Y.
For example, polio is caused by a virus, the polio virus, and everybody with the disease has got it. And you expose a healthy person to the virus and they get polio, unless they've got the vaccine.
So no mechanism.
What is it in cigarette smoke that causes lung cancer and why is known that before 1964; and indeed, you've heard from Dr. Figlar, it's still not fully known today.
After the Surgeon General's report came
out in 1964, my client, the rest of the tobacco industry, and most doctors still weren't willing to accept statistical or epidemiological evidence.
Instead, my client and the rest of the tobacco industry clung to the position that you need proof of a mechanism or an animal model. And they did that for too long. For far too long. It was not my client's finest hour.
But where is the evidence that it mattered to Laura Grossman?
Where was that evidence? There isn't any in this record. Laura Grossman knew the risks of smoking before she even started.
The warnings were on every pack and every ad for years before she started. She discussed them with her family. She told her sister that smoking was no good.
And again, Dr. Proctor tried to suggest that the "not proven" statements had some effect. But that attempt failed.
He admitted he had no information that tied Laura Grossman's decisions to Reynolds' statements. He tried to suggest that since she was a member of the public, the effect on her
would have been the same as it was on everybc else.
But just what was that effect?
Professor Schaller and Professor Dickie showed -- Professor Schaller talked about the overwhelming publicity about smoking and lung cancer and addiction that was available in the 1960s, '70s, and '80s.
And, you know, I should say this.
Plaintiff's cross-examination of both Professor Schaller and Dickie were kind of all about process.
And they seemed upset that they focused on an issue that I think it was important for you to learn about, the public informational environment, what was out there, so that you didn't come away with the impression that the only thing the public heard was not proven by the tobacco industry and what the effect of all that was on people's awareness and belief.
But they want to criticize him, want to say they didn't study the history of the tobacco industry.
That wasn't their purpose.
So their cross-examination was not that
they thought that anything that they had actually presented to you was wrong, but that they were unhappy that they hadn't done what Dr. Proctor had done.
And they asked him a bunch of questions about process. Do you watch yourself on the videotape, that sort of stuff. But they didn't really touch the substance of their testimony.
And what was that substance? Professor Schaller told you about the overwhelming publicity about smoking and lung cancer and addiction that was available throughout that time.
And Professor Dickie showed you that 90 percent of the public was not only aware of the scientific evidence linking smoking and lung cancer, but that over 90 percent of the American public, including teenagers at the time that Laura Grossman was a teenager, believed that smoking was harmful.
Professor Dickie specifically told you that that belief was as a result of the total information environment. The whole thing. Th whole ball of wax.
And that the results included any effect
of the public's exposure to industry "not proven" statements calls for more research, Congressional testimony, movies and everything else.
And neither Dr. Proctor or anybody else gave you any reason to think that Laura Grossman was different than the 90 percent of the public that were aware and believed.
In fact, Professor Dickie showed you that smokers -- that the American public in general overestimates the risk of lung cancer from smoking. They put it at about 30 to 40 percent, where really it's about 7 to 13 percent.
But there's no need to rely on polling data here. I thought I heard Mr. Schlesinger say that even he does not deny that Laura Grossman knew about the health risks of smoking.
And indeed, again, Laura Grossman's sister, Margaret Thornton, testified that Mrs. Grossman actually knew that smoking causi lung cancer. So we don't have to go to the polls.
Youth marketing. Let me talk about that.
There's no evidence in this record, nothing, that any youth marketing had anything to do with Laura Grossman's decision to start smoking.
She smoked Vantage, for goodness sakes. There's not been a whisper of a suggestion, no document, certainly no ad, nothing to suggest that Vantage was marketed to youth.
Even Dr. Proctor grudgingly conceded that the Vantage ads weren't targeted to youth. And the charges of youth marketing with respect to other brands doesn't stand up very well either.
Let's talk about a couple of examples.
Dr. Proctor talked about a document written by Mr. Hind at R.J. Reynolds about a Camel filter campaign called "Meet the Turk."
And, first, Camel filters really don't have anything to do with Laura Grossman. It's not a brand she ever smoked, much less smoked when she was young.
Second, the document talks about the 14-to 24-year-old age group, that's the data.
That's the part they showed you.
The actual target was young adult males,
18 to 34, and the part they did not show you.
And, third, you saw the ads. Dr. Proctor thought they were targeted to youth, but you make the call.
Dr. Proctor also discussed Joe Camel.
The FTC fully investigated Joe Camel. It tried hard, it found no evidence of a violation, no marketing to youth.
That's a stubborn fact. That's the evidence.
Dr. Proctor also showed you documents from other tobacco companies. But there's no Engle finding in this case concerning youth marketing at all, much less that there was some sort of agreement to market to youth.
I think instruction number 7, if I remember correctly, said that R.J. Reynolds car be held responsible for the conduct of other companies only if it was concealment of a fact about the health risks or addictiveness of cigarette smoking that was concealed in furtherance of the agreement.
Doesn't talk about youth marketing.
And none of that is related to Laura Grossman's smoking of Vantage that nobody claims was marketed to youth. Or of Salem,
which she started to smoke when she was in her 30s.
Again, I don't know that the youth marketing stuff had any purpose other than to get you mad.
Movie placements. Dr. Proctor told you that in the 1970s and '80s, movie placements increased. No one is here denying there were movie placements.
But Dr. Proctor went further.
Dr. Proctor, who thought Superman might be considered an athlete testified that Philip Morris USA dictated the content from the movie Superman II, not just the choice of the brands of cigarettes that would be used in the movie.
And that's wrong. The agreement between Philip Morris USA -- again, not my client -- and the directors of Superman II is in evidence. And this is a letter from the movie produce,
Dovemead Limited.
And the movie producers told Philip Morris that we, the movie producers, shall have absolute discretion as to the final content of the film and all artistic and technical decisions over all aspects of the production
and post-production of the film.
There is no evidence at all that any other movie producers ceded control of the film's content to tobacco companies, nor is there any evidence that any of this had any effect on Laura Grossman.
In fact, there's been no evidence at all that Vantage was ever placed in any movie ever.
Again, plaintiff must prove reasonable reliance, and that any reliance was a but-for cause of Laura Grossman's lung cancer and death.
You must prove that but for that concealment, Laura Grossman would not have become addicted to cigarettes, and would not have gotten lung cancer, and they bear the burden of proof on that issue.
The evidence of reliance causing Laura Grossman to smoke and get lung cancer just isn't there.
Dr. Proctor didn't know anything about Laura Grossman's smoking decisions nor, excep for the purported conversation with the sales representatives, did Mr. Grossman.
Again, in his view there was no reason to
talk about it, and they didn't. Not even when Laura quit smoking when she was pregnant and not when she started again after Jessica was born.
And for all the reasons we've already talked about -- I'm not going to go back over it -- I don't think you should credit the story about the sales representatives and the switch to Vantage Ultra Light.
But even if you do, that switch for a few years, there's zero evidence that Laura Grossman decided to switch to Vantage Ultra Lights instead of quitting, or that if she had quit in the late 1980s, she would have avoided her lung cancer.
Plaintiffs ask you to infer reliance, no direct evidence. Let's infer it. But from what? And you shouldn't.
Because the evidence here is that there was no reliance that caused her to smoke and get lung cancer.
The evidence is clear that Laura Grossman knew the risks and smoked anyway. She knew I hard it was or easy it was for her to quit, because she did it in 1984, years before the
tobacco industry ever started denying that smoking was addictive in 1988.
So again, I would ask that you check no when you answer the first two questions on the verdict form about this issue.
Last topic I want to discuss is damages.
You heard about that from Mr. Schlesinger. And there are two kinds, compensatory damages and punitive damages. Let's talk about compensatory damages first.
Compensatory damages are meant, as the name suggests, to compensate the plaintiff for injury. To determine the amount of compensatory damages to be awarded, you consider what the plaintiff has lost, and you compensate the plaintiff for that loss.
The determination fully compensates the plaintiff for that loss. Again, that's why they're referred to as compensatory damages.
So the amount you award in compensatory damages should be the amount that you agree collectively are sufficient to make the plaintiff whole.
And again, plaintiffs will get compensatory damages in this case, reduced by
Laura Grossman's fault, even if you answer no to those first two questions on the verdict form.
So you've got to decide how much money you should award to make the plaintiffs whole.
And that's a tough task. Money doesn't truly replace a person. It's our legal system's way.
And this is perhaps the most difficult area in which to separate your emotion from reason. Your challenge, as His Honor has told you, and as Mr. Schlesinger said, is to be just and fair to both sides.
So what is reasonable and fair and just here?
Mr. Schlesinger has a very different view than I do, and my client has. He's asking for an extraordinary amount of money, $37 and a half million, I think it was.
To anyone, that would be extraordinary.
It would be to the Grossmans, and it certainly would be to R.J. Reynolds.
Based on the evidence, let me suggest different numbers that we feel would be reasonable, just, and fair.
Laura Grossman -- excuse me, Jessica Grossman clearly misses her mom even though s has never sought professional counseling for it, but she's touched. I would suggest that half a million dollars would be a just and reasonable amount.
Let's talk about Jan Grossman. Five months after Laura Grossman died, he met Shelly, who he started dating a few months later, and who he married 18 months after that.
Now, apparently Mr. Grossman wants you to believe that his marriage to Shelly was not a sign that he had started to move on after -not long after Laura Grossman died.
And so he testified here essentially that he had no choice but to marry Shelly because Steven called her Mom or because he couldn't find a housekeeper.
But I suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the marriage has lasted 15 years. Mr. Grossman describes it as happy, and Shelly says that she loves Jan.
So I think for Mr. Grossman, a quarter of a million dollars, $250,000, is something that is fair and reasonable.
And then we come to Steven.
You know, Steven was very young. He has no memory of his mother when she was alive. And he called Shelly Mom from the get-go, and he was raised by her, and for all intents and purposes, she was his mother.
And so I know it's hard to lose your mom, even though you may not have known her, but I think a lesser amount for Steven is appropriate. I would say $200,000. That's $950,000, almost a million dollars. That's a lot of money.
All right. Finally, let's turn to plaintiff's request for punitive damages.
Punitive damages serve two purposes, deterrenc and punishment.
And there are a number of issues I want to highlight.
First, you don't get to punitive damages unless you answer yes to one of the first two questions on the verdict form.
In other words, punitive damages can only be considered if you determine that Laura Grossman relied on statements by R.J. Reynolds or others that concealed information about the
health risks or addictiveness of smoking, and that but for those statements, Laura Grossman would not have gotten lung cancer and died.
For all the reasons we discussed earlier,
I think the evidence requires that you answer those questions no. And if you do, you don't get to punitive damages.
I'm not going to repeat all of that. But I did want to remind you about Dr. Proctor's admissions.
He had no evidence that anything R.J. Reynolds said about the health risks or addictiveness of smoking had any effect on Laura.
He had no evidence that the information concealed in the internal documents about addictiveness or health risks of smoking had any effect on Laura Grossman. Nothing.
And I don't think Mr. Grossman provided the missing link.
In fact, he didn't really talk to Laura about it, and he said it was her personal choice. That's why.
Second, plaintiff has got to show that the concealment, if any, that caused Laura
Grossman's addiction and death from lung cancer amounted to this reckless disregard, conscious indifference, intentional violation.
Other acts of concealment, acts that you, the ladies and gentlemen of the jury, determine did not cause Laura Grossman to smoke and get lung cancer may not be considered in deciding whether to award punitive damages, as His Hono has instructed you.
Third, you cannot base a punitive damages award on conduct inside or outside this courtroom that is incident to the defense of litigation.
That's what His Honor has told you.
You know, when people sue people in this country, you have a right to mount a defense.
Fourth, plaintiff's burden of proof here is much higher than it is for the other issues in this case. It is not the greater weight of the evidence, it is clear and convincing.
Clear and convincing evidence.
And, fifth, you may consider mitigating circumstances. And there are two of them I want to draw to your attention.
You are entitled to conclude that
misconduct that occurred in the distant past doesn't need to be punished any longer.
And those documents from decades ago, as far back as the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, are in the distant past.
You should consider the extent to which R.J. Reynolds' conduct has changed from any conduct on which you might base your determination that punitive damages are warranted.
Have plaintiffs met that burden? I submit no.
Let's talk about deterrence. That's one of the purposes.
The question here is whether you believe that there is a need for deterrence in the future.
Now, plaintiff presented evidence that they told you constituted concealment. The argument was based on those old documents th were not made public, and there's not a single internal document from R.J. Reynolds that is in evidence in this case after 1990, 23 years ago. Not one.
And the concealing documents, that can't
happen again, Dr. Figlar told you, it hasn't happened since 1988, because the company documents produced in litigation are made publicly available even today. It continues.
Millions of them.
There is also no need to deter R.J. Reynolds from making public statements about disease causation or addiction.
R.J. Reynolds, Dr. Figlar told you, acknowledges that smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases and can be addictive.
R.J. Reynolds tells smokers to make their decisions based on what the Surgeon General and other public health authorities say.
And the website has links to the Surgeon General and other public health authorities' websites for that purpose.
And since 2009, the Food and Drug Administration has had regulatory authority over virtually every aspect of my client's business.
You also know that the Tobacco Institute and CTR are gone. They haven't existed since 1998.
The people that authored the internal
documents that you heard about -- Claude Teague, Frank Colby, Murray Senkus, Allen Rodgman, Edward Horrigan -- they're all gone too.
Since the merger with Brown & Williamson in 2004, Reynolds is a new company.
We brought Dr. Jim Figlar here to tell you about it. The new R&D department, the product initiatives, the Premier story, the Eclipse story, about Vuse, the electronic cigarette, and about snus and about Niconovum and the nicotine replacement products.
And what is the guiding policy, philosophy of the research and development department now, harm reduction.
And it basically amounts to don't make it worse, make it better if you can, and encourage the use of lower-risk products.
You heard about Premier. Dramatic reductions in harmful components, benzo(a)pyrene almost gone, heated rather than burned tobacco, a virtually no-tar cigarette.
It was all about health and safety. Even though it wasn't exactly welcomed by the Surgeon General and the public health
community, and it was rejected by consumers because it was so different from the tobacco-burning cigarettes, Reynolds didn't give up. And in 1996, it developed Eclipse.
Again, dramatic reductions in harmful smoke constituents, animal testing that shows dramatically fewer tumors and skin painting tests.
It was all about health and safety. It became available. The company continues to work on it to try to improve it. It's still in the market, including here in Florida, in a limited way.
The company loses money on every pack i sells, so it's not about profits. There's a very small market share. Hardly anybody is buying it, so it's not about market share.
But Reynolds believes in its potential.
It's all about health and safety.
You heard about Vuse, a new electronic cigarette in test markets now. Doesn't have any tobacco in it at all, although the FDA does consider it a tobacco product. It has no tar.
It's just nicotine and an aerosol with some of the flavorants. And it's about health and
safety too.
You heard about snus. Reynolds advises smokers who are concerned about their health to quit. But for those who don't, it has made available snus. And here is one of the little packets of tobacco that's inside of it.
And it's a smokeless tobacco, and you heard about the epidemiology that shows that it has a much lower risk of disease, including from oral cancer. And you heard about the studies from Sweden.
And this is an approach that R.J. Reynolds is committed to.
You heard that from Dr. Figlar, migrating smokers to smoke-free products where they can achieve significant risk reductions.
And Reynolds is engaged in an ongoing dialogue with the public health community and with the FDA about this topic.
Dr. Figlar also told you about the ownership in Niconovum, that's the Swedish company that makes nicotine replacement products. Nicotine replacement therapies.
Again, R.J. Reynolds tells smokers concerned about their health to quit. And now
it has nicotine replacement products that can help them quit.
It's another step in the company's commitment in harm reduction. The FDA has already approved the Niconovum nicotine gum.
More products have been developed and are being sold in Europe, including a nicotine patch and a nicotine inhaler.
Products for smokers in the U.S. who desire nicotine replacement therapies to help them quit.
And I think you can see that the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is committed to producing cigarettes under its harm reduction strategy, encouraging those who choose not to quit to migrate to reduced-risk products like snus. And to those who want to quit, it offers nicotine replacement therapies, such as the gum to assist them.
Plaintiffs aren't satisfied though. They crossed Dr. Figlar suggesting that R.J. Reynolds should take all the nicotine out of all its cigarettes.
Something that Congress has prohibited the FDA from doing, something that has failed
in the market every time it was tried.
Something that would cause most smokers of Reynolds' cigarettes to switch to another cigarette manufactured by somebody else, and something that would essentially put my client out of business.
Plaintiffs tried to suggest that the nicotine replacement therapies and electronic cigarettes that Reynolds makes and is selling don't count because they are being sold by a sister company, not by the tobacco company itself, even though the tobacco company scientists helped develop the electronic cigarette.
Plaintiffs tried to suggest that not enough money is being spent to advertise snus. But if it were heavily advertised, they would turn around and say you're trying to make snus look normal and appeal to kids.
Plaintiffs tried to suggest that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company should go out a limb and declare that its innovative products, such as Eclipse or the Vuse cigarette are safer, even before the FDA finalizes the ground rules for doing that and without the
FDA's advance approval.
And if the company were to do that and get slapped down later, they would claim that the ads were fraudulent and misleading.
They are so desperate that they tried to make an issue of menthol.
You heard from Dr. Figlar that menthol has been used in cigarettes for 80 years, or about 80 years.
You heard that the FDA issued a preliminary report four days ago. Tried to make a big deal of that, because Dr. Figlar hadn't read it yet.
But it isn't a big deal. The FDA, as you have learned, has made no final conclusions. And in any event, Laura Grossman didn't smoke cigarette with menthol in it until she was in her 30s as her regular brand.
Okay. Let's talk about punishment. The starting point, again, is you cannot punish R.J. Reynolds merely for selling cigarettes or making profits. Cigarettes are a lawful product. Lawful to manufacture, lawful to advertise, lawful to sell.
I submit you should not award punitive
damages based on the evidence that you have heard.
Remember, the compensatory damages fully compensate the Grossman family for their injuries. You will have made them whole with those, with the compensatory damages.
Punitive damages are different. They have nothing to do with compensating plaintiffs for their losses.
Punitive damages are an award of cash over and above the amount that you think is necessary to fully compensate the plaintiffs for their loss.
And the thing to keep in mind is that you cannot award punitive damages to the American Cancer Society, to the American -MR. SCHLESINGER: Objection, Your Honor. That's outside -- it's a pretrial rule in this case.
MR. BIERSTEKER: I don't think so, Judge.
THE COURT: Why don't you come sidebar.
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
THE COURT: Mr. Schlesinger, I don't know what the objection is.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He's not allowed to talk about what they're going to do with the money. There is a pretrial order on it.
MR. BIERSTEKER: I'm not talking about -MR. SCHLESINGER: There's a pretrial order -THE COURT: I agree with that.
MR. SCHLESINGER: About the money goin other places. He can't make that argument. There is a motion -- there is a pretrial order on it.
MR. BIERSTEKER: May I be heard?
I'm not arguing that. The Grossmans should be -- I'm arguing that the jury itself cannot award punitive damages to the American Cancer Society or the American Lung Association.
I'm not saying anything about what the Grossmans are going to do with the money.
THE COURT: Sustained.
How much more do you have?
MR. BIERSTEKER: I'm almost done.
THE COURT: Mr. Schlesinger, are you ready to go?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Sure.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
MR. BIERSTEKER: Another reason why I don't think punitive damages are appropriate.
In this case, you are aware that Laura Grossman started smoking in the 1970s, nearly a decade after the first warning appeared -- I'm sorry, is that five minutes?
THE COURT: No. I was asking counsel to keep it down.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Oh, I thought you were trying to tell me something, Judge. Sorry.
-- nearly a decade after the first warnings appeared on the cigarette packs in 1966.
As you heard from Professor Dickie, by that time the vast majority of Americans believed that smoking was harmful to health.
In fact, about that same time period,
1970, three years before Laura Grossman startec to smoke, 93 to 94 percent of teenagers, people Laura Grossman's age at the time, agreed that smoking was harmful to health.
There could be no doubt she was aware of the risks. Her sister said she knew smoking
caused lung cancer. She had an attitude we are young, we are healthy, lung cancer just won't happen to us.
As you know, this is an Engle case.
Laura Grossman was one of the many smokers in Florida who were part of a class action that led to the findings that Judge Murphy has read to you.
And that means that many other Floridians can come into court and seek damages, just like the Grossman family is here, and they can seek both compensatory and punitive damages.
As Dr. Figlar told you, there are many more lawsuits pending in the state, and I ask that you consider that too when you deliberate.
When you do, I submit that you should say no, this is not a case for punitive damages.
Okay. This is my last chance to talk to you. Plaintiff, through Mr. Schlesinger, I expect, will get the final word. And as he commented even in his opening round, he though he might have been yelling a little bit at you,
I expect that the fire and brimstone is going to come next.
And I don't get a chance to stand back up
and say anything. So I would ask as you listen to his rebuttal closing that you think about how I might have responded if I had the -responded to what he says if I had been given the opportunity.
Let me say this, too. We tried to make this trial efficient, to respect and to not waste your time. And on behalf of everybody, including R.J. Reynolds, I want to again thank you for your service, your attention and your patience. It is something that we genuinely appreciate. You have our respect.
Thank you very much.
