MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court, counsel; good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay. So, the question to answer, that begins this case, is the last question on the verdict form; it's the first one I want to talk about briefly.
And that is Question Number 9: State whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company under th circumstances of this case.
And I submit that they are, and I'm going to try during this discussion with you to stitch together some of the thoughts as to why.
But I want you to keep in mind that we are talking about the findings you've got and
read -- and we'll refer to them -- that over the years, over the course of many decades, there was an intentional act of conspiracy, an intentional act of fraud by the combined tobacco companies to embark upon a campaig that, rather than cure cancer, they would cause it.
And I say, in our society, good, decent people should work to cure, not cause.
And the way in which they caused cancer was by hooking children, and hooking children -The better phraseology, the basic tenet is, we should protect, not addict; we should guide our children, not mislead them.
And, so, for an enterprise of death, which is what this industry is, to create a business model intentionally, knowledgeably, that trades the life of folks for money is -it's just -- it does not meet with the bounds of human decency.
And there's an Elton John song, "Mona Lisas and Mad Hatters" -- I thought about it while I was trying to stop thinking about this case a little bit over the weekend, but it came
to my mind -- one of the lines in that song is,
"I thought I knew, but now I know."
So it starts off, "I thought I knew, but now I know that rose trees never grow in New York City." It's a great song. And it's -When you all came in here and we -- you were a venire, a group of 150 people, and we asked some general questions, "what do you think you know," and you raised your hands and gave us some preconceived ideas, some of whom were so strong that folks said, I reject even wanting to learn about this case, for the most part, that was not you. So we filtered out a group of folks.
What do they say? They say that many are called, but few are chosen. You have been chosen.
And so you may have thought you knew. I thought I knew, but now I know. And, in this trial, we have given you a tidbit, an overview, not a year-long Engle trial in 1999, where thousands and thousands of documents were revealed, but enough so that the findings that are binding on you are findings that we hope you can now embrace and say, these are matters
which we believe to the point it's as if we found them ourselves.
How did we get to the place that we're at now? Well, remember I told you at the beginning, it's like the Iwo Jima Memorial.
What was he talking about at that time? Well, I'll tell you what I was talking about.
It just occurred to me that this US Marine Memorial in Washington, D.C., which is in bronze, captured a moment in time.
It was a very famous battle correspondent photographer, and he captured the moment in time where, after an enormous struggle in an American battle for freedom, World War II -Which, by the way, has -- didn't kill as many people as tobacco has killed.
And when I heard Dr. Proctor say in court, in front of you all, a truth from a man eminently qualified to do so, selected to be a senior scientific reviewer on the 2014 Surgeon General's report -Because everything he knows about the secrets of tobacco, that were revealed in 2000, which, to this day, we still have to digest because there's 33 million of them, when he
said -How many people have died needlessly, preventably? And he said 20 million just since the conspiracy started in the '50s, just Americans.
And how many are slated to die?
And you'll see it in the books in evidence, because in the Surgeon General report 2000 -- excuse me, 2012, how many are slated tc die in the 21st Century worldwide? It's a billion.
And then the enormity of that comes in front of us. It makes this something that's of no small moment. It's important. I thought I knew, but now I know.
Now you know. Now you have seen, not all of it, some of it. Maybe enough of it that after this case is over, you'll have an interest to learn more, to read more.
These books are free. You go to the government, they send them to you. This book is free. If you write to the government, they send it to you. You don't even have to pay for the postage.
So it's out there for folks who want to
see it, because you thought you knew, but now you know. That's what I submit. I submit now you know.
The image, to me, of Iwo Jima, the importance of that statement in a courtroom, it's -This case is bigger than just the Grossmans. That's why we talk about punitive damages. Punitive damages is to punish some for a long period of intentional wrongdoing, a reckless disregard, a conscious indifference to the rights of others. That's what the tobacco industry showed.
This is an episode in our history that is -- it is reprehensible. Today is a day of reckoning.
What is reckoning? Reckoning is a calling for an accounting for past misdeeds. That's what we say.
And so it takes on a feeling of significance that transcends just us in this courtroom in Broward County. And you all are the ones that get to make that decision. You all are the jury. Today you are empowered, through the Court's rulings and orders, in a
way that might be the most power you ever hold in your entire life.
And, so, when I saw the Iwo Jima Memorial, it said to me that we got this far from the Engle findings. Dr. Howard Engle, a pediatrician, a member of a class action in the '90s, year-long trial, tons of information, where they denied everything.
They denied it was addictive, they denied
it -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor. MR. SCHLESINGER: -- caused lung cancer -MR. BIERSTEKER: Defense of litigation.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And at every step along the way, every single point -Because they are a powerful industry, overwhelmingly so, and such that they can get a lot done, they can influence a lot and in a lot of ways; but, in this courtroom, in front of you, a jury, when we finally get in front of one, you all get the chance to say, I'm going to do what's right, I am going to follow that -- that direction that the Court gives me.
So, Iwo Jima, they battled against overwhelming odds, carnage, a terrible battle, a terrible fight, a terrible struggle, so much so that it's an iconic American image to reflect and memorialize the effort folks went to to fight for freedom.
But there was a little something in the picture that occurred to me that was important, is that the flag isn't quite raised. It's not all the way up yet. It's almost up, and there is nothing that can stop it if you see the case our way.
If you see this case our way, you will finish bending it to the vertical position, and planting it finally, because we have brought it this far.
We've got it past the -- the resistance, we've got it past the original findings, we've got it past the point of determining if Laura Grossman was addicted to cigarettes, that thei negligence, their defective product, was the legal cause of her death from cigarettes, the addiction caused the death. But for her addiction, she would not have died.
And so what we're asking you today is
consider finishing it, standing the flag up straight, and saying, they need to be punished, they need a day of reckoning. We recognize this conduct as reprehensible.
You hear an instruction which describes a corporation, for purposes of fairness, as being entitled to the rights of people. And I'll reflect on something I said in opening statement, which is similar to that, which is, that's fine. If you want to be judged and accorded the rights of people, then you are expected to show the obligations, the responsibilities, you have to -If you want to be treated like a person, you should act like a person.
I don't know if I mentioned Robert Fulghum, "Everything I Ever Needed to Know, I Learned in Kindergarten," in the opening; but the idea is -He's just got the ten rules, you know?
Tell the truth, don't hurt people. If you hurt people, say you're sorry.
You didn't hear the word "we've changed" in this courtroom. There's a reason why you didn't hear that word. Because they haven't
changed, number one; and to change is to acknowledge past wrongdoing. And you've not heard that, not to this day.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor. MR. SCHLESINGER: So if a lesson -THE COURT: Excuse me.
MR. BIERSTEKER: He's basically -"You've not heard them admit wrongdoing." THE COURT: Thank you. Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The instruction on punitive damages that His Honor read talks about clear and convincing evidence and how it should be compelling and persuasive.
Even more so than the greater weight of the evidence, it should be precise, explicit, lacking confusion, and it should be able to produce a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue.
And that's one of the things you want to think about if you want to award -- award? -if you want to punish, if you want to find -If you want to find that R.J. Reynolds and the tobacco companies with which it conspired, and the organizations, the front groups, the shields, the Center for Tobacco
Research, the Tobacco Institute, the Tobacco Institute Research Council, all of the entities, the law firms that banded together, rather than cure cancer, to cause cancer, rather than to guide children along, but to mislead them and put them on a path that leads them astray.
They got you by the fine print. There's a warning on a pack of cigarettes.
Can I get a pack of Camel cigarettes?
There's a warning on a pack of cigarettes.
If a child -- if a -If a child of tender years, an adolescent, a teenager, a 12-year-old, a 13-year-old, a 14-year-old, whatever it is -one that's in the wrapper -- is on a -- walking up on a high-diving board and there's a sign that says "the pool is empty," and the little kid gets up on the board and continues to walk towards the end of the board, and someone see him, an adult, a person with knowledge, are they going to say, hey, go right ahead, good idea, push them right along?
Is that what human people do? Is that
what humans do? Is that what decent folks do?
Or do they do everything they can to stop them, to get in front of them, to run up the ladder and grab them, to scream, "don't jump," to alert everybody in the area to protect a child? Isn't that what you're supposed to do?
So creating a business, a business model, that describes children as replacement smokers for their parents who are leaving the market, it just -- it's -- it doesn't meet with the bounds of human decency, and it should not be accepted by you.
And you have an opportunity in this case, in this trial, if you see it our way, to reject it and to say, I'm sorry, this is -- these behaviors are in the nature of atrocities.
We talk about millions of people dying. That's just not a number. We took Laura Grossman, and she got into this courtroom. Think of the millions of people that never did, that never got a day of justice, that never had a chance to tell their story. She's one of millions, but every one of those millions is a real person -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- with a real family. And to the extent that His Honor instructs you, in punishment damages, that you may consider the harm to others as to whether or not a corporation, this corporation, treated as a person -- treat them as a person -- this person, who has done so much -- so few have done so much harm to so many -- are they folks that bear some meaningful, somber evaluation by yourself, saying, no, we just can't accept this, we can't accept it and we refute it, we reject it in the strongest possible terms.
Now, you should -- you should believe that that -You should recognize that clearly. And when I say "clearly" -They had a campaign of doubt and confusion. They -- they did it beautifully.
They have witnesses they brought in, and the witnesses tried to tell you things that made the tobacco company disappear and made advertising disappear, as if that could have nothing to do with what the world is, when we know everyone was immersed in advertising; the
advertising, undoubtedly, had an influence. There's no way to avoid the influence of the advertising.
These are the things that come to mind when you listen to the suggestions -- the attempts to say, it's all your fault. You know, the idea that -- the idea that, hey, you trusted us, you know? There was the -You missed the fine print, the fine print on the pack of Camels wrapped in cellophane -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, preemption. THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- with the black -with the black lettering and the gray, that when it reflects, you can't even see it, because every single thing they do is planned and considered and analyzed in a layer of levels -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, preemption. MR. SCHLESINGER: -- you can't even begin to believe.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There is integration.
It is an integrated approach to continuing to sell tobacco products.
They're lawful? Okay, they're legal.
Congress doesn't have the power to overcome it.
They didn't give you any testimony the FDA has ever exacted any restrictions. And Dr. Proctor told you. Have they got a pre -- a reprieve on lowering nicotine? Yep. No lowering nicotine.
The FDA Family Protection Act for Tobacco, signed in 2009 by Obama, they didn't put in any evidence that there's ever been a restriction because there hasn't been.
2009,	four years later, no action's been taken. And why? Dr. Proctor said they've been steamrolled by it.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And what did we talk about -THE COURT: Excuse me. Come sidebar, please.
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
THE COURT: When there's an objection, I just don't want you to keep talking.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I apologize.
THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. BIERSTEKER: There's no evidence the FDA was somehow steamrolled.
The evidence has been the FDA is in the process of adopting the regulations.
THE COURT: Thank you.
All right. The objection's sustained.
(The sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Proctor, Page 2115, sworn evidence in testimony:
Has the industry been able to achieve a reprieve of a certain number of years from selling addictive-free cigarettes?
Answer: Yes.
The FDA draft guidance we talked about with Dr. Figlar yesterday, talking about what do you need to do to make cigarettes safer -Which, by the way, they didn't give you any evidence that there has been any modified harm products, that -- that cigarettes are any safer. And the companies are encouraged to take advantage -The guidance for industry, the FDA -- the companies are encouraged to take advantage of these provisions by making bold, innovative
product changes that substantially reduce, or even eliminate altogether, either the toxicity or the addictiveness of tobacco products or both.
And there was a question asked and answered by the industry spokesperson. Got scientists working on addiction? No.
Why? Addiction is their business.
Why? You can't sell cigarettes without addiction.
Why? Because nobody's ever become a tobacco smoker without an addictive product.
Do you want to give people a real choice? Give them addictive-free cigarettes.
The taste? Nobody likes the taste of their first cigarette. It makes them sick, they choke. Dr. Teague talked about that.
You have to overcome the learner, you have to help the learner along, get him to where he's able to tolerate the cigarette, because first you convinced him to use the cigarette for wholly "unrelated to nicotine" purposes.
The beginner, the child, doesn't know why we're using cigarettes. It's to emulate a
revered figure, to be cool, to belong to the crowd, to be an adult. The warning labels are a help, because the kids like to rebel. And then -And can we put up that document?
Dr. Teague, the one -- the chilling -And then he will discover the real satisfactions therein. Get them going, get them started, and hope that he discovers the real satisfactions that lay therein.
Now that, I told you in opening statement, is chilling. I didn't show it to you because we had to put it in evidence. Now it's in evidence. That is cold-blooded. Realistically -No, that's -I'll read it.
Realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. In my opinion, this will require new brands tailored to the youth market.
In any event, youth marketing is the basis of their business. And the questions on the verdict form --
The very last question is, are punitive damages entitled. And I want you to get there.
I want you, if you see it our way, to check that box; and I want you then to let us finish tomorrow.
We have no additional evidence to put on. Sometimes they put in the net worth of the company. That's why it's not relevant now.
There are limitations to what you can award in punitive damages, when you get there. It's not some wild free-for-all, and it's governed by the good graces and good thoughts of the six of you good people.
And what I want you to do, if we get you through this, I want to show you how to get to that question.
Do I have my -- my one quote, the "chiller" quote from Dr. Teague?
You can't get that? If you get it, you'll let me know.
In the meantime, I want to show you how to get to what I think is the overarching theme, the main reason we're here, because we're almost there. We've gotten so far, we've come so close. You all are the ones that are
able to finish this.
So let's go to -- let's go to this (indicating). It's in the outline.
Laura Grossman started smoking at age 15, in 1972 or 1973 -- Slide Number 36 -- because in the opening statement, Mr. Biersteker -And I may be mispronouncing his name. I can't remember if he said "beer" and "steak" or "beer" and "stack," and I'm not doing that on purpose.
But defense counsel, fine -- fine counsel for RJR talked about it. It's very confusing, and we don't know when Laura Grossman started smoking.
And he cited a whole bunch of different references, none of which became a central point in this litigation; but the bottom line point was -- is -I mean, he even had one where it said she smoked starting in 1980, and some things from Margaret Lynn about she didn't smoke that much.
This was a pack-and-a-half-day smoker since the day she was 15 years old. That ends up being hundreds of thousands of cigarettes and millions of nicotine hits to the brain,
because there's ten puffs in a cigarette.
And you heard from Dr. Benowitz about how smokers smoke on a clock, and you're only smoking for nicotine, nothing else. That's all it is.
It isn't taste; it isn't flavor; it isn't pleasure; it isn't satisfaction; it isn't the imagery of healthful, happy people, living a wonderful life.
It is drug addiction, a powerful form of drug addiction; more powerful than heroin and cocaine.
Why? Because it's harder to quit. And there's more relapsing of it.
So when you enter -When you embark upon this business, and from the '50s and '60s, you know what the business is, but you don't share that with the public, and you deny and you belittle the public health authorities that are trying to get the word out, and you create and successfully cause confusion, and people keep smoking, and lung cancer deaths keep going up, that's a set of railroad tracks. And they run parallel. And you can't have a train run on
only one track. And that parallel track, the connection is addiction.
And Laura was on that path. She was 15 years old. And what is the most reliable -and I tried to show this to you before -what's the most reliable piece of data that tells you when she started smoking?
It's what she said; not what some doctor said how many years backwards from '94. No math involved.
Ask the poor lady who is ill, facing the ultimate end, and she said that -- she told, in her Coral Springs laser radiation therapy center, January 9th, 1995, into her cancer treatment, her social history.
She was born in New York, lived in Florida the last four years. She used to smoke one-and-a-half packs of cigarettes a day since age 15.
So we look at evidence, what's more likely than not, what's most convincing, what's probable, and I think the easy answer there is she started smoking at 15. That's a tender age.
A 15-year-old does not have -- and
Dr. Teague said it himself -- any concept of what the future will hold. His words: At 15, the teenager is immortal. Is immortal. No concept of what the consequences will be. And because -And it's in the Surgeon General 2012 -And you've got that book; it's in evidence. The actual copy's here in evidence. You can go through it and you can see it. It talks about how easy it is to get teens addicted.
Their brains are the most susceptible, and the nicotine addiction begins quickly. It starts quickly. It starts to lock on quickly.
It changes the brain. And the pediatric brain is the most susceptible. Without children, there is a 90 percent reduction in the tobacco business.
Now, a responsible company that wants to do right by its -- by its customers, and wants to let them know the truth and really give them a "frank statement" and really say, yeah, we know what causes cancer, yeah, it's really bad, doesn't engage in a cover-up, doesn't engage in spy craft to spy on the Surgeon General, to
interfere with the true -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection -MR. SCHLESINGER: -- scientific -MR. BIERSTEKER: -- Your Honor, "spyini on the Surgeon General."
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They tell the truth.
If -- if the companies were simply acknowledging that children are the overwhelming basis of the business, if they were acknowledging that addiction is the overwhelming thing we sell, what we sell is addiction, the product is nicotine, if -- and nicotine is this powerful drug, then you take it away from the kids.
And you take it away from kids in a meaningful, sustainable way. No kid under 21 can ever get that cigarette. No kid under 21 ever gets that cigarette. It's behind the counter in the pharmacy, or something, and, really, adults are the only ones who ever get it. Adults at 21 -They don't even get the first puff, they
don't get the first drag, they don't get that first cigarette, because that's what leads to addiction.
Could Laura Grossman, at 15 years of age, even if she knew -Even a child in the '70s probably heard something about cigarettes having harmfulness to your health. The original statements were cautions: May be hazardous to your health.
In the early '70s, when Laura was 15 years old, the caution was changed to:
Cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health.
The Surgeon General says cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health. The tobacco companies said no. The tobacco companies belittled the public health authority.
And, so, at the time she began to smoke, they didn't have anything out there warning about addiction. They didn't have anything out there saying, hey -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, preemption, Judge.
THE COURT: Thank you. The objection's noted. It's overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They didn't have anything out there to advise a child that this behavior, this trying of the first cigarette, is going to lead you down a path that you have no idea where it's going to take you, how long it's going to take you, and what it's going to hook you into being. That was their goal.
Take kids' -- take cigarettes away, 21-year-olds get cigarettes, they get one in ten or less of a business.
So, instead of 16 billion cigarettes, they sell a billion six cigarettes. Instead of making billions of dollars, as Dr. Proctor said, they only make hundreds of millions of dollars.
It's not still a business? It's still a business. It's really a business for adults, but there are things they could have done as a responsible company, to continue to be a company, that they didn't do.
So, to me, this is -- I call this the "chiller" document, because every time I look at it, I -This is when -- when -And it's -- it's a perfect storm of
events. And it's a perfect storm of events, that even 20 years later, or 18 years later since Laura Grossman died -- I mean, it's been 20 -It's been 18 years, and we're here, and you felt the fresh, raw pain of these folks in this courtroom, that such pain and suffering can endure. And you could see it. The -the -But when she's 12 -When she's a young girl, '72 -- 1972,
1973,	fixing to smoke that first cigarette, in a household where the parents are addicted smokers, three packs a day, the kids can smoke at 16, because that's what the parents allow; and, of course, it makes sense that she started smoking a little ahead of that because her older sister was smoking.
So, sometime in that year, between November of '72 and November of '73, during he 15th year, she's smoking. And what's going on?
Back at RJR, Claude Teague, the mad scientist, is stirring a caldron's brew like a witch, like Hansel and Gretel, to catch kids like her. That's what's going on.
And when he says, we have to figure out a way to market to them -- right? -- with advertising, we have to get them to think it's cool, which is just such a -It's such an inadequate way to term what they did, because they psychoanalyzed the smokers. They cut up every demographic, every race, creed, color, religion and age -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor, not in evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- and they figured out -THE COURT: Excuse me, there's an objection pending. Don't keep talking when there's an objection pending.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Sorry, Judge.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you ar to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And they targeted her. The Vantage ad, it looks like a target.
Well, they targeted Laura, and they hit her right in the lungs with that target. They targeted her.
But this statement here: We have deliberately played down the role of nicotine; hence, the non-smoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him, and no desire to try it. Instead, we must convince him, with wholly irrational reasons, that he should try smoking, in the hope that he will then -- he will, for himself, then discover the real satisfactions obtainable.
That is just chilling. And to do that, and to aim for Laura -And she fell in their track, and they spun that web, and they got her; and she is one of millions, which is why we take one person out.
Laura lived half a life. They want to say she should have quit. Okay, she should have quit. We're willing to accept our fair share of blame when we get to comparative fault, and we'll talk about that.
What fault are they willing to accept?
What amount of blame are they willing to accept?
And I submit to you that they will not accept any.
You'll hear him talk, and my prediction is they won't, because they can't, because this is an existential threat to them. This isn't this case; it's all those cases. You heard about them.
What is Dr. Figlar doing? He's running around the State of Florida, testifying in Engle progeny cases, the children of Engle.
And how do these folks describe themselves? They describe themselves, in their documents, in anthropomorphic terms. They call themselves people. They say, if we do this research that could lead to an acceptable antagonist of nicotine, that would be like digging our own graves, referring to their graves, their business' graves.
But they were willing to make the tradeoff, dig the graves of 450,000 Americans a year. That's okay, but not us.
This corporation wants to be treated as a person, act like a person. It has a survival instinct, right? It doesn't want to die.
They quote from one of the forwarding memorandum that's in evidence, that you can read, quotes from the -- the health scare, and
what are they going to do about the health scare, and how are we going to get Hill & Knowlton to come up with a way to help people with the nagging doubt, give them the psychological crutch, keep them smoking?
What did they say was going to happen to them now that, all of a sudden, all the advertising, the hypnotic advertising -- their words that they were using to spin to get people to smoke cigarettes -- now what do we d that this health scare came out?
Wynder and Graham studies, which they internally corroborate were a hundred percent true, they knew in the '50s it causes cancer; they wrote an article saying, hey, you know, it's addictive, and it's got a certain unattractive side effect, it causes -- it causes cancer, 1963.
That's one of the Brown & William's documents that -- Brown & Williamson, that Merrell Williams stuffed in his pants and ran out and stole -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- and it got into the hands --
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- of the public arena.
THE COURT: Excuse me. The objection's sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So the -- the attack to get the kids, recognizing that was what sustained their business, is a key part of what constitutes reprehensible conduct.
The young girl is learning whatever she learns, some exposure -- maybe there was, maybe there wasn't -- and then -- to knowledge about tobacco; but certainly nothing to really let someone know what you could be getting yourself into.
And when you're 15, you don't really have the capacity to understand that. So -But, in '72 and '73, at the same time, urgently, they were pursuing the crucial role of nicotine -- and that's Claude Teague -- and the new brands for the youth market. And this is a little girl that doesn't even have a driver's license yet.
TECHNICIAN: Mr. Schlesinger?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes. I already said that, okay? So, the --
We talked about PT3400. Even to this day, 3800 kids start smoking every single day.
A great many of them become long-time smokers, and a great many of those are going to die.
These are the death statistics we face.
They were studying kids and targeting kids and going after kids as young as 12 years old. The younger adults' importance as replacement smokers.
Remember, "adults" is just a code word.
We showed you the document. It's in evidence. Change the word "youth smokers" to "young adults" from now on; and we know full well that when they talk about young adults, they're talking about youth. We know -We've got the goods on them. They -their denials, their defenses to this day, they're tired, they're played. They're as out of date as the mullet that my client was wearing in one of those pictures, that it isn't addictive, or that, even if it's addictive, you can quit, when all of their internal documents say, no, you can't; when their internal documents say, as Shook Hardy reminds us, the law firm coordinating this, we can never defend
as free choice a case of a smoker being addicted if they -If this addiction comes out, if the truth of addiction comes out, how are we going to defend those cases? That was for defense.
And yet, here today, they're trying to tell you, oh, she's addicted, but she still could have quit.
Maybe she could have; maybe she could have tried harder. We accept that fact, and we want you to make those decisions, as humans, to what is her fair share of the blame, you know?
But the -- the fact is that they know how many of these folks don't quit or don't quit in time.
And Laura didn't get her chance. People quit in their 40s, people quit in their 50s.
They get more mature, they get more serious. She wasn't in -- at the age where the likelihood of her quitting, the maturity levels would get to the point where she could understand it. She just wasn't there.
We know that when people try to quit, five percent or less are successful of the
80 percent that want to try to quit every year.
We know from the Surgeon Generals' reports that the cigarettes they make today are more addictive than those that have ever been made. More addictive than those that have evei been made.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor; not in evidence, misstates the evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The way tobacco -This is the preface, in evidence, the book. Look at it yourself.
The way tobacco is grown --
2010.	The way tobacco is grown, mixed and processed today has made cigarettes more addictive than ever before.
Now, they make it into a totally normal consumer product, right? Totally normal consumer product.
What are we going to tell our children as to what is wrong with a pack of cigarettes?
It's a box -You got to take this stuff out, Jon.
It's a box of material, of consumer goods. Remember they talked about consumer goods? Like every other consumer good.
What's the difference between this and this and this? And what do you tell the kids? What -- what do you say? It's bad, it's wrong?
It doesn't look bad, it doesn't look wrong. It looks nice, it looks normal. It looks like everything else.
How do you say that these things are bad? What do you -- how do you keep the kids from smoking? How do you do it? It's a normal-looking consumer product.
One of these things is not like the other. One of these things just doesn't belong. This -Put up the Creamsicle.
Camel Crush, like little kids have a crush. The document -The Surgeon General document in evidence says it's for youthening the brain. They know there is no doubt, the NCI, the Surgeon General. There's no doubt about it.
And what does the NCI 13 say, that's in evidence, that you've got in evidence, that you
can look at?
And if you're only going to look at one page, look at Page 233. But the pages from like 227 on will tell you everything you need to know about the Vantage smoker, and how our client is the perfect example of the target Vantage smoker.
And we focused on Vantage, she was a Salem menthol smoker, too; but the fact is, is that they psychoanalyze the market, they study the market, they -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- find the women like Laura -THE COURT: What's the objection?
MR. BIERSTEKER: "Psychoanalyzing the market." There's no evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence in the case.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I will tell you this:
That you should rely on your collective recollection. You have notes, you'll have the evidence in there, but you'll also have this
evidence. You'll have this evidence here.
Write this down: Page 227. Because I will not intentionally mislead you on any of the evidence. If your collective recollections differ, then you use your collective recollections.
Right here: "Psychoanalyzing Merit and Vantage smokers."
See right there? See that word? I didn't make that up. That's in evidence.
"Psychoanalyzing Merit and Vantage smokers." That is what they are doing. That is the depth of what they do to prove their point, okay?
Now, what did we say? We said that 450,000 people a year die, and we said that's an important thing to think about.
But just saying the number isn't enough, because, like I said, there are families that grieve over those 450,000 people that have died.
So this is a moment in time, a place where things are going to come together to lei you finish what's been started and has taken years and years to accomplish.
And why did you see some of the evidence you saw?
Well, you saw some of the addiction evidence from our expert, Dr. Benowitz, even though she's already been found to addicted, so you -- found to be addicted, so you could see it and believe it yourself.
You saw the internal documents, the secret documents, that which they thought would never hide (sic) the light of day, which lays bare the nefarious intent behind the scenes that was going all along with their denials, in 1988, saying that calling nicotine addictive is an irresponsible scare tactic, belittling the public health authorities that are trying to let people know about the dangers of smoking.
That is no way -- that is no way for a caring, responsible corporation, or a decent human being to act.
And why? For money. They made a risk-benefit decision. They decided that the benefit of them getting money -They enjoy money. It gives them pleasure, it gives them satisfaction. They choose to get it. And they said, let's
balance.
Over half of the people that we sell this product to, who will become the smokers we want them to be, the long-time smokers who, because of their addiction, will smoke enough of these cigarettes, sucking in these poisonous dosages, to shoot that nicotine to their brain long enough that we'll make money off them, and they will die, and we will choose to do that because we enjoy money. Money gives us pleasure.
That's the choice. With con -- with -consciously, knowledgeably. There was no maybe we're doing it for some other reason. There's no societal benefit to a cigarette.
How do you tell a five-year-old that there's noth -- that this -- that there's something wrong with this?
I got a deck of cards in here. How do you tell a little kid -How do you tell the little kid that this is different than this or this? How do you do it?
So the normalization of tobacco, the fact that it's an irrational madness that hides in plain sight, that has become --
It's a cancer on our nation. The tobacco industry--
America is this industry's ashtray. They put -- they stub out 450,000 bodies a year.
That's what happens because of a decision -- a risk-benefit decision to trade lives for money.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor, to "trade lives."
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: So the very first question on the -- on the verdict form -The very first question on the verdict form is: State whether Laura Grossman reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company intentionally concealed or omitted a material fact or statement; and, if so, was the reliance a legal cause of death.
It's a mouthful. You'll read it, the instruction; and I submit -And it asks you before '82 and after '82.
And we know that her cigarettes and the -- the smoking she did was on both sides of that; and so both of those questions we suggest you answer "yes." We hope you'll answer "yes." I
think the evidence has shown it.
Because if you look at the FTC reports that are in evidence, both from '67 and '81, the Federal Trade Commission says: Advertising was immersive. It is impossible for anyone to avoid the advertising. Advertising has an indirect effect.
You don't go back in time and ask somebody, do you remember an ad, because that' not the way ads are supposed to work. You don't do that. That's not how it works. It influences at a subconscious level, it changes behavior. It -If you behave in accordance with the advertising -And Vantage advertised to her and people just like her, and her behavior was she began smoking Vantages.
We know there was great -- a great series of Vantage ads that confronted the issues of the day, and then went on to make Vantage Pleasures; but it was overwhelming, a quarter-trillion dollars in advertising in the last 50 years, that -They don't spend that money for nothing.
You know, they don't cast their bread crumb in the water if they don't get a return. They know the advertising works. It's immersive.
She responded to it, she smoked their cigarettes. We got so far as to find a picture of a pack of Vantage in the background of a picture of her. We know she smoked Vantage. There's testimony that she smoked Vantage.
We know they positioned Vantage as a health reassurance brand: If you have a concern, this is going to be better, this is a high-tech filter -- back in the '80s, you know, you say "high tech" -- it will take out the impurities and then you will be safer, you'll be healthier. We are reassuring you to keep you from quitting, to give you the psychological crutch to keep smoking.
They didn't want people quitting. When they said, if we make this antagonist or this drug that will block nicotine, we'll dig our own graves.
They went so far, one of the co-conspirators, that RJR went along with happily, Merrell Dow, comes out with a product a product of nicotine replacement gum in the
early years -Which started, by the way, as a pharmaceutical, and they even had a -- a health letter talking about the benefits of it. And you'll see the documents in there. They went crazy.
Philip Morris and the tobacco industry, one of the -- one of the co-conspirators, went completely wild, and said, we're not going to buy those millions of dollars worth of chemicals we've been buying to put in our cigarettes from Merrell Dow anymore; we're going to boycott them, we're going to strong-arm them, we're going to pressure them.
And who does that affect indirectly, that you may infer? It affects people like Laura Grossman, because it delays the introduction into the market, it delays the absorption into the market; but it also proves the intent of the tobacco companies. They didn't want people to quit. They still don't want people to quit.
They bank on addiction. They sell addiction. That's all they sell.
So Question 1 talks about, did you rely on the omission of information?
Now, remember, there's two things in the Engle findings -- two things in the Engle findings that -- are that there was fraud and there was a conspiracy. So that's -- that's a finding binding on you. There's already fraud and a conspiracy. And you go -You accept that, you work with it, and then you decide, okay, well, what difference does the fraud and the conspiracy make insofar as Laura Grossman?
And you have two critical points in evidence. One is the NCI monograph, which ha: overwhelming descriptions of they -- they use the Vantage, they use the filter fraud to mislead people. Pages 227 through 231, they used those Vantage ads to mislead people.
The classic Vantage smoker was a woman who was middle-class, liked arts and crafts -there's an ad in there about that, or there's something in one of the documents about that -and liked to be outdoors, and was concerned about her health, and that -The NCI monograph, 2001, Dr. Burns -I was going to bring Dr. Burns. I didn't have to bring him because we put in his book.
He's the one that was the Surgeon General scientist.
Well, the book, 2001 NCI Monograph that's in evidence, says they misled people, they -they falsely reassured them, they undermined cessation and prevention efforts. That's -that's Surgeon General '12 -No; Surgeon General '10, Page 20: The tobacco industry undermined prevention and cessation efforts with the filter fraud.
So, in the '50s, they started a conspiracy, and they said, we're going to deny it, we're going to create a doubt campaign.
They were able to buy ten years before the Surgeon General came out and said, it causes lung cancer in men; and then they were able to change everybody from unfiltered cigarettes to filtered cigarettes, with an implied health assurance -- because they couldn't actually say it's safer, because that would mean our other cigarettes are more dangerous -- an implied health assurance. Everybody bought it and everybody went to cigarettes that smoked (sic) filters.
They're every bit as dangerous, even more
dangerous. The deep inhalation causes a much nastier kind of cancer called adenocarcinoma.
So filter cancer made it worse.
So that first and second question -- real quick -- are that -Was the advertising, was the conspiracy a -- a cause. A cause. Not the only cause, it's a cause in contribution with everything else they did: Their negligence, the fact that they chose to make a defective product and sell it, the fact that -- that they are culpable in that regard, and the fact that Laura may, herself, not have tried enough to quit. But how -When she's 15, she's an innocent. I submit there should not be a percentage or a comparative part of fault against her in those teenage years, up through her pregnancy with her daughter, okay?
Because she was 15. What could she know' She had no way to predict the future.
They didn't say, hey, this first cigarette might get you hooked. She didn't know that. She couldn't have known it. She smoked in an environment, in a world, where
that's what people did. People smoked.
So the important part of the instruction that goes along with Question 1 and 2 -And this is how you get to punies. You got -You want to get to punies, you've got to answer "yes" to either Question 1 or Question 2, or else you can't get to punies.
If you want to get to punies, you've got to answer "yes" to Question 1 or Question 2; and you should answer "yes" to every part of it, because she didn't know.
Whatever she might have known vaguely, from what Dr. Schaller said, who knows? I mean, he gave an opinion about what she might have read.
And I say to you it's shifting justification. They want to tell you what she didn't see, but they want to use a different standard for what she must have seen.
She must have seen something in school, but they didn't go to the school records or the old teachers or get definitive evidence of it.
They gave some general statement that doesn't necessarily apply to her.
But then when you talk about what she must have seen, advertising, we know she must have seen advertising, but they want to say it doesn't matter.
So, Question 1 and Question 2 -- it's before '82, after '82 -- I would suggest you check those questions off "yes," because is she justified in relying, to her detriment, on the fraud they perpetrated, which the Engle findings says they intended people to rely on?
So the finding says they intended to rely. Her behavior, in accordance with that reliance, is she smoked the Vantages. She did what they wanted her to do. She was the perfect customer. She was their customer. And what's more -What's the icing on the cake? What's the cherry on top of the icing on the cake? I told you, tragically, cigarettes brought them together, and yet cigarettes tore them apart.
How did cigarettes bring them together?
A pretty young girl walked into his -- into his variety store one day, and bought a pack of cigarettes. And they got to know each other because, among other things, he sold
cigarettes.
Well, what happened when they got married and she went to work for the family business? What happened was, salesmen came in.
What kind of salesmen? Vendors.
What kind of vendors? RJR vendors, among others.
And what did they do? Here's our latest and greatest brand.
And who's the best way -- what's the -What does the salesman want to do? A salesman wants to believe in his product. A salesman that believes in his product can get that belief into his vendors.
So they're saying, here's the greatest new product we got, it's got the super-duper high-tech filter, it's so cool, it takes out the impurities, the filter doesn't look white, and you should use it, and here are some free samples. And she did.
So not do we not only have inferred reliance from the general world in which she lived and the way in which tobacco pivoted to protect the health scare by saying these -- by implying that filters would be safer, we also
have direct evidence that she took the cigarettes that the salespeople from RJR promoted, and said, hey, this is the great new stuff we're going to use.
So we have direct reliance, inferred reliance, and was it a cause.
And you'll hear this very confusing language about what constitutes legal cause, and it's hard to really, really explain.
You'll read it, you'll get through it.
The point is, legal cause doesn't have to be the only cause. It doesn't have to be that solely and exclusively there's no other way she ever would have smoked these cigarettes exce for the advertising and the statements by the representatives. It's in combination with everything else: The addictiveness of nicotine, the concerns about being healthy and not getting sick from cigarettes or trying a safer cigarette, the fact that she was not trying hard enough to quit, maybe, back in the days when there was no CHANTIX.
It wasn't like there was a cigarette cessation clinic on every single corner. Those things didn't exist at that time. So --
And, of course, their fault, as well. So if you check off "yes" to those questions, you'll be able to move on, and it will -- it will guide you towards some of the other decisions you have to make.
So now let's look at -- let's look at -Let's talk about the pain and suffering in this case. Let's talk about the damages for a few minutes in this case, because that's the next set of questions.
And I, in no way, mean to give this short shrift; but, you know, I would like to get up here and I would like to say something beautiful and true and American and real to you about this case.
I would like to rise to the ability to do that, and I can't, and I don't need to; and my clients have done me -- have done us a service, because what they showed you, what they did, their behavior in this courtroom, tells you everything you need to know about the degree and the intensity of this tragedy, that this is not just a run-of-the-mill, bad thing, this is not a rear-end collision, someone's got a sore neck. That isn't what this is.
This is a tragedy of monumental human proportions. You are people who can judge it. You saw it. It's excruciatingly difficult.
And it's somebody else's suffering, and you shouldn't have to endure it; but you saw it, you -- you were able to think about it, and the -- the pain poured out in this courtroom.
Jan -- the things that I think about -Slide 18 -- of Laura and when she got sick, and knowing she was terminal, knowing about the prognosis, and the fact that Shelley talked about Jan, saying he was a very somber man wh she finally met him, and, you know, he was sad and he was depressed, and she came into a family that was really hurt -I mean, I think Jan is -- was damaged by this. I told you, he's a broken person. I think he -- I think he is. He said he had nightmares about her and he still misses her.
He used the wipes meant for the baby to have to wipe his -- his wife when he was taking care of her in the final days.
I mean, you know, he said he enjoyed -I remember he said, we enjoyed eating chicken salad sandwiches together, and he said
she was pretty. And I -And those things -- those things, I thought, were touching, because they're simple human pleasures. And I think they were a nice family and I think they loved each other; but I think, for sure, you can see from the evidence, from the folks on the stand, that the outpouring of -- of anguish was pretty substantial. So -And, then, with regard to Jessica, what can I say about Jessica? She -- she was just -She goes, I'm coming to understand in my adult years why I'm a broken person. She visits her grave. She couldn't -- she couldn't lay with her mother for a few minutes while she was dying because of the pain of it. She can't understand -Isn't this something you don't expect from teenage girls or young girls: Why would you be yelling at your mother?
Well, all teenage girls yell at their mother. But why would you be yelling at your mother?
Because she didn't have a mother. And
the idea of having a mother, the idea of not having a mom to help with the wedding dresses, and things like that, and just that outpouring,
I think, shows the tragedy that befell Jessica.
And I don't think there's a lot more I need to say about it, because you saw it, you experienced it, and it's real. It's real.
The -You've seen some pictures of them.
The -Steven. Does a two-year-old sustain a trauma, at that early age, that stays with him for a lifetime? What more do you have to say?
When I heard from Steven -- and we heard in this courtroom -- and this is 17, 18 years later -- the idea that he asked Santa Claus for his mommy, the idea that he was running around out of the house, and showing up in other people's houses, looking for a nuclear family, looking for his mom, then he put a lost-and-found sign about his mom, bald, because remember how her hair -- he had pulled her hair and her hair came out in clumps?
And then, finally, when Shelley said she noticed that he -- you know, years later, that
he had a safe and -- there's an empty safe, and, in the empty safe, there was nothing in there but a picture of his mom taped up in the safe?
She said, what -- what about that? You know, and he goes, well, to keep her safe.
There's not -- there's no -There's no more I can say about it. You saw it. And nobody else, anywhere, except a jury -- not an appellate court -- nobody else, anywhere, can reflect on it the way you reflect on it, because the believability of witness instruction tells you to look at folks and judge their demeanor, and the frankness or lack of frankness, and are they telling it to you straight.
Did you see how they feel? Did they demonstrate the feeling? Is that pain and suffering? Is that still raw?
I told you folks were angelic: Shelley and Dr. Sutton.
Dr. Sutton, 1969, San Francisco was where she's getting her education. An angel of mercy. All she wants to do is provide some -some relief to someone who's going through
incredible pain. Goes around and does charitable teaching.
Jan taught ESE kids because he learned that from Shelley. Those twin pillars, Shelley and Dr. Sutton -Sutton said it was the most worst excruciating pain she's ever seen in a patient, ever, and she's seen thousands of them. She couldn't -It's unforgettable 18 years later. This is a woman that's treated hundreds or thousands of patients: I'll never forget her.
She went to the funeral. She documented in her records things: I want to be fixed, I want to live. There is -Those records are in evidence. You'll see them. There is no way to emphasize enough or to overstate the horror of this particular tragedy.
And for what? This is the price? This is the price? Serves you right, there was a -there was a warning on the label? You -- you screwed up, you trusted us. This is the price you pay for pleasure and satisfaction of a cigarette?
This is the end result of drug addiction, drug addiction that is hiding in plain sight in our country, that is bent on only one thing: Replacing dying smokers with kids. That's the dirty little secret of the tobacco industry. I thought I knew, but now I know.
So I say, with regard to the compensatory damages part, you can't bring back the clock, you can't give money based on -You can't bring her back. And some folks say, we can't bring her back, so why should we give her any money? That's not the law. The Judge wouldn't want you to make your decision that way.
The Judge wants you to make your decision this way: Based on pain, suffering, anguish.
And here's how it is. We say -- we, as the jury, we say to Steve and Jessica and Jan, we say, we measure the harm that you sustained and we tell you in our verdict, we place great value on your loss.
And if you do that, I suggest that in the years since this has happened, Jan should get seven-and-a-half million dollars for the past;
Jan should get two-and-a-half million dollars
for the future. That's $10 million for the loss of his wife.
I suggest that Jessica, because of the age she was -- she liked to dance with her mom, and she talked about Annie Lennox -Annie Lennox has a song about, "would I lie to you," "would I lie to you, sugar," and that's -And I'm asking you something. Would I lie to you? She -Her mom was lied to by tobacco companies; and that reliance was a contributing cause, one of many, of her death.
I think that a fair amount -- and this is ultimately for your consideration -- for Jessica, would be $10 million for what she's gone through. Because I just don't know that you can -- I just don't know that a person can hurt -There's a ghost inhabiting the house.
There is a spirit there. Shelley is an angel because she accepts that spirit. What subsequent wife wants to have to compete with the presence, an eminence, a presence?
And I'm saying, in your verdict, release
them, release her from what they've gone through. If she gets 10 million -- it's a lot of money -- $10 million for what she's been through in the last 18 years, and $5 million in future years, that's $15 million. She was older.
And I think a fair amount for Steven, an amount I would suggest -And, again, these are my suggestions.
I'm obligated to give them to you. You're -you're only obligated to use your collective conscious, your understanding as human beings A computer can't do this. As people, what do you want to do? What's fair?
Steve, I think, should get seven-and-a-half million dollars for what he's been through, and five million for the future.
So it would be a total of -- of amounts that you can add up there. I think it's $37,500,000. Seven-and-a-half and two-and-a-half; 10 million and five million; and, for Steve, seven-and-a-half million and five million.
And, you know, so -- and -Because I don't know exactly how to --
How do you mark it up? You know, what does it mean when a nine-year-old's last memor is seeing her mom being taken out in a body bag? I don't know.
What does it mean that Steven didn't get to know his mom that well, so he doesn't know as much of what he missed? But he seems to have been traumatized in a way that, as Shelley said, they -- they diagnosed him with this oppositional defiant disorder and ADHD, and it seems like the doctors feel that that was caused by this traumatic loss of a mom.
And so these are -- these are the human tragedies that you must take into consideration. Think about it. You'll decide what you do. You can give less, you can give more. It's up to you.
I don't ask for any more, and I don't suggest you give any more. If you decide to give less, I ask you to please give a fair amount.
And you can hear from defense counsel, if he has a recommendation, as to what would be reasonable range. This is an intangible. It's uniquely your job.
So then you get to the matter of comparative negligence. And I would suggest that as you think about comparative negligence in this case, you have to compare intentional wrongdoing with the idea of an innocent, a
15-year-old who is an innocent.
Did she develop knowledge somewhere alo the way? Well, I don't know.
Did Jessica develop knowledge?
There was one statement made in this courtroom that I didn't think was very -- very understanding of the realities of the situation. And that was a question asked of Jessica on cross, which was this -And I guess it tied in a little bit to what they were saying about Laura must have learned something in school, when -- that Dr. Schaller said.
Laura -Jessica, you learned about smoking being unhealthy in school, didn't you, when Laura (sic) was a kid -I mean, Jessica, you learned about smoking being unhealthy in school?
And however it comes out, the point of it
is this: Do you think that Jessica doesn't smoke because of something she learned in school? Do you think that Steven doesn't smoke because of something he didn't -- learned in school?
They took a lesson that nobody should have to take: A mother that lived half a life.
She never got old enough to get a true chance to really quit.
To assign her some obligation, hey, you're 45, 50, you should know enough by now; it's the late '80s, there's -- they've put out evidence that -- that you need to know to get going; it's the late '90s, you should get going.
Jessica never smoked because she saw her mom on the slab, okay?
That was the amazing trauma. But is that -- is that how we have to teach the kids?
Is that how a kid has to learn not to smoke, by seeing his parent go out dead?
I don't think so.
It had nothing to do with, and it isn't reasonable to suggest it has something to do with what she learned in school.
The larger lesson is there that this is not a price you should have to pay for "pleasure," "taste," "choice," and "satisfaction," every ridiculous word that they use for advertising, to spin a web, that's got nothing to do with anything but drug addiction from nicotine. So the -I'm sorry I'm yelling a little bit. Not yelling; but I'm sorry, I'm a little...
So, the -- I've told you about the damages in the case. There's some money and bills in there for lost -- funeral expenses and medical expenses. It adds up to less than half a million dollars; you can fill that out.
And then percentages of fault, here's what I would suggest: If you're going to break up the percentages of fault, you break them up, very simply, in what is the fair share. You make the fair share, okay?
And I say that, because she was young at the time she began to smoke, and, therefore, was not -She was tender years. Fifteen is a teenager, and you have to be able to have some responsibility as a teenager, but you should be
judged as a teenager. She was an innocent.
If she was less than attentive to a warning or the knowledge of cigarette smoking, in a family that accepted cigarette smoking because they had been taught to accept it, then I say, from 15 on, despite the fact that there was a warning on a label that she probably saw because, obviously, if you smoke a cigarette, you're going to see it, the warning -- not the caution, but the warning that said, cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health -- it doesn't say anything about addiction -- I don't think she should bear responsibility for being a victim of their targeting in those first nine or ten years of her smoking behavior.
She smoked 20 years, that's enough to give you lung cancer and kill you; but during that period of time, I would suggest -This is my -- my way of calculating it -You can calculate it any way you want, but my way of calculating it is, she's not responsible then. She was able to quit during pregnancy. Moms quit during pregnancy, and then they take the habit up again, like Dr. Benowitz said, because they relapse.
That's the hard part about smoking cigarettes and the difficulty in quitting.
So she relapses. During that relapse, when she was able to quit, she demonstrated the ability. Pregnancy is a profound time of hormonal change with a mom, and the mom is doing something to protect somebody other than theirself, maybe. There was a lot of motivations there. She was able to get through that during that period of time.
Okay. From that point forward, for the next ten years, let's say she bears some fair share of responsibility, but so does American Tobacco, Brown & Williamson, and the predecessor that bought them all and gathered them all up, and that's RJR, Reynolds.
And if you want to split it even between them, then she would get one-quarter of that group, that company's group. They would get 75 percent, she would get 25 percent.
Twenty-five percent for half of her smoking life is 12-and-a-half percent. That's my suggestion. I think that's -I don't think -It doesn't matter what I think. I
suggest -I hope that, if you see it our way, the evidence supports the idea that the overwhelming fault, the profound overall fault and wrongdoing of the proven negligence, the proven legal cause of addiction, the proven legal cause of lung cancer from addiction that's definitively determined already in this case, is 12-and-a-half percent for her, 77-and-a-half percent for them. You can adjust it any way you want.
And, quite frankly, if you will check off "yes" on the first two questions about the advertising, her being told filters are better, her being targeted as the Vantage target customer -- she fit them to a tee -- if you check those off, the percentages are not as significant. They don't matter as much because they won't reduce for the percentages. You could put anything you want. It's up to you.
Then, ultimately, you get to the question of whether there was clear and convincing evidence.
What time -How much time do I have?
MR. GDANSKI: I think you've been going an hour and five minutes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Okay. Thank you.
So there was something I wanted to -Can you find what you're looking for when you're flailing and going a hundred miles an hour?
Willful ignorance. I submit to you that the defendant's case that they presented, which is the most recent case you heard, is a case of willful ignorance.
Dr. Schaller is not an expert in tobacco.
He's an expert in being an expert, hired by tobacco to become an expert of the kind they wanted him to be.
Nobody beat a path to his door. He wrote a book about Japanese prisoners of war. Somebody came to him and said, hey, you're an expert on Japanese prisoners of war, would you be an expert on -- in a Japanese prisoners of war case? And he was.
And I highlighted that for you, because when they -- when tobacco came to him and recruited him, and tickled around -They don't just come straight out; they
come on the oblique. Everything they do, the doubt, the confusion that they're -Even the doubt and confusion here. They would like to tell you, in the punitive damages, oh, it's got to be clear. You guys have to come to it. So that's part of the reason why -Even in this courtroom, there's doubt, there's confusion. They're talking about stuff that's got nothing to do with the case.
They're denying the Engle findings that exist. They were talking about stuff that's got nothing -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection -MR. SCHLESINGER: -- to do with the case. MR. BIERSTEKER: -- Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Schaller was, I say -- and I think Dr. Dickie, as well -Dr. Dickie had a paper in there, that we cross-examined him on, saying your whole idea about this is completely indefensible.
But Dr. Schaller was, I say, willfully ignorant, or what do they call it? Plausible deniability.
Whatever it is, the point is, he was not a guy who had, through scholarship, through intellect, through a dedication of a part of his career, come to analyze tobacco.
And we talked about the guy, Merrell Williams, who stuffed the secret papers from Brown & Williamson in his pants and ran out.
We asked Dr. Schaller about that. He was, like, well, I don't know; I don't really know the detail of it.
You don't know? You're a historian, and you're here in a courtroom about tobacco history, and you don't know the monumental moment in time where they got caught with their hand in the cookie jar?
And the internal documents which now make up the bulk of the scientific research across the country on what tobacco did, and understanding the nicotine addiction scourge and the youth targeting scourge, he didn't know anything about that.
A seminal event, 1996, out came the first flurry of documents that showed the truth of what they had been lying about for 50 years.
I'm a historian interested in it, I don't know
anything about it.
Why? I'll tell you why.
Kurt Vonnegut, Slaughterhouse-Five. Kurt Vonnegut, Slaughterhouse-Five. Billy Pilgram was a -They made a movie out of it, but the book by Vonnegut, Billy Pilgram was the hero. He had become unstuck in time, and he would travel back and forth through time.
And he was caught by some outer space creatures called Tralfamadorians, and they put him in a zoo. And what they couldn't understand about Billy Pilgram was, he was stuck in time. Humans couldn't move through time, but Tralfamadorians could.
And so the Tralfamadorians, when they would bring other -- other Martian-type little outer space people to see Billy Pilgram in the zoo, they tried to explain what it's like to be stuck in time.
And here's what they said: There was a lot that Billy said that was gibberish to the Tralfamadorians. They couldn't imagine what time looked like to him, and Billy had given up on explaining that. The guide outside had to
explain as best he could.
The guide invited the crowd to imagine they were looking across a desert at a mountain range on a day that was twinkling bright and clear. They could look at a peak or a bird or a cloud, at a stone right in front of them, or even down into a canyon behind them. But amoi them was this poor Earthling. His head was encased in a steel sphere, which he could -which he could not take off. There was only one eyehole through which he could look, and welded to that eyehole were six feet of pipe.
This was only the beginning of Billy's miseries in the metaphor. He was also strapped to a steel lattice which was bolted to a flatcar. And there was no way he could turn his head or touch the pipe. The far end of the pipe rested on a bi-pod, which was also bolted to the flatcar. All Billy could see was the little dot at the end of the pipe. He didn't know he was on a flatcar, he didn't even know there was anything peculiar about his situation.
The flatcar sometimes crept, sometimes went extremely fast, often stopped, went
uphill, downhill, around curves, along straightaways. Whatever poor Billy saw through that pipe, he had no choice but to say to himself, "that's life."
That's the defense they present to you:
A historian whose head has been encased in a steel pipe, with a six-foot pipe and an eyehole this big, who only sees what they want him to see and only talks about some newspaper articles, none of which he could put in our client's hands, all to make a point that we don't even deny: That Laura must have known something about the dangers of tobacco, but she didn't fully understand it. They wanted her confused, and all of their advertising confused her. So that -That is how I see the selective attention, the willful ignorance. And it passed through some of the other witnesses. The -THE COURT: Counsel (indicating).
MR. SCHLESINGER: I gotcha.
Do you want to put that one up? You got
it?
TECHNICIAN: It's up.
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is just an exampl of a lie, of a falsity, of misleading the Surgeon General way back then, where, in '61, they knew carcinogens are found in practically every class of smoke. Present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke.
And you've got something in the evidence that says, if you burn it over 700 degrees, it's going to have cancer in it and it's going to kill people.
So they knew this internally, in 1961, in November. And what did they say just a little more than a year later to James Hundley, the Assistant Surgeon General?
They said: None of our chemical substances have been found by scientific research to be harmful to smoke. It is possible for us to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters.
So that's what they knew internally.
That's what they told the Surgeon General, to lie and mislead him, and if the -You'll hear about the -- 81 -- FTC 81 --
and advertising age.
They talk about a valley of snow holds a log farmhouse under a blanket of white. Smoke rises in the still air from the chimney. A lone cowboy rides his horse through the untouched, virgin snow, dragging the Christmas tree by a rope. It's hard to imagine a more evocative American image, even though the white boxed cancer warning in the right-hand corner has stained the snow yellow. The reflective pleasure of tobacco pervades the ad. It unifies the desire for a perfect Christmas with the experience of smoking. The Surgeon Genera has no chance against this.
And I submit that if the Surgeon General has no chance against the depredations and the deceptions of the tobacco industry that have resulted needlessly in the death of millions, what chance did my client, Laura Grossman, have?
And just to finish this point -- and I'll get another chance to talk to you -- I want to just talk to you about an excerpt from a book called "1984," by George Orwell, which is all about totalitarian states, industry, deception,
and treating people like sheep.
And there's a movie, and in the movie Richard Burton plays the "Big Brother" character, and he's fixing to torture Richard (sic) Hurt.
And I submit that if tobacco had their way, this is what they would say.
Talking to Winston; Richard Burton is whispering in his ear.
If you've ever seen the movie, it's Richard Burton, who's quite the actor.
Above all, we do not let the dead rise up against us. You must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, Winston.
Posterity will never hear of you. You will be lifted clean out from the stream of history.
We shall turn you into a gas and pour you into the stratosphere. Nothing will remain of you, not a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain. You will have been annihilated in the past, as well as in the future. You will never have existed.
Well, I'll get a chance to talk to you again, folks, but Laura Grossman does exist. And the importance of her existence was
exemplified dramatically, honestly, and really by her family, and we pray that, in your verdict, you will not let them erase her memory, but you will stand and make an indelible statement about her memory.
And in that same song by Elton John, "Mona Lisas and Mad Hatters," he talks about: You stand at the edge while people run you through -- and Laura got run through with cancer, through every part of her body -- but he also says: I thank the Lord for people out there like you.
And you are the folks that get to finish this, and I appreciate your time.



MR. SCHLESINGER: I'm ready to go, Judge. Should we take two minutes, or -THE COURT: No. Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: All right. Off we go.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, this is Mr. Schlesinger's chance at rebuttal. As I indicated to you, that's how it's broken down.
If you would give him the same courtesy and respect that you showed Mr. Biersteker.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Take a look at page 54'
in SG '12. You want to take a look at something to talk about, page 541 and Surgeon General '12. We used it so quick we call it the SG.
They do not migrate people from snus.
They graduate children to stronger forms of addictive drugs. That dog and pony show that Dr. Figlar put on that he's put on for 21 consecutive trials in Engle, in the many, many Engle trials that are still pending because we have Engle findings that say they are guilty of fraud. They are guilty of conspiracy. They intended the American public and the Floridians who made up the class to rely on the fraud and conspiracy.
And what I heard for an hour and 45 minutes from a finely trained lawyer was some terrific parsing in the form of a denial of that which I have asked you to embrace, the findings.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor, no denial of the findings.
THE COURT: Thank you. Sustained.
Go ahead, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The findings should be
applied. The way in which he describes it would mean you couldn't apply it.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Object again, Judge.
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted. This is argument.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Let's go to the national -- this is my paper copy. You've got this one, okay?
Vantage, an intelligent choice.
The target Vantage smoker was female, white collar, extremely concerned about her health, and would like to quit smoking. A Vantage ad headlined "To Smoke or Not to Smoke" ran in both the United States and Canada.
Vantage is the cigarette for people who may have second thoughts about smoking and looking for a way to do something about it.
According to an RJR/Reynolds operational plan and strategic plan, the basic strategically was to present Vantage as an intelligent choice, positioning Vantage as the contemporary choice for intelligent smokers.
The tactic was to influence consumer perceptions.
A 1983 R.J. Reynolds media plan sought to establish a consumer perception that Vantage is a contemporary cigarette for intelligent smokers. And they went on to analyze the smokers and make them believe the filter itself is strong enough to catch impurities, and the hole structure is such that they will not see much of a resulting discoloration. These ideas will make them think the end product is a milder and more healthful smoke.
The Vantage smoker, the advertising influenced them by promising real smoking satisfaction.
This is what they told them. The industry recognized that the FTC was in their own interests. The cigarette advertising is notoriously uninformative with characteristic forms using veiled health implications. But almost without specific -- without being specific about what constitutes -- what the constituents are of tobacco, or to smoke or what filter, what filter effectiveness was not being realized.
The cigarette industry has not voluntarily employed its advertising to inform
consumers in a consistent and meaningful way about any of the following: The technologies employed in fabricating the products, the constituents added in manufacturing products, the residues and contaminants that may be present in the combustible column, the constituents of smoke that may be hazardous, the addictiveness of nicotine, or the health risks to which regular consumers and their families are inevitably exposed.
Instead, they are advertising for low-yield products as relied on pictures of health and images of intelligence and mis -and has misled consumers into believing filtered products in general and low-tar products in specific to be safe or safer than any other forms, without exactly explaining why.
There's a sweepstakes winner in this courtroom. Dr. Schaller is a sweepstakes winner. He won the $100000-a-year-for-life, $2-million-and-counting-thus-far sweepstakes because he let tobacco come to him and say: You'll be our expert.
And they have the gall to attack the
credibility of my client, Mr. Grossman, because of some computer form that he supposedly clicked a button on with potentially preprinted answers in it, that he never solicited, that they sent to him. And they're trying to say therefore you shouldn't believe him because he wanted to win something.
And I would recommend you reject that. That's not fair. That's not why Mr. Grossman is here before you today.
You heard what he had to say. You saw the outcome of emotion. Was he candid? Will anybody else but you and this jury be able to say, I think overall, I think this man was a pretty straight shooter.
What, they wanted to dirty him up a little bit, just like they wanted to dirty up Dr. Proctor? Let's talk about that. Let's talk about that now.
Now Mr. Biersteker is a very good attorney. He's very clever. And one thing he wants to do, as the face of RJR/Reynolds, because you know, you don't see -- there's not a client sitting there. There's not a corporate --
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Mr. Biersteker is the face of R.J. Reynolds -THE COURT: Excuse me. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, disregard the last comment.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He doesn't want to do anything to offend.
But in a courtroom, real things happen, unscripted moments happen. The outpouring for my clients, the beautiful testimony of Dr. Sutton, the wonderful commitment that Shelly has made to a broken family came out in real time. Words don't need to be the only way.
The body language, the demeanor, the lack of -- of frankness or lack thereof. Where is your power? I will give you power. I will hand you something.
The instruction on expert witnesses say there are people here who call themselves experts. Now this is not for regular people.
This is not just for the credibility of regular folk. This is the credibility of someone who
wants to say, I'm an expert. And you may consider their underlying basis, why did they get into it?
Why did Dr. Schaller, with not one wit of anything having to do with tobacco suddenly become involved in tobacco? And only with what they show him, a steel ball encasing his head. Why? $100,000 a year, $2 million a year, not for a purpose of telling people what he knew.
What does the instructions say?
His Honor read it to you. You may consider these witnesses who call themselves experts, you may reject their opinions. Or give it the weight you deserve.
More than what you do with a regular witness, you may reject an expert whose opinion is not worthy. And a guy like Dr. Schaller, opinion is not worthy. For that reason, you can take him like a bowling ball and roll him out of this courtroom and say, I reject what he has to say.
You're not bound by it. You're not bound by an economist who comes into the courtroom to talk about addiction that doesn't know anything about addiction. You're not bound by it.
What did they do? What was an unscriptec moment, a moment of truth, a moment of courtroom drama?
I think about this as something that could be a movie, when I think about what my clients went through and who did it to them.
An industry that relies on one thing and one thing only, selling nicotine. Not going to take out that addictiveness, no matter what.
The documents in this book, the snus document, all that business has nothing to do with being sick. They'll spend a billion dollars on an Eclipse cigarette that they won't advertise and they won't sell, just so they can come into this courtroom and say, We spent a billion dollars on Eclipse cigarettes -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
You are to draw your own recollection from the facts that are in evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Anyway ...
Dr. Proctor gave testimony without turning a hair, was cross-examined by Mr. Biersteker for hours on end, showed lots of documents that Mr. Biersteker wanted to show.
Didn't turn a hair. Seemed like a very polite exchange, a lot of give and take.
Dr. Proctor gave the points up that were willing to be given up. He was willing to see both sides. He also explained there was industry scientists being corrupted, industry scientists on the take. He was saying how they got in and infiltrated all the halls of politics and medicine and the AMA and everything else and messed with the truth and confused people.
That's one of the findings. They did it for 50 years. They conspired, they lied, they created a doubt and controversy campaign to undermine it.
How many scientists now say we are facing climate change and how few, how few, what de minimis amount say that's a bunch of bunk. And how much doubt and controversy does that create in public opinion? Public opinion can be confused by a small vociferous minority.
But to me, and Dr. Proctor, after being a qualified witness, a senior scientific reviewer of 2014 -- do you think this stuff is fresh and new? Do you think we need to keep studying it?
In 2012 we're publishing Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults.
Things have changed? In order for things to change, someone needs to say there needs to be a change. Something in the past was wrong. We're never going to do it again.
That's what penitence is. That's what repenting from some wrongdoing is.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: You want to have mitigating -- you want to mitigate? Come in here and mitigate. Start by some acknowledgment of past wrongdoing.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: We are allowed to dra an inference from those findings that say they conspired and intended the public to rely. You are allowed to draw an inference is there any real change, or is that crocodile tears in this courtroom.
Dr. Proctor, they're asking him questions and referred to some email from another doctor who was concerned about his treatment at the
hands of tobacco defense.
And then right at the end, right at the end, we're going to sleaze him up right at the end. We're going to attack him right at the end.
What did they say? Oh, you did this, you said good, they won the case, victory.
This is a public health advocate. What does he care about? Does he care about a laudable goal?
Does he care about something worth caring about, not killing people, not seeing to it that we live in a society where we have a blind eye to 443,000 people dying a year, real people. 1200 people a day?
How many thousands died in the 15 days we've -- or the 12 days we've been in trial.
Do the math. That's -- it's incomprehensible.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: He answered this question.
This was when the tobacco industry was harassing me so much that they actually tried to seize my computer. Tried to seize my
unpublished manuscript, harassing me on such a scale I had to file an affidavit. It was a massive effort to intimidate me.
And that is the big truth that you all ought to also consider. This is a highly Ivy League educated, full-tenured professor at Stanford whose background and training and education happens to be the history of tobacco.
And he took on a formidable foe by speaking the truth and speaking out. And in that regard he is a hero, and what he has done should be lauded, should be looked upon.
He goes: It was by your -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. BIERSTEKER: I think this is improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It was by your massive power that you intimidated my university so much they said they would never do business with you again.
And then he followed up and said: He's proud to discuss this. This is an industry that's killed so many people that harasses and
tries to steamroller anybody who stands up against them. There's never been anything like it in the history of the world.
It's manufacturers of the world's most deadliest product. More deaths, more intimidation, more harassment and more corruption. And by and large, they've got away with it. Cigarettes are still killing 450,000 people a year.
That's sworn testimony in this courtroom.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection. Can I have a continuing objection, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Was this a man who -do you need to take a break? Sorry. We have a juror that seems -JUROR ELYZEE: Can I use the bathroom?
THE COURT: All right. We'll take a short recess.
Thank you. Don't discuss the case. It's not being turned over to you for deliberations at this time. Leave your note pads on your chairs. Thank you.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
THE COURT: Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect the presence of our jury, as well as plaintiff, plaintiff's counsel, and defense counsel.
You may continue with your closing argument.
MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court, Counsel.
Thanks, folks. Look. This litany, this moment in time when -- after they were polite, nice interchange, it continued where Dr. Proctor said more deaths, more intimidation, more harassment, more corruption, and by and large they have gotten away with it. They have still -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor, repetitive and prejudicial.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They still have 450,000 people dying of cigarettes every year, by the manufacturer of the world's deadliest product. When we take your deposition, you try to be polite to them and talk to them on a break.
Right?
ANSWER: I try to be very polite.
And they tried to block you from publishing your book?
They ordered a subpoena to have the entire manuscript provided to them in advance, the way they do with the Surgeon General's reports. This was the first time ever Stanford professors had their unpublished work subpoenaed by an industry.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Excuse me. Objection. Objection.
I object. It's becoming a feature,
Judge.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, this is sworn testimony I'm reading to you from the record. It's page 290.
They follow you at airports?
They followed me at airports.
They stood over your shoulder listening to your phone conversations?
Yes. They follow me to lectures I give.
You've had incidents where you're giving lectures and someone in the back you don't know, and it turns out they're from Jones Day or Shook Hardy or some tobacco company?
Yes. They disguise themselves like students. I was organizing a conference. There was a woman in the background writing furiously. She was dressed in these ripped jeans, like that's what they thought a student would look like, and that's not what the Stanford students dress like.
When I asked her what she was doing there, she said she was from Shook Hardy & Bacon.
Okay. And there hasn't been any FDA regulation.
Now, let's -- they want to talk about a
proper response to -- they want to talk about a proper response to defending the case.
Let's go to the jury instruction on reliance, inferred reliance, please.
It's circumstantial evidence. My contention here is that the 1967 Federal Trade Commission, the people in charge -- the people in charge of making sure advertising is not false and deceptive and unfair have come to the conclusion the warning labels were not effective, and that -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Excuse me, what is the objection?
MR. BIERSTEKER: Preemption.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It was impossible for anybody, particularly teenagers, to avoid the wallpaper effect of advertising back in the '60s.
My client, young Laura Grossman, was 7 years old in 1964. She didn't read the Surgeon General's report.
My client, Laura Grossman, was a little kid. She didn't read any Reader's Digest
articles.
My client was exposed to wall-to-wall advertising. Promoting and making cigarettes seemed like the right thing to do by a company that knew they killed people with lung cancer, but decided to go ahead and keep selling it, denying the health effects, and that's why they were found to be guilty of fraud and conspiracy.
And that's why you're here today to consider.
And then Laura Grossman was found, because of their negligence and the defective product that they denied at every point along the way, to have died from the addiction to cigarettes that caused her to have lung cancer.
That's how far we've gone. That's why I put up the picture of Iwo Jima. After an immense battle, we're that close, all we want you to do is see things the way they are.
That's what this is about. It's about seeing things the way they are.
Despite us having their playbook, we know what they say now. The internal documents, they are a treasure trove of millions and
millions of documents. It's going to take decades for us to learn from them.
They started writing about them at NCI 2001, saying, Man, you can't believe the stuff we're learning from what they knew inside that they were lying to us about. 2010. Refers to scientific analysis of the secret documents.
2012 refers extensively to the analysis of the secret documents and the scientific conclusions that people whose obligation is to help public health have derived from learning from these documents. Critically important.
So you want to make a defense? Fine. Make a proper defense. Take a reasonable position.
Do you know how much $950,000 is compai to the millions and millions that you've heard the experts involved in these cases got?
950 -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: 950,000 is not an adequate amount of money to compensate the folks just for the personal loss of their loved one. That doesn't measure the harm, that
doesn't tell these folks we place great value on your loss, your third time in a courtroom in 20 years trying to get to justice in this case.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: There's what they've had to do.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And don't forget this. He didn't say a percentage. Mr. Biersteker didn't say a percentage. He said, and he was consistent, zero percent, zero percent.
Do you know what zero times 950,000 is? It's zero.
That's what Mr. Biersteker would like you to do.
But that is not what you are going to do, in my estimation, judging from how I've seen you react to the evidence and take in this evidence. You're not likely to do that.
He knows that, and if he knows that, then why don't you just be candid and -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- and truly suggest a fair number or a fair range of fault to take.
Now, the -- I want to also show the concurring cause instruction.
First of all, we talked about it. You can infer on circumstantial evidence. Okay.
Is that -- this is concurring cause?
Why are you laughing at me? Is that concurring cause?
MR. GDANSKI: It's inferred and concurring cause, both.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Both. Okay.
It is not necessary that a direct statement be made to Laura Grossman in order to give rise to the right to rely on the statement.
You can infer from circumstantial evidence that Laura Grossman relied on a statement of omission. Of course, circumstantial evidence. Her behavior is consonant with, it is congruent with the advertising campaign of Vantage.
The overall advertising campaign of tobacco companies, RJR included. She is just a typical smoker, a generic smoker.
We have taken one of the millions out and put them in front of you and say: See what
this is. See what this is. This is the price.
You should try harder to quit.
Why should it be so hard?
Because we've got you addicted.
Why should it be so hard?
Because you enjoy it. I enjoy it. The taste of a disgusting, burning product I suck into my lungs.
I enjoy nothing. I enjoy not having withdrawal from nicotine, a pregnant woman -lots of pregnant women quit and they relapse. That's what Dr. Benowitz talked about. That's the powerful urge to go back to tobacco is the concept of relapse.
You're inferring from circumstantial evidence. The 1981 Federal Trade Commission report speaks volumes. Read from it, that you can infer she was -- her behavior was congruent. She acted just like they wanted her to act. She smoked just like they wanted her to smoke.
Can we put up the typical Vantage smoker ad, the -- no, stay there. Let's just stay there. Wait. Stay there.
In order to be regarded as the legal
cause of Laura Grossman's lung cancer or death the concealment or omission of a material fact may not be the only cause, even though it operates in combination with some other cause.
A concealment or omission of a material fact may be a legal cause of lung cancer, that even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause.
So it isn't the only thing. It isn't just the advertising. It isn't the fact that the R.J. reps were in the store telling them this is our latest and greatest brand.
Those things all work together to be a cause, along with her choices, her not quitting hard enough, the plastic cigarettes that she smoked.
People try to cut down. People use the ultra lights and people use the filters to cut down.
Back in those days in the '70s, that was seen as the normal behavior. That was cutting down, taking less. You'll be healthier if you don't smoke as much.
And she's only in her 30s, so she was --
she was not someone who didn't try. She tried. She didn't try hard enough. You assign some responsibility to her.
But what responsibility are they taking?
If they say she should take 100 percent, they've taken zero. So they would suggest that you award nothing.
These are the kind of ads they saw.
Vantage Pleasures.
Put this one up, please.
MR. PHILIPSON: Switch over the Elmo, please.
MR. SCHLESINGER: They talk about Vantage -- this is an internal document in evidence. It's from 1981. Vantage smokers face up to life work and products in a relatively aggressive, discriminating and factual way.
They tend to feel that they know what they like and what they do not like. They think of themselves as active, efficient, productive people.
They like to set their own pace and style and deal with problems as they come up, rather than worry about them.
They have a good capacity for enjoying themselves, their families, their cigarettes and other activities.
They are outdoor-oriented and enjoy sports. They tend to think of themselves as on target. They're apt to engage in occupations that require some technical operational skills.
The women tend to think of themselves as efficient, active homemakers and mothers who enjoy and are handy at arts and crafts.
The women tend to think of themselves as efficient, active homemakers and mothers who enjoy and are handy at arts and crafts.
Does that sound a little bit like the descriptions you got of Laura Grossman here?
She was handy at arts and crafts.
There's a piece of her needlepoint right here. They have an advertisement of a lady, what is she making? Arts and crafts. She's doing dress design.
So these things apply, and these things show that they are doing exactly what they're looking to do, which is to get her to be their customer, and they did.
MR. HAMMER: Shut down the Elmo, please.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And they did.
So go to the next one, please.
Let's go to PT1913.002, please.
There is another excerpt in evidence, okay, talk about the way the tobacco company -they work at multiple levels. There's advertising, legislation, litigation, politics.
And they have a document: Our medical/scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- clearly implying that they lack -THE COURT: Is this in evidence?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, it is.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Their medical/scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying if not stating they lack credibility and integrity.
Their internal documents, the secret documents they thought you would never see. Over the shoulder. Talking about how they go about doing this and trying to create doubt and controversy in this courtroom.
So what is clear and obvious and what should be a played, tired, old defense should no longer work in the year 2013. We know too much now. We know too much about the power addiction. We know too much about the evils of attracting and targeting youth.
Lest some lawyer be looking over my shoulder, I do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes.
They denied addiction in the Engle case originally. Just -- in case a lawyer is looking over my shoulder, that's for a courtroom, for a jury, I do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes.
It wasn't until they were forced to, in the year 2000, long after my client was dead, that they ever had to acknowledge in the courtroom. They don't get credit for that here. They don't get credit for that here.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SCHLESINGER: The Heimann clip, please.
(The video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
Q. One source of expectations concerning a product which a consumer has are the advertisements that product. Is that accurate?
A. I would agree with that.
Q. Would you expect a consumer to rely upon your advertisements?
A. Yes. Our advertising is truthful, and we would anticipate that they would rely on it if they chose.
Q. That's your promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, isn't it?
A. Yes, it is.
Q. Throughout your tenure with American, it was not only American's position but your position that cigarettes weren't injurious to health. Is that accurate?
A. Through my tenure?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, that is so.
Q. That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. That's a statement that American Tobacc placed great reliance on?
A. We issued that statement, yes.
(Inaudible.)
Q. As far as you're concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. SCHLESINGER: This is the same guy that said the Surgeon General's warnings on the pack of cigarettes were dead wrong.
They know and they expect and they admit -- this is in a 1996 deposition he gave -- that consumers are going to rely on advertising.
Several tactics were employed by the tobacco industries that misled consumers to perceive filtered and low-tar delivery products as safe or safer as a viable alternative to quitting.
We will block the Merrell Dow introduction of cigarettes right at a key point in this lady's life where it might have helped her.
We will use these nonfunctioning filters that are a complete fraud, a complete fakeout, the illusion of filtration.
Can you put that document up?
That nicotine delivery is a design feature of cigarette products, an essential part of the design. Tobacco company document reflect a fear of consumers becoming weaned from smoking if they are not maintained with sufficient nicotine.
That's not a real choice.
In 19 -- the two paragraphs, 10 and 11.
In 1988 and '89, the refutation of free choice was determined by the Surgeon General, and they mocked him. And they belittled him, and they said it was irresponsible.
And he said: It isn't a free choice.
So we already tried a case that we proved Laura was addicted. We didn't have to prove it all over again, but we did.
Now you know she was, and they're still saying she chose this, she chose that, she chose this.
That's an ignorant -- it's ignoring the fact that free choice is constrained by
addiction.
Did she have some information and could she back in the '70s been someone -- '70s,
'80s, '90s, when she -- after she was pregnant didn't smoke, that maybe didn't have to go back to it and didn't have to relapse?
Sure. Give her -- we want you to give us your interpretation of the fair share of that fault, to the extent it's there.
But the bulk of it lies on the tobacco companies who predate on children. It's like the movie Jaws. It's like Quint scratches his fingernails on the blackboard when they want him to hunt the shark.
He goes: This shark, bad fish, swallow you whole. A little shaking, a little tenderizing and down you go.
That's what they did to Laura, okay?
Just like all the kids they caught. They get them, they hook them, and they stay hooked.
And menthol versus regular. Different baits for different fish.
And addiction. Look in 2010. We know now genetically different people have different levels of addiction.
Different people, the CYP2A6 gene is the fast metabolizer gene. Those folks with that gene metabolize nicotine more quickly. They are found to be more addictive.
The 2010 also says menthol is more addictive.
She smoked them both.
But its different baits for different fish. You cast that net out there. You're going to get your share of these folks.
They're not trying to migrate anybody.
98 percent of all sales comes from cigarettes. Combustible products.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection. Not in evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's in evidence.
THE COURT: Excuse me. This is argument, Counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Guide children, don't prey on them.
Here, to increase our young franchise, ensure -- increase long-term growth for Camel filter, the brand must increase its share
penetration 14-to-24 age group, which represents tomorrow's cigarette business.
1975.
Diane Burrows. She was their marketing gal. Everything was about what are we going to do, Marlboro is getting more share now.
Why? Because they figured ammonia make the nicotine freebase and gives it an extra nicotine kick.
There's a song by Coolio called, "C U When U Get There." And he talks about little Tamika around the corner just took her first hit off the pipe.
In one sentence, he said -- he said something that casts a person down the road to addiction.
Little Tamika around the corner just took her first hit off the pipe.
That's a rap song, Coolio, and it's the idea that is -- same thing with kids smoking a cigarette. Except it looks like the Batman toy I showed you. It looks normal.
THE COURT: Five minutes, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Pardon me?
THE COURT: Five minutes.
MR. SCHLESINGER: I've got ten, Judge, but I'll take five. Maybe I'm not measuring well. I'll keep going.
All right. So, anyway, talks about smoking in the 14-to-17 age group, talks about teenagers being price sensitive, and younger adult smokers, 14 to 24, the only source for replacement smokers.
Let's play Waxman or the other clip?
MR. PHILIPSON: The other one.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Play it.
(The video clip was played and taken down
to the best of the reporter's ability as
follows:)
VOICE: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. It may not be. We just don't know.
VOICE: I don't know. Frankly, I think that smoking may be hazardous, it may not be.
VOICE: Smoking may be hazardous, it may not be. No one, including TV 7, knows for certain.
VOICE: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
VOICE: I don't know if cigarettes are
bad or not bad.
VOICE: We don't know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking.
VOICE: I'm saying that the science to date and over $100 million of our industry indicates that there is no causal link.
VOICE: I am not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people.
VOICE: Yeah. When a rabbit runs through the briar patch, it's pretty hard to look back and see which briar stuck him.
VOICE: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no?
VOICE: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. That has not been causally established.
VOICE: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
VOICE: Despite all the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
VOICE: Do you or do you not agree with the Surgeon General's estimate of over 400,000
smokers dying?
VOICE:	I do not agree.
VOICE:	Okay. Do you know how many die
each year?	
VOICE:	I do not know.
VOICE:	Okay. They agree that smoking
causes lung	cancer. Do you agree?
VOICE:	It may.
VOICE:	Do you know whether it does?
VOICE:	I do not.
VOICE:	If your company responded to the
2010 report,	which vowed that it was more --
menthol made cigarettes more addictive and ma	
cigarettes --	
MR. BIERSTEKER: I don't know what this
is.
THE COURT: Can I see counsel sidebar, please?
(The videotape was paused.)
(The following discussion was held at sidebar:)
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's the excerpt of his testimony. He gave this yesterday.
THE COURT: I saw a portion of it. I didn't see the whole thing played. But the
whole thing is in evidence?
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes. This trial.
THE COURT: I'm asking.
MR. BIERSTEKER: I don't have access to that.
THE COURT: I saw a portion of it. I didn't see this portion.
MR. SCHLESINGER: It's absolutely in this courtroom. It's from -- absolutely.
THE COURT: Proceed.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the
following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. This is counsel's argument. He's explaining what evidence in the trial he believes was there.
Counsel, you may proceed.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Play it, please.
(Video clip continued as follows:)
VOICE: -- found that it was more -menthol made cigarettes more addictive and made cigarettes more for the youth, to be more inclined to start smoking and become addicted.
As Vice President of Product Development
for RJR, you certainly had to be aware of your own company's position with regard to that. Correct, sir?
VOICE: Well, I am. And what the TPSAC suggested, however, was not that it was, but that it was likely that it may be.
So the question is still somewhat open.
If you look at what the levels of assertion are in the FDA reports -VOICE: Sir -VOICE: I'm sorry, but I think I need to explain -- that the FDA can conclude that there is a direct link between A and B, there is likely to be a direct link between A and B, which means there is still some question involved, and there may be more data that need to be evaluated.
Our company at this point said that the evidence is not suggestive of a causal relationship.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. SCHLESINGER: Open, still more data. Not suggestive of causal relationship, 2013.
Just like 1994, the Waxman hearings, still making doubt. And yet here is the most
freshest, recent book.
Cigarette smoking by youth and young adults has immediate adverse health consequences, including addiction.
Advertising and promotional activities by tobacco companies has been shown to cause the onset of and continuation of smoking among adolescents and young adults.
Fooling the machines and using data to fool smokers, filters and cigarette papers were developed during the 1950s, that air-conditioned the smoke, diluting the smoke column with sidestream air.
This was a desirable outcome for promotional purposes, but higher yields were ingested by real smokers, a desirable outcome for maintaining nicotine addiction.
Consumer ignorance and confusion has been persistent over many decades.
Advertisements of filtered and low-tar cigarettes were meant to prevent smokers from quitting based on those same concerns.
Advertising and promotional efforts were successful in getting smokers to use filtered and low-yield cigarette brands.
Internal tobacco documents demonstrate that cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent deception of advertising that offered cigarettes as light or ultra light or as having the lowest tar and nicotine yields.
That's page 233. I said make sure you read it if you get a chance. But I read it to you.
Page 16 and 17 of 2010 has got the whole explanation of how the public health authority didn't know what tobacco knew about the light: fraud.
So was what happened to her a result of this entire conspiracy? Did that contribute to it? I submit it does.
If you see it our way, please, work through this. It's only when you guys come together and see this -- and we talked a lot about history in this case.
And this -- this is a historic moment, and it gives you all a chance to do something larger than yourselves.
It is not just Laura Grossman on the punitive damages. It is the harm to others. That is why we put in the evidence of the
scourge of -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. SCHLESINGER: You may consider not just what happened to Laura Grossman. You ma consider in deciding if they richly deserve punishment. Your censure, your condemnation, your objection as one human to another entity that wants to be treated like a human. Be decent. Be decent people. Act with honesty.
And you can say so many that never got their chance got hurt. So many died. So many families grieve. So much pain, so much suffering.
We have to say to you, This is wrong. We reject it, in the strongest possible terms.
And I said at the beginning of this trial, I said even the littlest person can make a difference. And it does make a difference.
It may just be that you're one of many.
There's other cases. But you're a brick in the wall. And that's -- that song by Pink Floyd. Another brick in the wall, which has a line in it about. Hey, teacher, leave those kids alone. And I say: Hey, tobacco, leave those
kids alone.
It's all yours now.
Thank you, folks.
