MR. BIERSTEKER: I think so, Judge.
May it please the Court, Counsel.
Mr. Grossman, Jessica, Steven.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I had hoped that my closing argument on Tuesday wa going to be the last time that I addressed you.
It wasn't.
You entered a verdict that said that my client should be subjected to punitive damages.
I would not be honest if I said that I was happy about that.
But I do want you to know that R.J. Reynolds, Carol Hogan and myself, we understand your verdict and we respect it.
You have served here for weeks. It is clear that you did not rush through the verdict form. You worked pretty hard back there. It's plain to all of us that you took your role very seriously.
My client also takes this lawsuit seriously, including this, the last phase of
it.
So let's get started. I want to talk a little bit about the Court's instruction and how that relates to the evidence you've already heard. Nobody is putting on new evidence here. So let's do that.
First, just because you indicated on the verdict form that punitive damages were warranted does not mean that you have to actually award any.
The Court has instructed you that you may award -- do we have the instructions? If not,
I can put them on the Elmo. I'll put them on the Elmo.
The Court has instructed, instruction number 2, that you may -- oops, too much.
Sorry.
You may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages. And even at this stage, you have the discretion to do that.
Having heard from Dr. Figlar in the last phase, it's up to you. You may opt not to impose punitive damages.
In short, you can use your discretion to determine the punitive damages, that they're
unnecessary, even though you found already tha they may be warranted.
Second, as Judge Murphy advised you in the instructions, and this is the one I think he read twice: In determining the amount of punitive damages, if any, you may not impose punitive damages to punish R.J. Reynolds for harm caused to others.
In other words, the focus here is on the harm to Mrs. Grossman.
Harm to others was a consideration before when you were deciding whether or not punitive damages were warranted when you filled out the verdict form the last time.
But here, the focus is on the harm to -oh, my goodness, you can't read that.
Here, the focus is on the harm to Mrs. Grossman.
So the only concealment that you can consider is that which you think was concealed and that caused the harm to Mrs. Grossman.
No other.
So, for example, you may not consider evidence of conduct that has no connection to the conduct that you found injured
Mrs. Grossman.
Your award, if any, must be based on account of the concealment and harm caused to Mrs. Grossman.
Not only that, you may not consider the harm to others in deciding the amount. No one affected by youth marketing, for example. No one smoking other brands. No one else who may have suffered a smoking-related disease.
So I think it's important that you focus on the specific conduct that you found harm to Mrs. Grossman that warranted punitive damages and to consider only the harm that occurred to her.
In reaching a decision, as Judge Murphy has further instructed, and this is in instruction 7, that you should take into consideration any mitigating evidence.
And that evidence may demonstrate that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed; for example, events that occurred in the distant past or changed company conduct.
And, you know, I really wish I could ask you some questions right now. I don't really know exactly what it is that you determined
Reynolds did or is doing that led you to check that box on the verdict form and say that punitive damages were appropriate.
It would be easier to address what you think Reynolds should or should not do going forward if I knew that. But I don't. So let me talk a little bit about the evidence you've already heard. And let me start by discussing whether or not there is a need for future deterrence.
And I'm going to have to touch on a number of subjects, because I don't know what was the focus in your minds when you were back in the jury room.
You know, we talked about -- Dr. Figlar came here and how things have changed, how thi activities that you saw evidence of over the last three weeks have stopped and won't happen again.
Plaintiff presented evidence to you that they characterized as concealment. And plaintiff's argument was, one, that the formerly secret -- it was based on these formerly secret documents.
But even as described by plaintiff, these
documents aren't secret anymore. They are available. They haven't been secret for over a decade.
Dr. Proctor told you there's millions and millions of them available to the public and company documents that are generated even today -- even today that are generated and that are produced in litigation or produced to the government are made publicly available, and there's millions of those too.
So there's no longer a treasure trove of secret documents being built up in the tobacco industry.
I don't know, maybe you were troubled by the position that R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies took with respect to smoking and health and addiction over the years.
Dr. Figlar told you that smoking has inherent risks and that smoking is addictive.
There is no dispute with that. For over a decade, Reynolds has acknowledged that smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases and that smoking is addictive.
If you smoke and you want to know what the ingredients are in your cigarettes, I don't
know if that was an issue for you guys. If you want to know what the ingredients are, you can go and look.
Plaintiffs did just that when Dr. Figlar was on the stand. And remember, they put up the list from Vantage cigarettes specifically?
Dr. Figlar also told you that the company makes Winston cigarettes additive free, basically with just water and tobacco.
As Dr. Figlar also said about ingredients, the company has shared the ingredient information with the government for about a quarter of a century now, and not once has the government during all that time said remove this additive or take it out.
You know that Reynolds advises smokers to rely on the Surgeon General and other public health authorities in making their decisions about smoking if the company has retreated from the field, no longer engages in discussions with the public on these issues, other than to tell them rely on the Surgeon General, rely on the public health authorities.
And its website provides them links to -directly to the Surgeon General and public
health authorities.
Today, and since the turn of the century, Reynolds advises smokers that quitting reduces the risk for disease and says if you're concerned about your health, you ought to quit.
Regulation. I don't know if this was a focus. But Dr. Figlar told you how virtually every aspect of my client's business is subject to regulation by the FDA.
FDA has authority over marketing and has authority over the design of cigarettes, the manufacture. It has regulatory power basically over every aspect of my client's business, and the company is participating in that regulatory process with the FDA.
For example, Dr. Figlar told you how the FDA had already come down and inspected both the research and development department and manufacturing facility.
Bottom line, Reynolds is closely and heavily regulated going forward.
I don't know, you were probably troubled by the fact that the companies got together and agreed to conceal information through CTR and TI. That's over. The Council for Tobacco
Research ceased to exist in 1988, and the Tobacco Institute ceased to exist that very same year, and there is no new organization to take their place.
The people that you saw and heard about from the '50s, '60s, '70s, and 80s are gone.
The people that you saw testify in front of Congress about smoking not being addictive or about the health risks of smoking, they're gone too.
Since 2004, with the merger of Brown & Williamson, Reynolds is a changed company with new management, folks like Dr. Figlar.
Marketing and youth. That was a theme that Mr. Schlesinger hit again in his closing just moments ago. And you may have been troubled by that.
You may have inferred reliance on advertising, as plaintiffs suggested, even though Mrs. Grossman smoked Vantage, a brand that is not targeted at kids, but at middle-aged women who have concerns about the health, I guess.
Dr. Figlar told you that the company not only advertises currently in magazines that
have 85 percent or higher adult readership, that advertising has dwindled, you heard that in the cross-examination of Dr. Proctor, how virtually no money, the percentage of the budget on advertising and promotion that goes to advertising is vanishingly small.
Most of the money goes on coupons, and buy one, get one free, sort of price competition that Reynolds engages in against its competitors, such as Philip Morris and Lorillard, to encourage smokers to buy their brands by giving a price break.
Dr. Figlar also told you that the company actively participates in youth smoking prevention efforts. There is mitigating evidence here showing no need for deterrence with respect to youth marketing.
The new research and development department. I don't know, maybe you were upset about research and design efforts that went into filters and to lowering tar and nicotine yields over the years.
Dr. Figlar told you about the approach to harm reduction. Don't make it worse, make it better when you can. Encouraged smokers to
migrate. Plaintiffs want to denigrate that approach. But this is a tobacco company. What do you want them to do?
So if they can make products that have less risk and encourage people to switch to them, that's what they're trying to do.
And, finally, nicotine replacement products for those smokers who want to quit and want to use nicotine replacement in order to do so.
Dr. Figlar fleshed that out, the general overview, but he also gave you specific examples.
And I won't run through them all, but just to rattle off the names. Premier and Eclipse, the tobacco heating cigarettes; Vuse, the electronic cigarette.
You heard about Camel Snus and how the company is trying to get folks interested in that. About how at least in Sweden with the epidemiological studies, a much lower risk, vanishingly small risk, increased risk of lung cancer, but even a lower risk of oral cancer.
And so he told you too that snus wasn't safe. It comes with the distinct warnings on
the tin. You saw that.
He told you that sales of cigarettes by my client are declining. And while sales of Camel Snus are relatively small, they are growing.
Again, he told you about Vuse, the electronic cigarette. No tobacco, no tar, just a nicotine aerosol. And about Niconovum and the nicotine-replacement products.
I submit that this is mitigating evidence and that no deterrence is necessary on the research and development problem.
(Interruption.)
MR. BIERSTEKER: I'm sorry, Judge?
THE COURT: I hit the button on the computer, Counsel. I apologize.
MR. BIERSTEKER: That's all right.
I saved that discussion for punishment for last. It inevitably involves money, and how much more money you're going to award the Grossmans over and above the amount that you have determined fully compensates them for the loss of Laura Grossman. So let's talk about it.
From time to time during the course of
trial, you heard about profits. You heard about it again in Mr. Schlesinger's brief remarks. I guess the starting point is, you can't punish Reynolds merely for selling cigarettes or making profits.
Cigarettes are a lawful product, lawful to manufacture, lawful to advertise, and lawful to sell them. And yes, profits are earned from their sale.
It's not a basis for imposing punishment.
It's legal. I mean, even the FDA is prohibited, by statute, from requiring that all nicotine be removed from cigarettes.
You also heard that there are many lawsuits like this. I don't know, I can't remember the number Mr. Schlesinger threw out in his closing remark. I think he said 700,000 Floridians were members of the Engle class.
And so there are many lawsuits like this one where plaintiffs seek both compensatory and punitive damages. So this is not the only case out in the world.
In light of the facts, the evidence that I think Reynolds has changed as a company with new management, the concealment that occurrec
decades ago, and that there are many of these lawsuits pending in which punitive and compensatory damages can be brought by other plaintiffs like the Grossmans.
In light of those facts, what is the number? What is the extra money you should award Mr. Grossman, keeping in mind not only the facts, but Judge Murphy's instructions that we can be punished only for the conduct that harmed Mrs. Grossman and only for the harm caused to Mrs. Grossman, not harm to others.
Mr. Schlesinger, I thought I heard him say $75 million. That's just astronomical.
Just astronomical.
I would suggest you pick a number not based on emotion, but rather settle on a number that seems reasonable and has an objective basis and to use your common sense. Obviously, that's going to be up to you.
But here's a thought. I think you have been very fair to the Grossman family. I think you awarded them. I was trying to make a total as I went along, but it's over $15 million.
That's a lot of money.
And I would suggest that punitive damages
in the neighborhood of 1 million might be appropriate, given that you have already -- if you decide to award any at all. But if you do,
I think 1 million would be in the ballpark, given that you have already fully compensated them for their loss.
It's a rational number. It's a reasonable number. It makes the plaintiffs whole with your $15 million award already, without giving them a huge windfall.
And I know, when I sit down Mr. Schlesinger is going to get up in the last five minutes he's got available to him, and he's going to ridicule that number and he's going to say $1 million is not serious money.
But just remember, this is money on top of what you thought was appropriate to fully compensate the Grossman family because of Mrs. Grossman's lung cancer and death.
Punishment has to be based on the harm that was caused to her, not on harm to others, and it's extra money above and beyond what you thought was appropriate.
The money goes to the Grossmans and to only the Grossmans.
I can't read your minds. I don't know exactly what convinced you to check that box "yes" on the punitive damages.
I submit that it was based on events and conduct from long ago; and that what you heard from Dr. Figlar and about Reynolds today, it's a different company. It's a different culture.
The current company and its employees ask you to be fair and just.
I want to thank you again for your service. And rest assured, you have our appreciation, our respect.
I am confident that you will return a just verdict, one that is just to my client, as well as to the Grossmans.
Thank you.
