MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court.
Counsel.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
People throw themselves on the mercy of the Court, and I will tell you that the Court has granted you mercy by severely restricting the amount of time I can speak to you from here on in.
Actually, the whole thing right now is only about ten minutes. I wanted to tell you that we thank you for your verdict thus far.
We recognize that since you want to finish this case, you have an idea where you want to be, and you have the evidence that you need to get to where you need -- where you war to be.
So I will give you a couple thoughts to let you work with this and then turn this over to you to finish it.
But on behalf of my clients, they want to thank you because you have vindicated them. You have respected their position, you have justified what they've submitted themselves to for this period and have liberated them in a certain way. And no matter what you do from here on out, we want to let you know that we thank you.
The -- I told you at the very beginning of this that even the smallest person or little person can make a big difference, and because this is the punishment phase, you are able to take into consideration the word that we use, "reprehensibility," the degree of wrongfulness of the long-term conduct of this entity.
You've already seen some of it, and you understand where we're coming from. It's an
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: All right. The jury is deliberating, but we have counsel present, along with plaintiffs.
Mr. Biersteker, you're saying you want to file some type of motion, oral motion?
MR. BIERSTEKER: I did, Judge.
I would like to move for mistrial based upon the closing argument. I think that there are a number of grounds. The first would be prejudicial, unduly prejudicial and inflammatory statements, a number of which were objected to and objections sustained, but not all.
There was the comment at 4868 in the record that Reynolds embarked on a campaign that, rather than cure cancer, they would cause it. And the way they would cause cancer was by hooking children. So for an enterprise of death, which is what this industry is.
And then it continued, on page 4877 of
ongoing problem.
That is why we put in the 2012 document preventing teen and youth smoking, because that conduct has not changed.
And when Mr. Figlar talked about it, and I cited you to page 541 of this document, which is still in evidence and still is something that you can consider as part of this, it says "this conduct is ongoing."
So the concept that teens, youth are those who are the only source for replacement smokers is part of the reason why this is an ongoing problem that merits your attention and is worthy of your consideration, as you decide how to punish them.
Because even if you say we cannot make them change, your expression to them in terms of a fine, a penalty, a reckoning, which is an accounting for past wrongdoings, is saying to them, we want you to change. As members of the community, we want you to change.
I told you at the very beginning of this that that class action back from '92 to '96 involves 700,000 people. Florida is the fourth most populous state in the nation. We are
nearly 20 million people in this state.
You know from Dr. Proctor that they earned billions of dollars during the period of years that he was an expert. Okay?
One of the things that Doctor -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor, I don't think that's in evidence.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Dr. Proctor testified. How much money in the 20th century did the tobacco industry spend on advertising?
$250 billion in 2006 dollars.
And then he was asked about, has he been an expert for a period of years. And they were asking him, he made some money.
And then we said, during the period of years you were making money, how much have t made? And he said billions.
That's in evidence.
So you know they are a large company.
They make a lot of money. Their revenues are in the billions.
20 million Americans have died just from
1954 to the current time, and there's 450,000 people dying every year today.
And I express to you in terms of -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor. Harm to others.
THE COURT: Thank you.
There is a specific instruction on that.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, there is a risk of harm to others.
In assessing reprehensibility or wrongfulness of Reynolds' conduct, you may consider the risk of harm to others, not parties to this lawsuit.
That's really when I said this case is bigger than the Grossmans themselves, and it is because when you decide yes, we find what you've done is wrongful and therefore needs to be punished and we speak to you in terms and say we don't want you to do this, we -- this jury in this community says: Stop, reconsider. We reject this kind of behavior. You are able to say who is at risk? Children are at risk, teens are at risk.
Every single day as we speak in this county, in this state, kids are starting to
smoke their first cigarettes, and they are beginning a path of life-long addiction which will lead to disease and death.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: What is the objection?
MR. BIERSTEKER: Same issue.
THE COURT: Come sidebar. Can I see the instruction again?
(The following discussion was held at
sidebar:)
THE COURT: Okay. I understand where Mr. Schlesinger is going, and I don't know that he said anything that's inappropriate. I don't have a problem clarifying it by rereading that instruction about harm to others as -- as well as -- that they can't punish for that.
That only goes to reprehensibility, that portion of the instruction. I don't have an issue with that.
Because I'm concerned about the phraseology of it. But I didn't think what Mr. Schlesinger said was objectionable, to be candid with you, Counsel. I didn't think it fell within that.
I'm going to do is I'm going to instruct
them, at some point in time, I'm going to read the instruction over again so we're all on the same page.
All right?
MR. BIERSTEKER: Instruction 4.
THE COURT: Whichever one it is.
(Sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:)
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, before we get further, there was an objection that was made, and I wasn't 100 percent sure of the -exactly what Mr. Schlesinger said in his argument, so I want -- it's an important point, and I just wanted to revisit the instruction one more time, so we're all on the same page.
And I indicated that to counsel, and both counsel seem to agree.
That's regarding Final Instruction 4.
It says: In determining the amount of punitive damages, if any, you may not impose punitive damage to punish R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for harms caused to others. But in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of Reynolds' conduct, you may consider the risk of harm to other persons not parties to this
lawsuit.
You may proceed, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: May it please the Court. Thank you, Judge.
I asked you -- can we show a picture of Laura up there?
I don't think I got to show a picture of her in the closing argument. And I'm in the shower this morning and thinking of all the things I wanted to say that I didn't say or that I forgot to say and what would I do if I got another chance to talk to you all.
And I had them all in my head this morning, but we're sitting on the benches outside because we're on your time and you're deliberating, and we're so keyed up, waiting to hear the verdict that when the buzzer rings with a question, our heads hit the ceiling.
So I forgot everything I wanted to say, but I thought if only I had a couple more minutes, I would say this really important thing, because that's how we think about it.
That's why we like the fact that you are a jury, you guys go back there as a collective group of folks that don't know each other, come
together and do something important and meaningful, in an era, in a world where sometimes the events like that, they're lost on us. Not everyone feels they can make a difference. One person, one group, one jury can make a difference.
And even if it's just that you're like Gulliver's Travels, and we're the Lilliputians and someone is throwing a rope across the chest of a giant, eventually one of those ropes and one more of those ropes and one more of those ropes, and the giant can't break the ropes.
So if we're doing nothing else but throwing one more rope across, the harm to Laura and the life she left half finished that you recognized was worthy of compensation to a deeply grieving family now goes one step further and we say: We reject R.J. Reynolds' behavior.
We reject a methodology that sells cigarettes in a way that gets after kids to this day, causes harm, hurts our neighbors, hurts our friends, hurts our family, hurts our relatives.
So we fine them. We fine a penalty, we
exact a penalty. That penalty has to bear a rational relationship to Laura Grossman.
Because it's her -- the one bad thing that happened to her at the hands of the cigarette company, that one bad thing is what guides your punitive damages.
That's why you can't go crazy on punitive damages. You can't put them out of business. You can't financially destroy the company.
That's why I said you're just one -- you can throw one rope across their chest.
And you heard about a bunch of other cases out there that are doing the same. And when each of those juries get together and say that, at some point maybe they really will change.
And instead of hearing pretty words about we're migrating people to smokeless products -THE COURT: One minute, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: -- instead of graduating them to higher levels of nicotine, you'll know why Dr. Figlar said, I'm not worried about the stock price.
And he wasn't worried about the stock price because he doesn't think you can move the
stock price.
And I'm not asking you to consider a billion or $2 billion to give as an award or to fine them, to punish them for that amount of money.
But the amount should be a relationship to the amounts you compensated Laura Grossman. That's the law.
You can't give, really, under our appellate laws, more than ten times the amount of money you gave to them by your jury verdict.
MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
I instruct on the law.
MR. SCHLESINGER: $75 million. That is the amount of dollars that we suggest you fine and you penalize this company for its wrongdoing insofar as what they did to Laura and what the risks they pose of harm to the kids that live in this state going forward is.
And if you do that, they will hear it and they will know you've said we reject what you did.
THE COURT: You're up, Counsel.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And we're telling you
we don't want you to do it again.
Thank you.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Yes, I may.
MR. PHILIPSON: The Elmo, please.
MR. SCHLESINGER: Five minutes. Five minutes.
I wish, I wish a fervent, a fervent wish.
What -- everything Mr. Biersteker just said
were true. I wish it were true, that kids were not the target of this industry. I wish it were true that they no longer targeted kids.
I wish it were true that Dr. Proctor didn't have to testify to you that, despite a lapse in cigarette magazine advertising, that R.J. in the last several months has launched a massive advertising campaign that reaches millions of kids, not only in Florida -MR. BIERSTEKER: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of what is in evidence.
MR. SCHLESINGER: And I will -Dr. Proctor testified that 24 different magazines have an advertising campaign.
And of those 24 magazines, it reaches millions of kids. He mentioned Sports Illustrated and others. But he mentioned 24 magazines, a very large print ad campaign.
I wish it were true that their conduct was not motivated solely by financial gain. It is not true that it's only -- it's not compensation, this phase of the proceedings.
You've decided they deserve -- they
should be punished. There should be punitive damages. This is strictly punishment. This is strictly a fine. It's penalty.
You will speak to them with your punitive damage verdict in the only language they understand, and that is the language of money.
They will understand it as a fine, and they will understand that six good people rejected their conduct, which is ongoing.
And they will understand that because they will hear it from you loud and clear.
What is fair is up to you. The language there says you can deter others. So the idea isn't just we're entering into a punitive damage award for the purposes of the harm done to Laura, but it's as a deterrence to others.
It's a statement not only to other tobacco companies, to any company that would engage in behavior that is solely motivated by money, at the expense of people's lives and health.
That's just not the nature of what should be fair and reasonable, good business practices, ethical business practices, moral business practices in this country.
He talked about he doesn't know what you're upset about.
That's why a jury deliberates. We do not look at you as folks who are upset about anything. We look at you as a deliberative body, as a group of folks who got together in good conscience. You don't know anybody in this case. You don't know each other.
You are brought together to solve a problem that is in our community, by working in a deliberative fashion. And we believe that is what you did.
And when you make your punitive damage award and your fine and you penalize them, it should not be from a place of hatred. It should be from a place of teaching a lesson or letting the word be known. And it will be as a result of somber conduct.
I can see you're ready. That's why I've only got a couple minutes left. I feel the obligation to render unto you whatever persuasive statement I can make to see this through to its completion as you want and say that no matter what you do, no matter what you do, the family I represent thanks you. And
we'll never forget you and what you did this day.
So we know you're ready. We know you know what's right. You've spoken to us. There's really nothing more to say.
I just -- the picture of Laura on that beach that -- I don't know why, but for some reason I think about it. I see it. It sustained us through this, and I'm just so thankful that we've gotten as far with you, folks, because it has been a long path to justice.
And Martin Luther King said -- and I know, enough with the quotes, enough with the songs, enough with the book references. I've got a hundred more that I never got to.
But, as Martin Luther King said, he said: The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice.
And that's what's happening now. And I say it's a historic moment. And a little person can change the world. And it may just be one brick in the wall. And if that's what we've done today, it says something. It means something. And to me, it's meaningful.
I thank you.
