MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Counsel.  John.  Good 
morning. 
THE JURORS:  Good morning. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  The first thing I want to 
do is explain to you -- first of all, thank you for 
giving up your time, several weeks of your life, 
for this trial.  On behalf of John Hackimer and the 3088
rest of the team, we really appreciate the 
sacrifice that you made to make this process that 
we call the American civil justice system work.  
Thank you. 
The second thing I wanted to tell you is I am 
going to split up my time with Mr. Freidin, I am 
going to go for about an hour and 15 minutes, he's 
going to go for about 20 minutes, and then I'll 
have an opportunity at the very end, very briefly, 
to talk to you.  
And the last thing I wanted to talk to you 
about is I want to introduce one more member that 
you didn't -- you actually saw -- you actually 
heard him when he was deposing Dr. Figlar.  You 
heard the voice, but you never saw the person.  
Well, this is Gary Paige back there.  
MR. PAIGE: (Raises hand.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  He was the lawyer that was 
taking the depositions.  
So I want to talk to you about some of the 
issues in this case. 
MR. PHILIPSON:  Want me to start it?
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Yeah.  
This is a -- this case is about a conspiracy 
that started in 1953, when John was a little boy. 3089
And, you know, it went on until 2000, way after he 
was injured and suffered from COPD.  I mean, it 
culminated in 1954, when the heads of tobacco 
companies went in front of Congress, swore to tell 
the truth, and lied, and lied to Congress about the 
health effects and addictive nature of smoking. 
And this was a massive conspiracy.  It was a 
well-funded conspiracy.  It was a conspiracy that 
reached every level of our -- of our lives.  And it 
was massive.  And it cost the lives of 20 million 
Americans.  And caused a significant and serious 
illness to John Hackimer.  And that's what we're 
here to talk about. 
If you'll look at some of the documents that 
you've seen already, this was one of them that was 
actually published by the -- this is one of the 
leakage documents that talks about the simple 
truth.  And it talks about how heavy cigarette 
smoke -- smokers thus appear to be true addicts.  
You know, they knew it.  They knew what they 
were doing.  They knew how addictive nicotine was.  
They purposely did these things, said these things 
because they knew, they knew an addicted smoker, if 
they had a choice and they had competing messages, 
they would choose the competing message that 3090
created doubt and confusion, and they knew it, and 
they purposely did this.  
These were very smart men and women, very 
educated, knew more about the science, knew more 
about the medicine, knew more about addiction than 
anyone.  
And what they knew is if you don't grab the 
kids, if you don't hook the kids, your business is 
done.  They knew that.  And they made that the 
focal point.  They made that the focal point of 
their marketing practices.  
And, you know, here are documents that talk 
about "School days are here, and that means big 
business for somebody.  Let's line up the most 
popular students." 
You know, the most popular students, let's get 
the most popular students, give them cigarettes so 
that they look cool so that other kids will follow 
and that they would have lifelong customers, 
knowing that they were peddling death. 
They did it intentionally.  They did it 
purposely.  And they did it for one thing and one 
thing only, is to make money, and they didn't care 
who they hurt. 
You know, the records are clear even as early 3091
as 1960, they had marketing studies of 14- to 
24-year-old age group.  They talk about how this 
represents 21 percent of the population.  
They even knew to a -- to a -- to a 
percentage, to a percentage, you know, the number 
of kids in this country and what they had to do to 
grab that market.  
"They represent tomorrow's cigarette 
business."  And that's all they cared about.  "As 
this 14 to 24 age group matures for at least the 
next 25 years."  That's all they cared about.  They 
knew if they grabbed the kids and they had them for 
the next 25 years, they would stay in business.  
And this was massive.  This was well funded.  
This was intentional.  This was purposeful.  These 
men and these women did it for one thing and one 
thing only.  
One of the things you didn't see in any of 
those documents from anyone is where they showed 
one, one statement where they cared about any 
smoker.  All they cared about was their profits.  
And that's not right.  That's not right.  
I want to talk to you about the very first 
question on the verdict form, which is "Was John 
Hackimer addicted to cigarettes containing 3092
nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal 
cause of his COPD/emphysema?"  And that's basically 
two questions.  The first question is, was he 
addicted, and was that addiction a, not the legal 
cause, a legal cause of his COPD/emphysema. 
So let's talk about that.  I want to talk 
about the addiction component of it.  And then 
Mr. Freidin is going to talk to you about the 
medical causation component of that question.  
Okay?  
So, you know, you talk -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor.  If you 
could take that down, I need to make an objection 
on it.
THE COURT:  Sure.  Counsel, sidebar.
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) 
THE COURT:  What's the objection?  
MR. FURR:  This is the same issue that came up 
in Purdo, if the Court will remember.  He's got a 
slide where he's going to say the class membership 
is not about choice.  Obviously, that's an 
incorrect statement of law under the Florida 
Supreme Court's opinion that says a class 
membership, it's not an issue of whether the smoker 3093
smoked because of addiction or some other thing 
like their decision to smoke for weight control or 
some other choice that they made. 
THE COURT:  If I recall correctly, I allowed 
him to use it in Purdo, but just made that correct 
statement saying -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I didn't say anything about 
the law.  I'm saying here this is not about this in 
class membership.  And I'm going to read the 
instruction.  I could argue the instructions 
whatever way I want. 
THE COURT:  Isn't that what we did in Purdo?
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Yeah.  
MR. FURR:  What he cannot say, though, is that 
choice is not part of the analysis as a matter of 
law. 
THE COURT:  Yeah.  No, he's not going to do 
that.  He's just going to use the jury instruction, 
that's fine. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I'm going to use -- but I 
can say addiction, it's not about choice, It's not 
about -- 
THE COURT:  That's fine. 
MR. FURR:  Okay.  We'll see what he says.
THE COURT:  Okay. (The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.) 

MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Go ahead, put it up.  
So, you know, keep your eye on the ball.  Keep 
your eye on the ball because addiction is not about 
choice.  People don't choose to be addicts; right?  
Addiction is not about the ability to quit, because 
their own expert admits that even if you are 
addicted and you quit, that doesn't mean that you 
weren't addicted from the beginning.  So the fact 
that you were able to quit does not have any 
determinative factor on whether you were addicted. 
It's not about the known dangers of smoking.  
That has nothing to do about whether you are 
addicted.  And it's not about control.  It's not 
about control.  
Those things have nothing to do with addiction 
at all.  
In fact, this is the legal standard that 
you're going to hear.  "Addiction to cigarettes is 
a legal cause of COPD/emphysema if it directly and 
in natural and continuous sequence produces or 
contributes substantially to producing such 
COPD/emphysema so that it can be reasonably -- 
reasonably be said that but for the addiction to 3095
cigarettes, the COPD would not have occurred."  
And think about it this way under the but-for 
addiction.  If he was not addicted, would he have 
smoked one, two, three packs a day for over 32 
years?  Would somebody do that, smoke up to three 
packs a day for over 32 years if they're not 
addicted?  
Use your common sense.  
And there is also an instruction -- I think 
this is very important -- this is called the 
concurring cause instruction.  It says, "In order 
to be regarded as a legal cause of COPD/emphysema, 
addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause.  
Addiction to cigarettes may be a legal cause of 
COPD/emphysema even though it operates in 
combination with some other cause if the addiction 
contributes substantially to producing 
COPD/emphysema."  
So there are other factors that could play a 
role in you getting addicted and causing your 
disease.  And the law allows for that.  And that's 
what this instruction does.  
So nicotine addiction is the reason people 
smoke enough to get sick.  And, you know, you 
heard, you know, Dr. Giakas.  He put up this -- 3096
this was the defense addiction expert.  He put up 
this and he talked about how, you know, smokers 
report many reasons for smoking, you know, 
pleasure, relaxing, social aspect, weight control, 
opportunity to take breaks, you know, things of 
that nature.  
But, you know, Reynolds knows the real reason.  
And you know how they know the real reason?  
Because they spent hundreds of millions of dollars 
researching this and studying this, and no one has 
studied more about this and their internal records 
say that we now know more about addiction than 
what's published in the literature.  
And what do they say about that?  They say, 
"If it were not for nicotine in the tobacco smoke, 
people would be little more inclined to smoke 
cigarettes than they are to blow bubbles or light 
sparklers."  
I mean, that's -- that's the truth.  
Internally, that's what they were saying.  Nicotine 
is the reason people smoke one pack, two pack, 
three packs a day.  Not because they are bored.  
"Addicted smokers smoke for enjoyment and to 
reduce unpleasant feelings.  The addicted smoker 
suffers whenever he is without a cigarette." 3097
"He suffers when he is without a cigarette." 
"Nicotine addiction contributes substantially 
to producing COPD/emphysema."
And look at their internal records.  Because 
Reynolds and their co-conspirators knew that 
nicotine is the important chemical that keeps 
addicted smokers smoking.  
You know, let's look at some of these.  It 
talks about "Moreover, nicotine is addictive.  We 
are then in the business of selling nicotine, an 
addictive drug effective in the release of stress 
mechanisms."  
"Therefore, in the design of any cigarette 
product, the dominant specification should be 
nicotine delivery.  Nicotine is a potent drug.  Our 
industry is based upon the design, manufacture, and 
sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine.  We 
provide a product that is essential -- that is an 
essential commodity in an habituating act."  
And it talks about how you put the rat in the 
cage, you hit the lever, and he gets a reward.  And 
smokers, and they compare smokers exactly to those 
rats.  That's what they did.  
And you had an instruction about experts and 
believability of experts.  And let's look at the 3098
quality of the witnesses that we brought you.  We 
brought you a professor from Stanford who has made 
his lifelong professional career studying the 
tobacco company.  Okay?  
We brought Dr. Henningfield by video 
deposition.  He's a professor at Johns Hopkins.  
He's a former investigator for the nicotine 
addiction for the NIDA, he's a former lead 
scientist for FDA, he's published over 400 journal 
articles, two-thirds of them on nicotine addiction.  
He's a consultant for the CDC, he's on the standing 
committee member of the World Health Organization, 
he's testified before Congress.  This is a man who 
studied this area and this subject.  Okay.  
And who do they bring?  Who do they bring?  
They bring a -- they bring a gentleman, a doctor 
who has never published on nicotine addiction, who 
has never lectured on nicotine addiction, who has 
never performed any studies on nicotine addiction.  
Less than 1 -- an expert, this is the expert, who 
is less than 1 percent of his patients are treated 
exclusively for nicotine addiction.  And even the 
substance abuse people that he treats, patients he 
treats, only 10 to 15 percent.  But he spends 35 
percent of the time testifying in court. 3099
That's the expert?  That's the expert who has 
made $2 million from tobacco companies in the last 
eight years, who's never written anything, who 
admits that if you Google him and nicotine, you're 
not going to get anything?  This is the expert?  
And in all the cases that he's testified in, 
13 cases, the smokers are 0 and 13.  And he wants 
to make it 0 and 14.  
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, this is 
improper. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  Move to strike the argument, 
improper. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  And he's only been asked to 
be an expert by the tobacco companies.  No one else 
in the world has ever asked him to be an expert on 
nicotine addiction, only the tobacco companies.  
That's the qualifications when you do the 
comparison of the two.  Who is the real expert?  
And what did Jack Henningfield, 
Dr. Henningfield say?  He talked about that 400 
percent more nicotine receptors in the brain.  The 
time of the first cigarette is very important.  And 
you heard from John that one of the first things he 3100
did when he woke up is he reached for a cigarette.  
He talks about how one pack a day or more is a 
heavily addicted smoker.  And he talked about the 
Fagerström is the most widely used test for 
nicotine addiction.  I went through it with John.  
He answered all the questions.  He's heavily 
addicted.  
He talked about the Heaviness of Smoking 
Index, which is basically how much you smoke and 
when you smoke.  Those are the two most important 
factors.  Well, in his case, that's the first thing 
he does when his eyes open in the morning, the very 
first thing he does is he reaches for a cigarette; 
right?  And there was a time that he was smoking up 
to three packs a day.  Now, we're going to talk 
about how long it takes to do that.  
And let's talk -- you know, you're not going 
to get -- you know, you just got the law.  There 
was no definition of addiction.  You don't have to 
accept any definition of addiction.  None.  It's up 
to you to decide and use your common sense and 
experience.  What is addiction?  What is nicotine 
addiction?  
But let's look at what their own corporate 
scientist for R.J. Reynolds says is a layperson's 3101
definition of -- a laypeople like you, what is the 
definition?  Can you play that?  
(Videotaped deposition of Michael Borgerding, 
Ph.D., played as follows:)
BY MR. PAIGE:  
Q.
Dr. Borgerding, on behalf of R.J. Reynolds, if 
you can give a layperson definition of addiction, what 
would you say? 
A.
In terms of a layperson definition of 
addiction, I believe that a reasonable definition would 
be something that someone does for an extended period of 
time and they have difficulty quitting. 
(Videotaped deposition stopped.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  And let's look at that.  
That's a very simple definition.  How does it fit 
John?  Well, it fits John because he smoked for 
over 30 years.  He smoked three packs a day.  It 
took him two months to quit smoking.  He needed 
prescription medication.  He failed multiple times 
while he was trying to quit.  It took him two 
months. 
And what does Dr. Henningfield say about 
addiction?  
(Videotaped deposition of Jack E. 
Henningfield, Ph.D., played as follows:) 3102
A.
As I mentioned, you can boil it down to what 
is sometimes called the Heavy Smoking Index, which is 
two items from it, how much you smoke and when do you 
smoke.  In my opinion, well, it's really two.  It's 
number of cigarettes.  So if somebody is smoking more 
than a pack of cigarettes per day, virtually every day, 
that is a sign that they are very likely heavily 
dependent.  
And the waking-up cigarette.  People that 
smoked more quickly when they get out of bed regularly 
are more likely to have higher cotinine levels, higher 
nicotine levels in their blood, stronger withdrawal, 
greater difficulty in quitting, and so forth. 
(Videotaped deposition stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Lay the facts on top of 
this testimony, and it's obvious that John is 
addicted.  
You know, they brought you the DSM.  And they 
actually read this portion of the DSM to you.  They 
published -- put it up there.  And it said, "Note 
that the word 'addiction' is not applied as a 
diagnostic term in this classification."  
It's over.  They admit that the criteria that 
they're using from the book, the book says, "Note 
that the word 'addiction,'" which you have to 3103
decide whether he was addicted, "is not applied as 
a diagnostic term in this classification." 
So they're using a book that doesn't even 
apply, but let's look at the facts.  This is a 
young man who started smoking between 10 and 11.  
He became a regular smoker by high school in 1961.  
He smoked first thing in the morning as soon as he 
could.  He only went to places where he could 
smoke.  His favorite cigarette of the day was when 
he first got out of bed in the morning.  He started 
smoking one pack a day and went all the way up to 
three packs a day.  He smoked while he was sick in 
bed.  He never intended to smoke for over 30 years 
of his life.  
He tried quitting cold turkey.  He tried 
cutting down.  Couldn't concentrate at work, he had 
to leave his office to smoke every few minutes.  He 
suffered from withdrawal anxieties and symptoms, 
irritability, insomnia, agitation, anxiety.  He was 
on the edge.  I mean, by the way, this is a 
criteria that the expert gave him.  
And he always had a cigarette near him or 
around him.  He craved cigarettes.  Would 
constantly smoke everywhere, in the house, in the 
car, at work, in bed. 3104
Why would somebody do that if they weren't 
addicted?  
There were times that he would wake up in the 
middle of the night to smoke.  Wake up in the 
middle of the night to smoke.  Who does that unless 
they are addicted?  
He tried several times to quit, but was 
unsuccessful until he was finally diagnosed in 1993 
with COPD.  And then he used the patch, and it took 
him two months.  He still has cravings to this day.  
I mean, this is a classic profile of a heavily 
addicted smoker, heavily addicted.  You know, let's 
look at the -- if you were to take the average 
amount of cigarettes that he was smoking, let's say 
he smoked -- you know, we know he smoked more than 
32 years, but let's use 32 years.  And let's -- we 
know he started at one, then he went to two, then 
he went to three packs a day, but let's you use two 
packs as an average; right?  
So for 32 years he smoked two packs a day.  
That's 14,600 cigarettes a year; right?  And the 
cigarettes smoked over 32 years, that's almost half 
a million cigarettes; right?  And it takes an 
average -- let's say it takes an average of about 
ten minutes to smoke.  That's almost 5 million 3105
minutes.  That's 4.972 minutes.  In hours, that's 
77,866 hours.  In number of days spent smoking, at 
16 hours -- remember, it's not 24 hours, you're 
awake 16 hours a day.  That's 4,866 days.  And 
actual time spending, using or smoking, okay, is 
13.33 years.  That means if we were to lock him in 
a room there and tell him to smoke, he would smoke 
for 13.3 years.  
Let's put it in context.  Let that sink in.  
That's how much smoking he did.  And he wasn't 
addicted?  Something he did for -- that would take 
13 point -- 13.33 years and he's not addicted?  How 
does that make any sense?  
Half the time that he's awake, he was smoking. 
Now, there are many carcinogens and compounds 
in cigarettes.  Dr. Proctor told you about some of 
them.  There is hundreds of thousands of them.  
There is over 70 of them that cause cancer.  
And, you know, nicotine is a disease.  90 -- 
90 to 95 percent of all COPD cases are caused by 
smoking cigarettes.  Smoking cigarettes is the 
number one cause of lung cancer.  There is 
thousands of chemicals in smoke, like cyanide, 
arsenic, polonium-210.  
You know, 50 percent -- one of the things that 3106
Dr. Proctor told you from his research is 50 
percent of all long-term smokers, 50 percent of all 
regular smokers will die of a smoking-related 
disease.  
That's not something they told him when he was 
10 or 11 years old.  
Over 500,000 Americans die each year from a 
smoking-related disease.  
So we know the addiction caused him to 
continue to smoke, and that continued smoke caused 
his COPD.  
And all we have to do is prove it by the 
greater weight of the evidence.  This isn't we have 
to prove it a hundred percent.  It's just the 
greater weight of the evidence, which means the 
more pervasive [sic] and convincing force and 
effect of the entire evidence in the case. 
That's all.  All we have to do is tilt the 
scales.  But we've done more than that.  We've done 
more than that.  We've gotten -- we've brought you 
the world's best experts from the historical aspect 
of medicine, science, and the tobacco industry, to 
nicotine addiction, to one of the foremost experts 
in the world on COPD.  
And they knew a lot about nicotine addiction. 3107
I mean, this is more documents from their internal 
records.  "Without the chemical compound, the 
cigarette market would collapse, Philip Morris 
would collapse, and we'd all lose our jobs and our 
consultant fees."  That's all they cared about.  
You didn't -- like I said, you're not going to see 
a document that says they care about smokers, that 
they're hurting people.  This is what they say 
they're worried about, they are worried about their 
pocketbook. 
"However, we can never be comfortable selling 
a product which most of our customers would stop 
using if they could.  That is to say, if the exit 
gates from our market should suddenly open, we 
could be out of business almost overnight."  That's 
what they cared about.  They concealed; they didn't 
reveal.  
So, again, "addiction is a legal cause if it 
produces or contributes substantially to producing, 
but for the addiction, to cigarettes, the 
COPD/emphysema would not have occurred."  
Would he have smoked one, two, three packs a 
day for over 30 years if he wasn't addicted?  
And the answer to that question is yes.  If 
the answer to that question is no, we go home.  The 3108
case is over.  We're done.  
But we've proved this case not only by the 
greater weight of the evidence, but by the 
overwhelming amount of evidence in this case.  
I want to talk to you a little bit about the 
world that John was born into, because the culture 
of smoking was created by them.  Was created by 
Reynolds and their co-conspirators.  They created 
that culture.  He grew up in a small country town 
called -- was it Maple Shade?  Very small town 
where kids congregated at the little candy shop; 
right?  They played pinball and they had shakes and 
they smoked cigarettes.  That's the world he was 
born into.  They shaped that culture.  They shaped 
that culture in the movies.  They shaped that 
culture everywhere.
His parents smoked.  At 16, his parents said, 
you know, you're old enough now, go ahead and 
smoke.  Get a job, buy your cigarettes, and smoke.  
That's the culture that he was brought into.  They 
created that culture.  People didn't wake up in the 
morning and smoke bananas.  They smoked cigarettes.  
They smoked cigarettes for a reason.  It was the 
most heavily marketed and advertised product in the 
United States, in America. 3109
They got ball players, football players, 
hockey players, golfers.  They did everything, they 
permeated every aspect of Americana to make smoking 
normal.  That's the life and that's the world that 
John was born into.  He wasn't born into this 
culture, he was born into that culture that they 
created and shaped purposely, intentionally.  
They glamorized it.  They had doctors, people 
posing as doctors say it was healthy for you, it's 
better for you.  Smoke this brand.  60 percent of 
all doctors smoked in the '50s and '60s.  They 
spent over $250 billion marketing cigarettes from 
19 -- as an industry from 1940 to 2004.  $250 
billion.  
That's a lot of marketing.  That's a lot of 
messaging.  That's a lot of impression.  And that's 
why people saw smoking as normal.  
Let's play some of these. 
(Video clip played as follows:) 
SPEAKER:  What cigarette do you smoke?  You'll 
be interested to know how the doctors of America 
answered that question.  It was Camel.  Yes, 
according to the survey, more doctors smoke Camels 
than any other.  
SPEAKER:  Do you inhale?  Then you're better 3110
off smoking Philip Morris.  And here is how you can 
prove it.  Light up a Philip Morris.  Take a puff.  
SINGER:  Don't miss the fun of smoking.  Don't 
miss the fun of smoking.  Mildness is a pleasure 
with Pall Mall.  
AUNT PEARL:  Winston tastes good. 
GRANNY:  Like a cigarette oughtta.  
MS. LONDON:  You get a lot to like with a 
Marlboro, filter. 
CHORUS:  Filter. 
FRED FLINTSTONE:  Okay, how's about taking a 
nap?  
BARNEY RUBBLE:  Hey, I've got a better idea.  
Let's take a Winston break.  
FRED FLINTSTONE:  That's it.  Winston is the 
one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times 
a pack.  Winston's got that filter blend.  
SPEAKER:  -- uses a fine quality tobacco.  And 
for another, I like Kent's filter.  To me, Kent is 
the mildest taste in smoking.  
SPEAKER:  And all over America, Kent with the 
Micronite filter is smoked by more scientists and 
by more educators than any other cigarette in the 
country.  Why not discover for yourself that for 
good smoking taste, it makes good sense to smoke 3111
Kent. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  You couldn't turn on the 
TV, you couldn't open up a magazine, you couldn't 
open up a newspaper, you couldn't drive down the 
street and go past a billboard where this wasn't 
part of Americana.  That's the world he was born 
in.  That's the world he grew up in.  That's the 
world he smoked in.  
Now I want to talk to you about -- I'm going 
to skip question 2 because Mr. Freidin is going to 
talk to you about question number 2.  But let's 
talk about question number 3 and 4.  And the judge 
read it to you.  But I want to focus in on certain 
parts of that that talk about -- see, because it's 
not so much about what they said, it's about what 
they concealed.  Okay?  
It's about what they concealed and did not 
reveal.  That's what this case is about.  Because 
they had the information and the knowledge that 
they should have shared and they didn't do it, and 
they purposely created doubt, created a controversy 
so that people, especially an addicted smoker, 
would continue to smoke, and it happened, and 
millions of people believed them, including John 3112
Hackimer.  And you can't create a conspiracy, you 
can't create a conspiracy of lies, controversy, and 
deceit.  People believe you, and then run.  
And it started 1953.  "It's fortunate" -- they 
knew.  I mean, they knew as early as 1953 this 
is -- this is -- these are the interviews with the 
scientists from the company in 1953.  "It's 
fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they 
can't break.  Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our 
company was the first to produce a cancer-free 
cigarette."  
It's 1953.  They didn't tell the world that.  
They didn't -- they concealed that.  They didn't 
reveal that.  They didn't tell John Hackimer and 
the rest of the world that. 
And it talks about here, "The very heads of 
the great corporations themselves signalized the 
end of the old days when they are linked arm" -- 
"they linked arms and walked together."  
I mean, they weren't going to let this thing 
happen.  They weren't going to let their business 
go out, go down the tubes, they weren't going to 
admit it.  They were making huge profits.  The 
number one marketed product in the United States, 
and they weren't going to give it up.  And it 3113
didn't matter to them how many people they killed 
or how many people they harmed.  They didn't care.  
They were going to do whatever it took. 
The Frank Statement says, "There is no proof 
smoking causes lung cancer.  We accepted interest 
in the people's health as a basic responsibility 
paramount to every other consideration in our 
business."  We know that's a lie from their 
internal documents.  
It says, "We believe the product we make are 
not injurious to health."  Lie.  They know that 
they did.  Here it is.  "We will always" -- "We 
always have and will always cooperate closely with 
those whose task it is to safeguard the public 
health."  
Like the Surgeon General calling them 
demagogic, calling them irresponsible.  Is that how 
they cooperate with the Surgeon General, every -- 
preempting him?  Is that how you cooperate?  Is 
that how you put people's interest in health first? 
"We accept an interest in people's health as a 
basic responsibility paramount to every other 
consideration of our business."  
Well, let's look at what the documents say.  
1954, "If any one of believe that the product we 3114
are making and selling was in any way harmful to 
our customers' health and our own as well, we would 
go voluntarily out of business."  That's what 
they're telling the world, right?  This is -- this 
is a speech that they gave; right?  This is what 
they're saying.  
They go out and they say, "If our product is 
harmful, we," this is James Bowling, he says, this 
is the vice president, "We'd stop making it."  
Right?  And they go on TV, these are the things, 
they go out in the public and they tell people, 
hey, we don't believe this.  If we believed this, 
we would stop doing it, we would change.  They are 
telling people this, people believed them.  
Millions and millions of Americans after the 
Surgeon General's Report, half of the -- half the 
smokers, over 25 million smokers believed. 
Look what they said in 1964.  
Go ahead, play it. 
(Video clip played as follows:)  
MR. HOWARD CULLMAN:  I don't think the 
industry admits there are any bad elements.  If 
there are bad elements, through our laboratories, 
through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, 
through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find 3115
them, and if they are found, they will be removed.  
But at this point, we do not know.  
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  That's what they were 
telling the people.  We don't know, we don't 
believe, if we find something, we'll change, don't 
worry about it, we're looking into it.  Okay?  
But there was no doubt internally.  No doubt 
internally.  "The individuals we met believed that 
smoking caused lung cancer.  Carcinogens are found 
in practically every class of compound in smoke.  
Obviously, the amount of evidence accumulate to 
indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is 
overwhelming.  The evidence challenging such an 
indictment is scant."  Scant, meaning very little.  
"Cigarettes have certain unattractive side 
effects, they cause lung cancer."  Well, that's an 
understatement.  
"They may be truly causative in emphysema," 
et cetera, et cetera.  And they knew that.  This is 
1963, causative of emphysema.  They didn't come out 
and say to people, hey, listen, smoking causes lung 
cancer, smoking causes emphysema.  They said the 
opposite, when their own research, their own -- 
their own scientists are telling them this. 3116
"Bronchitis and emphysema.  These are serious 
diseases involving millions of people.  The 
cigarette industry may be in greater trouble in 
this area than in the lung cancer field."  1963.  
He's just started smoking on a regular basis.  
He's a young man.  All they had to do is reveal and 
not conceal.  Change history for this man.  
Oh, sorry.  
You know, John started smoking in 1956, 1957, 
shortly after the conspiracy began.  He was ten 
years old.  They could have changed.  The suffering 
that this man is suffering every day to gasp for 
breath.  For the last 17 years, he's been attached 
to an oxygen bottle, breathing through a -- through 
these plastic cords that he sticks in his nose.  He 
can't even take a shower without labor.  He can't 
walk from there to here without stopping.  He can't 
enjoy the simplest pleasures of life.  
And all the time, if this could -- this is 
what they care about.  Patting themselves on the 
back.  "If this committee had not been formed, the 
cigarette industry by now would have been in a 
deplorable position."  Yeah, deplorable.  Saving 
lives is a deplorable position?  Telling people the 
truth?  Helping people?  Not causing death and 3117
suffering is a deplorable position for them?  
"We must in the near future provide some 
answers which will give smokers a psychological 
crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking."  
Let's keep it going.  Let's keep perpetuating.  
Obviously, the key word is confusion.  
"Anything we could do to confirm such a situation 
would work to our advantage."  
"Doubt is Our Product since it is the best 
means of competing with the body of" -- quote, 
"body of fact that exists in the minds of the 
general public.  It is also the means to establish 
a controversy."  Why would you want to establish a 
controversy when you know your product is killing 
people and harming them?  
A reasonable corporation doesn't act that way.  
"The most important story is one which 
create -- casts doubt on the cause-and-effect 
theory of disease and smoking.  The CTR and the 
industry have publicly and frequently denied what 
others find as truth" -- quote, "truth.  Let's face 
it, we are interested in evidence which we believe 
denies the allegations that cigarette smoking 
causes diseases."  1970.  
That's what they cared about.  That's why they 3118
spent hundreds of million of dollars.  They spent 
over $600 million funding The Tobacco Institute, 
the CTR and TIRC.  Over $600 million.  And they got 
what they wanted.  People believed.  John believed.  
If everyone knew, why would this company spend 
$600 million creating a campaign of doubt and 
confusion?  
And this is what they were saying. 
Please play it. 
(Video clip played as follows:) 
MR. JOSEPH CULLMAN:  I don't believe that most 
people who smoke get lung cancer.  We are now in an 
era, as you know, of moderation.  We have smoking 
habits, which incidentally are today changing the 
type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to 
filters.  
We do talk to the question of whether or not 
cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not believe that 
cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't accept that.  
Because when, as, and if any ingredient in 
cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to 
human health, we are confident that we can 
eliminate that ingredient. 
MR. MINTZ:  Do you believe that cigarettes are 
safe?  Have they been proved to be safe, 3119
Mr. Cullman?  
MR. JOSEPH CULLMAN:  I believe they have not 
been proven to be unsafe. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  They haven't been proven to 
be unsafe, creating doubt, confusion, controversy.  
When he said that, he knew that that was not true.  
You know, the confidential polls that they -- 
they knew their campaign was working.  They knew 
it.  They knew it.  And this thing was working.  
They would poll people, they would do these 
confidential polls, they would ask the smokers, 
they would ask the smokers do you believe, and they 
found that half of them, half of the smokers in 
1964, after the Surgeon General Report, after the 
Surgeon General Report, did not believe or had 
doubts that smoking caused lung cancer.  
They got what they paid for.  It was working.  
They -- in fact, the conspiracy got greater, got 
more funded, they put more money into it, they put 
more resources into it, they put more time into it. 
They created this whole filter myth.  The word 
"filter," what's it supposed to filter out?  They 
told people that it was safer.  People believed it.  
People started switching.  And they knew all this 3120
time that it wasn't any safer.  
"Filter tip smokers, health reasons are 
apparently the primary reason, at least the stated 
reason for smoking filter tips.  The tabulation 
reveals the highest interest in trying filter tip 
cigarettes is shown among the younger smokers.  
Health factors again show up as the basic reason 
for people trying them."  This is their internal 
documents.  
"Health filters may be some prestige value.  
The public has been conditioned, conditioned to 
accept the filter effects of charcoal in other 
fields, and when charcoal was added to cigarette 
filters, filters improved" -- "proved to be an 
effective advertising gimmick."  
I mean, these guys didn't stop.  They went 
from almost no -- almost no filters in 1950 to 
almost all filters a decade later or two decades 
later.  They did that on purpose. 
"The sale of filter tip cigarettes making use 
of therapeutic claims is a purely merchandising and 
sales promotion."  This is 1953.  This is American 
Tobacco.  They knew it.  They knew that it didn't 
do anything.  
"As we know all too often, the smoker who 3121
switches to a hi-if cigarette," meaning filtered 
cigarette, "winds up smoking more units in order to 
provide himself with the same delivery which he had 
before."  
"We say here is our triple, quadruple 
quintuple filter capable of removing whatever 
constituents in smoke is currently suspect while 
delivering full flavor and incidentally, a nice 
jolt of nicotine.  The illusion of filtration is as 
important as the fact of filtration.  In most 
cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette 
was getting as much or more nicotine and tar that 
he would have gotten from a regular cigarette."  
So the whole time they're telling people 
switch to filters, it's safer for you, people 
believe it, and they know this whole time that it's 
not -- not only is it any safer, it could probably 
be worse for you.  
What reasonable corporations do that?  
"For nearly 20 years, the industry has 
employed a single strategy to defend itself on 
three major fronts, litigation, politics, and 
public opinion.  While the strategy was brilliantly 
conceived and executed over the years, helping us 
win" -- "helping us with" -- "helping us win 3122
important battles, it is only fair to say that it 
is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for 
victory."  
They wanted victory.  
"On the contrary, it has always been a holding 
strategy consisting of creating doubt about the 
health charges without actually denying it."
Conceal rather than reveal.  
An admission by -- you know, they use their 
money to hide the truth and to pay for lies.  
That's how they use their money.  Not to help 
people.  They use their money to hide the truth and 
to pay for lies.  "An admission by the industry 
that excessive cigarette smoking is bad for you is 
tantamount to an admission of guilt with regards to 
lung cancer problem.  This could open the door to 
legal suits in which the industry would have to" -- 
"would have no defense."  This is 1978. 
1982, "I stated that one of the elements of 
our legal defense was that there was no 
dose-response relationship between cigarette 
consumption and lung cancer and that what he was 
saying seemed to contradict that position."  
He said -- this is them talking amongst 
themselves internally.  Now they're talking about 3123
their -- "Our medical and scientific witnesses will 
say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, 
if not stating, that they lack credibility and 
integrity."  
They knew that when they put these scientists 
out, they were lying.  
1987, it talks about "At least some lawyer be 
looking over our shoulder, I do not concede that 
even one person dies of a chronic disease that is 
caused by smoking a cigarette."  And that was their 
position in 1953 to 2000.  2000.  Too late for John 
Hackimer.  Too late for him. 
"Historically, the joint industry funded 
smoking and health research program had not been 
selected against specific scientific goals, but 
rather various purposes such as public relations, 
political relations, et cetera.  In general, these 
programs have provided some buffer to public and 
political attack of the industry."  It was set up, 
the CTR/TIRC was set up as an industry shield in 
1954, and it acted as a front.  
"Tobacco money ain't so dirty anymore.  
Cheapest insurance the industry could buy and 
without the industry" -- "and without it, the 
industry would have to invent CTR or we'd be dead." 3124
Conceal.  They didn't reveal.  
If important -- and, you know, they destroyed 
documents.  They destroyed documents.  They hid the 
ball.  "If important letters and documents have to 
be sent, please send them to" -- "please send to 
home.  I will act on them and destroy." 
"Remove certain reports.  Once such actions is 
necessary for the successful defense of our present 
and future suits."  
Conceal, not reveal.  
"If, however, the results with nicotine are 
similar to those gotten with morphine and caffeine, 
we want to bury it."  When they do research and it 
comes out bad, they bury it, they destroy it, they 
conceal it, they don't reveal it. 
"CTR should work largely by means of contract 
thus reserving the right to control, control 
publications which might be detrimental to the 
industry.  The long-term scientific program should 
be carefully planned such that the results obtained 
should not be able to harm the industry.  Subjects 
to be avoided, attempts to relate human disease to 
smoking." 
Conceal, not reveal. 
And they went on TV, they went on radio.  Play 3125
some of these. 
(Video clip played as follows:) 
SPEAKER:  A California doctor said, "As a 
scientist, I find no persuasive evidence that 
cigarette smoking causes lung cancer."  
A New York doctor told Congress, "To claim 
there is now sufficient scientific evidence to 
establish that cigarette smoking causes disease is, 
in my opinion, unjustified."  
MR. DWYER:  Turning a significant health 
question into a publicity stunt is an insult to 
serious science.  
SPEAKER:  On emphysema, Dr. Levine.  
DR. LEVINE:  There are large numbers of us who 
have some background in this field who do not 
believe the evidence is sufficient for the 
statements that have been made. 
MS. BROWDER:  The case is still open.  The 
jury has not come in. 
MR. STOSSEL:  It may not be harmful, you are 
not convinced?  
MS. BROWDER:  It may be or it may not be.  We 
don't know. 
MR. DWYER:  So insofar as the correlation 
between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are 3126
concerned, no one knows.  It may, it may not.  How 
can cigarette smoking be a cause of lung cancer if 
the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown?  In 
fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer.  No one 
who values scientific evidence should assume that 
cigarettes cause cancer of the lung. 
MR. KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking does not cause 
lung cancer, yes or no?  
MR. HORRIGAN:  It is not known whether 
cigarettes cause cancer, has not been causally 
established. 
MR. KOPPEL:  Cigarette smoking, no causal 
relationship between cigarette smoking and 
emphysema?  
MR. HORRIGAN:  Despite all of the research to 
date there has been no causal link established. 
SPEAKER:  Do cigarettes cause cancer?  
MR. MERRYMAN:  I don't know if they do or not. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Stop it there.  The man you 
just saw before, that was 1984, that was the 
president of R.J. Reynolds.  He went on TV on 
Nightline, told the American public that smoking 
does not cause COPD/emphysema.  That's what he said 
in 1984. 3127
But they want you to believe that before 
May 5th, 1990, John Hackimer, a man with a high 
school education, a man who grew up in Maple Shade, 
a man who had a blue collar work -- who went to 
work every day, knew more about what causes 
emphysema/COPD than them.  
That's what they want you to believe.  That's 
what they want you to believe.  
(Video clip played as follows:) 
MS. BANKS:  I'm not in a position to give you 
a does or does not answer.  
MR. TISCH:  The data that we have been able to 
see has all been statistical data that has not 
convinced me that smoking causes death.  
MR. CAMPBELL:  We don't know what causes 
cancer in general right now, so I think that we may 
find out what causes cancer and we may find out 
some relationship, which has yet to be proven.  
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  And, you know, they 
perpetuated this whole fraud with the light 
cigarettes and ultra-light cigarettes, you know, 
because filters wasn't enough. 
Let's now introduce lights and let's tell 
people if they smoke low tar and nicotine 3128
cigarettes, light cigarettes that they were safer, 
and use ultra-lights for the same reason.  They 
perpetuated this fraud and the whole time they know 
it's not true.  
How do people stop smoking.  "We might then 
design products to intercept people who are trying 
to give up smoking.  Those who are currently 
smoking lights do so because they are better for 
you than the full-flavored cigarettes, although 
some perceive they actually smoked more lights.  
They perceive that they are cutting down and it is 
an alternative to quitting which most cannot 
accomplish.  
"Most smokers can be the considered nicotine 
seekers for the pharmacological effects of 
nicotine.  If the industry introduction of an 
acceptable low-nicotine product" -- "products does 
it make it easier for dedicated smokers to quit 
than the wisdom of the introduction is subject to 
debate."  
So they are even thinking about, listen, if we 
do this and people quit using these -- these -- 
this is not good for us.  This is not good for us.  
I mean, these guys want to catch you on every end.  
The industry wants to catch a smoker at every 3129
end.  They want to find that sweet spot.  What's 
that sweet spot that we could say something, do 
something, put something out there to get them to 
continue to believe us so that they continue to 
smoke.  Let's give them a rationale, a crutch, so 
they can continue to smoke. 
These are very smart people.  These are very 
smart people, well funded, permeated every aspect 
of Americana.  This message got out.  Millions of 
people believed them.  He believed them.  These are 
the evidence of it.  We're not making it up.  These 
are their words, not ours.  
"They switch brands to find one that would not 
cause irritation, coughing, and to find one that 
would reassure them that they are doing the right 
thing for health reasons."  They knew that.
"To discover ways to exploit the benefit of 
smoking, the advantage and profitability of our 
major companies, switching to low-delivery 
cigarettes, more illusory than real in effect" -- 
"effective intake reduction since they will likely 
compensate with large and more frequent puffs and 
more cigarettes."  
What they say is listen, this is going to be 
perfect for us, we are going to double up here 3130
because if we produce a low-tar, low-nicotine 
cigarette, people will smoke more, right, because 
what they want is the nicotine and we'll sell more 
cigarettes.  And they're pedaling more death and 
disease and they know it.  And it worked and it 
wasn't just John, it was millions of people.  
Millions of people believed them. 
(Video clip played as follows:) 
SPEAKER:  It hasn't been proven in black and 
white.  
SPEAKER:  They come and out and really say 
well, you are going to get it, I'll stop then, but 
when they just keep on saying some say you do, some 
you don't, I'll just keep on. 
SPEAKER:  You know they say it causes cancer 
and heart disease, do you believe that?  
MR. GAINES:  No, I don't.  Not in my heart I 
can't believe it.  I look back at the peoples that 
makes the cigarettes, and I feel like that the one 
that make the cigarettes should know what they're 
doing.  
(Video clip stopped.) testimony ALEX ALVAREZ: 3131
Q.
Did you hear or read statements about the 
tobacco companies, about the harms of smoking, what they 
thought? 
A.
Q.
Yes. 
What did you hear from them about the harms of 
smoking, what they were telling you? 
A.
They said there was no proof, it has never 
been proven. 
Q.
A.
Q.
And did you believe that?  
Oh, yes. 
And when you read newspaper articles in the 
'70s that talked about the harms of smoking, was the 
tobacco companies still at that time disputing the harms 
of smoking?
A.
Q.
A.
Q.
A.
Yes.  
And did you believe them as well?  
Yes. 
Did you believe those statements as well? 
Yes.  ALEX ALVAREZ:  He was just one more person 
of the millions and millions of people that 
believed it.  Just one more.  And they stood before 
Congress and the American people and told lies 3132
knowing that they would intentionally be harming 
smokers.  
(Video clip played as follows:) 
REPRESENTATIVE WYDEN:  Let me begin my 
questioning on the matter of whether or not 
nicotine is addictive.  Let me ask you first, and I 
would like to just go down the row, whether each of 
you believes that nicotine is not addictive.  I 
heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes 
or no.  Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?  
MR. CAMPBELL:  I believe nicotine is not 
addictive, yes. 
REPRESENTATIVE WYDEN:  Mr. Johnston.
MR. JAMES JOHNSTON:  Congressman, cigarettes 
and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic 
definitions of addiction.  There is no 
intoxication. 
REPRESENTATIVE WYDEN:  We'll take that as a 
no.  And again, time is short.  If you could 
just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not 
addictive, we just would like to have this for the 
record. 
MR. TADDEO:  I don't believe that nicotine or 
our products are addictive.  
MR. TISCH:  I believe nicotine is not 3133
addictive.  
MR. HORRIGAN:  I believe that nicotine is not 
addictive.  
MR. SANDEFUR:  I believe that nicotine is not 
addictive.  
MR. DONALD JOHNSTON:  And I, too, believe that 
nicotine is not addictive.  
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Reliance.  Did he rely?  
Did he believe?  Did he rely to his detriment on 
any statement of material fact by the Defendant 
that concealed or omitted material information?  
But for the reliance, the COPD/emphysema would not 
have occurred.  He would have acted differently and 
avoided his COPD had they stopped, had they stopped 
the lies.  
He believed them.  He relied on them.  You 
heard it from him.  
Let me talk to you a little bit about some of 
the material that was concealed from him.  You 
know, he didn't know that there was a controversy.  
He didn't know that they formed a conspiracy to 
form a controversy.  He didn't know all the 
ingredients, that there was polonium-210, cyanide, 
radioactive polonium, arsenic in cigarettes. 3134
He didn't know that 50 percent, that if you 
threw up -- if you flipped a coin, if you were a 
smoker, you had a 50 percent chance that you were 
going to die from smoking.  No one told him that.  
He didn't know that nicotine was a heavily 
addictive drug.  He didn't know that filters and 
low-tar cigarettes weren't any -- any safer.  In 
fact, they were more dangerous.  No one told him 
that.  They concealed.  They didn't reveal.  
So let's talk about that.  Because this is the 
question.  That they concealed or omitted material 
information.  Did they conceal or omit material 
information?  
This is what he said about lights and 
ultra-lights. testimony of John Hackimer played as follows:)  
BY MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  
Q.
A.
Q.
A.
Q.
A.
Q.
You smoked Winston Lights? 
Yes. 
Kent III Lights; right?  
Yes. 
How were light cigarettes being advertised?  
They were advertised as being safer.  
And did you switch to light cigarettes because 3135
you thought they were safer?  
A.
Q.
Yes. 
And how were ultra-light cigarettes being 
advertised?  
A.
Q.
Safer yet.  More safe.  
And did you switch to ultra-light cigarettes 
because you thought they were even safer than light 
cigarettes? 
A.
Q.
Yes. 
Was it the taste or was something else the 
reason you switched to Winston lights? 
A.
It was they were advertising lower tar and 
nicotine, I figured they were safer. 
(Video clip from CVN stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Action speaks louder than 
words.  Why would he go from filtered to light to 
ultra-light if he didn't believe that they were 
safer?  Why would he do that?  Why would he keep 
going from a unfiltered to a filtered to a light to 
an ultra-light if he didn't believe that he was 
trying a cigarette that was actually safer as it 
was being marketed?  Why would he do that?  
He relied on them.  That's the fraud that was 
perpetuated on him.  You heard it from his own 
voice sitting there, he told you why he did it. 3136
In fact, another part of this question says, 
"Did John Hackimer reasonably rely to his detriment 
on statements of material fact made by this 
Defendant?"  Did they make statements of material 
fact to him that concealed it?  Did they actually 
make statements?  
Let's look at some of the things that they 
said to him that he believed.  testimony of John Hackimer played as follows:)  
BY MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  
Q.
Were you aware from the things that you saw 
and heard, were you aware that the tobacco companies 
were saying that smoking had not been proven to be 
harmful?  
A.
Q.
A.
Q.
on TV?
A.
Q.
Yes.
Did you read about it in -- in newspapers?  
Yes.  
And did you see it on TV, statements like that 
Yes.  
And did you believe those statements?  That 
cigarettes had not been proven to be harmful? 
A.
Q.
Yes.  Yes. 
And did those statements that you saw and 3137
heard or that you read and saw and heard, did you 
believe it?  
A.
Q.
Yes. 
Now, you were in the courtroom for this entire 
time when Dr. Proctor was showing us advertisements, 
statements from tobacco executives on TV and in 
newspapers and magazines.  Were those some of the types 
of statements that you heard and saw?  
A.
I recognized them.  Yes, I recognized them, 
yes. 
Q.
And did you continue to believe those 
statements? 
A.
Q.
Yes. 
And did you continue to believe those 
statements and continue to smoke? 
A.
Yes.   ALEX ALVAREZ:  That's evidence that the 
conspiracy worked.  It worked.  Notice that I asked 
him what you believed, not what you were aware.  
It's what you believe in your heart.  And he 
believed in his heart what they told him and he 
continued to make decisions about switching and 
switching and switching and believing them the 3138
whole time. 
THE CLERK:  Counselor, one hour used. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Thank you. 
And now he's suffering the consequences from 
that reliance.  Now he's suffering the consequences 
of believing them.  
Let's talk about some of the information that 
was withheld from him that he didn't know.  testimony ALEX ALVAREZ:  
Q.
Were you aware that Reynolds and other tobacco 
companies formed a conspiracy in 1953 to conceal the 
harms of smoking and their addictive nature? 
MR. FURR:  Objection, argumentative. 
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
BY MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: 
Q.
A.
Q.
Were you aware of that?  
No.  
Did you know that there were scientists and 
doctors that were hired by the tobacco companies to talk 
about the -- that there was no harms of smoking or it 
wasn't proven, did you know that? 
A.
Q.
No.  
Did you know about the number of deaths from 3139
smoking? 
A.
Q.
No. 
Did you know that half of all regular smokers 
would die from a smoking-related disease? 
A.
Q.
No.  
Did you know that nicotine was a highly 
addictive drug? 
A.
Q.
No.
Did you know what type of chemicals were in 
cigarettes, like arsenic, cyanide, radioactive 
polonium-210?  
No.  
MR. FURR:  Objection, leading, argumentative. 
A.
Q.
BY MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: 
In smoke? 
THE COURT:  Overruled. 
No. 
A.
BY MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: 
Q.
Did you know that there was over 70 
cancer-causing constituents in every puff of smoke you 
inhaled?  Did you know that?  
A.
Q.
No.  
Did you know that light cigarettes were no 
safer than regular cigarettes? 
A.
No. 3140
Q.
A.
Was that important information? 
Yes.   ALEX ALVAREZ:  Those are all things they 
concealed from him.  We know that they told him it 
hadn't been proven, he believed it.  We know they 
told him to switch to filters, switch to lights, 
switch to ultra-lights, and he believed them.  And 
they concealed all this information, the whole time 
knowing it was not true, for one reason and one 
reason only, because they wanted to keep their 
customers, they wanted to keep people smoking, and 
they wanted to keep profits up, and they didn't 
care who they hurt, who they harmed.  
So when you are asked this question, the 
answer to both these is yes.  Both of them are yes.  
The first question is about Reynolds, and the 
second one is about their co-conspirators.  Because 
they are responsible for the acts of their 
co-conspirators, whether it's Philip Morris, 
whether it's the Tobacco Industry Research 
Committee, whether it's the Council for Tobacco 
Research, it doesn't matter.  They're 
co-conspirators.  They're co-conspirators.  They're 3141
all responsible for the acts.  So if it was a 
statement or something said by the tobacco 
industry, they're responsible for it as well.  
That's why the answer to 4 is yes. 
Let's talk to you a little bit about 
percentages of responsibility, because we have to 
compare the fault of Reynolds and the percentage of 
responsibility for John Hackimer.  They're not on 
an even playing field.  They're not on even -- 
because if two people go into an agreement, they 
both know the same information, then maybe it can 
be 50/50; right?  Because both people go into it 
knowing the same thing.  
But when one side goes in and lies to the 
other side, deceives the other side, withholds 
material information from the other side, it's not 
50/50.  It can't.  They're not on equal playing 
field.  
This young man, when he was ten years old, 
didn't have the information that they had.  Didn't 
have availability to the internal documents and the 
scientific research that they had.  How can they be 
equal?  How could it be 50/50?  
Now, he admits partial responsibility, but 
less than a hundred percent for causing his 3142
COPD/emphysema.  And what he admits, just so you 
know, is that he could have tried harder to quit.  
He could have tried harder to quit.  That's what 
he -- but he didn't know what they knew.  He could 
have quit earlier if the conspiracy would have 
ended.  It would have avoided him getting the 
disease.  
"30 to 40 percent of smokers either did not 
believe that smoking increased their risk of 
cessation" -- "or cessation reduces the risk.  
These propositions correspond to 15 to 20 million 
smokers in the United States.  Clearly, our efforts 
to educate the public on the health hazards of 
smoking and the benefits of quitting are not yet 
complete." 
This is from the 1990 Surgeon General's 
Report.  This is 1990.  He's still saying, look, 
there is 15 to 20 million Americans who still don't 
believe. 
"Smoking is more addictive than using heroin, 
hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke.  
We can't defend continued smoking as a free choice 
if the person is truly addicted."  
So when you compare responsibility between 
what they knew and what John knew, it's not equal. 3143
It's not even close.  
And, you know, you put down whatever figures 
you want.  You can put down whatever figures you 
want.  It's up to you.  No one tells you what to 
put down on this verdict.  You as a collective jury 
decide this, your unanimous verdict on each one of 
these counts.  
And what I would propose is 5 percent for John 
and 95 percent for Reynolds because they had an 
overwhelming amount of information that they 
concealed and did not reveal. 
Okay.  So this is probably the most important 
question I think on the verdict form, which is 
punitive damages are warranted in this case.  Okay?  
Because if you say yes to this -- if we get through 
the verdict form and you've said yes to all our 
claims except for number 2, which he's going to 
tell you you should say no to, which is for the 
Defense, we get to go to a punitive damage phase.
But let's talk about that.  You have read the 
instruction.  And I'm going to focus in on this one 
here, the last one here, that says, "Defendant's 
conduct was so reckless or wanting in care that it 
constituted a conscious disregard or indifference 
to the life, safety, or rights of persons exposed 3144
to such conduct."  Okay?  
That's gross negligence.  That's what they 
did.  Not only did they intentionally make those 
statements knowing it was going to harm people, but 
they were reckless and wanting in care.  They knew, 
they knew what they were doing.  They knew what 
they were doing.  
I mean, this was a broad, massive conspiracy 
that needs to be punished.  They need to be 
punished for the harms that they caused this man. 
You can also consider harms to others suffered 
by other persons not party to this lawsuit in 
assessing how reprehensible their conduct was.  
Okay?  
"The Defendant's conduct must be based on the 
same or similar conduct which has been shown by 
clear and convincing evidence to have caused 
Mr. Hackimer's COPD/emphysema."
They caused disease, destruction, and death to 
millions of Americans just like John Hackimer.  
They did it intentionally, did it purposely, and 
did it for money.  That has to be punished.  
Corporations cannot do that.  They cannot be 
allowed to purposely, intentionally lie and harm 
people so they can make a profit.  That is not what 3145
America is about.  
Your job is to uphold the law.  
"We deliberately downplayed the role of 
nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no 
knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him, 
and no desire to try it.  Instead, we somehow must 
convince him with wholeheartedly irrational reasons 
that he should try smoking in the hopes that he 
will for himself then discover the real 
satisfaction obtainable."  
You know, and here it is, let's look at some 
of these documents that talked about how they 
perpetuated the ritual of smoking to kids.  You 
know, this whole thing about the candy cigarettes, 
they knew that -- they knew that candy cigarettes 
were being sold.  
They told the Meyner -- they told, in a letter 
to Governor Meyner, who was in charge of regulating 
this, they said, look, we don't -- we don't 
authorize our consent to use our markings on these 
cigarettes, they're doing it on their own.  
That was a lie.  Here are the documents that 
says, "We have never raised any objection to use 
our label and it is not bad for advertising."  
Okay?  "We would raise no objection if you 3146
wish to" -- "if you wish" -- "and wish you good 
luck" -- "good fortune with it."  
"We would raise no objection and wish you all 
good fortune with it." 
Selling candy cigarettes to kids that look 
like real cigarettes so they could perpetuate the 
ritual, that's what they were about.  They knew 
they had to hook these kids.  
Fourth graders, they are writing to fourth 
graders and they're lying to these people saying -- 
these kids, saying there is no medical evidence, 
scientific evidence established that smoking 
directly causes lung -- human disease.  They tell 
fourth graders, second graders.  I mean, they go on 
and on and on.  
You know, it's estimated by the Surgeon 
General that 45,000 -- 4500 youngsters begin 
smoking every day.  Every day. 
THE CLERK:  Counselor, five minutes. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Very good. 
"The base of our business is the high school 
student."  
"Increase education programs to prevent young 
nonsmokers taking up practice."  
"Listed below are our future problems." 3147
This is what they saw as a problem.  Educating 
our kids is a problem.  
Is that revealing or concealing?  Is that 
showing that they care?  Is that showing that they 
care about people?  This is why they need to be 
punished for what they did to him.  
"Today's teenagers is tomorrow's potential 
smokers.  Young adults, a critical factor in the 
growth and decline of every major brand in 
companies over the last 50 years.  Just as our 
population" -- "just as a population which does not 
give birth will eventually dwindle."  
That's all they cared about.  They studied 
12-year-olds, what percent of 12-year-olds are 
smoking.  
"Who ain't for more money?"
"Our basic proposition in the cigarette 
controversy is subject to the charge, and may be 
subject to the finding, that we are making false or 
misleading statements to promote the sale of 
cigarettes."  
Punitive damages?  This case screams for 
punitive damages.  Screams for punitive damages.  
That's what this case is about.  Punishing them for 
what they did to him. 3148
The answer to that is yes.  
And this is the last -- I want to close by 
talking to you about compensatory damages.  And 
this is question number 6, which is, "What are the 
amount, if any, you find with respect to John 
Hackimer's pain and suffering, disability, physical 
impairment, mental anguish, inconvenience, 
aggravation of a disease or physical defect, and 
loss of the capacity for the enjoyment of life 
sustained in the past and sustained in the future 
as a result of his COPD/emphysema?"
So it's up to you.  There is no book.  There 
is no standard.  You guys decide what's fair, 
right, and reasonable in light of the evidence and 
what he suffered.  
He has suffered for the last 17 years.  He is 
reminded of his illness with every breath he takes, 
with every step he can't master.  
Life connected to a tube with a lifeline of 
oxygen, fearing and knowing the fear that he will 
die, that he will probably suffocate to death.  
That's his fate.  That's his fate.  
So it's a huge loss.  It's an enormous loss.  
And the only way that the law allows people to 
compensate -- to be compensated is through money 3149
damages.  
And we would suggest -- and you may think it's 
too low or you may think it's too high, you decide.  
But we would suggest $15 million as reasonable, 
fair compensation in this case for the enormous 
loss and destruction that this man has suffered for 
the last 17 years and for whatever time he has left 
knowing that he will die for what they did. 


MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  May it please this 
Honorable Court. 
THE COURT:  Yes, thank you. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I have 24 minutes, not 25.  
I am going to do my -- 24 minutes, I'll do my best 
to get it all done.  I have a lot to cover. 
Mr. Furr told you that we have to earn every 
point of the comparative fault.  Remember that?  He 
said you have to earn every point.  
All right, well, let's talk about that.  Okay?  
Well, I think the Plaza Hotel meeting is good for a 
few points; right?  How about the Frank Statement, 
that's good for a few points; right?  How about 
"Doubt is Our Product"?  That's good for some 
points; right?  
How about marketing to kids?  That's got to be 
worth a lot of points.  How about manipulating 
nicotine to keep smokers smoking?  That's got to be 
worth at least ten points.  How about the filter 
frauds?  How about the lights fraud?  How about the 
ultra-lights fraud?  
How about writing school letters to kids 
telling them that smoking doesn't cause cancer?  
How about those points?  
He talked about America and that this is 3275
America and let people make choices.  Right?  But 
in America, corporations, corporations have to act 
responsibly.  Right?  They can't lie, they can't 
cheat, they can't deceive people, and they can't 
cause death and suffering to people.  They can't do 
that. 
He talked about how today, it's 15 percent now 
of the population are smokers.  But that's not what 
it was when he was smoking.  You saw the statistics 
in the early '60s.  
Three-quarters of all kids in high school that 
were juniors and seniors smoked.  That's the world 
he was living in.  That's the world they shaped.  
That's not now.  
You have to punish them for what they did to 
him.  For what they did to him.  This isn't about a 
case that happened in 2016.  It's what they did to 
this man. 
He said that a cigarette didn't jump into 
John's mouth.  And that's true.  Right?  It was all 
part of the big marketing scheme.  He didn't pick 
up a banana and decide to smoke it.  Right?  He 
picked up a cigarette, a carefully designed device 
made by them to addict you.  Okay?  
So, no, it didn't jump into his mouth.  It was 3276
purposely placed there, strategically, by them.  
And the money didn't jump into their pockets.  
What they did is they purposely, intentionally lied 
to people to get it there.  And that's why punitive 
damages, that's why punitive damages are 
appropriate in this case.  Because corporations 
can't do that.  They can't lie, mislead, deceive 
people. 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, that's not 
the legal standard for punitive damages. 
THE COURT:  Well, I don't think that's what 
he's arguing.  
Overruled, you can continue. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  And cause harm to him.  
They can't do that. 
Let's talk a little bit about the statute of 
limitations.  I'm going to jump around, by the way.  
I may come back to it in a little bit, but these 
are my notes, so they're not in any particular 
order, okay?  So I'll do my best. 
They have to prove that -- let's talk about 
May 5th, 1990.  Nothing happened in his life on 
May 5th, 1990, that's just the statute period about 
when the lawsuit was originally filed in the class 
action.  They've got to go back five years, and 3277
that's the cutoff date.  That's all that means.  
Okay?  
But before May 5th, 1990, he was never ill 
that he went to a doctor.  He didn't miss any work.  
He didn't have any restrictions.  He didn't have a 
productive cough.  He didn't have any shortness of 
breath, okay, only when he ran from first to third.  
Okay?  
He never visited a doctor.  He never had a 
pulmonary function test which tells you if you have 
COPD.  It's the GOLD standard.  All the doctors 
said that.  He's never had one.  And there was no 
diagnosis of COPD.  And no one ever told him he had 
COPD.  Not a single person. 
Can you do this, put this one up?  
So, you know, this is a -- a knockoff of one 
of their boards.  Okay?  So they gave you -- they 
said no one spoke about -- you know, no fact 
witness talked about when he started smoking, 
brands, amount, when he knew, what he knew, when he 
knew, whether he tried to quit, all those things.  
You know, but I don't need to bring any of 
these people.  You know why?  Because I have the 
man that was there that happened to him.  He 
testified to all that.  He testified.  I don't need 3278
anybody else.  You have it from the horse's mouth.  
You have it from the horse's mouth.  You don't have 
to get it from anybody else. 
And with respect to addiction or expert in 
industry conduct, we have -- we brought Proctor.  
An expert in nicotine addiction, we brought 
Henningfield.  And Proctor talked about nicotine 
addiction and the impact it has on people.  So, you 
know, we brought witnesses.  
The other one I want to talk to you about 
is -- 
Let's do this one. 
Okay, they said that we didn't bring witnesses 
this or we didn't bring this person here.  Well, 
let's talk about that.  
In the Plaintiffs' case about John Hackimer 
and R.J. Reynolds and its co-conspirators, we 
played -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, I have no 
burden of proof to bring a witness.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  I'm saying what we brought.
THE COURT:  Sustained.  Just slightly 
rephrase. 
MR. FURR:  I think the slide should be taken 
down. 3279
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  No, I'm going to -- I'll -- 
THE COURT:  The slide is fine, Just indicate 
that it's Plaintiffs' view of the evidence.  That's 
fine.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  They don't have to do 
anything.  Right?  We have the burden of proof.  
But let me tell you what we brought.  Okay?  We 
brought two corporate representatives that -- by 
video deposition.  We brought Dr. Proctor.  We 
introduced over 200 internal documents and 
advertisements of the tobacco industry.  We played 
numerous video clips and played statements of 
employees and many of the co-conspirators.  Okay?  
And when you were shown the verdict form, you 
said this is all about John Hackimer, and that's 
the only name on the verdict form, well, that's not 
quite true, because this case is about both of 
them.  This is about two converging lines, right?  
Two converging lines, the tobacco company and John 
Hackimer.  And they purposely went after John 
Hackimer and millions of others just like him.  
And if you look at the verdict form, you know, 
once you get past class membership, it's about both 
of them.  It's about both of them.  
Defendant that concealed or omitted material 3280
information.  Defendant agreed to conceal material 
information.  When you do the percentage of the 
fault, the Defendant, R.J. Reynolds.  When you talk 
about punitive damages are warranted against the 
Defendant. 
Let's talk about the DSM.  One of the 
interesting things about the statute of limitations 
is that they have to prove that he knew or should 
have known through the exercise of reasonable care 
that he had COPD.  Right?  That's one of the things 
that we have to prove.  Right?  
Their own expert, their own expert, their 
addiction expert, says he doesn't meet criteria 
number 9, which is "Tobacco use is continued 
despite knowledge of having a persistent or 
reoccurrent physical or psychological problem that 
is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by 
tobacco." 
Their own expert says, look, he didn't know he 
had COPD, he had anything -- any problems from 
smoking, that's why he doesn't meet this criteria.  
So their own expert blows them out of the water on 
the statute of limitations.  Their own expert.
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, this 
misstates -- Dr. Giakas never addressed this 3281
criteria. 
THE COURT:  I'll sustain the objection. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Could we approach? 
THE COURT:  Sure.  Of course.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Yes, he did.  He said --  
MR. FURR:  Why don't you wait till I get up 
there?  You know I can't hear from back there. 
(The following proceedings were had before the 
Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) 
THE COURT:  Go ahead. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  He said that the only two 
criterias that he didn't meet was number 10 and 
number 11.  He didn't meet any of the other 
criterias.  That's what he said.  
MR. FURR:  He didn't say anything about why he 
didn't meet that criteria.  He never addressed that 
specifically.  He's making that up.  He never said 
that.
THE COURT:  I don't remember where -- 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Judge, he said that he 
reviewed every single one of the criteria. 
THE COURT:  Right.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  And the only ones the 
Plaintiff met were 10 and 11.  That's what he said.  
THE COURT:  He said he actually reviewed that? 3282
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Yes.  He went through every 
single one of them. 
MR. FREIDIN:  Otherwise his testimony would 
have no meaning.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Right.  
THE COURT:  Do you have his testimony?
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Dude, I'm right about this, 
Judge.  I'm right about this.  
MR. FURR:  No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.  
That's not what he said.  Here is the problem.  He 
said -- he told the jury why Dr. Giakas said that 
he didn't meet number 9.  That didn't happen.  He 
never addressed number 9.  He can't make up why 
Dr. -- 
THE COURT:  Does someone have the testimony?  
MR. FURR:  Yeah, what he just said. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Judge, he testified, he 
testified, he went through the criteria clearly.  
They put up the criteria, and he -- he went through 
some -- and he said the only two he met, the only 
two he met was number 10 and number 11.  He claimed 
he said that. 
MR. FURR:  That's not what I objected to.  Not 
what I objected to.  He said their own expert says, 
look, he didn't know he had COPD.  He hadn't 3283
anything -- any problems from smoking.  That's why 
he doesn't meet this criteria.  
That didn't happen.  He never talked about why 
he doesn't meet it. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  That's fine. 
MR. FURR:  So that's just not -- that needs to 
be stricken. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  That's fine. 
(The following proceedings were had in open 
court before the Court and the jury.) 
THE COURT:  All right.  Let's continue 
forward, Mr. Alvarez. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Use your collective memory.  
Many of you took notes.  Right?  When Dr. Giakas 
testified, he said that the only -- the only two, 
the only two that he met, that John Hackimer met, 
was number 10 and number 11.  Right?  Those are the 
only two that he met.  
Well, look at number 9.  "Tobacco use is 
continued despite knowledge of having a persistent 
or reoccurrent physical or psychological problem 
that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated 
by tobacco."  
That -- if he would have said, look, he meets 
this criteria, they would have legs to stand on on 3284
the statute of limitations, but they don't because 
he says he doesn't meet this criteria.  
Let's go to Richard Seidelman's testimony, 
treating physician.  
Here is what he -- here is what he said.  He 
said, "It's hard to know without knowing how much 
diesel fume" -- "diesel and fume exposure there 
actually was to assign a percentage of cause.  I 
also don't have the pack-year smoking well 
documented.  
"None of the medical records that you created 
during the course of your treatment of Mr. Hackimer 
discussed the cause of his COPD; correct?"
Answer:  "I would have -- I would have to 
review all the records, but it was implied.  The 
operating notion was that it was smoking related."
Question:  "Was that an assumption that you 
made?  
"Yeah, it's -- I think it's a reasonable one.  
I -- I did look at alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.  
He did not have that many respiratory infections.  
I don't believe he gave me a history of that.  So 
the working presumption -- presumptive cause was 
smoking related, which I think statistically would 
be a correct assessment." 3285
And the reason -- 
Let's go to this.  
They talked about how the Defendant -- the 
Plaintiff did not prove reliance and legal cause.  
And, you know, they showed this with a chain being 
broken.  Well, the agreement to conceal and the 
concealment, what did they reveal to him in 1956 
when he was 10 or 11 years old and before -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, it's not 
revealing.  It's reliance. 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  The standard is reliance. 
THE COURT:  Sustained.  Okay.  
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  It's on the reliance.  On 
the reliance.  On the reliance.  Okay?  On the 
reliance.  
It says, what did they -- what did they reveal 
to him in 1956 when he was 10 or 11, the conspiracy 
had already started, and before he was addicted?  
Nothing. 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, that's not 
the standard. 
THE COURT:  Reliance.  Sustained.
MR. FURR:  It's reliance. 
THE COURT:  Concealment.  It's concealment. 3286
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  That's fine, Robert.  It 
doesn't matter. 
Let's do this one. 
So I took out him and put the tobacco 
companies because they're part of this world, too; 
right?  They're part of this equation.  
What's the matter, they weren't -- they didn't 
have friends and family members who were getting 
ill and getting smoking-related disease?  They 
didn't know?  They weren't -- they didn't go to 
school and see the schoolbooks?  They -- they 
didn't see the PSAs?  They didn't have friends that 
were telling them that smoking was bad?  They 
weren't watching TV?  They -- they didn't see 
newspapers and magazines?  They weren't paying 
attention to the Surgeon General's warnings?  
They weren't seeing the warnings on their own 
packs of cigarettes; right?  But they expect this 
man to know more than them. 
Mr. Furr said -- quoted one witness who made a 
statement, and I want to put it in context, because 
they said, well, you had to have been living under 
a rock; right?  
Well, let's put that in context; right?  Why 
do you think they spent $600 million; right?  Why 3287
do you think they spent $600 million on a campaign 
of doubt, confusion, and controversy if everyone 
knew.  Okay?  
Why would they hire -- why would they waste 
their moneys on scientists and doctors to lie for 
them?  Why would they plant false stories in 
magazines and newspapers if everyone knew?  
And the reason is because not everyone knew.  
And their own polls told them that at least half of 
Americans, half of the smokers, over 25 million of 
them, didn't know.  And one of them is sitting 
right there attached to oxygen.  
They spent this money.  They got what they 
wanted.  And now it's time to do justice.  They 
spent that money to get him, they got him, and now 
they have to own up to him.  
You know, you heard a lot about gambling.  He 
probably mentioned it a dozen times.  He said 
gambling is a metaphor for this entire case.  
Right?  
But they gambled with people's lives.  They 
gambled with people's lives.  But they've won.  
Right?  They won.  They won, and people lost.  And 
when they -- and when people lost, all they would 
do is replace them with another teenager. 3288
That's the gambling that they did.  It's a 
roulette wheel where they always win.  It's a slot 
machine that always pays off for them.  
THE CLERK:  Counselor, 15 minutes. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  You know, if you look at 
the evidence about productive cough, because that's 
one of the hallmark signature symptoms of COPD, he 
didn't have it.  There is not one medical record, 
even after he's diagnosed, that shows that he had a 
productive cough.  
We did a subset of the medical records that 
are in evidence, and I want you to look at them.  
Every single one of them, and you were shown many 
of them during Dr. Seidelman's deposition, they all 
say no productive cough.  None.  
Mr. Furr said this is a case about choices and 
personal responsibility.  And that's true.  I 
agree.  
The corporations made choices, too.  And when 
you chose for 50 years to lie to your customers, to 
manipulate the levels of nicotine, to market to 
kids so that you could make money and cause harm to 
others, then it's time to take responsibility for 
that. 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor. 3289
THE COURT:  Sustained. 
MR. FURR:  I make a motion. 
THE COURT:  Denied.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  If actions speak louder 
than words, why did he switch from filters to 
lights to ultra-lights?  
And here is the big thing.  I want to -- I 
want to address this whole notion that he knew or 
should have known he had COPD before May 5th, 1990; 
okay?  
The fact that he never quit before 1990 is 
evidence that he didn't think he had a disease.  
Because the first time he was diagnosed with COPD 
was 1993, and what did he do?  He quit.  
If he would have known that he had a disease, 
the COPD, which they have the responsibility, the 
burden of proof to prove that he had it before 
1990, he would have quit, like he did when he was 
diagnosed.  But he didn't because he didn't know.  
You heard a lot about calling Mr. Hackimer's 
character in question.  And the way they -- it was 
done was very artfully -- 
MR. FURR:  Objection, Your Honor, to 
characterizing -- 
THE COURT:  Sustained. 3290
MR. FURR:  I move to strike, and I make a 
motion. 
THE COURT:  Sustained.  Deny the motion. 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Here is what he said.  He 
said before a lawsuit was ever filed, so-and-so 
said this, and so-and-so said that.  Before a 
lawsuit was filed, he said this, and this person 
said that.  
The inference to that is that he is saying 
something today in this trial, in this litigation, 
that's not true.  That's the inference.  That's the 
inference.  But the only evidence you have heard in 
this case about lies and deceits is from R.J. 
Reynolds and their co-conspirators.  They're the 
only ones that there is proof that they lied.  
And I can go on and on and on, but I think 
you've got it.  I want to leave you with the 
Surgeon General in 1988 and his words, because I 
think they're important for you to hear one more 
time.  Okay?  
(Video clip played as follows:) 
MR. RATHER:  Surgeon General C. Everett Koop 
has issued two major reports on smoking; one on the 
dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine 
addiction.  The tobacco industry disputes both 3291
reports as more political than scientific.  
SURGEON GENERAL KOOP:  We have been told so 
frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking 
is a matter of free choice, you start when you want 
and you quit when you want, but anybody who has 
ever smoked knows that is not true.
MR. RATHER:  What does the record, the 
longtime record say is the most dangerous age to 
get hooked on tobacco?  
SURGEON GENERAL KOOP:  The indications are 
very clear that the people who are most heavily 
addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble 
quitting are those who began smoking when they were 
14 to 16.  
I think the studies done all over the world, 
in every country and every culture, the younger you 
start, the greater the addiction and the more 
difficult it is to quit.
MR. RATHER:  Now, you said that you considered 
tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin.  Isn't 
that an overstatement?  
SURGEON GENERAL KOOP:  No.  I think the 
evidence is very clear if you understand what we're 
talking about.  Addiction is a specific physiologic 
problem.  And the manner in which you become 3292
addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in 
which you become addicted to cocaine or heroin.  
And that even after you have quit and you 
think you are clean, that there is a tremendous 
tendency to relapse.  
There is no such thing as a safe cigarette.  
There is no such thing as a quality death. 
(Video clip stopped.) 
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ:  Thank you.  
And, John, thank you for having the trust in 
me.  I appreciate it.  Thank you. 
