MR. COFER: May it please the Court, counsel, Ms. Haldeman, members of the jury, good afternoon.
I told you in opening statement that we believe this case comes down to three pretty straightforward questions: Why did Margaret McEniry smoke? Why didn't she quit? And what, if anything, did the defendants do to cause Ms. McEniry to smoke and get sick?
If you remember I told you that the evidence would be that Ms. McEniry smoked because her friends and family smoked; that she always had the ability to quit smoking whenever she made up her mind she wanted to quit and made a sincere effort to quit; and
that nothing the defendants did or did not do, said or did not say affected Ms. McEniry in any way.
And you may remember that I started my opening statement by telling you those things were not in dispute so we could take those off the table and focus on the real issues in this case.
And I'd like to begin my closing argument the same way by focusing on the facts that are not in dispute. And let's start with the first question. Why did Margaret McEniry smoke? Now, Dr. Burns told you that one of the most important factors in whether a person starts smoking is whether her friends and family smoked.
You may remember that Dr. Burns was a senior reviewer of the Surgeon General's Report and he told you that that report found that the principle determinant of whether an adolescent starts smoking is whether her friends and family smoked. He told you that if a parent smokes or someone's brothers and sisters smoke, it's more likely that he or she would become a smoker, too.
And as you now know it's undisputed that virtually everyone in Margaret McEniry's family smoked. Her parents were smokers. Her mom died -- or smoked until she died of kidney disease. Her dad smoked until 1987 when he died of emphysema. All three of her brothers and her sister was a smoker.
We don't know about her first husband, Charles Wagner, but we do know that her second husband Tom McEniry smoked, and her third husband, Harold Apple, smoked.
And we also know, members of the jury, that all four of her children smoked. Her son Tom smoked and he took the stand and told you about his smoking. Her daughter Carol smoked until she died of Leukemia. In fact, I don't know whether you caught it, but Carol continued to smoke for 13 years after her mother died of pancreatic cancer. And, in fact, Carol smoked until she died of cancer, too.
All three of Carol's husbands were smokers, and Carol's son, Michael Glenn, Jr. smoked. And I'm sure you remember his testimony. Mr. Glenn told you that he began
smoking when he was 13 years old. And he told you about the time that he and his grandmother were sitting on his Aunt Kathy's back deck.
Ms. McEniry was dying of cancer, and according to the Kathy, her mother believed that it was caused by cigarette smoking. You may remember that Ms. Haldeman told you that as soon as Ms. McEniry was told she had pancreatic cancer she explained, I'm a dead woman, cigarettes killed me.
So what did Ms. McEniry and Michael Glenn do? Ms. McEniry gave her grandson, Michael Glenn, money and sent him to the store so he could buy each of them a pack of cigarettes.
Mr. Glenn went to the store, bought the cigarettes, came back to his Aunt Kathy's house and smoked outside with his dying grandmother.
Now, at the time that Mr. Glenn testified it was plaintiffs position that Mr. Glenn should get his mother Carol's share of any damages that are awarded in this case.
MR. SMITH: Objection, Your Honor.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, Carol is not a claimant. And you didn't allow him to answer the question as to whether or not he was a claimant, meaning Mr. Glenn, because we still don't know if Mr. Glenn would have been -MR. COFER: You told the jury that they wouldn't answer the second question because I would address it in closing argument. And my next line is, you've now been instructed that he's not a claimant. Remember they sent a question asking -MR. SMITH: If you say that -MR. COFER: That's what I said.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, that's not the issue. That's not -- that's not the issue.
The issue here is, they're saying that the time he testified he thought he was a claimant.
Judge, we told you up here when we were arguing, we didn't know if he was a claimant then or now. Their argument was that in fact he was still -- she was still married to someone else.
MR. COFER: Judge, that's not what I
said. What I said is, it was plaintiff's position that he was entitled to the money -that his mother shared the money.
When he was testifying the jury asked a question: Is he going to get money? The question is: Does he have an interest? And then they objected. You said, okay, don't answer it but you can address it in closing, which is exactly what I'm doing.
The next thing I'm going to say is, you've now been instructed on Page 19 that Mr. Glenn is not a claimant.
MR. SMITH: And my point is that they're trying to color his testimony as if he was a claimant, and he, you remember, did not know and we still do not know if he was claimant.
MR. COFER: Judge, they filed an amended complaint during the middle of trial to add Carol, and then Carol -- and they said, in fact, Avera said during voir dire that the kids take her share. Mr. Avera told these jurors that. That's why they asked the question. They didn't want the question answered and Your Honor said I could address it in closing, which is what I'm doing.
MR. SMITH: And, Your Honor, if you recall the question came from their own inquiry as to whether or not Michael knew whether or not his mother was actually divorced at the time of her death.
MR. COFER: No, he didn't.
MR. SMITH: Yes, he did. Absolutely did. MR. COFER: Avera raised it in voir dire. This jury wanted to know whether this person had an interest because he called Tim Stricker a vindictive -THE COURT: He's trying to say that he had no interest -MR. COFER: That's my next line.
THE COURT: Just tell them that. (Following the sidebar conference, the following proceedings were had:)
MR. COFER: In any event, if you go to Page 19 of the jury instructions you'll find the Court has now instructed you that as a matter of law there is no claim for damages on Carol's behalf.
Kathryn Haldeman, the plaintiff in this case, is a former smoker who used to smoke with her mother. So is her first husband,
Robing Greenlee, and her current husband, Rick Haldeman. And her daughter Melanie Greenlee also used to smoke.
Melanie Greenlee told you that after her grandmother died, she became a social smoker and smoked one of the brands her grandmother used to smoke.
Now, I want you to think about that for a moment. Melanie Greenlee told you how close she was to her grandmother and how devastated she was when nana died. The whole family is claiming that smoking is what killed the grandmother. In fact, they feel so strongly about it, they brought this lawsuit. They are asking you to award them money for Ms. McEniry's decisions to begin and continue smoking.
Mr. Avera just told you in his argument that they would like to get seven and a half million dollars, yet, Melanie Greenlee,
Kathryn Haldeman's daughter, chose to start smoking after her grandmother died.
Clearly she understood that smoking caused cancer. Clearly she wasn't addicted to nicotine when she decided to pick those
cigarettes up.
Plaintiff wants you to believe that the reason people smoke is because they're seduced by advertising into become smokers. They showed you all those ads. That's one of the cores of their case.
But that's not why Melanie Greenlee smoked and that's not why Margaret McEniry smoked. Margaret McEniry smoked because smoking is just a way of life in her family.
It's the family norm. It's what her entire family has always done.
Ms. McEniry's family smoked before Margaret McEniry got sick, they smoked while Margaret McEniry was sick, and they continued to smoke after she died.
Ms. McEniry's daughter Karen was a smoker as was her first husband, Bill Shaw, and her second husband, George Diggs. On the next slide you can see a list of some of the friends that smoked with Ms. McEniry.
And here's the combined slide. Margaret McEniry smoked with all of these friends and family members, they all gave her cigarettes and the family members bought cigarettes for
her. Is there any wonder that Margaret McEniry was a smoker, too?
So that takes us to the next question:
Why didn't she quit? While it's true that cigarettes can be addictive, it's also true that even addicted smokers can indeed quit smoking.
Dr. Burns told you that all smokers, including addicted smokers, have the choice to quit. He told you that just because someone is addicted does not mean they can't quit. In fact, Dr. Burns told you that in the 1990 Surgeon General's Report, the Surgeon General reported that almost half of all people alive at the time who used to smoke had quit smoking.
They tried to disparage the number of quitters. These are statistics from the Surgeon General. Don't you think if there was some asterisk that they weren't being told that they would have showed that to you?
By the time of Margaret McEniry's death in 1995, close to 50 million Americans had successfully quit smoking. And Dr. Burns told you that the vast majority of those 50 million
former smokers were addicted. But when they made the choice to quit in the effort to quit, they did quit.
You learned that the single -- and this is not surprising to any of you, you knew this before you walked in -- but the single most important factor in quitting smoking is motivation and persistence. We know from our lives the single most important factor in accomplishing anything is motivation and persistence.
The bottom line is, if you want to quit, you have to try to quit. And members of the jury, there was very little evidence that Ms. McEniry actually wanted to quit.
Now Mr. Smith said, we know Ms. McEniry tried and failed to quit. Well let's look at the evidence. Tom McEniry, Jr. testified that during the 17 years of their marriage, he never heard Margaret say she wanted to quit, and he's not aware that she ever tried to quit.
Ms. McEniry's daughter, Karen Diggs, testified she never heard her mother say she wanted to quit, and she is not personally
aware of any times her mother ever tried to quit.
Now, Karen Diggs lived in Indiana. She was just down the street from her mother. The evidence was she saw her all the time and talked to her on the phone all the time. And she admitted under oath that she is not personally aware of a single time that her mother ever tried to quit.
Ms. Diggs also admitted she does not know if her mother was motivated to quit. Tim Stricker testified that Ms. McEniry told him, she knew smoking would kill her but she enjoyed it.
Now, Ms. Haldeman did tell you that her mother used Nicorette gum once and used the patch, but all of the witnesses agreed that when Ms. McEniry used the gum, she continued to smoke. And when she used the patch, she would take the patch off and smoke a cigarette.
Kathryn Swinney testified that she and Ms. McEniry attended a stop-smoking class at work in the 1990s, and Ms. Swinney's did say that they really tried to quit and they
participated wholeheartedly. Those were her words.
But she also testified while they both cut back on their smoking, neither of them actually quit. Did you hear what else she had to say? She was asked about how they felt after they failed a class and she said, Well, as we would light another cigarette, one of us remarked that we weren't doing very well with everything we learned in our stop-smoking class. As we lit the cigarette and went from there, we didn't talk about it much.
Now, members of the jury, let me be clear. I am not suggesting that it's easy for everyone to quit. For some people it's very hard to quit, and for most people it takes more than one attempt. But it's also clear that if you don't make a sincere effort to quit, you're not going to quit.
The evidence is that from the time Ms. McEniry became a regular smoker, she never put her cigarettes down for even one day, not once, not for one single day. Her family told you she never threw her cigarettes away. She never threw away her lighters. She never got
rid of her ashtrays.
And let me just ask you using your common sense, if a person is not willing to put their cigarettes down for even a single day, you have to ask yourself, how committed were they to really trying to quit?
Now Dr. Burns told you that a smoker is able to quit when she can muster sufficient internal resources and is provided with sufficient external support. Do you remember that phrase he used? And what that means is that the smoker has to want to quit and it's helpful if her family encourages her to quit and supports her efforts to quit.
Dr. Burns told you in his quote, "Very clear from the literature that family support is an important aid in helping people successfully stay off cigarettes."
Dr. Burns encourages people who are trying to quit to talk to their family and draw support from their environment. And, members of the jury, the evidence is that Ms. McEniry never asked anyone in her family for help in quitting, and it's unclear whether anyone in her family ever encourage her to
quit.
Karen Diggs, Kathy Haldeman's identical twin sister, told you she never encouraged her
mother to quit smoking, and that she's not
aware of anyone in her family asking her mother to quit. Thomas McEniry, Jr., her husband of 17 years told you, he never encouraged Margaret to quit.
The testimony with respect to Ms. Haldeman is conflicting. Kathy Haldeman testified under oath that even after she, herself, quit smoking -- and remember she talked of how addicted she was and how hard it was to quit? She described it as very, very hellish. She talked about still having nightmares 30 years later. Even with that experience, she never talked with her mother about quitting or encouraged her mother to quit, she said.
You know, Mr. Smith said that Ms. McEniry didn't know about addiction during her lifetime. Well, Kathryn Haldeman did. She knew about it back in the '70s. Anyone who's ever successfully quit smoking knows it can be hard to quit.
Ms. Haldeman told you she never spoke to her mother in any way about whether or not she should smoke except to tell her mother that she was not allowed to smoke in her home.
Ms. Haldeman said that smoking was just not a topic she would raise with her mother. She said that she respected her mother and that Margaret McEniry's children didn't try to tell their mother what to do.
And if you credit Kathryn Haldeman's testimony, she didn't have any reason to tell her mother to quit smoking, because Ms. Haldeman told you that until her mother was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 1995, she had no idea that smoking could be dangerous.
She told you under oath she never saw the warnings, she never saw any newspaper articles, she never heard of the Surgeon General's Reports, she never saw anything on television that smoking could be dangerous.
Ms. Haldeman told you that when her grandfather died in emphysema in 1987, no one in the family said it was caused by smoking.
So since Ms. Haldeman had no idea that smoking
could be harmful, there was no reason to tell her mother to quit; right?
But that's not what her brother Tom said.
Do you remember that her brother Tom took the stand and he said that Kathy absolutely encouraged her mother to quit smoking. He said, Kathy was dead set against smoking and told her mother to quit every time she saw her smoke.
And you remember I asked Ms. Haldeman about that and she said, well, Tom was just wrong. She said she has no idea why he said that. But if you can remember, members of the jury, that Tom was not the only person who testified that Ms. Haldeman encouraged Margaret McEniry to quit smoking.
Kathy Haldeman's daughter, Melanie, also testified that Ms. Haldeman encouraged Margaret McEniry to quit smoking. Remember that Melanie didn't live in the same state with Ms. McEniry until Ms. McEniry moved here to Ocala in 1993.
And Melanie testified that after her grandmother moved Ocala, she noticed her grandmother had a cough. And Melanie
described it as a productive cough and a smoker's cough. Melanie said that her grandfather coughed all the time. She said, she coughed so much she had to carry tissues with her.
Melanie testified that her mother Kathy encouraged Ms. McEniry to quit smoking. She specifically testified, before Ms. McEniry got sick her mother was worried about Ms. McEniry's health because of her cough.
Melanie testified that before Margaret's diagnosis with pancreatic cancer, her mother Kathy was quite aggressive in her tone about trying to get Margaret to quit. Melanie testified that her mother's tone was forceful.
Yet, you remember that both Kathryn Haldeman and Karen Diggs denying that their mother ever had a chronic cough, a persistent cough, or a smoker's cough. Do you remember? I asked Ms. Haldeman: Did your mother ever have a chronic or frequent cough? And she said, No, she didn't. I asked whether she ever had a persistent cough? And Kathy Haldeman said, No, she did not. And I said,
But you know that nine witnesses testified
that she did, are they all wrong? And she said, I do know that and they were all wrong.
Well, members of the jury, there is no way to square this testimony. Either Kathryn Haldeman is right and her mother never had a cough, and she never encouraged her mother to quit because she had no idea that smoking could be harmful until her mom was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 1995; or Tom and Melanie Greenlee are right and Ms. Haldeman nagged her mother to quit because she was worried about her mother smoking and her mother's cough. Plaintiff can't have it both ways.
Now we do know that sometime between 1980 and 1992, Margaret McEniry had breast cancer and had her left breast removed. Both Dr. Reynolds and Dr. Riggs told you that when they have a cancer patient that smokes, the very first thing they do is they tell them to quit smoking.
And they both told you there was two reasons they do that. The first is, they don't want to cure a patient of cancer and have them get a second cancer from smoking.
You remember Dr. Reynolds said, the very first lung cancer patient he ever had, that happened.
And the second reason that they tell smokers to quit smoking is because if a cancer patient stops smoking, they tend to do better, they tend to do better with the treatment.
And Dr. Riggs told you that's the standard practice and it's been a standard of care for a very long time. But as you know,
Ms. McEniry did not quit smoking when she had breast cancer, but more importantly, members of the jury, she didn't even try to quit.
Kathryn Haldeman told you that she did not encourage her mother to quit smoking even after she was diagnosed with breast cancer.
Ms. Haldeman did not encourage her mother to quit smoking even after her mother had her left breast removed and was going through chemotherapy. In fact, you heard Ms. Haldeman tell you that she and her aunt actually wheeled Ms. McEniry outside the hospital so that her mother could smoke.
Now why is that important? Well, it's important because all three of the physicians
that the plaintiff called in this case, all three of them, Dr. Burns, Dr. Reynolds, and Dr. Riggs all told you that when a person stops smoking, his or her risk of getting a smoking-related cancer goes down.
Dr. Reynolds and Riggs both told you that ten years after quitting, a person's risk of getting a smoking-related pancreatic cancer is the same as someone who never smoked.
And what you see on the screen is a web site from the American Cancer Society. And remember I showed that it both Dr. Riggs and Dr. Reynolds and they agreed with it.
Well, the uncontested evidence is that Margaret McEniry had quit smoking in 1980 or '81 or '82, whenever it was that she had breast cancer, by 1995 she would have had no risk of getting a smoking-related pancreatic cancer. That's what Riggs told you; that's what Reynolds told you; that's what the American Cancer Society's web site tells you.
Now let me be clear, and I'm going to talk about this in great detail later in my closing argument, I believe the plaintiff has not even come close to curing their burden of
proving that smoking caused her pancreatic cancer. In fact, I think the evidence is overwhelming that it didn't.
But if you disagree with that, and if you think that plaintiff did carry her burden of proofing smoking is what actually caused the cancer, the evidence is uncontroverted that, had she quit smoking when she had breast cancer, she never would have gotten a smoking-related pancreatic cancer, but of course she didn't and she didn't even try.
Members of the jury, there is no evidence that Margaret McEniry was any different than the 50 million Americans who successfully quit smoking. None. Was there any evidence of that? There is no evidence that if Margaret McEniry had put her mind to it, that she would have been unable to quit. The evidence is simply that she did not quit; not that she could not quit.
And the evidence is that Ms. McEniry did not try very hard to quit. And the evidence also is that Ms. McEniry personally understood that her smoking was dangerous and was putting her health at risk, and she understood that by
at least 1964.
But I want you to think about when she had breast cancer in '80, '81 or '82.
Margaret McEniry actually experienced cancer. She had to understand what a terrible, scary, dreadful, awful disease it is, yet, she didn't even try to quit smoking and no one encouraged her to.
In the late 1980s, after her breast cancer had been successfully treated, she told Tim Stricker that she knew smoking would kill her but she enjoyed it. Smoking was a risk that was always within Margaret McEniry's control, and whether to accept that risk was a decision that only she could make. It was not a decision anyone else could make for her.
And that takes us to Question 3. Now, you may remember at the end of Mr. Avera's redirect examination of Ms. Haldeman he asked a series of question to the effect of, who knew more about cigarettes and nicotine, your mother or the tobacco company? And not surprisingly Ms. Haldeman said, The tobacco companies.
Well, when you think about that, that's
kind of a silly questions. Because of course the tobacco companies know more about their products than Ms. McEniry knew. And also he asked you today, Mr. Avera asked you today, how much did you learn during this trial that you didn't know? And while that's an interesting question, it doesn't help you decide this case, because the question that you have to decide is: Did Margaret McEniry have the information that she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking?
And the evidence is clear that since at least 1964, Ms. McEniry personally understood that smoking was dangerous. And how do we know that? We know that from her husband, Thomas McEniry, Jr.'s testimony. Back in 1964, the same year the Surgeon General's Report came out, Margaret McEniry attended a stop-smoking class. Ms. McEniry was not going to go but a friend wanted to go with her so she did.
When Ms. McEniry came home, she told her husband what she learned about the evils of smoking. And Mr. McEniry told you that the
evils of smoking were health related.
Mr. McEniry recalls seeing lungs and comparing the lungs of a smoker with the healthy lungs of a nonsmoker. And that conversation in the information that Margaret McEniry conveyed to her husband was so impactful that he threw his cigarettes away and never again smoked another cigarette.
Now think about that. He didn't even go to class. Just based on what his wife told him and showed him was enough for him to say, I'm done with these.
I want you to think about something else, too. You heard from George Diggs and Karen Diggs and from Dr. Burns that it's easier to quit if someone you care about quits with you. That's how George and Karen Diggs quit smoking, remember? Their daughter asked them to quit and they made a bet. And 20 years later neither of them has smoked a cigarette.
1964 was a perfect opportunity for Margaret McEniry to quit smoking. Her husband quit based on what she told him, and quitting smoking was something they could have done together. But she didn't quit and Tom McEniry
told you, she didn't even try to quit. In fact, he told you he does not remember Margaret trying to quit at any time throughout their 17-year marriage.
Now, when I showed you this slide in opening statement, I told you that the evidence would be that nothing the defendants did or did not do, said or did not say affected Ms. McEniry in any way. But you don't have to take my word for it anymore because let's look what Ms. Haldeman told you.
This was the next to last question I asked her on cross-examination: Did she,
Ms. McEniry, ever tell you that she relied on anything that any tobacco company said or did in her decision to start smoking? No, she never said. And my next question was: Did she ever tell you she relied on anything that any tobacco company did or said in her decisions to continue smoking? Answer: No, she didn't.
And we'll talk more about this in a moment. Remember Ms. Haldeman testified that she talked with her mom about when her mom started smoking. She told you that her mom
said she started at age 14 with L&M cigarettes. We know that's not accurate but Ms. Haldeman said she talked with her mom; that he mother never at any time in her life told Ms. Haldeman she relied on anything any tobacco company said or did in her decision to start or continue smoking.
Members of the jury, I want you to look at your notes and think about this, not one single witness suggested that Margaret McEniry was ever confused about the risks of smoking, not one. Not one single witness suggested that Margaret McEniry did not realize that smoking was dangerous. Not one single witness suggested that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds fooled Margaret McEniry or tricked her into becoming a smoker.
The evidence, in fact, is exact opposite.
The evidence is that at all times, Margaret McEniry had the information that she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking.
Now, throughout this case, plaintiff has argued that the defendants hid the risk of smoking from Ms. McEniry, and she didn't have
the information they needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or not.
And let's look at the evidence.
Dr. Burns told you that people have known for a very long time that smoking could be bad for you. 100 years ago, 100 years ago people referring to cigarettes as coffin nails and smokers as nicotine fiends.
In 1999, the State of Florida banned the sale of cigarettes, in part, because it was understood that smoking was bad for a person's health.
You've seen the 1906 Florida Health Notes. Today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as a very worst form of tobacco addiction. Let me stop right there.
Mr. Smith has showed you some snippets out of some documents that used the word addiction and said, Uh-huh, look, before 1964, the companies knew that smoking was addictive.
No. Someone who wrote a memo used the word addiction, just like in 1906 and in other examples, people used the word addiction.
We'll talk a little more in a minute.
But the medical definition of addiction
until 1988 required intoxication. We all use the word addiction as part of our normal language, but the medical definition required intoxication. And you'll see that's what the '64 Surgeon General said. That didn't change until 1988.
The very fact that you find the word addiction in a tobacco company document doesn't mean anything, unless you also take into account that in 1906, the Florida Department of Health refer to cigarettes as addictive.
You've seen the one in 1912: Public decided no smoking. Florida Health Notes 1912, 100 years ago, called cigarettes coffin nails. Time Magazine, 1938, when Ms. McEniry was four, referred to cigarettes as coffin nails. Reader's Digest: Nicotine Knockout or the Slow Count, by Gene Tunney. 1941: The cause of most of the trouble is of course nicotine. The powerful poison is the source of all the pleasure derived from smoking.
Gene Tunney wasn't a doctor. He wasn't a scientist. He was the former heavy weight boxing champion of the world.
Cancer by the Carton, 1952: Recent medical research on the relationship of smoking and lung cancer. 1953, do you remember from the time line, right around the time that Ms. McEniry married Chuck Wagner, they had the big Wynder Graham mouse skin painting study.
And here's how it's reported in Life Magazine: Smoke gets in the news. Doctors report that tobacco tar induces mouse cancer, note rise in cigarette use in human lung cancer.
And you may remember this. I told you that there was no question that these studies were getting a bunch of publicity and that people were talking about them because there was a poll in 1954.
And here's what the Gallup Poll asked:
Have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs? 90 percent, members of the jury, in 1954 answered that question yes. Margaret McEniry was 19 years old at the time.
You've heard about the 1964 Surgeon
General's Report. That was a landmark document for the Surgeon General concluded that cigarette smoking was in fact a proven cause of cancer in men.
Dr. Burns, and I think Kyriakoudes both told you, this was a big deal, it got a ton of publicity. It was literally front page news.
It was on the cover of major national magazines, it was on the cover of newspapers, it was reported on television. And you may remember -- some of you may remember that back then there were three television ABC, NBC, and CBS. And here's how it was reported on Harry
Reasoner in 1964.
(The video clip was played as follows:) UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General committee.
HARRY REASONER: Almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's committee. This, in summary, is what the committee says:
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of
lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of the cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not proven that smoking is the cause.
On the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed.
In short, the committee said, If you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
The Surgeon General's committee presented its report at a news conference in Washington.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Of this long and exhaustive deliberations the committee has reached the overall judgement that cigarette smoking is a health hazard possibly (inaudible) to the United States to warrant
remedial action.
UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: This overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of the evidence as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates and a number of deceased categories.
More specifically, the committee states on Page 61 of the report, and I quote, "In view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to (inaudible) specific diseases and to the overall death rate.
HARRY REASONER: Cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. The familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. It's like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. In a case like that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you've been told, and maybe then you give him a chance to reform.
In this kind of a country, it comes down
to you, whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him either. The decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Good night."
(The video clip was ended.)
MR. COFER: Now you've seen a lot of this, I'm going to try to move through it fairly quickly because you've been very patient and I don't want to tax your patience too much.
But you've heard a lot about, okay, was it a habit or was it an addiction? And here is the '64 Surgeon General Report. In here the Surgeon General clearly says that it was a habit because it's not intoxicating. And you heard many times that the test at the time for addiction was whether the thing was intoxicating, because the issue is whether it clouded your judgment.
But look what the Surgeon General said at the bottom: Thus, correctly designating the chronic use of tobacco as habituation rather
than addiction carries with it no implication that the habit may be broken easily.
The point is, it's not what you call it.
It wasn't the label that was important, it was whether people understood that it could be hard to quit smoking. And people have understood that, according to Dr. Burns, in common experience in the Florida Health Notes literally for hundreds of years.
In 1966, after the Surgeon General's warning, Congress got involved and borrowed this label. Congress told the company exactly what the label would say, how big the wording is placed on the pack.
In 1970, they changed the warning making it stronger. This time they said: "The Surgeon General Has Determined That Cigarette Smoking Is Dangerous To Your Health."
You remember that Tom McEniry began smoking around 1976, and his parents found out in around '78 or '79. And when his parents found out, they both talked time about the health risks of smoking. And his dad told him, smoking causes cancer and talked about the difference between a smoker's lungs and a
nonsmoker's lungs.
But do you remember what else Mr. McEniry told you, what Tom, III told you? He said his mother told him many, many times that his smoking would kill him.
In 1985 the warning changed yet again.
This time it said: "Quitting Smoking Now Greatly Reduces Serious Risk To Your Health." "Smoking Causes" -- nothing equivocal about that, members of the jury -- 1985, "Smoking Causes Lung Cancer, Heart Disease, and Emphysema."
In 1985, you heard that Ms. McEniry's father, a long-time smoker, went under oxygen 24/7, and two years later in 1987, he died of emphysema.
So was there information available? Was there information available to Ms. McEniry? Did Ms. McEniry have the information she needed to understand that smoking can be dangerous? Did she have the information that she needed to make an informed choice, an informed choice whether to smoke or quit smoking?
So I want to change topics. I told you
in opening statement that if you looked back over the last 60 years at the millions of pages of documents written by the thousands of employees of Philip Morris and other companies, you would see that they said some dumb things and statements where the company said, smoking was not a proven cause of disease and smoking was not addictive.
And I told you the evidence would be that the companies hung their hats on too many technical distinctions. They held onto those views for way too long.
But I want you to think about how plaintiff showed you those documents, even in their closing argument today. And what they did is they took snippets out of documents, sometimes just one sentence written 40 and 50 to 60 years ago, and then they had Burns and Kyriakoudes tell you their historical significance.
They made no effort to try to tie these documents to any decisions Margaret McEniry made and they didn't tell you the whole story.
So let me give you just a couple of examples.
Remember when Dr. Burns showed you the
1961 Philip Morris research memo that showed a partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens? Do you remember he showed you? And today Mr. Smith said, the companies knew by 1953 there were carcinogens in cigarette smoke. But what you did not learn until cross-examination is this list came from the public literature.
Everyone knew it if you looked at it. The Surgeon General knew it, the scientists knew it, and Philip Morris knew it.
Plaintiff tried to suggest that Philip Morris knew something that the Surgeon General didn't and they didn't share it with him.
But then you remember I showed Dr. Burns this on cross-examination and I said,
Dr. Burns, you know, of course, that Philip Morris told the Surgeon General what was in the cigarettes and gave them seven months before the Surgeon General's Report, a list of the compounds and carcinogens in cigarette smoke, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, ammonia compounds, nitrosamines and metals. But what they said was, this is all in the scope, but we don't think they're
present in large enough amounts to make any difference.
And I talked it to Dr. Burns about that, remember? I said there's carcinogens in the air we breathe, the water we drink, the food we eat, but unless we ingest enough of them, they don't cause any harm. It's called dose response and we talked about that.
Here's another example. And, in fact, this document, Mr. Smith showed you a portion of it during his closing argument. He showed you the one that said, think of a cigarette pack as a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine. And he tried to suggest that Philip Morris was hiding the fact from the public that it knew that nicotine was an important reason people smoked. Well, this came from a speech.
You remember there was a conference in St. Maartin that had leading nicotine researchers and professors from major universities, and there was a conference on why people smoke. And then Dr. Dunn gave a speech that was open to the public.
And remember when Mr. Smith showed it to
you, I asked him to the show the last sentence that said, If you're interested in the speech, read my book?
So this was a speech he gave to the public. After the speech he was interviewed by a newspaper where he had said -- that's his picture right there. You can see it's above the fold, Sunday edition: One smokes primarily for the physiological response of inhaled smoke, that is their physical reaction of the body to inhale smoke. The other two propositions from the group stated the main ingredient in cigarette smoke which produces the physical response is nicotine, and that the sought after response results in psychological efficiency.
Then we have the book that's been cited by the Surgeon General's Report. So Mr. Smith showed you one sentence and suggested that Philip Morris was trying to hide that it knew that nicotine was an important reason why people smoked. That sentence was part of a public speech that then lead to an interview in a newspaper that resulted in the publication of the book that the Surgeon
General has cited in the Surgeon General's Reports. But you never heard that from Dr. Burns, you never heard that from Mr. Smith, and you didn't hear that on the cross-examination.
And remember back in voir dire, remember, two sides to every story? And I asked you to please reserve judgment until you heard both sides.
Let me give you one more example. This is the psychological crutch document: So around some point reflecting the same seriousness with which we meant in the report, we must in the near future provide answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
You can't see the first paragraph, but it says: This is a response to the Surgeon General's report.
You heard that and said, Well, that sounds pretty bad. And, in fact, Mr. Avera today said, the psychological crutch they gave him is, there is no proof. No, actually, psychological crutch came from the 1964 Surgeon General's Report. You'll see it down
there at the bottom. It's in the section under: The Beneficial Effects of Tobacco.
This is what the Surgeon General said:
The drive to use tobacco being fundamentally psychogenic in origin has the same basis as other drug habits, and any large fraction of the American population appears to satisfy the need -- total need of the individual for a psychological crutch.
They're talking about the benefits of tobacco and nicotine as a psychological crutch. And then if you go to the document from which the psychological crutch quote comes, here's how it ends: In closing, the main essence of the report and publicity to many is that it still left smoking on an individual basis, the individual's own choice of the psychological benefits versus the alleged hazard. Anything that impinges on the rights of the individual to make this choice is contrary to our most basic traditions.
George Weissman didn't invent the term "psychological crush." George Weissman was talking about the '64 Surgeon General's Report and the benefits of tobacco.
Now, you also saw some articles and some clips where Philip Morris and some of the other tobacco companies said, they didn't believe that smoking was a proven cause of lung cancer. But to put that in context, it's important to know why they said that.
The companies never denied that there was a statistical relationship between smoking and lung cancer. We talked about the epidemiological studies. What the companies maintained, their position was, statistics alone don't prove causation, and here was their argument: 80 to 90 percent of smokers don't get lung cancer. Nonsmokers get lung cancer, too. Therefore we know smoking is not a necessary cause. Because you can get it whether you smoke or not. Nor is a sufficient cause because many people smoke and never get it. So they argued something else must be going on.
Well, we now know that's not a very good argument, and we know that's not very convincing, particularly when we look at all the epidemiology. But you know what, unless plaintiff proves that Ms. McEniry saw or heard
those statements, and that they affected her decisions is some way, they have nothing to do with this case.
The issue is not whether the companies said some dumb things. The issue is whether Ms. McEniry saw them and relied on them. And when I get to the jury instructions I will show you where it says, they have to prove that she relied on it, that she changed her behavior in some way because of it.
The issue is whether Ms. McEniry was fooled by them and whether they caused her to get sick. And we know they did not.
Mr. Smith talked a lot about light cigarettes and filters and argued that they were fraud, that companies knew that people could change the way they smoked to get more nicotine. Well, everyone knew people could compensate or change the way they smoked to get more nicotine.
Remember the article for consumer reports? May of 1976: Nicotine is an addicting agent for most smokers. When cigarette smoke contains less nicotine than such smokers are accustom to, their bodies
simply contrive ways to get more smoke.
Compensation wasn't a secret. The 1979 Surgeon General's Report specifically talked about compensation. Yet even knowing that, the Surgeon General recommended, the Surgeon General recommended in 1971, 1975, 1979, and 1981 that if smokers were not going to quit, they should smoke lower tar cigarettes.
And why did they say that? Because as Dr. Burns told you, there were 50 epidemiological studies that reported that people who smoked filtered and lower in tar cigarettes had lower cancer rates.
In fact, in cross-examination I showed Dr. Burns a study from the American Cancer Society in 1975 that based on a 12-year study of tens of thousands of smokers, low tar and nicotine users had a 26 percent chance -- less chance of lung cancer than those who smoked high tar cigarettes.
The basis of that was the epidemiology, the studies that were being done by public health scientists. And you know why that's true? The reason it's true is because not every smoker compensates. People smoke their
cigarettes differently. And if in fact people get less tar, they lower their disease risk.
And Dr. Burns told you that and that's what the epidemiology proved.
And to be clear, when the public health community, including the Surgeon General, was urging smokers who would not quit to switch to low tar, they never said low tar cigarettes were safe; they said they were safer. And they said they're not even safer if you compensate to change the way you smoke.
But here's the kicker, and this is the most important point. All of the talk about filters and low tar cigarettes has nothing to do with this case and here's why. There is no evidence that Margaret McEniry ever believed that lights or low tar cigarettes were safer.
Kathy Haldeman told you, she doesn't know what her mother believed because they never talked about why she smoked the brands that she smoked.
Ms. Haldeman told you that even when her mother was smoking low tar cigarettes, she continued to smoke high tar cigarettes, too.
Ms. Haldeman told you she has no idea why
her mother switched low tar cigarettes, but her best guess is the decision was made on price. The filter story has nothing to do with Ms. McEniry. There is no evidence that she switched to filtered cigarettes or low tar cigarettes because she thought they were safer. The only evidence that she switched to filtered cigarettes because of advertising came from the advertisement not from Philip Morris or Reynolds, but from Liggett. And we'll talk about that.
Now let's spend just a couple of minutes talking about why the brands Ms. McEniry smoked are important. In this case, plaintiff is asking you to hold two companies responsible for her mother's pancreatic cancer, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds.
The story that she wants you to believe is that her mother became a regular smoker when she was a child and it was somehow Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds' fault. But members of the jury, there was absolutely no evidence of that, none whatsoever.
First, the only person who has any knowledge of Ms. McEniry's early smoking is
her second husband, Tom McEniry, and he didn't meet her until 1957.
In 1957, she was 22 or 23 years old and a divorced mother of two. And what he said is in 1957, she smoked Chesterfield, Camel, and Lucky Strikes, and she smoked about a pack a day.
Margaret's brother, Tom Spurgeon, remembers he smoked a cigarette with Margaret when he was nine and she was about eleven, and that's all he remembers. And that's all the evidence you have about her smoking between 1934 and 1957, that's it. That's all the evidence before you.
Now, Ms. Haldeman did testify that her mother told her she started smoking at age 14 and she smoked L&M. Well we know that's impossible. And they admit it's impossible because L&M wasn't on the market. So what does Mr. Smith say, Well, Kathy was wrong about the brand but not the age. What's the basis of that? Kathy wasn't alive.
No one, there's not a single witness who saw Margaret McEniry as a regular smoker until
1957,	and your verdict must be based on the
evidence. So why are plaintiff and Mr. Smith and Mr. Avera trying so hard to convince you that Margaret McEniry was a smoker when she was a kid and it's Philip Morris and Reynolds' fault? Because we know kids shouldn't smoke. Because we're protective of our kids.
Because they want punitive damages in this case because that's where they think the big bucks are, and they're trying to push your buttons and manipulate your emotions and make you mad.
That's the same reason they showed you snippets of documents taken out of context to try to make you think the tobacco companies knew smoking was risky and hard to quit and hid that information from the public.
They haven't made any effort to tie these documents or these ads or anything to Ms. McEniry because they can't. They're hoping you'll just fill in the blank.
But, members of the jury, you can't do that. Your verdict has to be based on evidence. And the evidence is, no one has any idea what or how much Ms. McEniry smoked until
1957.
In 1957, she smoked Chesterfield, Camel, and Lucky Strike. In 1958 or so, after she married Thomas McEniry, she also started smoking Philip Morris brand because that's the brand he smoked and he said it was easier if they both smoked the same thing. He then said, they saw an ad by Liggett for L&M in '59 or '60, and they switched to filters.
And Tom McEniry said that she, his wife Margaret, continued to smoke L&M until after their divorce in 1975. So that's what Thomas McEniry said.
What did Ms. Haldeman say? Kathryn Haldeman said the cigarette her mother smoked the most was L&M. Kathy Haldeman testified she personally observed her mother smoking L&M for 20 to 30 years. Ms. Haldeman said that her mother did not start smoking Marlboro until sometime between 1975 and 1980, after she switched from L&M to other brands.
Well, in 1975, Ms. McEniry was 41 years old. In 1980, she was 46 years old. She certainly wasn't a kid. She had been divorced twice, was a mother of four. There was absolutely no evidence, or for that matter,
even any allegation that Ms. McEniry ever smoked a brand by Philip Morris when she was a kid. She smoked some of her husband's after she married Tom McEniry, and she switched to Marlboro when she was in her 40s.
Karen Diggs testified she smoked her first cigarette in 1970 when she was 16. It was an L&M she took from her mother's pack. Tom, III testify when she was smoking in the late '70s he was taking L&Ms from his mother's pack.
Mr. Smith told you, we know she was not a brand-loyal person. Sure she was. There is absolutely no question that from 1960 to 1975 or 1980, L&M was Margaret McEniry's brand of choice.
So why is plaintiff trying to pretend it wasn't? Because L&M is not made by Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds. And since Liggett is not a defendant in this courtroom, they can't ask you to have Liggett give them money, that's why they're running as fast as they can from L&M.
So with all that said, let's get to what I believe are the real issues in this case,
and that is whether plaintiff has met her burden of proving that smoking is what caused her mother's pancreatic cancer.
And I'll tell you, it was appropriate that Mr. Smith started that topic and spent a half an hour on that topic, because that is the dispositive issue in this lawsuit. And I agree with Mr. Smith, there is no dispute that smoking causes pancreatic cancer in some smokers.
But the issue in this case is whether plaintiff has carried their burden of proving that smoking actually caused her mother's pancreatic cancer? Because unless they prove that smoking was the medical cause of her mother's pancreatic cancer, she is not an Engle class member, the answer to Question 1 is no, and the case is over.
Now, plaintiff, Mr. Smith, showed you this demonstrative where he said: Addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine caused Margaret McEniry's pancreatic cancer and death. Burns, yes; Riggs, yes; Reynolds, yes.
Well, members of the jury, that's a little misleading and let me tell you why.
Dr. Riggs is the only person who opined to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Ms. McEniry's pancreatic cancer was actually caused by cigarette smoking.
Dr. Burns did not. I want you to check your notes. Mr. Smith asked Dr. Burns to assume, to assume that the pancreatic cancer was caused by smoking, and if he made that assumption then how did nicotine play into it?
Dr. Burns never said, it's my opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that cigarette smoking is what caused her pancreatic cancer. And neither did Dr. Reynolds. And we'll talk more about Dr. Reynolds in a moment. But he never gave the opinion that smoking was the medical cause of the pancreatic cancer.
Okay. So you remember, Dr. Reynolds is the oncologist here in Ocala who was the treating physician. And he was a fabulous witness and he's a fabulous doctor and people here into Ocala are awful lucky to have him.
And what he told you was, when he had met Margaret McEniry she already had stage 4 pancreatic cancer and nothing they could do
could treat it. And he told you that he didn't make any effort to determine what caused her pancreatic cancer, but what he did do is he said, I know that she was a cigarette smoker. I know that smoking is a risk factor. That's the only risk factor I'm aware of. I know smoking about doubles the risk, so it's more likely, it seems more likely to me that's probably the explanation.
So I asked him, I said, Well, you were candid and you told us that even knowing -well, I said, We took your deposition, we talked about kind of the medical standards and legal standards for causation; right? Yes.
And you were candid and told us that even knowing that, you know, you couldn't say to your definition of medical certainty that smoking was the cause of Ms. McEniry's pancreatic cancer; right? And the answer was, Right.
And, in fact, the jury's same question.
And then I went through and I talked to Dr. Burns and I said, You know, did you know about heavy smoking, about heavy drinking? I didn't know that. Did you know that the BRAC
gene in 1995 was associated with pancreatic cancer? I didn't know that.
They never asked him whether it was his opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty whether smoking caused pancreatic cancer, and someone on the jury did ask that question and he wasn't allowed to answer it.
So when there's a suggestion that Burns and Reynolds -MR. SMITH: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
(A sidebar conference was had outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. SMITH: That's an entirely improper argument. Because the jury asked the question, you didn't allow the answer. That should be stricken.
MR. COFER: I didn't say that he objected. I just said they weren't allowed to answer it. I never said he objected.
MR. SMITH: They weren't allowed to answer it means that you made a determination.
THE COURT: I'll tell them to disregard that.
MR. SMITH: You can disregard that.
THE COURT: You used 60 minutes.
MR. COFER: I'm at 60? Okay.
(Following the sidebar conference, the following proceedings were had:)
THE COURT: Disregard the question was not allowed to be answered.
MR. COFER: Okay. So here's the bottom line. Basically, Riggs says, Yeah, I think smoking caused it and here's why. Because she smoked and she got pancreatic cancer, and we know smoking can cause pancreatic cancer in some smokers and that's it.
And that doesn't cut it, and let me show you why. Because smokers get pancreatic cancer but nonsmokers get it, too. The largest cause of pancreatic cancer in nonsmokers is unknown.
And I want to clarify something. They did show you, Mr. Smith did show you from the National Cancer Institute web site that it said smoking is the biggest known factor.
It's the biggest known factor. It's the modifiable risk. It's the important factor, because if you quit, you eliminate that factor.
But the largest cause of pancreatic cancer in nonsmokers unknown, and what causes pancreatic cancer in nonsmokers also causes it in smokers. And then here's the important fact. Burns told you and Riggs told you and Reynolds told you and Mr. Smith told you in opening, 70 to 80 percent of pancreatic cancers are caused by something other than smoking.
Think about that. What that means is if you put ten people in a room who've had pancreatic cancer, smokers and nonsmokers, two or three of their cancer was caused by smoking, seven or eight was caused by something else, and just looking at them there is no way to tell the difference.
What did Dr. Riggs tell you? I'm sure you were stunned at the beginning of my cross. Here's what he said. He had just told you his opinion, smoking caused it. And I said, When you're talking about an individual's pancreatic cancer, you usually can't say what caused it. That's right. Any single person could have many reasons for having cancer. That's right. In any individual you usually
cannot say why that person has cancer.
Dr. Riggs: That's right. It would be impossible -- these were his exact words -- it would be impossible to describe why a single person has a particular disease.
This is Dr. Riggs, their one expert on the cause of Ms. McEniry's pancreatic cancer. He says it would be impossible. So what you do is you look at population studies to try to infer what caused a person's pancreatic cancer. And he told you that most of the studies he relied on were below two.
And he also -- we showed this Iodice study and this is the medical analysis, looked at 82 studies and it found the relative risk for current smokers and pancreatic cancer was
1.74,	for former smokers is 1.2.
Now, I'm not sure everybody liked my example. I thought it was pretty good. So if you look at my -- take my example with football players, teenage boys who get acne.
And what you know is, five boys who don't play football get it, ten boys who do play football get it, so the excess risk is at five boys, the background risk is five boys. So while
it's twice as likely that a football player will have acne, it's equally likely it was caused just because they're a teenage boy.
2.0 -- if it's a 2.0, the background risk is the same as the excess risk.
And what Dr. Riggs told you is, for the majority of the studies he relied on, the relative risk was less than 2. Iodice has it
1.74.	Now look at that. If you have a relative risk of less than two, it's much more likely it's caused by the background risk, the number below the line.
That was the example I gave, the relative risk of 2 is like a flip of a coin. Why is that important? Because the studies he relies on says the risk is 2 or less than 2. And that's what's reflected in the Seer data. You remember the National Cancer Institute has a database and you can plug in information for people. Here we did it for white women who have pancreatic cancer, all ages, from 1975 to 2010, and also white women who -- same parameters -- that had lung cancer and breast cancer.
You remember Dr. Burns showed you this
demonstrative, and what it shows is more women began smoking -- or as people began smoking, this was men's rate of lung cancer, here's women's rate of lung cancer. And what it showed is as more women started smoking, they started having higher rates of lung cancer.
There is a direct correlation.
And the Seer data shows you the same thing, but look what it shows for pancreatic cancer. The lung cancer is the top line in blue, the pancreatic cancer is right there right around just the same. It's right around that line 10 per 100. Even though the number of women who are smoking was going up, the rates of pancreatic cancer were not.
And think about that. If smoking was a significant cause of pancreatic cancer in women, you would expect that line to go up just like it did with lung cancer. And the reason it didn't is because everyone agrees that 70 to 80 percent of pancreatic cancers are caused by something other than smoking.
And if you look at a tumor under a microscope, you can't tell what caused it. So based on the statistics alone, it's much more
likely, it's much more likely that if you knew nothing else about Ms. McEniry, that her pancreatic cancer was caused by something other than smoking.
We talked about Dr. Reynolds. One thing I want to clarify. Ms. McEniry had adenocarcinoma, an exocrine adenocarcinoma. He said that's 90 percent of pancreatic cancer. She didn't have some special smoker's pancreatic cancer. She had the sort of pancreatic cancer that 90 percent of people have. And as I told you what Dr. Reynolds said was back in 1995, based on what I knew, she smoked about a pack a day most of her adult life and that doubles the risk. Only risk factor I was aware of that's, why I filled it out the way I did.
I want to talk very briefly about other risk factors of pancreatic cancer. We know that heavy drinking is a risk factor for both breast cancer and pancreatic cancer. And Mr. Avera said we tried to make Ms. McEniry out to be an alcoholic. I never tried to make Ms. McEniry out to be an alcoholic. I never did that.
What I did was I brought you the evidence that I'm ethically bound to bring so that you would have the evidence you need to reach the verdict in this lawsuit based on the facts and the evidence. And there were three witnesses: Robin Greenlee, Tim Stricker, and Hobart Brammer that all described Ms. McEniry as a heavy scotch drinker. They told you we didn't bring Brammer's testimony. Sure we did, through Dr. Riggs and Dr. Nace.
Now, Tim Stricker and Hobart Brammer actually lived with Ms. McEniry for several months and had an opportunity to observe her behavior. And they described, and you heard it. Now plaintiff's children said their mother was not a drinker. In fact, Kathy Haldeman flat out said that Mr. Greenlee,
Mr. Stricker, Mr. Brammer, they're all alcoholics and they're all lying.
Well, let me ask you this. Why would they lie? What did they have to gain, particularly, Tim Stricker? You heard Karen Diggs tell you that he was one of her mother's boys. Karen told you that her mom loved Tim Stricker. She loved having him around. You
heard him tell you when I read his testimony yesterday that he loved Ms. McEniry. What possible motive do they have to make it up?
All three of them?
Let's talk about breast cancer. It's undisputed that both Margaret McEniry and her mother had breast cancer. There was some evidence that her sister Helen had it, too.
But let's assume that her brother, Tom Spurgeon, was wrong. That's still Ms. McEniry and her mother with breast cancer.
And Dr. Riggs told us that 10 to 12 percent of women with breast cancer have the BRAC gene. That's what Riggs told us. We know that Karen Diggs' doctor talked with her about being tested for the gene, but today no one in Ms. McEniry's family has been tested.
We know the BRAC genes increases the women's risk of pancreatic cancer. And we're never going to know for sure whether Ms. McEniry had the gene because she was never tested.
Let me ask you this: What caused Ms. McEniry's breast cancer? We know smoking didn't because the 2004 Surgeon General said it didn't. In fact, the last sentence: It
would be false to tell women that they will prevent breast cancer if they quit smoking.
The National Cancer Institute, the Center for Disease Control, the DaVita text, that big medical text that Riggs relies, no one even mentions smoking as a risk factor for breast cancer. The American Cancer Society lists it as factors with uncertain, controversial or unproven effect on breast cancer risk, and a group of the things like wearing a bra, using antiperspirants did not work.
Incredibly, Dr. Riggs told you it was his opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Margaret McEniry had a tobacco-related breast cancer. And I said -I showed him the 2004 Surgeon General's Report, and I showed him the National Cancer Institute web site, and I showed him the DaVita text that he says is authoritative, and I showed him the Centers for Disease Control, and I said none of these, none of these support your opinion. He goes, Yeah, that's right. And he said, I saw a study that suggested smoking might be related. And I said, Well, do you agree with Dr. Reynolds
that you could find a study that says anything, if you're willing to cherry pick it?
And he said, Sure.
To be completely honest, members of the jury, I was embarrassed for Dr. Riggs. Why did he extend himself and why did he offer that opinion? Because plaintiff knows that whatever caused Ms. McEniry's breast cancer could also have caused her pancreatic cancer.
So it was necessary for someone to take the stand and say, Well, smoking could have caused the breast cancer, too. And they knew that Dr. Burns wouldn't say it, and they knew that Dr. Reynolds sure wouldn't say it, so Dr. Riggs had to take one for the team and that's why he gave that opinion.
Here is the bottom line. Here's what Dr. Riggs told you. He told you this under oath: When you were talking about an individual's pancreatic cancer, you usually cannot say what caused it. Any single person could have many reasons for having cancer and any individual, you usually cannot say why that person has cancer. It would be impossible to describe why a single person had
a particular disease.
In this case, members of the jury,
Dr. Riggs is trying to do the impossible. And since plaintiff has not proved that smoking is what actually caused her mother's pancreatic cancer, Ms. McEniry is not a member of the Engle class and this case is over.
Let's look at the verdict form. First question: Was Margaret R. McEniry's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her pancreatic cancer?
There are really two questions you'll have to decide. The first is whether, but for her addiction to nicotine, she would have quit smoking. And the second is, did smoking actually cause her pancreatic cancer?
MR. SMITH: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, that improperly misstates the law. This verdict form, nor does the instruction say that, but for, she would have quit. That is a misstatement.
MR. COFER: Sure it does. I'm going to
show that next. It does.
MR. SMITH: That's not what it says.
(Following the sidebar conference, the following proceedings were had:)
THE COURT: You want to stand and stretch for a minute, go ahead.
MR. COFER: Stand and take a stretch break.
THE COURT: Anyone that wants to run in the back, go ahead.
MR. COFER: I'm only going to be about five minutes and I can wrap up.
THE COURT: All right. Let's do it.
Give you five minutes. Recess for five minutes.
(Short break.)
THE COURT: Do you need to wait a minute?
Are you ready? Let's go.
(The jury resumed their seat in the jury
box.)
MR. COFER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Thanks for being so patient. I'm about done. And I know that I need to wind up because my remote control clicker is not working anymore. I figured if I wore those
batteries out then I'm probably wearing you out, too.
So the first question: Was Margaret R. McEniry's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her pancreatic cancer?
Now, Mr. Smith told you the plaintiffs burden is to show that her cigarette smoking was more than insubstantial or something like that. Plaintiff's burden is not to show that cigarette smoking was insubstantial.
Plaintiff's burden is to show that Mrs. McEniry's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of her pancreatic cancer. That it actually caused her pancreatic cancer.
Now, let me talk about that. Plaintiff claims that if her mother were not addicted she would not have smoked, but that was not the evidence. The evidence was that an addiction to nicotine did not cause Ms. McEniry to keep smoking and did not prevent her from quitting. The evidence was that Ms. McEniry smoked because she liked to smoke, and she continued to smoke because she
did not want to quit.
Now that phrase, "legal cause," and you have an instruction I'm going to show you in just a second. Do you remember back in both voir dire and opening I gave you an example? And I told you that the law makes a distinction between something that is a cause in fact and a legal cause.
You may remember, it's been so long ago, you may not, I told you, think if I stepped out in the street and got hit by a truck, what's the cause and fact of my injuries? I got hit by a truck. But what's the legal cause? You'd have to know more. Why did I get hit by the truck? Did I cross against the light? Did I avoid the warning signal, or was the truck driver texting and not paying attention? You need to know more.
So how does that apply to this case? So here's the legal cause instruction that you will have. It will say: Addiction is a legal cause. And Mr. Smith is exactly right, it doesn't have to be the only cause. And that's what the second paragraph is: But addiction is a legal cause of death -- and that's one
thing plaintiff has to prove -- if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such doubt so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine the death would not have occurred.
So what does plaintiff have to show you? Plaintiff has to show you that her mother's addiction was so strong and so substantial that it can reasonably be said that but for her addiction, she would not have smoked and would not have gotten sick.
In other words, plaintiff has to prove that if she were not addicted, she would have quit. Well, where is the evidence of that?
Where is the evidence that she really wanted to quit and really tried to quit?
The evidence was that 50 million people in the United States had quit smoking by 1995. Dr. Burns told you that in his opinion, the vast majority of those people were addicted.
The bottom line is, addicted smokers can and do quit smoking every day. They quit when they make up their minds that it's more
important to them not to smoke than it is to continue to smoke.
Where is the evidence that Ms. McEniry was any different? The evidence was she always had the ability to quit whenever she was sufficiently motivated to quit. And addiction to nicotine did not prevent Ms. McEniry from quitting smoking. She didn't quit because she didn't make a sincere effort to quit.
Members of the jury, the evidence is compelling that an addiction to nicotine was not a legal cause of her pancreatic cancer.
And also as I told you in opening statement, the evidence is that Margaret McEniry, if she had never smoked a single cigarette, she would have gotten pancreatic cancer because if you look at the attributable risk and you look at the risk for pancreatic cancer, seven or eight of every pancreatic cancers are caused by something other than smoking, and that's true for nonsmokers and smokers.
So bottom line is, unless plaintiff actually proves, has persuaded you that her mother's pancreatic cancer was in fact
actually caused by smoking, and in fact it was caused by an addiction to nicotine, that she's not a class member and the case is over.
And I suggest that the evidence is overwhelming that Ms. McEniry was not an Engle class member and the answer to that question is no. And if you agree, check no, knock on the door and tell the deputy you've reached your verdict.
Second question, and we can make this short: Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or more of the defendants a legal cause of Margaret McEniry's death? No. Because plaintiff hasn't proved that cigarette smoking is what actually caused the pancreatic cancer.
So for the very same reason your answer to No. 2 should be no.
Question 3 -- and I put these two together -- 3: Was the concealment or omission of material information about the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes by each defendant a legal cause of Margaret McEniry's death?
4: Was defendants' conspiracy to conceal information a legal cause of Margaret R.
McEniry's death?
If you look at Page 12 and Page 14 on the jury instructions what they'll tell you is:
In order to be a legal cause of death for these two questions, Ms. Haldeman must show that Margaret McEniry relied on statements by either Philip Morris USA or R.J. Reynolds, which omitted material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both, plaintiff must prove that Ms. McEniry relied on something Philip Morris said or didn't say.
And as you know, there is absolutely no evidence whatsoever at that. Not a single witness testified that she was confused about the risks of smoking.
In 1964, what she learned at the stop-smoking clinic and related to her husband caused him to quit smoking.
Ms. Haldeman answered my last two questions: Did your mother ever tell you she relied on anything any tobacco company ever said or did in her decision to start smoking?
No. Did she ever tell you she relied on anything any tobacco company ever did in her
decision to continue smoking? Ms. Haldeman told you, No.
You don't need to take my word for it.
The plaintiff herself has told you that the answer to Question 3 and 4 is no.
That takes us to Question 5. Let me be clear about this. So this is the comparative fault instruction, and this is, if you decide that Philip Morris, Reynolds, and plaintiff are all responsible, here's how you can assign how much each person is responsible.
And plaintiff suggested that Ms. McEniry was 20 percent responsible and that Reynolds and Philip Morris were each 40 percent responsible.
Well, let me tell you one thing so there's no confusion. You never get to this question unless you decide that she was a class member. Unless you check yes to Question 1, you never get to this question. Okay. You never get here unless you answered those other questions.
If you do get here then what I suggest is, you think about what Mr. Smith and Mr. Avera told you. And what they told you is
that on her mother's behalf, Ms. Haldeman accepts some fault for her mother's pancreatic cancer.
Well, think about what that means. What that must mean is two things. That one,
Ms. McEniry knew smoking could kill her just like she told Tim Stricker. But it means something else. And that she had the ability to quit smoking in time, say for example when she had breast cancer, and she would have avoided her risk. Because unless Ms. McEniry both knew smoking was dangerous and had the ability in time to quit and time to avoid it, how could she have any fault? Think about that.
The very fact they admit that she was at fault, they're admitting she knew it could kill her; that she had the ability to quit and she didn't. So I respectfully suggest, members of the jury, if you get this far, you should assign Margaret McEniry 100 percent fault because only Ms. McEniry was in a position to decide whether to smoke or not smoke. Only Ms. McEniry was in a position to decide whether to accept that risk.
Next, you know, if you get this far this asks about damages. And you heard what Mr. Avera suggested. I'm not even going to give you a number on that. If you get this far, this is something you're going to have to use your own judgment to decide.
You heard each member of the McEniry family take the stand. They told you what their mother meant to them and they told you the loss that they've experienced since that, and that's something I can't help you with.
If you get that far that's a number you need to decide on your own.
The last question: Please state as to each defendant for which you answered yes to Question 3 or Question 4 whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against that defendant on the circumstances of this case.
Now, you never get here unless you answer yes to three or four. You have to first find that her mother relied on some omission to her detriment that caused her pancreatic cancer, and that she relied on some omission. And the evidence is clear that she did not.
But if you do get here, I want you to make sure you understand what it is that you're being asked to decide. You're not being asked to decide an amount of punitive damages. The issue is whether by clear and convincing evidence, plaintiff has shown she's entitled to punitive damages. Don't spend one minute thinking about amount.
If you decide that she's entitled to it there will be another phase to this trial, and they'll put on evidence, we'll put on evidence, we'll have closing arguments, and then you can decide whether she recovers anything and, if so, how much.
So your focus shouldn't be on amount, it should be whether they've established through clear and convincing evidence that they're entitled to punitive damages.
And I really want to talk about clear and convincing evidence. And it's on Page 22 of your jury instructions. And this is important, because clear and convincing evidence is a much higher standard of proof than the greater weight of the evidence.
With respect to punitive damages you will
see that the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without any hesitation about the matter at issue. It's a much higher standard and you have to really, really, really convince that punitive damages is appropriate.
And let me tell you something else, and this is critically important. In order to award punitive damages, you can only award punitive damages based on conduct that actually harmed Margaret McEniry. Let me say that again. You can only award punitive damages based on conduct that you find actually harmed Margaret McEniry. Because this case is about Margaret McEniry. It's not a class action anymore. It's not about other smokers.
Other people have an opportunity to bring their own lawsuits and have their own juries decide their cases. So this is about conduct and whether it harmed Margaret McEniry.
And, members of the jury, the evidence is overwhelming that other than sell cigarettes, nothing we did affected her life. The Engle
findings aren't a basis for liability. We can't be held liable simply because we sold cigarettes. There must be some evidence that we misled her in some way to cause her to smoke and caused her to get sick. And respectfully, there just was no evidence.
Now, I want to say just one thing about Philip Morris. You know that plaintiffs have talked a lot about youth smoking and tried to suggest that Ms. McEniry smoked when she was a kid. There is no evidence whatsoever, none, not even an allegation that Ms. McEniry ever smoked a brand made by Philip Morris before
1958.	When she was married to Mr. McEniry and she briefly smoked his brand, the Philip Morris brand, because that's what he smoked.
And remember he said it was easier if they both smoked the same brand. She never switched to a Philip Morris cigarette until she switched to Marlboro sometime between 1975 and 1980 after she switched from L&M when she was in her 40s.
So the warning had been on the cigarette pack for a decade at that time, there is no evidence that she smoked any product made by
Philip Morris when she was a kid, there is it no evidence that either company did or said anything that caused her to begin smoking or caused her to continue smoking.
And I respectfully suggest, members of the jury, the evidence is overwhelming that punitive damages are not appropriate in this case.
Now, let me say one more thing. And I told you this in jury selection and I want to echo something that Mr. Smith said. We do have the greatest civil justice system the world has ever known. And, you know, you hear about, you know, different things that maybe went one way or the other, but the bottom line is, day in, day out we have the pride of the justice system, the greatest justice system the world has ever known. And we have it because men and women like you are willing to take three weeks out of your lives and sit in that jury box and help parties resolve disputes.
And you guys have been incredibly diligent, you've always been here on time, you've kept your good humor even when the
parties didn't always get along, I just want to say on behalf of everybody, we really, really appreciate it.
I told you back when I met you three weeks ago that all I wanted was two things. I wanted you to keep an open mind until you heard the whole trial, and I said I wanted a fair shot. And I know that you've done that,
I know that we've gotten that, and thank you very, very much for all your time and your hard work. We all appreciate it.



MR. WEAVER: May it please the Court, Counsel, Ms. Haldeman, members of the jury, good afternoon.
Like anything in life if you want to get intelligent, you have to work hard at it. If you want to learn how to play the piano and be accomplished, you have to practice. If you want to be proficient in a foreign language, you have to work at it. In a court of law all of that is called the burden of proof.
And it was interesting to me as I sat here listening to Mr. Smith and Mr. Avera they didn't mention those three words. Mr. Avera told you in voir dire that the burden of
proof, he acknowledged that it was on the plaintiff. Mr. Avera told you in voir dire that that was a burden that they welcomed.
But you only heard things like, this evidence sustains our position; this evidence is by a preponderance.
No. 1, please.
Do you remember I told you in opening that the burden of proof is like an empty glass. It's a glass that the plaintiff has to fill to beyond halfway.
The last time we heard burden of proof from the plaintiff was in voir dire.
Mr. Smith is right.
No. 2, please.
This case is about Margaret McEniry.
It's brought by Ms. Haldeman. Ms. Haldeman is here asking you to review the decisions and the choices made by her mother and hold Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds responsible for those choices.
Generally, the burden that the plaintiff has breaks down into four areas.
No. 3, please.
You've seen this in opening, but these
are the four issues that I think the plaintiff has to address: Addiction causation.
Mr. Cofer has talked about that. I'm not going to be repetitive.
Medical causation. I have a couple of thoughts on that I want to share with you.
Brand causation. Did the plaintiff prove each defendants' brands were a legal cause of Ms. McEniry's death?
And finally, conduct causation. That's the chains. Was there a link made between the companies' conduct and Margaret McEniry?
So let's go to medical causation.
Reynolds agrees from the outset that the plaintiff has failed to meet their burden of proof. Heavy alcohol use, the breast cancer gene mutation, a family history of cancer, cancer of any type, not just pancreatic cancer, or the simple fact that most pancreatic cancers are unknown are risk factors that the plaintiff has a responsibility to convince you by a preponderance of the evidence that it was more likely than not that the pancreatic cancer was caused by smoking as opposed to any of those.
Mr. Smith mentioned during his closing statement, where is the evidence from the defendants?
Let's go back to the glass. The burden of proof is on the plaintiff. We don't have the burden to prove that. We don't have to bring evidence to convince you that it wasn't smoking. We point out the possibilities. The burden belongs to the plaintiffs.
If you find that they have not, or if you find that some other risk factor is at issue here, then your answer to Question 1 should be no and we go no further.
But I do want to highlight one point.
Dr. Riggs with the bow tie testified that based on his review of the radiology and pathology reports that cancer was located -let's look at C dem 6, please -- the cancer was located in the body of the pancreas near the tail. Remember this is the drawing that the plaintiffs used with Dr. Riggs and he says that it was in the body of the pancreas near the tail. We know that to be accurate because if we can go to C dem 5, the medical record here from May of 1995 indicates that the
biopsy where they got the tissue to be used in the pathology, the biopsy came from the tail of the pancreas.
The impression: The pancreatic tail biopsy was performed without complication.
Now why is it important that the cancer arose closer to the tail than the head? Well,
Dr. Riggs told us about that. Dr. Riggs -- in fact, Mr. Avera on redirect used the Iodice study with him.
CM7, please.
And during his closing, Mr. Smith also told you from the 2004 Surgeon General's Report that carcinogens from cigarettes can get access to the pancreas through either the blood or exposure to the bile. And Iodice here, and this is what Dr. Riggs talked about, he said, However it is possible that some carcinogens may reach the pancreas by exposure to the bile, which explanation the excess of tumors arising in the head of the gland.
Someone on the jury asked Dr. Riggs the question: Where did it arise? And he reconfirmed. If it arose near the tail in the body. So what does that mean? Dr. Riggs and
Iodice both tell you that the excessive tumors arise in the head of the gland. Well, if it didn't arise in the head of the gland -- let's go back to 5, Laura, the drawing, I'm sorry -if it didn't arise in the head of the gland, then it's not one of those excessive tumors that Iodice talked about and that Dr. Riggs talked about arising as a result of smoking.
That's the only clinical evidence in this case from which you can reach a conclusion that this was not a smoking-related tumor. And Dr. Riggs who testified for the plaintiff told you that.
Now let me be clear. We do not believe that plaintiff has sustained her burden of proof as to the first question. We don't believe she's a class member and we don't believe she can take advantage of the findings.
But if you disagree and you conclude that the findings are at play in this case, that does not end the inquiry because we're here for Margaret McEniry's issue, we're here for Kathryn Haldeman's lawsuit, and that means that the connection between everything on the
findings and Margaret McEniry is the plaintiffs burden.
Number 8, please. The findings don't relieve the plaintiff from establishing the link between their claims, whether it's concealment, conspiracy, negligence, design defect in Margaret McEniry. They had to show you that nexus, that connection, that bond between the evidence and Margaret McEniry.
Let's talk now about brands. That issue comes up in the context of Question No. 2, where you're asked to decide whether or not the cigarettes smoked by either Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds were the legal cause of Ms. McEniry's pancreatic cancer. Once again -MR. SMITH: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
MR. WEAVER: I said the legal cause.
That was a mistake. They have to show it's a legal cause, but they still have to show that connection.
When you go through the instructions please look at Page 11, Paragraph 2. Let's look at C dem 9. Page 11, Paragraph 2 of the
instructions set out legal cause when you're looking at how brands factor into this. And it says: Smoking a defendants' cigarette was as legal cause of death if smoking that defendants' cigarettes directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such death so that it can be reasonably be said that but for the smoking of those cigarettes, the death would not have occurred.
Now the shorthand that we use to refer to this instruction is substantial contributing factor or substantial contributing cause.
That's what the plaintiffs have to prove.
Another way to say it is, the plaintiff had to prove that but for smoking Reynolds' cigarettes, Ms. McEniry would not have gotten her pancreatic cancer; or but for smoking Philip Morris' cigarettes, Ms. McEniry would not have gotten pancreatic cancer.
Now, I was listening to the way Mr. Smith was carefully describing what the plaintiff's experts have told you about brand use. And the plaintiff's position in this case is that all cigarettes that were smoked by Ms. McEniry
are responsible for the pancreatic cancer.
Well, all cigarette manufacturers are not in this courtroom. It's Philip Morris and my client, R.J. Reynolds. So what does that mean? How do you resolve that? You resolve that by looking at how you determine what a substantial contributing factor is. And you do that by looking at a couple of different sources.
May I have the Elmo, please.
So this is from the 2004 Surgeon General's Report. You may recall Mr. Avera was using this with one of the experts, I think it was Dr. Riggs on redirect. And he went to sit down and he had just finished showing him the figure here, up here, 459,900 cigarettes, lifetime cigarette habit.
And I saw something on this page, and you may recall that I said, Counsel, could you please tell me what page that was? And he said, 157. I said, Thank you. Well, what I want to direct your attention to is up here: Pack-years. They didn't talk about this Table. I'm going to take this off. I've got it in a different form, but we'll get back to
it.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Riggs both went over this evidence.
C dem 10, please.
Here is a demonstrative from the 2004 Surgeon General's Report, and what it shows, pack-years, remember that was at the top of the page, it shows that 21 to 50 pack-years results in a relative risk of 1.7. That .7 is the excess risk. We know it's over 1 so there's an excess risk, so that means your risk is increased for pancreatic cancer if you smoked between 21 and 50 pack-years of cigarettes.
Dr. Burns also addressed this issue when someone from the jury asked him a question.
Let's go to C dem 11.
The question was: Pancreatic cancer requires long-term addiction. Define long-term preferably in years. And before he indicated that he wanted to look at it in terms of addiction, what did Dr. Burns tell you? Dr. Burns said, In order to be a substantial contributing factor, in order to increase the risk associated with pancreatic
cancer from smoking, you had to smoke in excess of 20 pack-years.
So these two experts, the plaintiffs experts, both have told you that in order for brand use to be a substantial contributing factor, the plaintiff's responsibility was to show you in excess of 20 pack-years of use of Philip Morris' cigarettes, but for Philip Morris' cigarettes, the cancer would not have occurred; and 20 years of a pack history of R.J. Reynolds' brands, but for R.J. Reynolds' brands, the pancreatic cancer would not have occurred.
Plaintiff didn't show you that evidence, ladies and gentlemen. If you get back into the jury room and you find yourself guessing or you find yourself pouring through your notes trying to construct that 20 years, not only does it tell you that you're not going to be able to do it, it tells you that the plaintiffs have not met their burden of proof.
No expert witness took this stand in this courtroom and said the smoking of R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes was a substantial contributing factor in the development of the
Margaret McEniry's pancreatic cancer, no one. No expert witness took that stand and said that smoking of Philip Morris brand cigarettes was a substantial contributing factor, no one.
But that was their burden of proof. They can't come go and just say, all cigarettes matter. They can't do that.
When you look at the instructions, Page
11,	Paragraph 2. They have to have shown you it was a substantial contributing factor.
C dem 13.
The only evidence that we have is that Margaret McEniry smoked Liggett and Myers cigarettes at various points through her life.
And the only evidence that you were brought in this case -- C dem 14 -- is from the plaintiff when she said she personally observed Margaret McEniry smoking L&M cigarettes for 20 to 30 years.
Let's take a second and look at what was specifically said about Reynolds' brands cigarettes. I want to talk about Tom Spurgeon for a minute, Ms. McEniry's younger brother.
C dem 15, please.
Up until 1957, tom Spurgeon was the only
person who had knowledge of Margaret McEniry. He answered that he had no recall of what brands Margaret McEniry smoked. He had no idea that she was smoking the same brands as her parents. He had no idea what brands she smoked throughout her life. There is no evidence in this case of what she smoked before 1957.
Mr. Smith tells you that he wants you to take into consideration that Lucky Strike and Camel were big sellers. But in the face of Tom Spurgeon's testimony that specifically indicates there is no knowledge to take advantage of Mr. Smith's request, is pure speculation on your part, and the instructions will tell you you're not allowed to speculate.
If the only witness who was there prior to 1957 doesn't know, then plaintiff hasn't proven anything. You have to take the evidence in front of you; you cannot speculate.
In 1957, through Mr. McEniry, Jr., we know that Ms. McEniry was smoking Chesterfields, Lucky Strikes, and Camels, among other brands. Almost every witness in
this trial told you that Ms. McEniry liked to smoke the cheap brands. There are many companies that manufacture cigarettes, not just Philip Morris and Reynolds. Remember Mr. McEniry said, she added more brands in
1958.
C dem 13.
In 1959 and 1960, she switched to L&M, smoked those exclusively throughout her marriage to Thomas McEniry when it ended in 1976. She smoked a multitude of brands including L&M and Eve made by Liggett.
C dem 14.
If you go back to Ms. Haldeman's testimony and you remember -- and I had not seen the Philip Morris database, but you remember and it will be back in the evidence room -- the jury room with you, you remember 1988, it lists her brand preference for 1988 as L&M.
Well, you know what, if you take the latest year that Mr. McEniry, Jr. said that Ms. McEniry started smoking L&M cigarettes, which is 1960, that's the absolute latest year she could have started, and you add 20 to 30
years to it, that's 1980 or 1990. It's consistent with the Philip Morris piece of information where it showed her smoking L&M in 1988.
George Diggs met Ms. McEniry in 1983. He said that she smoked menthol brands like Salem on occasion. Mr. Diggs told me that he stopped smoking Salems in about '84. He said he never saw Ms. McEniry with Salems unless he gave them to her.
Karen Diggs said that she saw Ms. McEniry smoke Winston with her ex-husband, William Shaw, but that was in her midst.
Thomas McEniry, III said there was Camels and Camels lights, but those were out of the standard, I think was the phrase that he used which meant, unusual, not regular.
Viceroy and Lucky Strike. Let's talk about those for a minute. I asked Ms. Haldeman about Viceroy and she said, Karen told me about those. That's why I testified on the stand here that she smoked Viceroy.
But you were here for Ms. Diggs' testimony, she never mentioned Viceroy.
The same is true with Lucky Strike.
Ms. Haldeman said, Karen Diggs told me about Lucky Strike, and Mr. McEniry, Jr. said about that. Well, we have the separate testimony from Mr. McEniry, Jr., but Karen Diggs never mentioned Lucky Strike.
So with respect to Reynolds' brands, you heard the following descriptive terms used:
16, please.
Occasional, not her regular brand, not often, out of the standard, very unusual.
Substantial contributing factor means in excess of 20 pack-years of cigarette smoking. You don't get it from that and there's no evidence that she smoked 20 years of Philip Morris brand cigarettes.
Let's go to 17. I asked you in opening to evaluate the evidence, and every time you saw either a historical document or heard witness testimony you should ask, what does this have to do with Ms. McEniry?
Let's animate that please, Laura.
Let's take a little different tact on it.
What does Dr. Kyriakoudes have to do with Margaret McEniry? He came here and said, I'm not a biographer, I'm not a genealogist. And
then his review of the fact witness depositions in this case did not follow the historical method. He used a different methodology to come in and talk to you in this courtroom than he does in his normal history practice.
And he took the stand and said, You know what, for my purposes, brands don't matter. They don't matter. I just need a general feel for what was going on.
The Elmo, please.
And then on cross-examination I asked him about his deposition changes. July, he changes all of his answers with respect to brands and front loads R.J. Reynolds' brands
into pre 1964. Why did he do that? Because
there is no evidence that she smoked the Reynolds' brands before 1957.
Ladies and gentlemen, you are judges of the witnesses' credibility, candor, and demeanor; you alone can decide what that changed testimony means and what weight to give it, if any.
Sixteen days after you showed up for jury duty you still haven't been shown a connection
between a tobacco company document and Margaret McEniry, much less one that she relied on.
You know, our society has become a sound byte society. Do you remember the 1994 Congressional testimony? Congressman Widen from Oregon, he had the big -- he had the same glasses that I had in the late '80s, the big windshield glasses. Congressman Widen didn't want the full answer. He interrupted my client's president, Mr. Johnston, and he said,
You know what, I think I know what you're going to say but I'm just interested in my sound byte.
If you want the whole story you have to look at the whole context. I'm glad you had a chance to hear his full answer on why he believed that nicotine did not meet the classic definition of addiction under the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
And let's talk about a few other things.
This was unusual to me that Mr. Avera showed Dr. Nace, a psychiatrist, some internal company documents and said, Doesn't this mean this, does it mean this? I got up and said,
Would you want to know context? He said, Heck yeah.
Don't you think that if there was an issue of pH regulation or freebasing nicotine, to use Mr. Smith's words, that David Burns, the man who worked for the Surgeon General, would have given you chapter and verse on that?
But Dr. Burns didn't talk about that at length. Dr. Burns didn't tell you that there was freebasing going on. Why would they use a document with someone that they know hasn't looked at documents, unless it was a scientific theory that perhaps had been discredited? Where is the evidence?
Dr. Kyriakoudes wanted you to think that cigarette advertisements were special, unique, and out of the ordinary.
19, please.
But Santa Clause, sports heroes, movie stars were not used uniquely by the cigarette companies. Motor oil used the same type of advertisements.
And from there, Dr. Kyriakoudes launched into youth marketing.
Let's show C dem 20.
This is the Claude Teague 1973 memo, a draft memo, where Dr. Teague notes, I believe unfairly, in terms of describing the company's position with respect to youth marketing. And Dr. Kyriakoudes admitted that what that meant was, Dr. Teague was acknowledging that what he was suggesting was against company policy.
Let's remember that the youth marketing documents that you were shown fell into two camps: Either before Margaret McEniry was born, the 1928 memo, or after she had become an adult, married with childre.
The Elmo, please.
You were shown this during closing. I was interested in the fact that they used Diane Burrows' memo. That's Diane Burrows from 1984, the big 90-page memo that in Appendix B had the government-provided statistics from Health Education and Welfare about 12- to 17-year-olds. But this is the document that has over 200 references to adult smoker as being 18 to 24. This is the document that says Reynolds' policy is to not market to youth.
This is the document -- C dem 21, please -- this is the document, if we can animate it, that contains the sentence: RJR's consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free informed adult choice which the company does not seek to influence it.
And yet they pick that document. Why did they do that? Because there is no connection and they're struggling to try and make a connection.
Let's look at C dem 22.
When you look at the company's internal and external activities, you see a pattern of a policy and action that does not seek to encourage youth smoking. 1964, Adoption of the Cigarette Advertising Code; 1967, Termination of the Beverly Hillbillies' sponsorship because the youth audience was too large. No American Graffiti in 1972. A 1989 Reynolds' company policy against minor smoking; 1990, memo to All Field Sales Employees; and the 1990 Willow Ridge letter.
All of those documents are consistent with respect to my client's policies about youth marketing.
Dr. Kyriakoudes didn't show you an ad campaign, he didn't show you a formal marketing program that was targeted to youth. Instead on redirect, Mr. Smith got up and showed this 1974 document, C dem 23. One that's called, The Hilton Head Marketing Presentation.
But you know what he didn't show you? He didn't show you at Page 3 where strategy is mentioned on Chart 7, that everything after strategy refers to 18- to 24- and 34-year-olds. That's not a marketing program. That's not a formal marketing set of ads. You still haven't seen that.
But again -- 24, please -- what does it have to do with Margaret McEniry? Youth marketing had no impact on her. There is no evidence of that. Whether in 1958, when she was 24; in 1974, when she was 40; or in 1984, when she was 50 years old.
Dr. Burns talked for a while about whether or not the companies cooperated with the federal government or the Surgeon General. Don't forget though, the Surgeon General,
Dr. Wynder, and the public health community
were all advocating that the manufacturers do research and investigate things like filters and low tar cigarettes.
Dr. Burns agreed that the industry's actions in reducing tar and nicotine levels were consistent with what the public health community was advocating.
C dem 26, please.
"These activities were done in an effort to remove or lower polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons." Dr. Burns admitted that was a good thing.
Dr. Burns conceded -- let's look at 27 -that the Tobacco Industry Research Committee scientific director, Dr. Clarence Cook Little, was a distinguished scientist, and during the '57 congressional hearings, the acting head of the FDC said that the companies had cooperated greatly with the federal government.
Dr. Burns also admitted -- C dem 28 -that the companies were thanked and acknowledged in the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
C dem 29.
The Green Monster was published that
contained important TIRC and CTR funded research.
Let's go to AS173. This is in evidence.
In 1969, the President of Reynolds,
Mr. Galloway, wrote to the head of research saying: In cooperation with others, you should push the work containing tobacco and health. You should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of the facts ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper research of the subject. If there is a safer cigarette, let's continue and increase our efforts in this program. Please prepare a plan to carry it out.
And what did the companies do? Dr. Burns told us that in the early to mid 1970s, the tobacco manufacturers worked with the National Cancer Institute in the context of the tobacco working group.
C dem 31.
When you look at the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, there is no nexus, there's no connection, there's no evidence that Ms. McEniry ever heard or relied on the Frank
Statement, anything from third-party organizations like TIRC or CTR, Tobacco Institute, Reynolds or Philip Morris, there is no evidence that she heard any of that.
Plaintiffs ask you to infer -- another way to look at that is, they want you to assume or to guess.
MR. SMITH: May we approach, Your Honor?
(A sidebar conference was had outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, the instruction says infer. Any idea that infer is to assume or guess is in direct contradiction of the instruction which Your Honor has already put in evidence.
THE COURT: I think he's got that.
MR. WEAVER: That should be fine.
(Following the sidebar conference, the following proceedings were had:)
MR. WEAVER: The only way you can infer, ladies and gentlemen, is if the entirety of the evidence supports it, and if there is no bear there, you can't infer.
Ladies and gentlemen, our laws have
determined that cigarettes are a legal product and that people should have the ability even today to make a choice. Margaret McEniry wasn't deceived. She wasn't fooled. That's the kind of person she was. She knew what was going on. She had the intelligence to understand the facts as society was bringing them to her.
Let's look at 34. She was highly intelligent, a life-long learner, hard working, decisive, never blamed anyone else for her decisions. There should be no doubt that she was able to appreciate the risks.
And if you look at what she knew and how her personalized experiences changed over the years. Let look at C dem 35. She worked at the Indiana Department of Health for three years. This was at the time when the mouse skin paintings were starting to be publicized.
And remember I asked Dr. Kyriakoudes and Dr. Burns, would the mouse skin paintings have been more noticed by the public health community than in the general public, and they both agreed.
Well, Margaret McEniry was working at a
Department of Health at that time. That's a situation where an inference is reasonable.
The witnesses say that it was reasonable for the public health community to have known more. Margaret McEniry is working at a Department of Health, it's a reasonable inference.
But it really doesn't matter because by 1964, we know that she had a personalized warning, and the rest of these dates just indicate all of the different evidence that she chose to smoke despite knowing smoking was dangerous and addictive.
What was material to Margaret McEniry?
That's a burden of proof that the plaintiff had. They showed you a bunch of ads, but they never showed you a single ad about low tar cigarettes that they could put her in front of. Dr. Kyriakoudes admitted that.
The only evidence regarding Reynolds' low tar or light cigarettes was that she chose Camel lights for a short time because regular Camels were too strong. Thomas McEniry, III testified to that.
And there is no evidence, ladies and
gentlemen, that but for some statement made by either Philip Morris or by R.J. Reynolds that she would have done something different. The mountains of information already in the public contained information that smoking can cause illness or that nicotine is addictive, and once you start, it can be difficult to quit. Margaret McEniry knew no later than 1964.
You were shown a document, sine qua non, where that phrase was used. But you weren't shown the corresponding Reader's Digest article that's in evidence from 1950 that says: Nicotine is what makes tobacco tobacco. It's what makes it something different from an ordinary weed. That's in evidence. You can look at it.
And look at Mr. Teague's 1954 memo. I believe that it's -- what was that number?
MR. BROWN: 3608.
MR. WEAVER: 3608. That's the one that Mr. Smith showed you that supposedly said, we knew before society knew. Well, go back and look at the back of Dr. Teague's document. You'll see every bibliography reference, something from the public literature. It
wasn't something that was known to Reynolds. It wasn't a secret. It was in the public.
The last thing I want to do is talk about plaintiffs admission, because like Mr. Cofer, that gives me some great pause.
Let's look at C dem 30.
What does it really mean when they say,
Ms. Haldeman, on behalf of her mother, accepts some fault? It means that Ms. McEniry knew that smoking was dangerous and she continued to smoke. She had the ability to quit earlier but she didn't. She had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented her death, but she chose not to.
And 39, please.
Ms. McEniry's choices are the only legal cause of her death. Nothing that Reynolds or Philip Morris could have done would have prevented her death, only Ms. McEniry had the ability to prevent it and she's 100 percent responsible for those choices.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to start -I want to end where I started.
C dem 40, please.
By now you know the issue is not as
simple as whether or not some tobacco employees said dumb things, and the issue is not whether or not you like a tobacco company. That's not why you're here though, ladies and gentlemen. If you focus on the things that have no connection to Margaret McEniry, if you focus on those things, you will be allowing the wishes, the inclinations, and the dictates of someone else's passion to interfere with the facts of the evidence.
Mrs. Haldeman has not given you reason to second guess her mother's decision. As a result you should answer no to the questions and render a verdict for the defense.
Like all the others, ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you for your patience, I want to thank you for your attentiveness, and I thank you for what you're about to do.
