MR. SMITH: May it please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. SMITH: Counsel.
First of all, I would be remiss if I didn't start by thanking all of you for what you've done. I think the Court told you when you were in voir dire, that outside of serving our country in harm's way, nothing is more important than jury service. It has separated us from the rest of the known world in terms of our justice system.
We come before citizens, we give them the evidence, we give them the instructions, and we allow them to make a decision.
For generations we have preserved and admired this. Why? Because it works, and it works because people like yourselves are willing to do it. So I start with thank you, on behalf of everybody.
I think for a moment in this -- in the next few minutes, I want to start off with the easiest place to start, and that's with the first question on the verdict form.
I believe we ought to start with the first
question on the verdict form because it really frames your discussion, I think focuses on the evidence, and allows us to talk about what really is the most important decision in front of you because, in large part, you will find that this question is the one that is the gateway to the determination of the question which we're really here about, and that is whether or not Margaret McEniry is a member of the Engle class, because as you've already learned from voir dire forward, that frames much of what happens in this case.
And I think I would start off by having you notice the questions that you are not being asked.
First of all, you're not being asked to determine whether or not Margaret McEniry was addicted to nicotine. That has been determined. The Court has already instructed you upon that. And so there's no question. No one is going to come up and contend and no one has contended that Margaret McEniry was not addicted to nicotine.
Second of all, you really are not going to be asked to decide the medical cause of death in the sense of what actually caused her death physically. Margaret McEniry died from pancreatic cancer. No one is going to contend to the contrary.
And as I told you in opening, the medical evidence
on that was pretty clear. She was diagnosed in April preliminarily. In May, Dr. Reynolds made his final diagnosis, and her death followed shortly thereafter in September from pancreatic cancer. That's not an issue.
So the medical cause and the issue of addiction have already been determined in this case, or they are not in contest.
You're really not going to even be asked to determine whether or not pancreatic cancer can be caused by cigarette smoking.
Every Surgeon General since 1972 has acknowledged an association between cigarette smoking and pancreatic cancer.
By 1979, the Surgeon General's Report -- by 1979, the Surgeon General's Report already included a graph from someone you learned a lot about in this case, the renowned researcher Dr. Ernst Wynder in which he suggested that the relative risk of pancreatic cancer in males was increased if someone smoked greater than two packs a day by a factor of 5, or 500 percent, or 5 times greater risk than a nonsmoker.
Now, it was suggested that when I first showed this that I was a little misleading because I hadn't included the table before. I want you to see the table and recall, because this is all in evidence in front of
you, the table before actually deals with females and breaks it out and says that while males have a higher rate of risk, females were at 3.0, which is 300 percent.
But remember what the standard was in this one.
This is for people who smoked simply more than 15 cigarettes a day. That's less than one pack.
So in a sense, there's not going to be a question that cigarette smoking can cause pancreatic cancer. In fact, we know by the 2004 Surgeon General's Report, which finally made the finding for this country, that studies conducted around the world provide consistent evidence for increased risk in smokers compared with lifetime nonsmokers. The relative risk estimates increased with pack years and with the number of cigarettes smoked daily. At the highest levels of smoking, the relative risk ranged from 3 to 5.
That's 300 to 500 percent, 3 times or 5 times greater.
Risks tended to be lower for former smokers than current smokers.
We know that the International Association for the Research on Cancer, which I think is in the next column of this same page, that the International Association for the Research on Cancer -- drop down one paragraph, please -- determined much either in 1986, IARC concluded
that smoking causes cancer of the pancreas. Since that report was published, many more studies support that causal link.
In 2002, IARC again concluded that smoking causes cancer of the pancreas, and the risk for pancreatic cancer increases with the duration of smoking and number of cigarettes smoke daily. The risk remains high after allowing for potential confounding factors such as alcohol consumption, and the risk decreases with increasing time since quitting.
We know that, in fact, internationally and within our country from the Surgeon General's Report, that smoking cigarettes causes pancreatic cancer, or can cause pancreatic cancer.
By the way, I want to talk about something. I know you're going to see it later this morning, I predict, because it was so important, and that was something called the Iodice study. If you remember, there was a statement by Mr. Cofer, that he talked about the Iodice meta-analysis.
Well, I want to show you the meta-analysis relied on by Philip Morris actually contains much of the same information suggested by the Surgeon General's Report and the IARC, which, of course, are themselves the result of decades of meta-analysis.
Look to what Iodice's analysis actually says: For dose response estimates, we presented the estimates for one cigarette, one pack year, and for one year duration; and for greater doses, consider a linear trend.
Smoking one cigarette per day increased the risk of, the relative risk of pancreatic cancer by an estimate 2 percent. Smoking one pack year raised the risk of pancreatic cancer by 1 percent. The risk of pancreatic cancer remains elevated after smoking cessation for a minimum of ten years.
If you apply these factors, if you apply these compounders that were set forth in the Iodice report, you will find, especially if you accept Dr. Nace, their expert's initial computation of 120- to 125-year pack history, or even the 80-year pack history that he somehow now has come back with, remember this: You would see for every one of those years, that's the percentage that would be increased, and for every one of those cigarettes smoked a commensurate increase.
If you apply those factors, you will see that Mrs. McEniry's risk, relative risk for pancreatic cancer would be increased by application of the Iodice study by as high as ten times.
And what does Iodice say about the way that smoking affects the risks, even for those with confirmed
genetic disorders, confirmed hereditary pancreatitis, or familial pancreatic cancer; none of which have been proven in this case.
On an individual level, physicians should make sure patients are aware of the risks of pancreatic cancer if they continue to smoke, and the clear risk reduction associated with long-term continued smoking cessation. This is especially true for patients with any of the genetic disorders such as familial pancreatic cancer or hereditary pancreatitis where smoking may augment the already existing genetic risk.
Now, what does that mean? That means that even accounting for that, what augment means, it increases it, it substantially increases it.
Indeed, I want to remind you of -- there's so many studies, and you've seen them by now. But in 2004 the Surgeon General's Report included a 1991 study which found that for persons who smoked 459,900 cigarettes, the risk for that individual was raised to 5.15. That's 515 percent.
And for a woman who smoked greater than 38 pack years, the risks were increased to 473 percent.
Drop down, please.
By the way, 459,900 cigarettes is less than half the pack history initially given by their expert, and
still a third less than their expert relied upon yesterday.
Now, you will undoubtedly see Mr. Cofer display a graph line. You remember it's a graph line in which he shows there was a small discernable risk for those who smoked cigarettes contracting pancreatic cancer. And, of course, he used that against and sets that up against a lung cancer scale which, of course, is apples to oranges. And we got into the Y axis, and I couldn't barely pass algebra, so I will tell you this: The simple truth is we ought to look and see what it is, the fact about what happened to pancreatic cancer once women were established smokers. Well, that was looked at in 1979 by the Surgeon General.
This was the observation: In 1979, pancreatic cancer is more common among men than women in the United States. But the male to female ratio has been decreasing steadily from 1.6 to 1 during the period of 1940 to 1949, to 1.3 to 1 observed from 1965 to 1969.
What does that tell us? It tells us that the gender gap that has been observed in lung cancer, COPD, heart disease, and every other form of disease that was spoken about by Dr. Burns as being tobacco related, it shows the common denominator was this: That before the 1940s, very few women had been smoking 10 or 20 years.
By 1965 and 1969, as you know from the testimony of both Dr. Burns and Dr. Kyriakoudes, that was no longer true. And what happened? The gender gap narrowed proportionally, just like it had in all other cancers, and women were catching up because they were catching up as cigarette smokers.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I told you in the beginning: Between 20 and 30 percent of all pancreatic cancer is caused by cigarette smoking. Indeed, for a moment, let's see where cigarette smoking ranks according to the National Cancer Institute.
What's the National Cancer Institute say about it? Smoking tobacco is the most important risk factor for pancreatic cancer. People who smoke tobacco are more likely than nonsmokers to develop this disease. Heavy smokers are most at risk.
It's not just a cause, it's the most recognized cause for pancreatic cancer.
Now, for one moment I want to focus your attention even more narrowly. I want to go specifically to the medical evidence in this case.
I want you to recall and note that the only physicians who treat cancer produced in evidence in this case were all produced by us. We put on Dr. Burns, board certified, a former employee of the Surgeon
General, board certified, has treated cancer much of his life and has taught about it.
We put on Dr. Reynolds, board certified oncologist who made the original diagnosis, and Dr. Charles Riggs, board certified and the former director of the Cancer Center at Shands at the University of Florida.
And what did they tell us? Well, I think that we should perhaps back up and remember the following. Each one of them, and we'll go over it. Each one of them said the following: They said that her addiction to nicotine, her smoking history substantially contributed to her death from pancreatic cancer.
I'll discuss this in detail, but those are the only three physicians who treat cancer that have appeared in this case, and that's what they told you.
Let's review this evidence for a moment.
The starting point I think should be 1995. In 1995, Dr. Reynolds, as you learned, who was and is not just a local oncologist, he is a renowned researcher and was a professor at the well-recognized Washington University in St. Louis.
Dr. Reynolds was the person who reviewed the medical history in this case. But he was also the person who had the medical file because he had been there in 1995, and had made the final diagnosis. I say
"final diagnosis," because remember, she came to Dr. Reynolds, which we'll discuss in a moment, after having preliminary tests which indicated pancreatic cancer.
Dr. Reynolds told you then, and that today, he maintains that Mrs. McEniry's exocrine pancreatic cancer, sometimes called EPC, a type of adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, was caused by her smoking cigarettes.
Was her heavy smoking history a substantial contributing cause to her pancreatic cancer?
Answer: Yes.
Was it the cause of her pancreatic cancer more likely than not?
Answer: Yes.
We know that Dr. Reynolds, as well as Dr. Riggs, said that the adenocarcinoma of the exocrine type is the most common form of pancreatic cancer. And we know from the Surgeon General's reports that it is the type most closely associated with cigarette smoking.
Dr. Reynolds was not compelled, by the way, back in 1995 to do this.
Put up the death certificate.
In 1995, he didn't have to say what the cause was if he didn't know. He filled out the birth -- the death
certificate. Pancreatic cancer. Cause: Tobacco use.
What did he say the reason for it was? And because she had smoked for 40 years and we know the risk of pancreatic cancer at least doubled in patients with a history of tobacco use, I felt that that was the underlying cause for pancreatic cancer, which is why I put that on the death certificate.
Folks, that was done long before any litigation existed. That was done because that's what the doctor found and reported to the state of Florida.
It was suggested by these defendants, and it will be again, Dr. Reynolds was unaware of her true history of consuming alcohol, which we'll talk about it. But he did not consider BRCA1 or BRCA2, genetic disorders that you heard about which, of course, for which there was very little known in 1995.
But what have we learned in this case? Well, it has been Dr. Reynolds' experience when directing BRCA testing, BRCA testing for women with a demonstrated familial risk, that BRCA testing almost always proves to be negative.
Let me make sure I understand.
Since the test has been available, you've ordered somewhere in the order neighborhood of 100 tests for the BRCA gene mutations?
Yes.
And when you ordered these tests, those are for the women who have a very heavy family history of breast cancer?
Yes.
And in the overwhelming majority of those cases, does the test come back negative?
Yes.
Is it true, Doctor, that in the overwhelming number of breast cancer cases, that the BRCA gene mutations Mr. Cofer just spent 10 to 15 minutes talking about had nothing to do with the breast cancer?
Correct.
And remember, this was based upon Mr. Cofer's suggestion that Aunt Helen, Mrs. McEniry's sister, had breast cancer, which, of course, no one in this case has proven. And the only person who testified who lived near Aunt Helen, and actually cared for Aunt Helen, was Karen Diggs, who says that she never had breast cancer.
In fact, look what Mrs. McEniry herself reported in 1995 on her medical history at the Ocala Oncology Center: Sister, kidney cancer. And, I'm sorry, and mother, breast cancer. She also, of course, revealed, and they knew she had breast cancer.
So she revealed that her sister had kidney cancer,
renal cancer, if you will, and that her mother had breast cancer, and that she had breast cancer.
Now, if her only sister had had breast cancer,
Mrs. McEniry would have known it and would have disclosed it.
Nevertheless, even assuming the history suggested by Mr. Cofer, what did Dr. Reynolds say would be his expectation, even if we assume the familial risk suggested by Mr. Cofer, but not by the evidence?
Would it be pure speculation with that history today as to whether she had the BRCA gene in 1995?
Yeah. I think, you know, based on my experience,
I would -- you know, if I saw her today, I would probably order the test if she was agreeable and if you can get her insurance to pay for it, which is a separate issue. And then my experience is more likely than not it would come back negative.
But we brought you much more than just Dr. Reynolds, though I believe Dr. Reynolds is enough for us to sustain our position on the first question.
But we brought you Dr. Riggs. Dr. Riggs, as I told you, is at the University of Florida where he treats patients with cancer both at the VA and at Shands. He had reviewed all the medical evidence in the case, including the existing pathology. And what were
his conclusions?
Was her addiction to the nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked a cause of her pancreatic adenocarcinoma within a reasonable degree of medical certainty?
Yes. And this is what's borne out by what's in the Surgeon General's Report, I believe the 2010 Surgeon General's Report.
He explained why and how he reached his conclusions to you, and the likely reasons that pancreatic cancer is caused by cigarette smoking, particularly he told you about the repeated exposure, the dose response, if you will, to the dangerous carcinogens that are contained in the cigarettes manufactured by these companies.
He specifically identified nitrosamines, and said that those cigarettes -- that those nitrosamines contained in cigarettes had actually produced pancreatic cancer in animal testing.
He also identified aromatic amines as a cause of pancreatic cancer, and that they were present in cigarette smoke. So let's look at what the biological basis for cigarettes causing pancreatic cancer was shown to be by the Surgeon General in 2004.
Because RAS mutations appear to be strongly
related to cigarette smoking and other malignancies, this association adds support to a causal relationship between smoking and pancreatic cancer. Other potential mechanisms are support by animal studies which show that nitrosamines administered peripherally or in the drinking water experimentally induced pancreatic cancer.
Tobacco specific carcinogen may reach the pancreas through the blood or through reflux bile that is in contact with the pancreatic duct.
In addition to the nitrosamines that are present in high levels of cigarette smoke, aromatic amines also play a role in pancreatic carcinogenesis. These agents require metabolic activation probably in the liver and pancreas to bind DNA and cause mutations.
Dr. Riggs' testimony is the key also to another issue in this that I believe to be a false one: Alcohol consumption. Let's go back. Let's assume for a moment that we were just looking at the medical records in the case.
Dr. Riggs looked at the medical records in this case, and he found no prior suggestion in any medical records suggesting Mrs. McEniry consumed alcohol to excess, but yesterday their doctor, Dr. Nace, also agreed with that.
He said he had reviewed more than 900 pages of
medical evidence, and had seen no mention of alcohol.
By the way, Dr. Riggs will tell you that when he looked at the medical evidence in the case, he found the existing pathology, and he found no history of pancreatitis usually associated with excessive drinking, no evidence of scarring of the liver. He told you about the specific tests that were conducted, which showed no elevated liver enzymes, which are indicators of excessive alcohol consumption. He found no evidence of liver damage or increased liver size, and he found no evidence of the presence of cirrhosis, which would be typical of a person of her age who had drank to excess.
What was the big attack on Dr. Riggs? Because Dr. Riggs believes that the current science does suggest that there's a relationship between cigarette smoking and breast cancer. The Surgeon General is not there yet.
But folks, look at what the Surgeon Generals report. It is being studied, just as Dr. Riggs said, but all of this is a false trail. This case isn't about what caused a 1980 or '81 breast cancer. This is about what caused her pancreatic cancer, and that alone. The real issue is where is there in this case one piece of medical evidence that's been presented that suggests that these experienced, well-published, long-term
practitioners, these doctors were wrong?
If the argument is that our doctors were wrong, where is the contrary medical evidence? Where is the doctor who comes in and says I want to confirm that there's a BRCA issue, or yes, that whole played a role.
It's not present in the case.
For a moment I want to go back to Dr. Burns, who I will speak later about in another area, but do not forget what Dr. Burns said.
Dr. Burns has a distinguished public health career, but he told you for much of his life he spent 50 percent of his time treating and diagnosing people who were suffering from cancer, and that had included frequent and recurrent nicotine addiction diagnosis.
And what did he say?
He told you, by the way, he showed you, and actually yesterday you learned that their expert,
Dr. Nace, considers nicotine addiction a disease of the brain. His words.
Very simply, this is how nicotine addiction works.
It works on the brain, it works on the Dopamine pathways. There's no disagreement on this. You become addicted. As soon as you don't have that which the receptors require, they require it, you respond, and that's what is the dose response. And the reason the
cigarette is the perfect mechanism, is within seven seconds of lighting up you get a puff, and that puff goes to your brain. That's the testimony.
And what did Dr. Burns say? He said not only was she addicted, she was intensely addicted.
And what role did that addiction play in her death?
Dr. Burns, from your review of this case, in light of the relative risks accepted by the medical/scientific community, do you have an opinion as to a reasonable medical certainty as to whether Margaret McEniry's intense addiction to the nicotine contained in cigarettes substantially contributed to her pancreatic cancer?
Yes. There's no question in my mind her addiction was a substantial factor, substantial contributing factor in causing her pancreatic cancer.
For a moment I thought we might go through the exercise that doctors regularly go through. This is the American Cancer Society. We can do the same thing with the -- we can do the same thing with the National Cancer Institute. What are the facts?
Smoking. We know it's present. We know how heavy it was.
Diabetes. We know it's not present.
Family history. No one -- no one has ever in that family had pancreatic cancer but Margaret.
Inflammation of the pancreas, that is pancreatitis. They were asked. No evidence of pancreatitis.
Obesity. No one questions that Margaret was a petite, small person throughout her life.
Let's look if we did the same thing over here.
Age. Margaret was over 55 years old, so age would be a risk factor.
Gender. Well, that's not a factor here. Men are more likely than women, but she was a woman who developed it.
Race. That's not an issue in this case.
Cigarette smoking. You see where it is.
Obesity, it's not there.
Diabetes, it's not there.
Chronic pancreatitis, not there.
Cirrhosis of the liver, not there.
Occupational exposure, not there.
Family history, not there.
And genetic syndromes, not proven in this case and not expected to be present in this case.
That's the methodology that everybody used, and the one I suggest you would use with great success.
What's left? Well, some, including Dr. Riggs and Dr. Burns, have said that heavy alcohol consumption -heavy alcohol consumption is a risk factor. But they discounted it in this case.
But I want you to never forget the instruction that you're going to take back with you that you've already been given by the Court. We must only prove by the greater weight of the evidence that Mrs. McEniry's addiction to nicotine was a, not the, or not the only, substantial contributing factor for it to be a legal cause; meaning, that even if you found, which we'll discuss in a moment that I believe you should not, even if you found other risks, if this was a substantial contributing factor, meaning if it was not insubstantial, if her smoking history was not insubstantial, then we have met our burden of proof on the first question.
And what -- well, let's assume for a moment that you didn't believe all of the evidence from her children, her grandchildren, her former husband, from Mrs. Swinney, Mrs. Sergi; if you chose to accept the testimony of two people: An ex-son-in-law whose own brother, Lee Stricker, you heard gave nearly the exact opposite testimony as to -- and we heard that through Dr. Nace, and if you believe Tim Stricker and Hobart
Brammer, that's really all there is.
Now, I want you to not forget Mr. Cofer told you in opening that he was going to bring in another ex-son-in-law. That was a Mr. Robin Greenlee. You heard a little bit about Mr. Robin Greenlee from his daughter.
Mr. Cofer said we're going to present the testimony of Mr. Robin Greenlee. You haven't seen Robin Greenlee, and you haven't heard his deposition read.
But in considering the drinking issue, never forget one of the ironies in this case, and that is that R.J. Reynolds has gone to great lengths to convince you of the following: That she was an outstanding employee, that everyplace she worked she got recommendations, that she was so involved in her community, that she was at the Toast Master's, and that she ran for the School Board. They have told you and they have emphasized in their cross-examination of our witnesses that she went to work early -- Mrs. Sergi agrees -- and that she stayed at work late -- Mrs. Swinney confirms.
Does this sound like the person described by Hobart Brammer, a man who lived in her home about seven months, you heard it yesterday, and himself was such a drunk that when driving her car he wrecked it in a DUI?
Is this consistent with the testimony of an ex-
son-in-law, who Michael Glenn lived with and described for you what kind of person he was and why they were in the house for that short period of time with Mrs. McEniry? Because Tim Stricker didn't have a job, couldn't keep a job, and drank too much.
And, you know, one of my favorite people to testify just in terms -- yeah, Mr. Diggs. Mr. Diggs got up and he just said, I never knew of anybody in the family having a drinking problem except -- and Mr. Diggs, kind of, like, a regular son-in-law. He went about twice a month to see his mother-in-law when they were in the same town, and he went on holidays when it was his time to go on holidays, and what did he say:
The only person I ever knew to have a drinking problem was Tim Stricker.
But even if you believed all that, the fact of the matter is that it doesn't defeat the instruction you've been given by the Court, and that is all we have to do is show that it was by the greater weight of the evidence that her smoking was not insubstantial, that it was a substantial contributing factor.
They're going to raise BRCA, BRCA1, BRCA2. Folks, let's look at the facts. There's no evidence of BRCA.
The testing didn't exist back then.
But I want to tell you that this is, and I pardon
the pun given the nature of the case, this is a gigantic smoke screen.
Of all the women who get breast cancer, according to Dr. Riggs, especially when pooled -- in the entire pool, less than 5 percent are positive for any of the genetic disorders.
Next: Of those who are confirmed with the BRCA disorder, only 15 percent of that pool of people, which is a very small pool, themselves ever develop breast cancer. The number for them developing pancreatic cancer, or another form of cancer is proportionally even lower. And I submit no one has even computed it.
Finally, if there is a BRCA issue, which there is not, and if it was proven, which it has not been, again, the Surgeon General and the IARC has already said that it would only be a confounding factor. In fact, smoking would just simply augment that risk, make it greater than it otherwise would have been.
The last issue in this case is the role of nicotine addiction. They brought in Dr. Nace yesterday who testified that Mrs. McEniry was addicted. He even admitted that even under his revised years, and I want you to think about this. Under oath, before he came to trial, it was 120 to 125 years. You have at trial: Oh,
I misspoke, I miss calculated, I must have over-
estimated. It's a much smaller number. It's 80 years.
They will talk about everything everybody at Heartside got even monumentally wrong, or minutely wrong I meant to say, minutely wrong, and yet their expert came in and changed his testimony by a factor of almost half when he came to trial. And yet even then he had to admit that's a lot of years of heavy smoking.
What do we know? He says that well, she was addicted, but the reason that she got the disease, which by the way he assumed to be -- he assumed to be, his words, tobacco related. He assumed the pancreatic cancer to be tobacco related. He says that well, she was addicted, but it was her failure to quit. It was her failure to stop, it was her choice, not her addiction, which is kind of circular because why was her choice so tough to make? That's because she was addicted.
But folks, I want to tell you, in 1980 the tobacco industry realized that what he said to you yesterday was wrong. Of course he disagreed with it when they said:
The lawyers were told the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecutor could have in a lung cancer cigarette case. We can't defend smoking as free choice if the person was addicted.
What is addiction? It is that which does not
remove free choice entirely. No one suggests it does.
But what do we know according to Dr. Burns? It is the force that means that of all the people who smoke,
50 percent will try to quit this year.
Of that 50 percent who will try to quit this year,
6 percent 6 months out will have been successful.
3 percent 18 months out will have been successful.
That's how powerful the effect of nicotine addiction is. That's what the results really are for all those people who try to smoke.
Now, they will throw out huge numbers, huge numbers, 50 million, 40 million, 60 million of people who quit over time. How many of those people -- they haven't given you this number -- how many of those people quit after they've been diagnosed? How many of those people quit in the same circumstances that Margaret McEniry found herself? And she didn't smoke at the rates that they talk about, 100 cigarettes per year as being the bench line. She smoked at two to three packs a year for much of her adult life.
And what does the Surgeon General's Report of 2010 say about the role of addiction? Cigarette characteristics that influence either nicotine delivery to the smoker or smoke constituents that interact with nicotine deserve special consideration, because nicotine
maintains the addiction, and thereby leads to the ongoing exposures of the smokers to chemical compounds with known adverse health effects. That's what it says.
You will have heard an instruction. The normal sequence is addiction leads you to continue to repeat the action, you continue to repeat the action, and the action itself is the dose response that leads to the disease.
And what does the American -- you saw this yesterday. Of course we know that the Surgeon General in 2004 found the following: This is a scheme linking nicotine addiction with lung cancer, and it outlines the process. Nicotine addiction with lung cancer. It is showing the link that it is the nicotine addiction that leads to the lung cancer.
Now, what does the American Society of Addiction and Medicine say? Diseases either caused by or made worse by tobacco use should be regarded as complications of nicotine addiction.
We know that Mrs. McEniry tried and failed. We know she tried the extended filter. We know she took a six weeks course. We know she went cold turkey a couple of times. We know she got a prescription for the gum, the Nicorette. We know she tried the patch. We know she switched to lights and ultra lights and filters.
But she, like millions of addicted smokers, was never able to quit or stay quit. Why? Because the products they made and they lied about was a product that was a drug designed to keep addicted smokers smoking.
I submit the question Number 1, if we can return to it for a moment, is easy. Was Margaret McEniry's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her pancreatic cancer, which means was it a result of her addiction in something other than an insubstantial manner? Absolutely.
Let's review the evidence after that for a moment.
Once you have gone and you have found the answer to Number 1, then Mrs. McEniry gets the benefit of this, which I have shown to you; this, which the Court has read to you, and this which you will take back with you in the instructions given to you by the Court.
This is what binds you in this case when you find that nicotine substantially contributed -- nicotine addiction substantially contributed to her death:
Nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; that the defendants, and remember, this includes R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris, and the companies that they associated with, such as the TIRC, the CTR, and their co-conspirators, which included the other tobacco
companies, the defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous; that the defendants concealed and omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading; or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects of the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both; that the defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment; that all of the defendants sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective; that all of the defendants sold or supplied cigarettes that at the time of the sale or supply did not conform to representations of fact made by said defendants; and that all of the defendants were negligent.
Now, what that means is the next thing on the board that you will decide is whether or not the cigarettes they smoked, and I want you to remember what Dr. Burns said: There were never any safe cigarettes.
The disease is an accumulation. If they smoked these cigarettes by these companies, which we will discuss in a moment, then the questions we believe of negligence and defective product are over. Why? Because you are
instructed that if she's a member of the class, these cigarettes were defective.
We know about all the carcinogens they contained. We'll discuss that in a moment. And we know they were not only defective, we know that the companies knew them to be dangerous, and we know that they failed to reveal that to the public, and we know that the companies were negligent. That's the finding of Engle, which is really why we're here to start with.
When you find that she's a member of the class, and when you find that she smoked their products, and that their products were part of this chain of sequence of smoking cigarettes that led to her death, then I suggest that we're already, to a certain degree, at damages, and my partner will discuss that with you in a moment.
But I want you to know something, because it will be argued. On this verdict form there's no percentage attributed to any other company except R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris. Their the ones here on trial. There's no other company on this verdict form.
Do not be misled. This verdict is about their company. This verdict is about their cigarettes. You should not speculate or consider why or why not other companies are not on the verdict. This is not an issue
you should consider.
You have received a co-conspirator instruction.
It will tell you the responsibility of these companies as it relates to all of the other conspirators or conspiratorial partners.
So that I'm clear, once you determine that Margaret McEniry's addiction was a substantial factor, and that the cigarettes she smoked were the cigarettes -- included the cigarettes by these companies.
MR. WEAVER: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. WEAVER: I know he didn't mean to, but he just misstated the law. He said that all that needed to be shown were that Reynolds and Philip Morris' cigarettes were included. That's a misstatement of law. He needs to show each brand was a substantial contributing cause.
MR. SMITH: I think I said the experts said they were -- it was an cumulation fact of all the cigarettes, but I'll correct that.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. SMITH: To make sure we're clear on this, once
you show that their cigarettes were a legal cause, meaning that they were a substantial contributing factor, that's all we have to show to get past the issues and get forward on the issue of defective product and negligence.
Therefore, then we have to talk about concealment and the conspiracy.
As we stand here today, 2013, 18 years after Margaret McEniry's death, I want you to ask yourself:
How much have you learned in this case that you never knew before this case? How much has been disclosed to you in this courtroom because of the required information that was released by companies in 1999?
What are the things that you never actually knew, because if you learn something that was unknown to the public until after 1999, remember this: Margaret McEniry never could have known it, never had a chance to know it.
You've learned in this courtroom the real truth about cigarette addiction, and the 70 carcinogens that have been in their cigarettes.
You know that the tobacco company, what they casually came up and said in voir dire: We have a product that kills people and it's addictive.
That which they casually bring up in voir dire is
something they vehemently denied every year of Margaret McEniry's life.
Folks, every time they talk about what was known in the public, remember this: Every time there was a news article, we put them up; there was a counter news article. The tobacco industry was in a position of creating what? Doubt. That's what Dr. Burns said. The idea was two sides of the issue, two sides of medical issue, keep the issue in controversy. Why? Well, we'll discuss it. But it's clearly to keep people smoking.
How do we know that? What do we know in 1995? We know that the tobacco companies, and you learned this, knew as early as 1953, they recognized they had carcinogens in their cigarettes. 1953.
We know now that despite their outward statements to the contrary, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris recognized that the original epidemiology was correct and sound, and we now know that when they were attacking the mice paintings, and you saw some of that, we know that, in fact, they went back and replicated them and Philip Morris came up with the same results.
So in light of all this that they knew in '53, what did they do about it? Well, to paraphrase Mr. Weaver's opening statement where he said we were fierce competitors, trying to explain why
"confidential," "private" was on their documents, these former fierce competitors became in the words of Engle, co-conspirators.
How they reacted to cancer studies publicly?
2555
Believing as we do that cigarette smoking is not injurious to health, I feel a statement of reassurance to the public should be made, reassuring the public about the safety of their product.
And what do they do when they got together, when they got together in New York City at the Plaza Hotel? Well -2135.
-- they hired the foremost public relations firm in the world, Hill & Knowlton, because they felt they should sponsor a public relations campaign which is positive in nature, and is entirely pro cigarette, and that's what they did for the next 60 years.
What was the reason these competitors got together? Well, you heard from Dr. Burns. No one has rebutted his testimony that they got together because they had to create fake doubt and keep alive a false controversy. And why was the industry alarmed back then? What led to the meeting? Was it because they were producing a product that might be involved in the
deaths or the diseases of hundreds of thousands of people? Is that where they started? Is that anywhere in the documents in 1953? Not once.
Is it stated why they had the meeting? Well, there's the following reason, and this is exactly why they had it: As another indication of how serious the problem is.
Now, they were talking about death and disease.
The official state of the sales in the industry are frantically alarmed and that the decline in the tobacco stocks on the stock exchange market have caused grave concern, especially since tobacco earnings this year will be much higher next year because of the termination of excess profits tax.
Perhaps the best indication of the sentiments is found in those early documents, including the forward memorandum. Remember this? This is when they -- Hill & Knowlton met with the tobacco research directors. This is what they said: It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they can't break. We know why they couldn't break them, because they already knew about nicotine.
Said another way, said another: Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette, which is an admission when you
think about it in 1953 that they knew the product that they were producing wasn't cancer free.
And what was the plan of action?
Page 3, please.
There's only one problem: Confidence in how to establish it. Public assurance, how to create it. And in the long -- in the perhaps long interim when scientific doubt must remain -- doubts must remain. And most importantly, how to free millions of Americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths regardless of any pooh-poohing logic every time they light a cigarette.
And how were they willing -- what were they willing to do to be successful? Well, let's look at what they said when they were talking about -- you've heard -- remember Dr. Wynder and Dr. Ochsner and others in this case? We must decide our own attitude toward the findings of men like Wynder, Rhodes, Ochsner, et al. We have a choice as previously indicated. They list four of them. What's the first one? Smearing and belittling them.
And what was their long-term strategy for keeping scientific doubt alive? What was the cornerstone of the conspiracy to create false doubt? Why did they do it?
See problem number 2.
To reassure the public and instill fears in this interim when definitive facts from giving complete assurance are still lacking, when scientific doubts must remain, and when new unfavorable information had emerged from the laboratory any time to act as a bombshell on the industry, it has meanwhile tried to pooh pooh the unfavorable findings to date. And that's what they continued to do thereafter.
They created their front organizations like the TIRC, the TI, the CTR. That's the company fronts, what they called in their own documents which I showed you public relations gestures. They came up with the Frank Statement, 1954.
And the Frank Statement they published in every newspaper in America that had even 20,000 circulation the following: They said they would corporate with the public health officials, but they never did. We know what they did in terms of Dr. Burns' testimony and the documents you've seen. Every time a Surgeon General came out with a finding adverse to them, they attacked and belittled who? The Surgeon General and its findings.
We always will cooperate. They didn't.
They also said: We accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every
other consideration in our business.
And did they do it? No. We believe the products we make are non-injurious to the health.
Did they every recede from that position during the lifetime of Margaret McEniry? Not once.
And why do we know that? Because we know in 1984 what they were still saying.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"Let me try to ask some simple questions, and then we'll take a break and we'll come back with a couple of your critics and you can have the debate.
Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or
no?
It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
It has not been causally established.
Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
Despite all the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies that have been
conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces."
(The video clip was stopped.)
MR. SMITH: And what do we know from Dr. Burns and from the documents that we've seen from the Surgeon General by 1964 and thereafter? This wasn't consistent with what was going on in the medical and scientific world. This was a fictional debate to keep two sides of the issue open so people would have a reason to keep on smoking.
What do we know they were saying in between these times between 1954 and 1984?
Well, I just want you to play one more clip there.
Play 1697, please. This was on -- remember this? This is what they said to America:
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"From CBS Washington, in color, Face the Nation.
A spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with Joseph Cullman, III, chairman and chief executive officer of Philip Morris, Incorporated, and chairman of the Executive Committee of the Tobacco Institute.
We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that, because
when and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient
Do you believe that cigarettes are safe? Have they been proven to be safe, Mr. Cullman?
I believe they have not been proved to be unsafe."
(The video clip was stopped.)
MR. SMITH: That's what the tobacco company -that was the part, the crux of the conspiracy was always unproven, it was always contradiction, it was always controversy, and it was never the truth.
And how do we know that? Well let's go back to 1958. Do you remember in 1958 -- this will be 3588, please.
In 1958, the British American Tobacco Company came over to meet with representatives of the TIRC, the Scientific Advisory Board, Philip Morris and others.
They had this list of meetings. And then we have a memo from which they recall what they learned from the tobacco insiders in their meeting.
In 1958 when they were publicly denying -- as late as 1984 denying that lung cancer was caused by cigarettes, what do they say? With one exception, the individuals we met believe that smoking causes lung cancer if by causation we mean any chain of events which
leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable link.
What else did we find?
At the time when they were making fun of the mouse testing, they had done it, and they said at the same time there was general agreement in the field of smoking and lung cancer, no biological tests wholly free from criticism is available at the present time or is likely to become available in the foreseeable future.
They knew what the facts were.
Can I have the rest of that, please?
This is their insiders in '58: Dose response relationships can be established in animals which parallel those deduced from human epidemiology and, therefore, it is justifiable to base practical remedial measures on these relationships -- and go to the end, please.
Although there remains some doubt as to the proportion of lung cancer mortality which can be fairly attributed to smoking, scientific opinion in the U.S.A. -- scientific opinion. They've been meeting with the tobacco companies -- does not now seriously doubt the statistical core relationship is real and reflects a cause and effect relationship.
We know that they said in 1964 when the Surgeon
General came out. We know. You've heard all the tapes we played for you of how much they attacked the Surgeon General's Report. We know, according to Dr. Burns, that that was what they did as it related to every Surgeon General's Report from his time associated, which would have been 1974 until the most recent reports of the Surgeon General.
Yet knowing all that, knowing what they said in '64, look what the Brown & Williamson document in 1963 said, months before the Surgeon General report came out which they were going to attack.
3615, please. You saw it yesterday.
Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We know then that we in the business -- we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanism.
By the way, they're not having any problem with the definition, the technical definition of "addiction" in 1963 in this memo.
But cigarettes, you will assume the Surgeon General to say, despite the manipulative affect of nicotine, it has certain unattractive side effects.
They cause or predispose to lung cancer, they contribute to certain cardiovascular disorders, they may well be truly causative of emphysema, et cetera, et cetera.
They knew and they knew all along and they concealed the truth. But we -- what do we know the cigarette industry did to save itself? We know. It came up with the miracle, the illusion of filtration.
The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration.
How do we know that it worked? Well, we know they falsely advertised filters when they knew they could not selectively filter smoke condensate.
As a matter of fact, when you heard Joseph Cullman on television saying we think we can get rid of the problem, they knew, if you will, they already knew it, at least at Philip Morris, present technologies does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. They were always looking for a filtration gimmick.
Look back in 1953, a document I showed to you earlier. This is one where Claude Teague had an idea about having color changes to make it look like it was working, and look at the preferably the indicator dye or materials should be colors or contact with the filter of material, which should also be light in color, it should undergo color change to dark color, preferably brown on contact with tobacco smoke.
While the use of color change materials would probably have little or no affect on the actual
efficiency of the filtered tip material, the advertising and sales advantages are obvious.
By the way, they didn't do this, but they did exactly the same thing. They created a filter that never worked.
And yet Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and these co-conspirators sold to the American people a bill of goods. They said they were making a safer cigarette, and how do we know that that had an affect on Margaret and Tom McEniry?
Because just like millions, they switched around 1960 from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes. Why?
Well, let's look at what Mr. McEniry said.
Do you remember just generally the type of information you took away from the advertisement?
Well, I took it as that it would be better for me to smoke a filtered cigarette than an unfiltered cigarette. What they claimed was less tar and nicotine with a filtered cigarette.
Do you recall any of these advertisements saying that filtered cigarettes were completely safe?
No, I don't remember that, no, no. Do I remember that? No, no. I don't remember that at all.
Do you know if Margaret McEniry also saw the same advertisement?
I'm sure. We watched TV together.
So these were the advertisement you saw on television?
That's correct.
So we know she relied in making her decision with her husband, they relied on what? Filtration was safer.
And how do we know that? Because, folks, you heard Dr. Kyriakoudes carefully outline for you that Margaret McEniry's smoking selections generally mirrored that which was being advertised by the industry, that which was being advertised by an industry that was spending a quarter of a -- would spend up to a quarter of a trillion dollars over a lifetime, a quarter of a trillion dollars advertising and promoting their product. It was the most advertised product in American history.
And we know that after this she switched to the lights and the ultra light cigarettes, which we will discuss. And yet what do we know about those? They weren't any safer.
Now, I promise you this will be the argument that they advance. Their argument: Well, didn't the health community believe originally that -- didn't the public health community think filters were better? And didn't the public health community and the Surgeon Generals and
others, including yourself, Dr. Burns, didn't you originally think light and ultra light cigarettes were better? Didn't that make logical sense?
Yes, we did.
When did you change your mind?
Monograph 13 tells you we changed our mind when we got the internal documents from the company and we found that they always knew that they weren't making a less hazardous product, that they never reduced the risk in their product.
We know now that the cigarettes she first smoked unfiltered in 19 -- when she was 11 years old in approximately 1945 and 1946, we know that the last cigarettes she smoked, according to Michael Glenn, it may very well have been Merit Ultra Lights. But those two cigarettes in that gap of a lifetime, the cigarette never got a bit safer.
So if the public health community got it wrong, if the Surgeon General got it wrong, if they put up all these things, guess what? They had the information and they chose to conceal it. They never told the truth.
Margaret McEniry was another victim of the most massive media campaign in history, and she switched just like everybody else.
And you have an instruction that says we don't
have to show or prove. We don't have to prove that she heard a particular statement. It's been 30, 40, 50,
30 years ago. All we have to do -- all you have to do is you can infer from the evidence of her behavior that she switched to lights, that she switched to filters, that she went to reduced cost cigarettes when they marketed directly to her bonuses and bargains.
That's enough for you to meet the obligation -- or for us to meet the obligation we have.
Let's talk a little bit about how we know this.
Well, we know that some things about her smoking history are undenied. We know that she first smoked at age 11.
We know that she told her daughter she started smoking at 14. Kathy has told you that she had to be wrong about the brand. We know she had to be wrong about her recollection of the brand, but not the age.
We know that in 1957 when Margaret -- oh, by the way, we know that Margaret's parents smoked Lucky Strikes and Camels, for which R.J. Reynolds is responsible.
We know that in 1957 when she met Tom McEniry, she was smoking unfiltered cigarettes.
We know from Dr. Kyriakoudes' testimony people didn't typically switch, except in one direction. They moved completely away from unfiltered to a filtered
cigarette.
We know that in '57 she met and she was already smoking a pack a day, and we know from Mr. McEniry's smoking that she hadn't just started smoking, that he knew.
We know that they continued to smoke. They switched, and she joined him in smoking Philip Morris, still approximately 1960 when they switched, and they switched to L&M based on advertising, advertising which when you read the co-conspirator evidence of concealment or misrepresentation, you will see they switched to L&M.
But we also know she was never a brand-loyal individual. We know that she smoked the following brands, and we know how often she smoked them to some degree. We know that she smoked Virginia Slims, and that they were a popular brand for women, highly advertised and promoted.
We know that she smoked Basics and Lights and Ultra Lights on special. We know this because you heard her grandson talk about the specials that were provided her directly by Marlboro Milds, Camel Cash, and gifts and rewards.
She wore Winston and Basic T-shirts. I think we even showed you a Winston T-shirt she's wearing in the early 1990s. She had Basic and Camel ashtrays. She
clipped their coupons. She was their perfect customer. And how do we know that?
I promise you they're going to say you don't know exactly what she smoked at any point in time. I told you on opening, no one counted every cigarette, but we do know this: That she was smoking unfiltereds, she switched to filters, and she switched to lights and ultra lights.
We know as late as 1960, that -- and they may suggest she was a little older when she started. We know from document 3400 that as late as 1960, two-thirds of all smokers started smoking before age 18. We know that only 5 percent started after age 24.
We know from the testimony of Dr. Kyriakoudes that young people, one of the benefits is the brand they start with they tend to stay with.
We know that at the time -- we know, folks, and I don't want you to forget circumstantial evidence. You can use circumstantial evidence in making a decision just like direct evidence, and when we put them all together we know the brands she smoked in her lifetime.
We know from KEH 005, which was the marketing document received. Remember that listed of the last years when she was being directly marketed to by Philip Morris? We know that these were the brands she was
identifying. '87, in '88, L&M, also Merit, Merit,
Merit, Merit, Marlboro, Merit, Merit.
We know when she came to Florida because of her granddaughter what she smoked. She was smoking Virginia Slims, Merit Ultra Lights and Marlboro Lights.
We know after 1983 Mr. Diggs, her son-in-law in Indianapolis, never saw her smoke an L&M. He mostly saw her smoking Marlboro Lights.
We know from her grandson that she smoked Camel Light cigarettes during her last years.
We know that Marlboro Lights, Marlboro 100's were made by Philip Morris. Basic and Merit Ultra Lights, made by Philip Morris.
We know that Mrs. Swinney said that when she worked with Margaret in the 1980s, Margaret smoked Doral, which is R.J. Reynolds.
We know that she smoked Camel Lights in the late '80s and '90 from the testimony of Michael Glenn.
We know she smoked Virginia Slims in the 1970s based upon the testimony of Karen Diggs, and we know she was still showing Virginia Slims in the 1990s based upon the testimony of her granddaughter Melanie who stayed with her during those last years.
But remember, in putting this all together what Dr. Burns always said: No cigarette was ever safe, and
every one was an accumulation of the other.
Every cigarette on this chart was observed, or we had evidence of her smoking. Every one of these Philip Morris products, every one of these R.J. Reynolds products, and Liggett isn't on the verdict form. These are -- every one of these.
Now, some people will say the testimony was that they only saw her smoking it one or two times. Folks, the question is: Did they smoke them?
We know she smoked at a rate of two to three packs a day. We know that from their expert.
We know she was smoking, and we know these are the brands that people identified seeing her smoke, smoked with her or provided to her. We know that.
We know from Mr. Diggs, I gave her Salems. I know she smoked Salems. We had testimony. I remember her smoking Kools. I saw her smoking Kools.
That's the testimony in the case.
Ladies and gentlemen, we know how effective the advertising of the companies were, and how they affected the decisions of smokers like Margaret to switch to their types of cigarettes.
3888, please.
MR. COFER: That's blocking the jury's view.
MR. SMITH: I'm sorry.
It appears to the Commission from the switch toward filtered cigarettes and the popularity of low tar, nicotine cigarettes -- and nicotine cigarettes, that a substantial segment of the public is most concerned about the health hazards of cigarette smoking.
Many smokers would like to give up the habit, but don't and won't. Some of these have switched to brands that they believe, often erroneously, to be less hazardous.
And how do we know the effectiveness of the cigarette advertising campaign and their public relations? In 1981 we know the FTC, Federal Trade Commission, reported a dramatic under estimation of the dangers of cigarette smoking.
3836, please.
In 1983, Louis Harris and Associates conducted a national telephone survey of 1,254 randomly-selected adults from Prevention Magazine Paris, 1983. Respondents were asked to rank 24 health and safety factors on a 1 to 10, low to high scale of importance.
A sample of 183 health experts, medical school chairman of preventative medicine, public school health dean, public health school dean, government officials, journal editors and others, were also reviewed and was asked to make the same rankings.
All of the public's main rankings were in the top half of the scale. Thus, none of the factors were seen as trivially importance. Not smoking was ranked near the middle, below keeping water quality acceptable, having smoke detectors in the home, taking steps to control stress, and getting enough vitamins and minerals.
In contrast, the panel of experts ranked not smoking at the top of the list. We know -- you saw the charts. There was a gross under estimation of the dangers of cigarette smoking, even by people who recognized them to be dangerous when compared to things which we now know were much less dangerous.
And why was this the circumstance? Well, here's what they said: Although empirical evidence is sparse, tobacco industry activities in the form of advertising and promotion, public relations and lobbying, may interfere with public belief and personalized acceptance of the health risk of smoking. Because most individuals may not understand how smoking causes the diseases with which it is associated, many persons may be vulnerable to information that attempts to cast doubt on such relationships.
I want you to think about nicotine and addiction for a moment.
Ladies and gentlemen, they say that everybody always knew how dangerous cigarettes were, and we know that that's not true. But then they say well, they always knew about addiction. In fact, I think they put up something like a 1906 document.
Well, the evidence is really pretty simple on this. In 1959, both these companies recognized addiction as a real reason people smoked.
2231.
Why do people smoke? The next page, please.
Addiction. Their words.
And they recognized -- Philip Morris recognized that smokers have a physiological requirement that can be met by the optimum amount of nicotine.
Surely no one can argue that in 1963, the document I showed you a few minutes ago, that they didn't know nicotine was addictive, because that's what they said.
Now, please be clear on this. What they were acknowledging, years before the Surgeon General's Report, they never acknowledged even after the Surgeon General reported it in 1988.
We know that the tobacco companies, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, manipulated pH to obtain free base nicotine to maximize its affect.
And finally, we know from tobacco internal
documents you saw yesterday that their expert concedes as much.
We know that the nicotine levels in cigarettes were not by accident.
1552, please.
Certainly the nicotine level of B & W cigarettes,
Brown & Williamson, given in the above table was not obtained by accident. It may be well to remind you, however, that we have a research program in progress to obtain by genetic means any level of nicotine desired.
We know that R.J. Reynolds recognize that they were in the pharmaceutical business in 1920. And we know that Philip Morris recognized the key role, the key role that it played for their company.
2407, please.
Think of the cigarette pack as a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine.
Now, yesterday their expert said nicotine is not the primary reason people smoke. But then remember what he said. Well, there were some cigarettes out there that didn't have nicotine.
What happened?
Well, nobody bought them.
We know that the companies knew that nicotine was the reason they were in business and they stayed in
business. And we know that by 1982, the industry knew that many smokers would stop if they could.
1820, please.
And, unlike what their expert said, the tobacco industry knew in 1982 that many, but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. Many, but not most of those who would like to stop, meaning most are not able to do so. That's what the tobacco industry said.
By the way, they didn't seem to be real concerned about any technical definitions of addiction in their documents, which were written in some cases 25 years before their CEOs falsely testified before Congress.
We know that they internally recognized that -and they compared -I want you to show 1809, please.
We know that this is what they said: Operate conditioning is quite different. Consider the classic operate experiment. Put a hungry rat in a cage. Put a lever on the cage. Make it so that a push on the lever delivers a pellet of food. It is random movements. The rat will push the lever. He'll get the pellet. The rat will soon associate lever pushing with the food coming.
In the time -- in time, he'll be rapidly pushing the lever for food.
Down here what do they later say? Consider the smoker. Something is the lever press. The affect of that smoking act upon his person is a reward. That affect reinforces the smoking act. That's what they knew about their product.
Ladies and gentlemen, I promise you that they are going to argue about whether certain of our witnesses told the truth, or told the whole truth, or made mistakes. But I want you to focus on what we know they were telling the American people.
Well, what do they absolutely say? Remember the Superman, II contract made by Dovemead where they had all the control over Superman? And don't be misled, by the way. It was shown in America, and they sold Marlboro cigarettes in this country. The Marlboro that's in Superman, II was sold in this country, and remember how much control that contract had. And yet what did the spokesman for the tobacco industry say when asked about this by John Stossel, a person well known at the time and still.
(A video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:)
"These pictures are from Superman, II. Marlboro, made by Philip Morris, is shown at least 13 times. I asked The Tobacco Institute why Marlboros were shown so
often in Superman, II.
Do you think cigarette manufactures had something to do with that?
Yeah, I think that -Cigarette manufactures don't make movies.
What do you think, that the movie maker just showed Marlboro on his own?
Perhaps the movie maker was a Marlboro smoker.
(The video clip was stopped.)
MR. SMITH: Ladies and gentlemen, that says it all. That's what they were about.
Now, these guys are going to argue that it wouldn't have made a difference. How do they know? Because during the life of Margaret McEniry, they never tried telling the truth. They told a convenient truth.
Think about it a moment. What would have happened if once they had joined the Surgeon General acknowledging the dangers of smoking or the addiction of cigarettes?
Think about it. What if they had said we're making a pharmaceutical grade nicotine, which is addictive?
Think what would have happened if they had done what they had promised. What if they had, in fact, made a safer cigarette? What if they had, in fact, removed
the carcinogens out of their cigarette?
But that's not what they were interested in. What were they interested in?
1941, page 2, please.
This was an internal procedural memo in evidence, and they were talking about the -- the most important story to them is the one that casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking.
And what were they working for? Their headlines: They wanted Controversy! Contradiction! Other factors! Unknowns! Those were the tactics they wanted.
Ladies and gentlemen, this verdict form I submit is not difficult.
We submit the following: We, the jury, return the following verdict: Was Margaret McEniry's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her pancreatic cancer?
Yes.
Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or more of the defendants a legal cause of Margaret McEniry's death?
Yes.
Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendant Philip Morris a legal cause, meaning does it substantially contribute to Margaret McEniry's death?
Yes.
Were cigarette smoking -- was smoking cigarettes manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company a legal cause of Margaret R. McEniry's death?
Yes.
Was the concealment or omission of material information about the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes by each of these defendants a legal cause of Margaret McEniry's death?
Yes, as to Philip Morris.
Yes, as to R.J. Reynolds.
Was the defendants' conspiracy to conceal information a legal cause, meaning did they hide the truth, and did it make a difference? Yes.
5. There we go.
Please state the percentage of any fault that was the legal cause of Margaret McEniry's death that you charge to each.
We believe that Margaret McEniry -- we have always said she was partially at fault. We believe she was 20 percent at fault, they were 40 percent at fault and 40 percent at fault.
Why? They knew way more than twice as much. They hid it throughout her lifetime.
I want you to compare their conduct on issues like
youth smoking, issues about the things that they did, compare the conduct, and we suspect and believe that 20 percent is the correct amount.
Ladies and gentlemen, at this point in time we're going to discuss the damages in this case. I'm going to have my partner speak to you for just a few minutes about how we compute the damages, then you'll hear from the other side, and I know you'll give them all the attention, then I will return for our final summation.
I thank you so much. With that, my partner.



MR. AVERA: Good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. AVERA: Ladies and gentlemen, in just a few minutes after lunch sometime you're going to retire to decide this case, and you're going to consider all of the evidence that you've heard here in the courtroom and apply the law that Judge Musleh has already given you.
One of your jobs will be to make sure that you decide this case solely on the evidence that you've heard in this courtroom, and solely on the law that Judge Musleh has given you.
If someone falters during your deliberations, it will be the responsibility of the group to remind them that's not the evidence in this case, that's not the law that Judge Musleh gave us.
It is hard to imagine a loss more painful than watching one's mother die from pancreatic cancer. To see the mother who read to her children at bedtime, sewed their clothes, kissed their tears and who was the rock of the family to wither and die is something that no family should ever have to endure.
Margaret McEniry was taken from us far too early.
She would have been 78 this year, with much more, a lot to contribute to her family.
To understand the magnitude of the loss for Karen, Kathy, and Thomas, you must understand the kind of person that she was during her lifetime. From the perspective of her children and her grandchildren, she was the rock of this family, the center to which all the children and grandchildren were drawn for strength, advice and wisdom.
To her employers, she was the exemplary employee who was highly recommended to other employers and who would be fortunate to have her as an employee.
At times the defense portrayed Margaret McEniry as someone who cared enough about her community, to run for the school board, and almost by all accounts it seemed that Margaret McEniry was a wonderful mother, a delightful grandmother adored by her grandkids, and someone whose absence in the lives of her children has
caused a gapping hole in their lives because of her far too early departure from this life.
Indeed, it depended on which tobacco company was talking about Mrs. McEniry before we knew which version we would be getting. If it was R.J. Reynolds and Mr. Weaver, we have an intelligent woman who was well read, admired by her employers and who was involved in her community. She came to work early, stayed late, and took work home to get the job done.
For Philip Morris and Mr. Cofer, we heard of a woman who drank to excess.
What Margaret McEniry was is what so many of us are: An imperfect human being, but someone who placed her children above herself and did everything she could to make sure they were taken care of, even doing so by herself when she was a single mom.
As imperfect human beings, any of us -- all of us are subject at some time or another to make mistakes in our lifetime. Those of Margaret McEniry were always of the innocent kind. Never malicious, never devious, never lying to hurt others, always accepting, forgiving, and willing to give others a chance until they prove themselves otherwise.
How difficult it must be for Karen, Kathy and Tom to listen to these defendants try to make their mother
out to be an alcoholic. The same corporations that manipulated nicotine to keep her and millions of other Americans addicted, the same corporations that promised her and millions of other Americans that they would look out for her health and, God forbid, if they found anything cancer-causing in their cigarettes they would take it out.
Never in the history of American commerce could the pot who called the kettle black be blacker.
It must certainly be difficult for Karen, Kathy and Tom to listen to these tobacco company conspirators try to convince you that Margaret's smoking was her free choice, when they themselves admitted there was no free choice when a smoker is addicted; their words, not ours.
You will hear, I predict, the word "choice" used in the defense's closing. You will hear that word a lot. And choice is nothing, as you know now, is nothing other than an acronym for consciously and continuously hiding and obstructing with the intent to convince everyone of their distortions, their lies.
How horrible it must be to Karen, Kathy and Tom to hear a denial of what everyone else in this courtroom must know now: That Margaret's 45-year addiction to nicotine was a substantial contributing cause of her pancreatic cancer at worst, and at best was the cause.
This family has been robbed of their time with Margaret McEniry. Graduations have been missed, holidays, special events where her absence causes a heartache for which there is no cure.
There is no remedy that anyone can offer to Karen when her daughter, 5-year-old Kristin, screams out during her nana's living: Please don't take my nana.
This industry that worked very hard to conceal the truth and conspire to make money is responsible for that pain.
Each of Margaret's children has a story about their mother which they told you and how her loss at such a young age has affected them.
Judge Musleh has already told you that the damages for the loss of a parent are the loss by Kathy, Karen and Thomas of parental companionship, instruction and guidance, their mental pain and suffering as a result of their mother's death. In determining the duration of those losses, you are permitted to consider the life expectancies of Margaret and her children with all the evidence in the case.
Losing a parent can only be exceeded by the loss of a child or perhaps a spouse.
Loved, respected, hard worker, the rock of the family. She was the matriarch that each of her children
would look to for guidance or advice. She was an example of hard work, fastidious in her appearance, at work on time and bringing work home to get it done.
She was a typical Midwesterner who grew up during a time of Hollywood glamour that included cigarette smoking in almost every movie, almost every television show. She knew hard work and she knew raising children.
She didn't know about addiction and nicotine, or Dopamine pathways, or that 20 to 30 percent of all pancreatic cancer cases are caused by cigarette smoking, and how could she? The tobacco companies in America were denying that smoking caused cancer or that nicotine was addictive.
Compensatory damages in this case, ladies and gentlemen, are for the purpose of compensating each of these children for what they have gone through watching such a horrible death to a nice woman. It is meant to compensate them for the harm caused by these companies, their conduct in participating in the conspiracy that you now know about.
In reaching a decision of what is fair, you must decide an amount that is fair and just in light of all the evidence, and is an amount that reflects your common sense. This duty is uniquely yours.
You can evaluate all of their conduct, the lies, the distortion, the hiding of the truth, and then you can ask yourselves what are you going to do about it and to try to make it right to compensate these children for the harm caused by these defendants.
The numbers I'm going to suggest to you are our suggestions. You are free to award more, you are free to award less. What you must do is decide based on what is fair and just and in light of all the evidence.
This will be the verdict form that you will have back there. Mr. Smith has already gone through.
Question 5 is the one that allocates percentages.
This total must by 100 percent.
Question 6 is the question on damages. And for each of these children, the plaintiff suggests to you a fair amount in light of all the evidence is 2.5 million per child.
Now, I'm going to talk just a moment about this instruction right here, because it says in determining the total amount of damages sustained by Kathryn E. Haldeman, Karen Diggs, and Thomas R. McEniry, III, do not make any reduction because of the fault, if any, of Margaret R. McEniry. The Court, in entering judgment, will make any appropriate reduction in the damages awarded. You've seen the amount of 20 percent on there.
And the reason why is if the Court decides it is appropriate to reduce her damages because of Mrs. McEniry's fault, the Court will do that. Let me give you an example.
If the Court were to take the 7.5 million and apply a reduction of 20 percent for Mrs. McEniry's fault, 20 percent is 1.5 million by my reckoning, and that means the judgment would be 6 million.
If you reduce it in your deliberations and then the Court reduces it again, that's a twice reduction.
Is that clear to everybody? Okay.
Of course the Court will tell you that if you have any questions during your deliberations you should let the Court know that.
Now Question 7.
THE COURT: You used 90 minutes so far.
MR. AVERA: Thank you.
Please state as to each defendant what you entered yes as to Question 3 or Question 4, whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against that defendant under the circumstances of this case.
Part of what you do, or can do is to decide this issue on punitive damages, which we discussed in voir dire is intended to punish wrong doers or to deter
others who might be so inclined.
What can you do about their conduct that you've heard about in this case, the evidence in this case during Margaret McEniry's lifetime? Well, one is that you can do nothing, and by your verdict send them a message blessing their conduct, finding that their conduct is not recklessly indifferent, that it's not grossly inflagrant, that it did not place the lives of Americans in danger.
Or you can send them a message that is just as loud as they can imagine by finding that punitive damages are warranted for what they did.
By checking that box yes on Question 7, you will make it clear to them that their act of lying and harming Margaret McEniry will not be tolerated in this community of hard-working Americans.
You may consider on that issue of whether to award punitive damages for all of the harm they have caused, including to others. But when it comes time to decide the amount, you can only decide an amount that is for the harm they caused Margaret McEniry.
MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor. May we approach?
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. COFER: They can't consider harm to others in deciding whether to punish. They can only consider harm to others -- they can only consider harm to others in determining how reprehensible. But in order to award punitive damages, it must be based on harm of Mrs. McEniry. That's based on the State Farm case, the Williams case, the Supreme Court precedence, the state of the law, and I ask for a curative instruction.
MR. AVERA: I think that's what the Court instructed them, and I thought -MR. COFER: The objection is State Farm v Williams.
I'm telling you, he misstated the law. We cannot be punished for harm to others. The conduct of which we are to be punished must be based on the harm to Ms. McEniry and Ms. McEniry only.
If they decide that our conduct harmed Ms. McEniry, they are then entitled to consider whether that same or substantially similar harm also harmed others only to determine the degree of reprehensibility, but we cannot be punished for other people's injuries because there's no lawsuits, and I would ask -THE COURT: In considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm the defendant's conduct caused her. You may also consider
similar harm suffered by other parties in assessing the -- in determining whether punitive damages may be warranted. You may also take into consideration mitigating circumstances.
MR. COFER: So what that clearly says, Your Honor, you can only punish for harm -- for conduct that harms Ms. McEniry.
Once you determine the conduct harmed Ms. McEniry, if substantially similar harm also harmed others, you can consider that in terms of the degree of reprehensibility.
He misstated the law, and I would ask for a curative instruction and Your Honor instruct the jury what the appropriate standard is.
THE COURT: Why don't you just read the jury instruction on what that says?
MR. AVERA: I think that's what I just told them.
They can consider -MR. COFER: I would ask my objection be sustained.
I would ask my objection -THE COURT: I don't know exactly how he said it. Read what the jury instruction says.
MR. AVERA: I'll read them exactly that paragraph, Your Honor.
MR. COFER: Hang on a second. I would like to
take a break.
THE COURT: We're going to take a break.
MR. COFER: And I can set up my stuff.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. AVERA: As Judge Musleh told you when considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm that Philip Morris U.S.A.,
Incorporated, or R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's conduct caused Margaret McEniry.
You may also consider similar harm suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongness of Philip Morris U.S.A.'s or R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's act as proven in this case.
Ladies and gentlemen, for 50 years the tobacco industry focused their money, their propaganda, their marketing and advertising towards one goal, and one goal only: Addicting Americans and their children to nicotine using the cigarette to do it, what they call a drug delivery device that delivers a dose of nicotine.
These same conspirators that told Margaret and millions of other Americans that nicotine wasn't addictive were hiding in their lab and manipulating the amount of nicotine in their cigarettes to keep Americans
addicted and study the effect of nicotine on addiction with psychologists, all over a period of decades while they played with the word addiction, while they, themselves, were giddy with the like of how addictive their drug delivery device was and how their smokers would quit if they could.
They attacked scientists and medical doctors who threatened to expose their evil and deadly conspiracy, scientists and doctors who tried to show there was no controversy. They recognized that providing a psychological crutch to smokers by stating throughout the nation that there is no proof that smoking cancer -smoking causes cancer would hopefully keep all of their smokers smoking and the profits rolling.
They have always known why people enjoy it. When you heard testimony that Mrs. McEniry enjoyed smoking, you now know the reason why: Dopamine.
They denied the health effect of smoking while they were studying the human brain. They knew that nicotine changed the human brain, and particularly those of children.
They targeted children in our society. And Margaret McEniry was the perfect customer. They categorized a young generation of Americans as replacement smokers. Since when in our society do we
let anyone hide something that causes death?
Could they not find the character that Americans require of good corporate citizens to send her one letter with all the stuff that they knew?
Do you recognize the money and power that they brought to that message to Margaret McEniry and millions of other Americans?
Did they get together as competitors and agree that what they were going to tell the public was a lie?
Yes, they did.
Was there a someone conspiracy? You bet there was.
Did the conspiracy hide the truth about death-causing traits of cigarettes? You better believe it.
Did that conspiracy affect Margaret McEniry and her generation, and I mean every one of them? It absolutely did.
You would have to crawl under a rock to avoid the health controversy that they created.
And is such a conspiracy deserving of punishment?
It is.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is certainly deserving of a punitive verdict if they knowingly killed fellow Americans and they did not admit it, and they can't bring themselves to do it, and they won't do it today.
MR. COFER: Objection. State Farm v Campbell, 401, 403.
THE COURT: I'm sorry, I didn't hear what you said.
MR. COFER: May I approach, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. COFER: Again, we cannot be punished for harm to others, and they can't punish us because we killed other people. They can only punish us in this lawsuit for injuries, conduct that harmed Ms. McEniry, and again he misstated the law and I would ask the jury be instructed to disregard that and instead to refer to Your Honor's instructions.
THE COURT: I read the instructions.
MR. COFER: But then he argued inappropriately.
THE COURT: The last statement, you can go by the instructions.
MR. COFER: Yes, thank you.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
THE COURT: Members of the jury, disregard the last statement and go by the instructions the Court gives you, and you'll have a copy of it in regards to
pain and damages. Okay.
MR. AVERA: So as to Question 7, I see many looks showing that it's been a long two and a half weeks, and I agree.
Let's go back to the photograph of Mrs. McEniry, please.
So what are you going to do about it? That's the question for you, ladies and gentlemen.
Within these four walls of this courtroom people from different backgrounds -- you -- come together just as they do in every courtroom in America today with one common goal, one common purpose: The pursuit of justice.
It's been a long road for the McEniry case. It's been a long two and a half weeks for all of you. We leave it to you as to what you're going to do about it.
Thank you so very much for your patience and your attention.


CLOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. SMITH: I've had good news for you. I'm the last lawyer you're going to hear from after three weeks. And I'm just going to touch on some things that I think are critically important.
First is Question Number 1.
Question Number 1, that's where we start. On that, I think we all agree. Was Margaret McEniry's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her pancreatic cancer?
Now they've got up and hold you about the problems of the medical witnesses in this case. Let's go back real quick to be real sure what we have. Because suddenly they're, "Well, one guy didn't say what the other guy said." I want to explain exactly what we have.
Dr. Reynolds first, please. "Was her heavy smoking a substantial contributing cause to her pancreatic cancer?"
"Yes."
"Was it the cause of her pancreatic cancer?"
"More likely than not."
"By the greater weight of the evidence, was it the cause of her pancreatic cancer?"
"Yes."
Go to Riggs. Now, remember, Riggs is not a doctor that we presented on the issue of addiction because that's not what he does as much as he treats and diagnoses and does pathology on cancer.
So we asked Dr. Riggs: "Was her addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes she smoked a cause of her pancreatic adenocarcinoma within a reason degree of medical certainty?"
"Yes. And this is what's borne out by what's in the Surgeon General's Report, I believe the 2010 Surgeon General's Report."
And what do we have from Dr. Burns? Dr. Burns who, remember, treats cancer but he is primarily also involved in the diagnosis of addiction.
Addiction is not an issue in the case in one way because I noticed that Mr. Cofer never ever managed to bring around to say that in this case she was addicted. You've already been instructed on that.
But this is what Dr. Burns: "From your review
in this case, in light of the relative risk accepted by the medical scientific community, do you have an opinion as to a reasonable degree of certainty as to whether Margaret McEniry's intense addictions to the nicotine contained in cigarettes substantially contributed to her pancreatic cancer?"
"Yes. There's no question in my mind that her addiction was a substantial factor. Substantial contributing factor in causing pancreatic cancer."
That's it. That's the medical evidence you have. That's the expert opinion you have in this case. There isn't any other physician who's come forth and said, "Oh, I think they were wrong," or,
"Oh, they didn't get this right."
That's the medical evidence in the case.
That's the opinions that should guide and dictate the decision in this case, and that -- those three doctors, the only three physicians who diagnose and treat cancer who have appeared in this case all presented on behalf of Kathy said what? Yes, it was addiction to nicotine. Yes, it was pancreatic cancer caused by cigarette smoke.
Now, their answer is but there's a lot of pancreatic cancers that aren't caused. What did
Dr. Reynolds tell you? Dr. Reynolds knows that. He said that. But in 1995, before any of this came about, when he didn't have to make the opinion, what did he put in the death certificate?
Pancreatic cancer caused by what? Tobacco use.
When he was asked now all these years later with all this additional information that Mr. Cofer suggested, some of which may or may not even be accurate, would he change his opinion that -- no.
Now, what they said is, well, he had a different degree of medical certainty, he couldn't reach his own medical certainty which would be absolute medical certainty.
No, that's not a burden that's upon us. The burden upon us is to prove by the legal definition, and that's what we have. And that's what he said, that's what he knew, that's what they knew, and that's the evidence in the case.
What about BRCA? He considered it. He said: "It is remote. Even if it existed, it would be -it would be in a small number of people. I wouldn't even expect it to come back positive if I ordered it today on the facts that we know."
What did he say about alcohol? What did Dr. Riggs say about alcohol? Yes, if she was a
heavy consumer of alcohol, that would be a factor. What have they presented in their case? Well, they have an ex-son-in-law who says that he lived at the house about seven months, and we know from his stepson and the grandson at the time why he was there, because he couldn't keep a job and he was drinking.
They said, Well, why would he lie? What did -- what did the grandson say? Because he was a vindictive drunk. What do we know about his friend Hobart? He was there for seven months. While he lived at that house seven months of her life, what does he say? Well, he tells a story very much like his friend.
But interestingly enough, he's the person who took the car, went out and got a DUI and wrecked her car. Those are the facts in this case.
Now, they want to talk to you about not speculating.
Go to Dr. Reynolds again just for a moment.
They said, "Oh, you can't speculate. You can't speculate. Don't speculate."
Go back to -- I think it's the next Dr. Reynolds, please. That's also Reynolds but the next one, please. Go on down, please.
"Would it be pure speculation with that history today as to whether she had a BRCA gene in 1995?"
"Yes, I think, you know, based on my experience, I would -- you know, if I saw her today, I would probably order the test if she was agreeable and if you could get her insurance to pay for it, which is a separate issue, and then my experience is more likely than not it would come back negative."
"Was it -- would it be pure speculation?"
"Yeah."
That's what they're asking you to do while criticizing the -- the obvious use of your commonsense to make certain decisions. Let's talk about those.
If you believe the argument that we just heard from Mr. Weaver, there's a couple of things that would be unbelievable. First of all, let's just assume that Mr. Weaver was reading the law correctly and arguing the law correctly.
Under Mr. Weaver's theory, if a person smoked for 100 years, and there were six companies, the six major companies, and she smoked them in sequence for less than 20 years, at the end of 100
years smoking the answer for Mr. Weaver would be nobody is liable. She didn't smoke 20 years of any one. She just smoked 19 and a half of each one of them.
The doctors explained to you the absurdity of that position. They said all cigarettes, every cigarette. It's an accumulation. It's dose responsive.
The only question for you, I submit, is whether or not they -- their cigarettes were a substantial contributing factor. Well, what do we know in this case? They say, "Well, you can't prove before 1957."
Well, Mr. Weaver's argument on that borders on the absurd because what did Mr. McEniry say?
Mr. McEniry said, "She was smoking a pack a day when I met her." It was clear to him she hadn't just started smoking. So, consequently, I think it's safe to say that nobody just started smoking a pack a day.
And what was she smoking? She was smoking two out of the three cigarettes that were the largest brands known at the time. They had -- they dominated, according to Dr. Kyriakoudes, 80 percent of the market. They were the same ones that her
brother had started smoking and they were the same -- two of them were the same ones that her parents had smoked.
And you heard Dr. Kyriakoudes say one of the advantages to getting people young? Not from -because he said it were from documents from their company, one of the things they always were obsessed about R.J. Reynolds was getting them young. Why? Because if you get them young, they stay with you.
Remember, Diane Burrows where she explained this is the future. "By the way, over the next ten years, we can expect this to be 50 percent."
That's what Diane Burrows said in her document. That's what R.J. Reynolds knew. Yes, they want you to not use your commonsense. She didn't go to a pack a day the day before she met her husband.
They have forgotten two other things that I -he got up and they said, "Well, there was no discussion about freebasing by Dr. Burns."
Put it up.
This is what Dr. Burns said in his testimony:
"Dr. Burns, from your research of the tobacco industry, did the research continuously -- did they research continuously ways to enhance the effects
of the addictive effects of nicotine in their cigarettes?"
"Yes, they did."
"And can you give me -- can you give some samples how this happens?"
"This is an example: Where what you're doing is you're adjusting the pH of smoke to freebase the nicotine so that it can be more readily absorbed and you get a faster more intense perception of nicotine, particularly in the back of the throat.
"They also adjusted the substances in the cigarette, that they added things like levulinic acid which is a -- which at the exact correct level increased the binding of nicotine to the nicotine receptors in the brain."
They talked -- we talked about freebasing, they did it. Look at the documents. You have a document which shows that the share of market -according to them, the share of market correlated to the freebase level of nicotine in their cigarettes.
Oh, they say, you know, the advertising -there was never any advertising during her lifetime. Well, we know in 1928 that they were already focusing on schoolchildren.
We know in the 1930s and 1940s, remember the cartoons and the funnies and where we found -because of millions of children, where in the world did we find Camel advertising? They were advertising the very time Margaret McEniry was a youth, they were advertising in the funny papers through the use of the puff insert which was -- you saw all the common -- all the common children's figures that were well known to everyone.
And by the way, do you have the Johnny Roventini picture?
This is from Philip Morris which says, "We never really -- you know, we're not talking about R.J. Reynolds' documents, but we really -- there's no evidence we really ever advertised to children."
Can you put that up, please.
This is something that was found and we provided to you in evidence in this case. This was Little Johnny Roventini. You might remember, from the 1930s to the 1950s, he was the icon, the spokesman, if you will, for the company.
And Little Johnny Roventini was so popular that he couldn't go everywhere so they had a Junior Johnny Program. The Junior Johnny Programs, they would take people that looked like
Johnny Roventini, and they would allow them to go around and we know they gave cigarettes.
Do you have that picture?
And here we have Little Johnny. Here we have the cigarettes they were giving out. You be the judge. Use your common experience. What are the ages of those girls that they're giving cigarettes to?
You know, they come in here and they say, "Oh, by the way, you know, the evidence is that if she quit ten or more years, she would have what's called declining risk."
Let me ask you this: What if from the time we know, which is the early 1980s when she took up smoking Merit, Merit Ultra Lights, Basic, Doral, a litany of Marlboro Lights, Camel Lights. What if -- what if they had actually told the truth?
What if these companies had actually made a safer cigarette?
What if they had done what they said they would do for 50 years? What if they had extracted the bad stuff out of their cigarette or what if they at least told people we can't take it out which they knew since the 1960s?
What would her declining risk have been then
if, in fact, the cigarette they put out was not defective? What would have been the declining risk if the cigarette they said was safer was safer?
Oh, I love the use of the psychological crutch by George Weissman. What they said is that wasn't his phrase. That was a phrase that was in the Surgeon General's Report, and they're absolutely accurate. Absolutely accurate.
But what did he say three weeks afterwards?
At some point reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, which we know how seriously they met the report, they attacked it everywhere. They called it -- they tried to debunk it.
We must in the near future provide some answers which we must provide. In the near future some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking.
That's not what the Surgeon General said.
They were taking what the Surgeon General said: "You know what, they are right. All we have to do is come up with a psychological crutch and a self-rationale, and we can keep selling these cigarettes."
And they did. And they sold them as safer when they said they were filters, and they knew they didn't work. They knew in 1958 they didn't work. They knew in 1968 they didn't work. And they knew in 1976 that it had all been a gag in the sense of it had never worked.
And they were -- I knew they you would do it.
I predicted it before they got up. They said,
"Well, you know, the public health community got it wrong about the safer cigarette." What did Dr. Burns tell you, the guy who helped rewrite the history of the light cigarette?
"We thought they were telling the truth until we saw the internal documents. We realized we had been taken." To use a phrase that they used to use toward the Surgeon General: "We had been hoodwinked."
I knew they wouldn't do this but I want to make sure. Turn this up, please. This is one of the instructions. You know, they say, "You've got to show us a statement made by Philip Morris or not made by Philip Morris." Because this is a case of concealment. They want you to have to come up with a statement when, in fact, concealment is not what you said, it's what you didn't say.
But this is what the instruction you have is.
Philip Morris, USA and R.J. Reynolds are legally responsible for the acts of each of the coconspirators. Each of them. The Tobacco Industry Research Council, the coconspirator companies, including Liggett.
"Taken in furtherance of the conspiracy to conceal and omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking and/or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes."
Their conspirators. If you find that they are members of the class, if you find that they are members of the class, any statement made by any conspirator, they are responsible for.
So the only question in this case, the only question in this case -- because what they really tried to do today and over these last few weeks, if you will, is kind of retry something that doesn't need to be retried.
This is the law. This is the law. This is what you're instructed. This is what you follow. There isn't a question that she's a member of class. And to be a member of the class, what? She has to -- we have to have proven by the greater weight of the evidence. Just by slight greater
weight of the evidence.
In this case, by the clear medical evidence, we've proven pancreatic cancer she had, not somebody had, that she had was caused by cigarette smoking. Three doctors agree.
We have to prove that she was addicted to nicotine? No, we already have that. That she died of pancreatic cancer, no, we already know that.
That it was a substantial contributing factor. It doesn't have to be the only factor. It doesn't have to be the factor. It just has to be a factor.
And when I use the term "insubstantial," let me tell you how I mean it. If it wasn't insubstantial, it was substantial. You can't believe that her 45-year history of cigarette smoking -- by the way, they say, "Well, the numbers are wrong." Their doctor is the one who said it was a 120- to 125-year history upon reviewing the record. Their experts said that. Their experts is the one who corrected it to 80 years, their expert.
You can't believe for a moment that that addiction, that addiction which we know she had, was not a substantial factor. And if it was, you go to this.
But when you get here, this case becomes so
much simpler because these are the things that have already been found. We don't have to retry these. These have already been -- we don't have to retry that there was a conspiracy or that there was a concealment.
Now, we've given you evidence on that. We don't have to retry those issues. They've been tried. They've been found. And these companies have been found wanting in these -- in this decision.
You're going to get an instruction that shows that you may infer that she relied upon them from any of the evidence in the case. And you'll read the instructions.
What I want you to know -- can you put that up real quick?
What I want you to know from that instruction is this: You must have wondered why I was having Dr. Kyriakoudes testify to some of things he did. Number one, I had Dr. Kyriakoudes show you exactly when filters became very popular in America. Right when she and her husband switched. Why did they switch? Television commercials, part of the greatest advertising campaign, the most expensive in the history of the United States.
And what do we know? In order to be a legal cause, Mrs. Haldeman need not provide direct evidence of Margaret McEniry's reliance on any specific statement by the defendants. You may instead infer Margaret McEniry's reliance on such statements if the evidence as a whole supports such an inference.
Think about it. First of all, we got direct evidence. Her former husband said, "We switched because they said it was a safer cigarette in their commercials." That's direct evidence.
And then I asked it -- I asked Dr. Kyriakoudes: "Did her selections as to type, Camel Lights, Dorals, Marlboros, Marlboro Lights" -- by the way, L&M shows up one time after 1983 that I saw in anything.
Marlboro Lights, all of those -- all of those years -- all those years in between, they always say 20 to 30 years time. She told you from the stand: "I wasn't saying -- I did observe her smoking L&Ms. That wasn't the only cigarette she smoked. She tried to say it every way that she could say it.
We have all the evidence in this case of all the brands that were smoked. I've shown them to
you. When she switched -- when the markets began to emphasize light cigarettes, what happened? Margaret McEniry went to light cigarettes.
They said she was a person who bought on the account of price. What do we know in this case?
We had her kids tell you about Camel cash,
R.J. Reynolds, Marlboro Miles, Philip Morris. We had the family tell you about -- you saw the T-shirt, Winston in the 1990s.
You saw -- you heard her grandsons tell you,
"I know she had ashtrays and basic T-shirts and all from the company." I know that we know that the company, certainly Philip Morris, stayed in contact with her regularly. She was a valued customer because she was doing just what they wanted her to do, just what they gave her special rewards for doing. And now they want to say it was all her fault and not ours?
Ladies and gentlemen, you've heard this case. You know the facts and you know what happened. Your commonsense and your experience in light of the evidence establishes it. You know the facts you heard: 20 million Americans died in the last half of the last century.
MR. COFER: Objection.
MR. SMITH: 400,000 -MR. COFER: Objection, Your Honor. May we approach?
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:)
MR. COFER: State Farm, Campbell, improper argument, lack of foundation, 401, 403.
MR. SMITH: It's in evidence. I had testimony directly on it. It's directly out of the evidence.
MR. COFER: You can't argue we can be punished for that. That's where he's going. You cannot argue -MR. SMITH: I'll get to where I'm going.
THE COURT: Okay. If we release and they come back and say they get punitive damages, then we've got six people left. What if one of them aren't here tomorrow?
MR. SMITH: Can we discuss that in just a minute. I haven't thought about it.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:)
MR. SMITH: 20 million Americans died in the second half of the 20 th Century. 400,000 Americans die from cigarette smoking. Margaret McEniry has a claim for her small part. But it is an immense
part: The loss of a woman at the age of 60.
And they say it was none of -- her fault but they know she was addicted. And they marketed it to her for always directly. She did just what they wanted her to do. Just like all so many people have done.
I'm proud to be here today on behalf of this family. You know what happened. You know the facts, and all we seek is justice.
