MR. SMITH: Thank you, Your Honor. And as I advised the Court, we will be sharing our closing. Mr. Avera will be here, too.
First of all, on behalf of everybody in the courtroom in the process, thank you so much for w has been an incredible almost two weeks and the fabulous attention that you have shown.
I came before you now almost a week and a half ago, and I told you that this case was going to be about a conspiracy and that there was a certain irony to it and that the irony of it was going to be sort of the timing.
And I want you to think about it for a moment.
The evidence has shown in this case that in 1953 the tobacco companies were in a panic. A substantial number of studies had come out and those studies had linked pretty dispositively lung cancer to cigarette smoking. More importantly, as you learned from the testimony of Dr. Proctor, what had happened is the stock of the tobacco companies had for the first time begun to precipitously fall.
They assembled, as I told you, in December of 1953 and they started what would turn out to be a 50-year conspiracy which we'll talk about later to conceal the truth from the American people about the dangerousness of their product, the defectiveness of their product, the addictiveness of their product, and the hazards it posed and they knew it posed to human health.
The irony, as I told you then, was at that time, in 1953, there was a young boy in Bradford County, Florida, and he was just taking up smoking
cigarettes. He was, as best we know, 14 years old in April of that year when we know he was already smoking.
Fast forward, because the irony of this case continues. In 1994 the tobacco companies, despite mountains of evidence to the contrary, went to the United States Congress, and there the seven leading CEOs from the seven leading tobacco companies stood up and they testified under oath to the United States Congress that they did not believe their product was addictive.
Now, we know from the evidence in this case and from the instruction you will receive that there were mountains of evidence already that had been accumulated on that and that they themselves had known for -- literally since 1953 of the addictiveness of their product.
And again there's the irony, because at the same time that they were again going before Congress, despite what Surgeon General after Surgeon General had said, and disputing and creating controversy where none existed, Lamar Hall wasn't feeling well. Lamar Hall wasn't feeling well, his daughter was saying, "You need to go to the doctor." He went to the doctor, and we know what happened
next. He went in for a heart procedure. He was diagnosed with lung cancer, and a year later, a little over a year later, he died from it.
Now, that's the framework of this case. In many ways, the giant conspiracy to cover up, conceal, deceive the American public almost spanned to the day the lifetime of Lamar Hall. And that's the evidence we have in this case.
I want to go forward for just a moment to tell you some duties you're going to have now. Because, as I told you in the beginning, this case isn't like the normal case in one way. We come here today, or last week, because of a ruling that's already been made on a wide range of subjects that we will talk about in a minute that -- what's called the Engle class. And you've heard that talked about by everybody at this point in time.
There was an Engle case. That case went to the Florida Supreme Court. There were certain matters that came down that are, as we said we would prove from the beginning, as binding on you now as if you had sat on that jury.
To get to those, we have two things that we now have to prove. The first two questions we have to prove are the same I told you about from the outset.
Number one, we have to prove that Lamar Hall died from lung cancer. We don't have to prove that cigarettes cause lung cancer, because actually that will be an instruction that you will get. But we have to prove that Lamar Hall died from lung cancer. And, secondly, we have to prove that Lamar Hall was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
That's the first two things you'll have to answer in this case. And I want to review those with you quickly so that I can get to the larger issues in the case.
The first issue in the case on lung cancer, I told you what we would present, and we did, three medical doctors. Dr. David Burns -- and that was the videotape, and it was lengthy, but if you recall, that was the videotape by which he explained the mechanism by which cigarettes cause lung cancer He explained to you how, the more cigarettes you smoke, the more likely it is that you get lung cancer. He explained to you how it damages the lungs. And he explained in that process that 90 percent of lung cancer is attributable to one cause in this country, cigarette smoking. He explained in his testimony that that cigarette smoking causing lung cancer was such and other
diseases was such that 440,000 Americans die every year. Those are uncontroverted facts.
The second witness we brought in on the issue of lung cancer was an oncologist who was the treating physician in this case, Dr. Mary Aplin.
You remember last Friday when we brought Dr. Aplin before you.
Dr. Aplin came in and she said, "I was the treating physician, but I" -- and she explained that she treats veterans all over the country, all over the Lake City area, the Gainesville area. She explained her background and that she is an oncologist.
And what she does is that typically she gets called into a case when cancer is detected, and then she essentially takes over and becomes the treating physician in the sense of she makes the diagnosis and she prescribes the treatment.
We know the following: We know that Arthur Hall was feeling bad. We know he went to the doctor. We know in June -- because you have the medical records in front of you -- in June of 1994 he went into the hospital. He went into the hospital for a problem with his heart. It was going to require an angioplasty.
In preparation for that there was a CAT scan performed, and it detected a renal mass. And you remember that discussion. It was a renal mass that was detected.
Before the renal mass could actually have been addressed, what happened was Lamar Hall's family, Lamar Hall, and in fact the nurse, detected that he had a nodule. It was a lump. We now know it's called a subclavicular nodule. That's a lymph node. And we know it was so pronounced that they ordered it to be subject to a biopsy.
We know that Dr. Hamilton -- from the records Dr. Hamilton, a medical doctor and pathologist, and another doctor -- I think it was Dr. Gaddy -- they came to the conclusion that it was small cell carcinoma and it was in the lymph node.
We know from the unrefuted testimony in this case that that is not a primary source for cancer.
That means that's where cancer moves to in the lymph nodes and moves from in the lymph nodes, but the primary cancer had to be detected.
We know that there was some comment initially, because there was some confusion by the overlap, the timing -- someone said, "Well, that could be from the kidney cancer."
We know that a CT scan was performed and that there was a paratracheal mass discovered. The paratracheal mass led to Dr. Aplin coming in the case. And she diagnosed this case, as she has diagnosed hundreds if not thousands of cases, and she knew exactly what it was. She told you to a certainty what it was. At the time she diagnosed it as small cell carcinoma of the lung.
They began a course of chemotherapy and radiation. The chemotherapy and the radiation did, as it almost always does, two things. It made him very, very ill. But it also shrank the mass.
Because you remember chemosensitive, the term that was used, that small cell carcinoma has -- one of the things that is beneficial to it in terms of the way you treat it is that it reacts to radiation and therapy quickly in terms of the disappearance and you can get rid of the mass.
The bad news is you learned the unrefuted testimony in this case that it greater than 85 percent of the time is terminal. And it usually doesn't kill you in the lung. It metastasizes and it comes back.
And we know that Dr. Aplin treated him for a year, that he was in and out of the hospital. And
remember her statement that he was a very sick man when he presented on some of those occasions. We know that he had actually somewhat bloated before he came forward, which is typical of a -- one of the reactions of people who have this kind of cancer.
We know that the renal mass that she says may have been denied or may have -- we know that it never grew and it never reacted to the chemotherapy. She said, Even if I wasn't sure, and I was, after the fact I absolutely knew it was lung because -small cell carcinoma because it reacted to the chemotherapy and the radiation in the way that I would have expected and the other did not agree or did not react to the chemo, so it was not small cell carcinoma.
But her testimony is that she treated him, she treated him on a monthly basis, and he came back in I believe it was in August of the following year.
He was disoriented. He was ill. Lamar Hall was diagnosed now -- they found a mass on the brain.
The mass on the brain resulted in his death in November 1995. You have the death certificate that was signed, not now, not in preparation for a case, back then, by a treating physician who said he died from an intracranial metastasis that resulted from
small cell carcinoma of the lung. That was the cause of the death.
We could have stopped there, but we brought in another doctor. We brought in Dr. Charles Riggs.
He is an oncologist and a specialist. He teaches oncology, he's written the textbook chapters on oncology for medical schools, and he treats patients on a regular basis and he comes in and diagnoses for other doctors from the medical records the presence of cancer.
He reviewed the entire medical record, and he said to a medical certainty this man died from small cell carcinoma of the lung metastasized to the brain. He had no question about it.
And the questions came up and said, "Well, couldn't that be something else?" No. In the course -- remember his testimony. In the course of treating him, had there been any other place where small cell carcinoma was present, it grows so rapidly it would have been detected. It was not.
But what about the fact that in August of the following year he was having some congestive problems and they checked -- they did a bronchoscopy? He explained that away immediately. It is nothing but to create a lack of certainty.
And he took care of that with the absolute certainty that he had which said, "I wouldn't have expected it." He had had chemotherapy. He had radiation. Small cell carcinoma should have been gone. It was gone. And it would come back in one of two places, typically, the brain or the liver. That was his testimony.
That is the -- those are the only medical doctors who appeared in this case. The only suggestion that the other side has made regarding causation at all is they brought in a doctor of chemistry to say, looking back at it now, you could have had a biopsy of the brain and been more sure or you could have had an autopsy.
Can you imagine? This man was sick. His family was in pain. He was terminal. And a doctor was sure of the treatment and then says, "Well, let's do a -- let's stick a needle in his brain"?
Dr. Riggs tells you that's not what normally occurs. It would not occur. In fact, it almost never occurs.
And then to suggest a man under hospice who'd been ill for -- we would need an autopsy? For what? She was quite certain of her treatment and now we have a separate set of medical eyes who said it was
right.
But what do they bring in? They bring in their doctor of chemistry, to whom they've paid $4.6 million on 110 cases. And surprisingly, on the 110 cases that he recalls, not a single time can he actually remember that lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking.
Well, we know from the epidemiology histories, from all of these doctors and the testimony we've had in this case, that small cell carcinoma of the lung is 90 percent related. So we know he died of lung cancer.
And I challenge you to remember this: That's the same way they have approached everything for 50 years on behalf of tobacco. They will come in and say, "We're not quite sure. There's a little controversy here. Maybe if we had some more research."
You can be sure, as two -- excuse me, two medical doctors are sure that he died from small cell carcinoma of the lung. That question is over with. That's the first question on the verdict form, and I suggest to you that that one is easy to answer. There is no medical evidence suggesting anything else.
The second question. And this one is was Arthur Lamar Hall addicted. That's the other thing I told you we had to prove. Let's talk about this for a moment from a history that we all know.
Arthur Lamar Hall started smoking sometime before April of 1953. By 1958 -- he was 14 years old at that time. We can say he started then, because he was smoking then, when his later-to-be brother-in-law came back from the Navy and remember that specific date.
We know that in 1958 when he met -- took his bride-to-be to the county fair, he was smoking two packs a day. We know that for the next 40 years he smoked two packs of cigarettes, with some exception -- I think there's going to be a year at one point. There's several short tries to stop. He tried to quit. We'll talk about that later. But except for that, he smoked two packs a day.
What were his smoking habits that we know from the record? When his feet hit the floor in the morning, he lit a cigarette. He smoked in the house. He smoked on the way to work. He smoked at work.
You don't have to rely just on our witnesses.
Rely on two of the witnesses they called,
Mr. Woodard and Mr. Endicott, who said he was a chain-smoker, he smoked all the time, all his life.
That's the facts. We know that he tried to quit. We know he tried to quit because we know he told his son, "Don't pick them up. You can't put them down." We know he told him he's hooked on cigarettes. We know that.
We know that he smoked so much that, in fact, the house in which they lived for the years that they lived during the course of their marriage actually had to be cleaned from time to time from smoke stains that occurred in the living room. We know that. Those facts aren't controverted.
The Court will tell you, and it's one of the instructions, use your common sense.
Notwithstanding what someone said yesterday, your common sense is a guiding factor that you must use. This is an argument that a person who smoked 40 years, two packs a day, was not addicted to cigarettes, who tried to quit and could not successfully quit, who when he tried to quit -let's talk about what the factors were.
His daughter said he was irritable, which was the only time, because everybody said he was a sweet man. She said he was nervous and on edge, which
wasn't his temperament.
I think one of the words used was he went bonkers. I think that was his sister, who said they talked about trying to quit smoking but neither she nor he were ever successful with that effort.
Now, does that make him different than most smokers? No. Because the data we have in front of us shows the following: That 95 percent of the smokers who try to quit smoking can't quit the first time; that the majority of which takes -- I think it's seven or more attempts. You remember the testimony we've had. But what we know is that 55 percent of all smokers relapse into smoking.
We brought in an expert, Dr. Tonia Werner.
Dr. Tonia Werner is at Shands Hospital. The work she does at Shands Hospital is directly on -- with people who suffer from nicotine addiction. I think she said she does 10 to 12 -- 10 to 12 cases of nicotine addiction a week. She says in her career frankly she's never known a long-term, one-pack-a-day smoker that was not nicotine-addicted.
Now, that's the facts of the case. She gave you an opinion that to a reasonable degree of medical certainty she said he was addicted to
cigarettes. And there's no question there's -- in the question it says contain nicotine. No one suggests -- Reynolds doesn't suggest or anyone suggest -- that these were not nicotine cigarettes he smoked all his life. He smoked Lucky Strikes.
He smoked Camel. He smoked them at the time they were, if you remember the marketing expert, the number-one products in the land.
And in about 1974 he switched to Winston cigarettes, a filtered cigarette. At the time it was the top-selling Reynolds brand and tied for the top of all brands being sold. That's the history.
Those are nicotine cigarettes.
So then the question is, well -- and I want to talk about nicotine for a moment, because it's a central issue here. I want you to think -everybody now says -- in fact, Reynolds comes in this courtroom and says nicotine is addictive. But when did they say it first? 1999. It didn't do any good for Arthur Hall for them to admit the addictiveness of their product in 1999.
And they say, "Well, everybody -- everybody knew that nicotine was addictive." If that were the case, go back and look at how long they knew about it and kept it in secret and confidential documents.
Look at the documents in this record in which they talk about how much they knew on nicotine, the documents that say nicotine is in fact -- I think they use a Latin term which means, "It is the reason we're in business."
Remember Claude Teague's letter. Look at the documents when you get a chance in which Claude Teague says, "Let's admit it. We'd be out of business if people could quit." Go back and look at the document.
From the very first, one of the very first documents in which they talk about the reaction -remember when the first meeting -- we'll go to that in a minute. When the first meeting got together, they asked the research directors, and the research directors' first thing to Hill & Knowlton when they were doing their planning memorandum was, "It's a good thing people can't quit."
Arthur Lamar Hall was addicted to cigarettes because your common sense tells you that, because an expert tells you that. But they brought in another expert. They brought in their expert. And I want to discuss that just briefly.
They brought in a psychiatrist, a medical doctor just like Tonia Werner is, a psychiatrist, a
medical doctor, who admitted on the stand that in 2004 -- and I can't imagine that it's possible -- in 2004 he was a medical doctor who believed that nicotine was not addictive.
He testified in this court that despite 1988's report from Surgeon General C. Everett Koop that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine and heroin -that's what was found by the Surgeon General. Their doctor testified yesterday that he still doesn't believe that to be the case, notwithstanding the fact that every Surgeon General since 1988 has concurred with that finding.
Use your common sense. This was a man who could do anything. They talk about he was independent, a man's man, all of these positive qualities. And they say, "Therefore, he just -- all he had to do was put them down."
He tried and tried again. I think the testimony is some people think he tried as many as ten times to quit smoking. He could beat anything, he could do what he wanted to do, but he could never stop smoking. And he told his daughter Marilynn, he told his son Artie, "Don't smoke, because you can't put them down. I'm hooked." He said, "They are so addicting."
So the second question in this case, relatively easy. Was he addicted to cigarettes with nicotine? Absolutely. The doctors say so. The credible doctor who truly comes here said, "I don't get paid any extra for this testimony. I don't get $500 an hour. The University of Florida -- I get my salary for the cases I work on. That's what I get." She came in and opined to you that she has reviewed this and to a medical certainty he was addicted.
Those two questions then get us to the most important information in some ways in this case.
Put up the Engle, please.
Because once you answer those two things, the Court's going to instruct you -- the Court's going to instruct you of the following. Because this is the law in Florida now.
MR. MURPHY: Your Honor, can we approach on this?
(A sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury.)
MR. MURPHY: I thought he was going to skip this out of hearing.
MR. SMITH: I'll pass that.
THE COURT: All right.
(The sidebar conference was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury:)
MR. SMITH: The first thing that you'll find -I'll get past that one -- the first thing you'll find in Florida is that it is the law of the land that if you are addicted and if you died of lung cancer, we don't have to prove lung cancer causes -that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. That is the law. That's going to be charged to you. This Court's going to tell you you must be bound by that.
Secondly -Go to 2, please. Block it down from Number 1.
Block Number 2, please.
Okay. Number 2, nicotine is addictive.
They've admitted it. They've admitted it in this case because that's the law of the land in Florida, nicotine is addictive.
Number 3, the defendants -- and R.J. Reynolds was one of the tobacco defendants in the state in Engle -- the defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. That's the law that you are bound by. That's not something we question in this case. That is the law you will be instructed.
Number 4, that the defendants concealed or
omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. That's the law that you will be bound by.
Number 5, the defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment.
5B -- 6, please.
That all of the defendants sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective. No one has to prove the defectiveness of a cigarette now in one of these cases because it is the law that you will be bound by. These cigarettes were defective.
Number 7, that all of the defendants' sold or supplied cigarettes at the time of the sale or supply did not conform to the representations of fact made by said defendants.
MR. MURPHY: Your Honor -THE COURT: That's sustained. That's not one of your claims.
MR. SMITH: I'm sorry. Skip to number 8. I'm
sorry.
That all of the defendants -- and every time the word "defendants" appears, that means for your purposes R.J. Reynolds -- was negligent. We don't have to prove that they -- that they didn't do the things they could have done to make their product safe. We don't have to prove that they did things that they shouldn't have done. That is the law of the land. That, you will be bound by.
That then moves us to a very brief -- because I want you to go back through and recall the evidence of the case -- a very brief history of what really happened.
The first -- the first witness we brought was Dr. Proctor. Well, actually, Dr. Burns. What did Dr. Burns say about the cigarette industry's response over the years?
He is a man who wrote two of the Surgeon General's Reports, I think served as an editor or senior editor on 19 Surgeon General's Reports. And he said, "Every single time that we came out with new information, every time we would come out with something, the immediate response of the tobacco industry was to attack and to attack the quality of what we had done."
Now, that should be of no great surprise because, remember, in the first -- I believe it was the first time that they ever got together -Go to Document 5, Page 5, please.
In 1953, this was the planning memorandum. Two things. Back in -- why was it important to come up with a controversy? Why did they have to sustain doubt? Why did they have to have the scientific doubt?
On the previous page, on Page 4, it actually says, "Scientific doubt must remain." That was their finding. That was the tobacco industry's idea when they got with Hill & Knowlton at the first meeting.
And then what did they say? "The fact is, of course, that no one who has been a heavy smoker is going to benefit himself now by falling into a panic and eliminating the pleasure of smoking cigarettes.
He might just as well go on enjoying his smoke in this interim while research pursues the facts with full assurance that if any cancer-causing agent is ever really found in tobacco, the manufacturers will quickly find a way to eliminate it."
That's what their plan was in 1953. What a genius plan. "We need more research. You can keep
smoking with the assurance that if we find something in the tobacco -- in our cigarette, we'll get rid of it. Until that time, you might just as well smoke." That's what they told the American people.
He told you that there was a campaign of doubt, that in 1954 -Document 4, please.
In 1954 they came out with A Frank Statement.
Go to Number 1 and 2, please.
And they published this all over as kind of a statement they were giving to the American people, that there is no agreement among the authorities regarding what the cause is -- go on down, please -that there is no proof cigarette smoking is one of the causes.
That's what they said to the American people.
We know, however, that that same year a review of the literature by Claude Teague had already shown that they recognized that they had carcinogens that were likely in cancer. We know from the testimony of Dr. Burns and from the testimony of Dr. Proctor that the scientific consensus by 1953 was just -was overwhelming, but there were -- there were people who didn't agree.
But the statement that there is no proof that
cigarette smoking is one of the causes, suggesting to everybody it must be some other cause, was a lie in 1954 and never was -- they never changed their position in the lifetime of Lamar Hall.
They then also said -- go on down, please.
They pledged -- go down on, please. Go on down -- "We will always" -- this is what they said to the American people. "We will always" -- "We always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health."
Now, that would be the Surgeon General, the Health, Education and Welfare and the Federal Trade Commission. Those would be the people whose job it is to protect the consumers in the United States.
What did they do as to every single report that came out by a Surgeon General?
Let's go to Number 69, the clip.
They talk about the 1964 Surgeon General's Report. They were always going to cooperate with those who were in charge of public health.
Number 64, please.
64. Excuse me. I said 64. I meant 69, please. Play the video of 69. I'm sorry.
(The video clip was played as follows:)
ANNOUNCER: "This is a CBS news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the Surgeon General's Committee.
"In our studio this afternoon, following the Surgeon General's news conference, CBS news correspondent Richard C. Hottelet, put some questions to one of the leading spokesmen for the Industry Howard Cullman, president of the Tobacco Merchants Association and a longtime director of the Philip Morris Company.
MR. HOTTELET: "Mr. Cullman, prominent in the New York theater and civic affairs is a third-generation member of a tobacco family.
"Mr. Cullman, the conclusions are pretty stark and pretty solid. They say, quite flatly, the -they express the judgment that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate than they have the rate ten times as high for smokers in the case of lung cancer and rather higher in other cases.
MR. CULLMAN: "Well, it's awful hard to define the word substantial. I don't believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. We are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. We eat more
carefully. We have cholesterol habits. We have drinking habits of lighter whiskey. We have smoking habits, which, incidentally, are today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters.
"Now, I was surprised at the beginning of the conference when Dr. Terry is supposed to have said that there's very little evidence, if any, on the effect, if any, of filtered cigarettes.
"So when we have today 60 percent of the business in the filter field compared to 3 percent ten years ago, I think we need a little more research.
"I'm convinced that eventually they will find some element through a filter or through leaf growing or special type of seed growing that will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking for.
"We want to be the detective just as much as the Surgeon General or the AMA, and we'll cooperate in every way.
MR. HOTTELET: "Well, are you saying, then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco which are removable by filter?
MR. CULLMAN: "Well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. I don't think the
Industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements through our laboratories, through the Surgeon Generals, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck we hope we may find them. And if they are found, they will be removed, but at this point we do not know.
MR. HOTTELET: "Now, does any of the research that the tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any part of the findings here or the conclusions as a whole?
MR. CULLMAN: "Well, without reading the report I couldn't answer that to begin with. I don't think the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the conclusions."
(The video clip was concluded.)
MR. SMITH: 1953. That's the script they had in 1964. Almost to the word, "We need more research. There's nothing in there. But if we do find it, we will take it out."
In 1972 the Surgeon General came out with another report. Remember what they said in 1954, "We will cooperate"? In 1972 they came out with a press release in response to the Surgeon General's Report to Congress.
Number 117, please.
And this is what they said: "Vice president counsel in Washington said here today that the 1972 Report of the Surgeon General to Congress on smoking and health insults the scientific community and that the number-one health problem is not cigarette smoking but is the extent to which the public health officials may knowingly mislead the public" -- "the American public."
That's what tobacco did. They did it all along. They did it in 1979.
Number 118, please.
When the HEW came out with a report in 1979 -Go to the next page, please. Right there.
What did they say in response to that report?
"The American people would be better served if high government officials abandoned the pretenses and sham battles of so-called wars against diseases and their alleged causes."
Every time it was the same. It was always to deny. In 1985 -- '4 -- their own expert came in and said -- by then everything was a settled matter.
And in 1984 what did they run? They ran a series on the cigarette controversy.
For instance, Number 18 -- excuse me,
Number 15.
Number 15, which was run at the time, typical of what they were putting out everywhere. You will see document after document in your files -- in the files you take back with you in evidence talking about -- go to the bottom, please -- "We think -"We don't say there's no questions about smoking. Just the opposite. We say there's lots of questions but, as yet, no simple answers."
The idea was to keep the controversy alive. In 1967, Tiderock Corporation -- you remember Hill & Knowlton? They came up and said, "We need to reestablish the cigarette controversy." And you know what? It worked. It worked because they had the perfect thing. They were able to take "the big if," is what they called it. "The big if," as they called it in their documents.
And the big if -- remember what our marketing man said? The first thing you have to do is you have to give them some reason to believe your advertising. And then they advertised in a manner unprecedented in history. They spent a quarter of a trillion dollars, $10 million every day, on positive images of tobacco.
If you watched television in the '60s and '70s, you got on an average five messages on behalf of
cigarettes every single night. They spent more money than anybody because they needed to promote a product because they were creating doubt and they wanted to give the image, if you will, that they were -- that their product was safe. They wanted to convince people to continue to smoke and they wanted to recruit new smokers.
Go to Number 57, please.
And this is what was the result of their efforts, found in 1981 by the Federal Trade Commission, the number-one consumer agency in America.
You know, the other side has suggested to you, "Well, there were messages out there. There was the national clearinghouse putting out messages. There were public service announcements. Those were out there." Let's see in 1981 what the Federal Trade Commission found as to how they stacked up.
2.3, please.
"Cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in America. It has been estimated that the six major cigarette companies spent $1 billion in 1980 to sell their product." That's after they were off the television and radio. "This figure is several hundred times greater than the amount
government spends on public service announcements on smoking hazards. The National Commission on Smoking & Public Policy reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the National Clearinghouse on Smoking and Health, the government's primary agency working in this area, spent in a year."
And how do we know that it worked?
Go to 2.8, please.
Go to 2.8, please.
Okay. Good. That's fine. 2.15.
"Many cigarette advertising techniques appear to denigrate or undercut the health warning.
Information obtained from subpoenaed documents indicate, at least in the case of several advertising campaigns, these techniques have been carefully planned."
And how do we know that it worked?
Go to Section 3, please.
Because after -- in 1980, having conducted the study on advertising -- and remember, their budget actually went up by 50 percent on promotion and advertising after they went off television, where they were the largest advertisers save only Procter & Gamble.
But what do we know? They brought in an expert to say, "You know what? Everybody knew about it."
Well, first of all, if everybody knew about the problems with smoking, why did they put all those secret confidential documents in which they hid from the American people until 1999 the truth about what they knew and when they knew it?
But he said, "Well, everybody knew. Why, grade school students knew." We'll get to that in a minute.
But in 1978 Gallup asked respondents whether they believed smoking was harmful to health. Although 10 percent of the sample did not believe smoking had any harmful effects, 17 percent of all smokers didn't know that smoking is harmful to health, and nearly one out of every four heavy smokers did not know this fact.
In fact, the 1978 Roper study produced that huge amounts of people didn't know. Having gone through 13 polls, they concluded -- the conclusion was in that study that substantial amounts of people in the American public -Go to 3.13, please.
"The data" -- this is from 13 studies in 1981.
"The data also indicate that most people seriously
underestimate the number of years one's life expectancy is reduced due to smoking and the extent to which the risk of early death is increased."
Next page, please.
"The response to such a question put by Roper reveal that 34 percent of the total sample and 50 percent of smokers thought the statement 'Smokers have more of certain illnesses than nonsmokers' was not true or only possibly true. These data are important because they suggest that many still falsely believe that there is a substantial controversy about the basic fact that smoking is in any way hazardous to health."
We know that. Why? Because that had been their policy all along, create controversy and swamp the other side.
Remember what they said in their early meeting. The first option they put on the table, by the way, was to smear and belittle -- smear and belittle -Dr. Wynder, who had come up with the study against them. First option they put on the table.
Ladies and gentlemen, you know this. They never thought that smoking and lung cancer was a public health problem. They thought it was a public relations problem. They created The Tobacco
Institute Research Council. And you know what they said later? Addison Yeaman -- Addison Yeaman, speaking for the industry at the time, says, "Let's admit it. It was a public relations gesture."
They replaced it by the CTR, the Council for Tobacco Research. And what did the Council for Tobacco Research find? They made a finding in one of the documents called "The Best Way For CTR." It says, "Let's face it. We're looking for evidence that cigarettes don't cause health hazards."
That's in the record. That's what those CTR -the TI, The Tobacco Institute, was created. It was supposed to send out information helpful to the industry. They're the ones, of course, that sent out such articles as "Carcinogens Don't Cause Lung Cancer" or "Cancer in Bald Men."
The Tobacco Institute, the CTR, the TIRC were all in the company of R.J. Reynolds, working together with one purpose: mislead and deceive the American public.
You take that, you give them a public relations reason, as Dr. Goldberg said -- you give them a public relations reason to have doubt, and then you overwhelm them with the positive images about smoking.
You use athletes. You put Ted Williams out there. You put Frank Gifford out there. You pay and you get more placement in movies -- we have one we just used as an example. You know how many ther were. We had unrebutted testimony that in the movies almost every portrayal was a positive one, every five minutes, if you went to the movies.
If you were at home at night, on television you got message after message. If you were driving down the road, R.J. Reynolds, the unrebutted testimony is and found in Yankelovich is they're the largest outdoor sign advertiser of all time.
Why? Well, let me make a suggestion. Because when you're driving down the road, you can see the big image that says how sweet it is, how good it is, how healthful and vigorous it is. What you can't see is the health warning.
They're going to argue to you in this case,
"Well, wait a minute. You can't prove that all of this conspiracy affected him, Lamar Hall," because, admittedly, Lamar Hall has now been dead for 15 years. You can't say which ad he relied on, no, but what you can say is you can say that he spoke the English language.
Go to Number 209, please.
And you want to know what it was like? Look at Exhibit 209, which was found by the Fair Trade Commission in 1967.
Second page, please. Block that over.
"Cigarette advertising reaches virtually all Americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. Cigarettes are advertised on both network and spot television, on radio, in magazines and newspapers and outdoor media and by means of many types of point-of-sale advertising. So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for Americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising."
They then concluded, "The Commission believes that the warning label on cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude toward cigarette smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisements, particularly the barrage of commercials on television."
And guess what happened after 1967? They came off of television and their budgets went up. They paid actors $500,000 -- Sylvester Stallone, just an example $500,000 -- to positively portray their product by smoking.
Images were everywhere. Lamar Hall was not exempt from those. They want to say, "Well, wait a minute. You can't show that it was -- that their negligence was the legal cause or their strict liability was the legal cause."
No. Don't get misled. That's a strategy tobacco has used forever. It is create doubt where none exists. If you find they were negligent and he died of lung cancer, the negligence of -- led to the product that he smoked that gave him the lung cancer. We know that because the doctors said his lung cancer was from the cigarette smoking.
When they talk about strict liability, when they talk about the misrepresentation of their product -- and I want you to read that one carefully. They're going to say, "Well, how are you going to prove -- you can't show that he relied on the misrepresentation."
Of course the implication is pretty clear. He smoked all those years. He smoked the product that was the number-one product in the market at the various times. He smoked and did and behaved just as they wanted him to smoke and behave. They paid millions and billions to get every American that would smoke to behave just like he did. And now
they want to blame him for doing just what they wanted him to do. But that's the strategy they always had.
Lamar Hall -- it's very simple. You will see -The rest of the jury form, please.
All you have to find is -Number 3 and 4, please.
Once you've answered the first two, you will get the instruction, the Court will say -- it says on the instruction, "The Court has instructed you that R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous." Were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of Arthur Lamar Hall's death?"
That's easy. He died smoking a cigarette. His cigarette was defective and unreasonably dangerous. It was a legal cause.
The Court has instructed you that R.J. Reynolds Company concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarette smoking or
both.
The question is: Did Arthur Lamar Hall reasonably rely to his detriment on R.J. Reynolds Tobacco's concealment or omission.
In other words, if R.J. Reynolds did, as we know they did, they didn't put the information out there, they withheld the information, they omitted the concealed material and they practiced concealment of that information, did that relate to Arthur Lamar Hall's continuing to smoke and ultimately his death? Of course.
The next one, please.
The Court has instructed you that R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention -- the intention -- that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment.
Go to the question. 4, 5.
"Was R.J. Reynolds Company's agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effect of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment a legal cause
of Arthur Lamar Hall's death?"
How easy. They didn't tell them. They held the information back. They concealed it in one of the largest and most expensive conspiracies. And what happens? He continued to smoke their product, R.J. Reynolds' number-one product.
And remember this. And I don't want you to forget this, two things. The filter scam -- they want to blame -- you know, he was late coming around to smoking filters. He didn't smoke filters until they became the most -- in 1974, I think was the testimony, at which time they were the number-one product.
Remember the testimony of every professional in this -- in this case has been filters didn't do anything to make cigarettes safer. They were a scam.
By the way, the fact that they were a scam on public health is pretty simple. Remember the early 1953 Claude Teague document? And they're going to say, "Oh, we didn't do that." The idea was Teague noticed as early as 1953, "You know, if you look at the cigarette smoker, they look at that filter. If it turns a little darker, I notice that they feel better about it." And then he says at the bottom of
the document, "I know it won't have any effect, but the advertising potential is obvious."
You know, if best you want to know what tobacco's position was -Pull up Hyman, please. I think that's the one.
Where is Hyman, please, the video? Do you have
it?
Yes, go to Video Clip 106.
This is what tobacco said in 1986, a time when we know that Lamar was trying the hardest to stop that he'd ever tried.
(The video clip was played as follows:)
"Now, throughout your tenure with American, it was not only American's position but your position that cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is that accurate.
"Through my tenure?
"Yes.
"Yes, that is so.
"That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
"Yes.
"It's a statement that American Tobacco placed great reliance on?
"We -- we issued that statement, yes --
"As far as --
" -- and we wanted them to believe it.
"As far as you're concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
"Yes.
"Okay. No reason you know of why the public shouldn't accept your company's position, is there?
"Well, in the area of scientific integrity, I know of no reason why they should not accept our -"Position?
" -- our position. I know that as a practical matter with the great deal of material being issued by scientists of one kind -- of one persuasion or another, it's rather difficult to get them to even know our position.
"When the public smokes your company's cigarettes, they're doing exactly what you want them to do, though, correct?
"That's what we'd like them to do, to smoke our brands.
"You want them to buy your cigarettes, you want them to smoke every cigarette in the pack, and you want them to buy another pack, don't you?
"Yes.
(The video clip was concluded.)
MR. SMITH: That was their statement, it was not hazardous to their health and they wanted -- and you could rely on their representations. That's what they said.
You know, if you had and you evaluate -- the Judge will give you credibility -- the credibility instruction. And basically when a witness takes the stand, you can judge a witness by have they told the truth in the past.
I suggest to you that -- take a look at this case about how truthful R.J. Reynolds has been in the past. You know, they told -- in 1984 Edward Horrigan got up, and Edward Horrigan said, on the Nightline -- you remember the Nightline, where he's talking to Ted Koppel, a very popular guy, and he said, "What about youth smoking?" "We don't appeal to youth smoking."
You can hear the tape if you want to, but here's the interesting thing: That's the same guy who got a memo in 1980. And the memo in 1980 that he had received had to do with their concern that they were losing a critical market among the age group 14 through 17.
They entered something called the Cigarette Advertising Code. Remember that testimony about "We
won't appeal to children"? And yet we know from the documents that came in yesterday -- and these would be -Go to Number 149, please.
In 1980, long after the cigarette code, long after they had agreed not to -- and they were going on TV telling people, "We're not appealing to children," this was what they were saying about their loss of the 14-to-17-year-old: "Hopefully our various planned activities that will be implemented this fall will aid in some way in reducing or correcting these trends."
What trends? The one that they were losing that battle. What was their number-one marketing objective in 1975? "Appeal to the 14-to-24-year-olds because they'll be our market for the next 25 years."
If a witness takes the stand and has said something false in the past, we don't believe them. When a company takes -- comes before you and now says something and their representatives say something we know is patently untrue, you can't believe them.
Ladies and gentlemen, the tobacco industry has never changed. In 53 years -- I take that back. We
got testimony that they did change. They brought in someone who said, "In 1999 we changed. We admitted the addictiveness of cigarettes," because you know they had lied to Congress about it. "In 1999 we came forward and said we do believe lung cancer is related," and they've admitted that.
Arthur Lamar Hall had been dead from smoking cigarettes four years. In the course of his lifetime he never got the benefit of the truth.
Well, what they want to say is, "Well, everybody knew. It was in the textbooks."
Well, we know from the Yankelovich studies in 1981, we know from the Roper -- we know that's not true. But isn't it interesting, if everyone knew, they did a really great job. Because if everyone knew, they convinced so many people to keep smoking that we lost 440,000 people. A person dies of a smoking-related disease every 71 seconds. That's the math. And they come before you now and say, "We're not like we used to be."
You always have to wonder, when someone does that, "Is it you're not like you used to be because you changed your mind, or is it you're not like you used to be because you finally got caught?"
My partner is going to discuss with you what I
believe is the only issue in this case, and that is the damages you should award to Jean Hall for the loss of her love and the damages you ought to award against R.J. Reynolds because of the 50-year conspiracy to do one thing: To create controversy where none existed, to lie about every study that came out, to spend billions to make sure that you do not have to face the obvious truth.
And when they argue to you, as they will, that he didn't have lung cancer, it tells me that it's just the same old company with the same old wrapping. When faced with the obvious truth, try to say, "There's just not enough," because that's what they've always done.
Your Honor, I'd like to turn this over to my partner just -THE COURT: Okay.
MR. AVERA: Mark Twain once said that each person is born to one possession that out-values all others, his last breath. On November 3rd, 1995, surrounded by his wife and his family, Lamar Hall took his very last breath after a very long and courageous battle with lung cancer, a disease that ravaged his body and forced his wife to watch helplessly as he slowly declined and died.
If only the courage that Lamar Hall had shown during that battle with lung cancer had existed in the souls of the executives at R.J. Reynolds, who could not find it within themselves to admit the truth to the American people, the very simple truth that smoking causes lung cancer and that nicotine is addictive.
It's going to be my job to talk to you a few minutes about apportionment of fault. Because remember in voir dire we talked about choices. And I am going to talk to you about choices.
There was a lot of discussion in voir dire about personal choices, the choices that we make, knowing choices. Then I asked everybody whether you would take that spotlight of choice, accountability and responsibility and point it over to that side of the room and evaluate their choices. And everybody said that they would because everybody recognized that corporate responsibility, corporate accountability, is important in our country.
We told you from the very beginning of this case that Mrs. Hall, on behalf of her husband, accepted some of the responsibility for what happened. But there's a very, very stark contrast between the two sides that are before you in this
courtroom today.
On the one hand is Mrs. Hall, who comes before you with candor and says, "I share, we share some responsibility. Could Lamar have tried harder?
Could he have engaged in more quit attempts? Should he, could he have known that he needed to go to the doctor to have a greater degree of success? Could he, did he know of nicotine replacement therapies?" Complete candor on her part.
And then on the other side, on the other side, an absolute refusal, an absolute and unequivocal refusal to take any responsibility, not one ounce, not one ounce, for the choices that Reynolds made over not one decision, which you, a jury, could forgive, but over decades, choices made over and over again as part of a corporate-wide policy and conspiracy to hide the truth from American families.
Mr. Murphy may be reluctant to talk about the conduct of his client and their industry. And when you weigh those choices in apportioning fault, justice cries out that because of their corporate choices that the blame, the fault, the accountability not be blamed primarily at the grave of Lamar Hall but that it be placed in the corporate boardrooms of Reynolds Tobacco Company, who made
choices, as well.
When Mr. Murphy stands up and talks to you about personal choice, ladies and gentlemen, every time that phrase is uttered I want you to think, right there with it, corporate choice. Because they made their choices in a different manner.
Because on the one side, when they want to talk about Lamar's choices, a 14-year-old boy -- that's what a 14-year-old is. He's still a boy -- maybe even earlier, in a different time, in a different culture, in a decade long, long ago, trying to fit in and be cool at a time when most men smoked cigarettes, he picked up cigarettes and began to smoke; certainly something that Reynolds wanted that boy to do.
That evidence cannot be refuted. They wanted 14-year-olds to pick up their product, which they knew was addictive and had carcinogens in it. They wanted them to pick it up and smoke it.
The choice of a boy to do that is not a sinister choice. It could not be a knowing and informed choice at age 14, because they had made the choice to not tell American families and the American public what they knew about their product. Even had they, a 14-year-old lacks that judgment.
But on their side, their choices were of a sinister kind. It was all about money. Because there could be no other reason to hide the truth from American families. There could be no reason that you would hide something that is dangerous to American families nationwide and hide it from this community, from Americans.
You all remember Dr. Figlar. Dr. Figlar was the vice president of research and development at Reynolds. And I asked him about some rules, because if you're going to break a rule, if you're a corporation and you break a rule, you have to make the choice to do that. And you remember there were seven or eight of them. And I asked Dr. Figlar if he agreed with them.
A corporation should always tell the truth about its products. In order to make an informed choice about the risks of a product, the customer must know of all the dangers. A corporation should never needlessly endanger American families. RJR specifically should never endanger families in this or any other community.
A corporation should never hide safety information about its products from American families when that information puts lives at risk.
When a corporation knows that its product is dangerous to health, it must tell American families that immediately. That's consumer expectation for you.
A corporation should never create a controversy about safety when its product is dangerous to health. A corporation must never smear or belittle scientists who publish to the scientific community safety concerns about a company's product.
They broke -- they chose to break every one of those rules that everybody in this courtroom agrees is a rule applicable to corporations. Those are choices, ladies and gentlemen, of a sinister kind.
And no one held a gun to their head, either.
I would submit to you that when Lamar Hall was a 14-year-old boy, the executives in boardrooms of Reynolds made their knowing and informed and perfectly free choices to do what they did.
Now, we know what the apportionment will be from Mr. Murphy. He's already told you that his apportionment is 100 percent on Mr. Hall; that it was a personal choice.
Ladies and gentlemen, it would be a miscarriage of justice to not hold a company responsible for the conduct it engaged in over a half a century, a half
a century, and not tell them by your verdict, "We understand your point, Mr. Murphy, about choice, but we're going to hold you accountable, too, for the decisions, the choices, that your company made."
So when you answer the questions on this verdict form -- can I see the other pages, please -the first pages?
Let me go through this quickly with you.
If you don't answer both 1 and 2 yes, the case is over. Mr. Smith has already gone over why the overwhelming evidence is that you must answer yes to 1 and 2.
And I will just remind you briefly. Remember we talked about the burden of proof in voir dire, the tipping of the scales. Ladies and gentlemen, I would submit to you we did not tip those scales; we slammed them up on our side. That evidence is unequivocal and without doubt.
You have heard the evidence regarding, over the last two weeks -- and the Judge will instruct you, when you answer 1 and 2 yes, about questions 3, 4, 5 and 6. Those all should be yes.
6 has to do with negligence being a legal cause of Mr. Hall's death. The Court will instruct you if you answer 1 and 2 yes, that Reynolds was negligent.
And then 7. There would be no small irony in this case if, after having heard all the evidence in this case and now knowing what by far most Americans don't know are in the internal documents of Reynolds and the tobacco industry -- for you to say,
"Mrs. Hall comes before us and she is willing to share some degree of responsibility, but because your choices, Reynolds, were of a sinister and evil kind and because Mr. Hall's was simply one of not being able to beat an addiction, we find you,
Reynolds, 99 percent at fault."
Mrs. Hall doesn't suggest that. The apportionment must be fair. We have never said to you there was information -- there was not information out that called into question smoking.
What we have proven to you beyond the exclusion of all reasonable doubt is that the folks over here created a controversy where none existed.
What's the word? Irresponsible?
Unaccountable? There is no word but obscene that comes to mind to describe that level of conduct.
And so when you weigh the choices, when you weigh the apportionment of fault, of who bore the fault leading to the death of Lamar Hall, it must be fair.
Mrs. Hall suggests to you that an allocation of
fault be 80 percent as to Reynolds Tobacco and 20 percent as to Lamar Hall.
Compensatory damages in our society are for the purpose of fixing the things that can be fixed.
When a wrongdoer breaks rules and causes harm to somebody, compensatory damages are there for the person harmed, to help what can be helped, and if it's something that can't be fixed or helped, to make up for the harm.
When a corporation causes harm on the scale that Reynolds has in this case, the money damages that they must pay to compensate her must be equal to the amount of harm that they have caused her.
I've told you that the damages are related primarily to pain and suffering damages. And the measure of that harm is what was taken from Jean Hall and what she's been left with as a result of what Reynolds did.
What they did has left her with a memory of a man she loved so dearly with grief, sorrow, mental pain and suffering on just about a daily basis. Not a day goes by when there isn't an event that reminds Jean of what could have been. Memories good, battle with the horror of watching her husband die from cancer.
Remember, Jean was but a child herself -- she was 15 when she met Lamar, 16 when she married him She had him for 38 years. And by all accounts Lamar Hall was nothing except a nice and gentle man who never had a harsh word, who was the type of husband who would reach over if his wife got a little angry and pat her on the knee and say, "Now, Honey."
With the rare exception when his quit attempts would cause him to be irritable, fidgety, sharp with his words, he was a nice man, the kind of man that, when a relative's son needed some guidance, Lamar would take him under the wing -- under his wing and teach him how to be a man, what was right, what was wrong.
That's the man she remembers. And those memories battle her memories of cancer. Cancer is a horrible death. Jean described for you that year and four months. When she got the telephone call that Lamar had cancer, he was on the phone and they hugged. It ensures if you're the victim of cancer that just about your only thoughts are, "Will I survive this? And if I don't, what will happen to my family?"
Jean watched as her husband, suffering from small cell carcinoma of the lung, went through
tests, suffered the toxic effects of chemotherapy, having drugs injected into his veins, X-rays, blood transfusions, CT scans, bronchoscopies, hospital stay after hospital stays where he was a very sick man. And each step, at each and every step, she was there, as she had promised him, as she had vowed to him on their wedding day, that she'd be right there beside him. Because Jean Hall wanted to make sure of one thing, that if she lost him, if he left this world, he would absolutely know that she loved him.
Even today how the nightmare of experiencing a year and four months of watching your husband decline from a horrible disease that they knew as early as the 1950s can cause cancer, the effect of that is still palpable in a room today when she speaks of the man that she loved and how he died so horribly.
She can try to direct her thoughts to the recollections of the joy and kindness that Lamar brought to her life, but that is so very difficult because that always brings with it the intrusive thoughts of the last year and four months of having him.
Only those who have taken a life would come before a jury and say these are pain and suffering
damages and this isn't worth an awful lot. I just want to take one minute and compare these damages to some other things that we compare in our society. Because ultimately, folks, there is no magic formula for which you decide human suffering, pain, mental agony from this kind of loss. You are to decide it based on your common sense, in light of your circumstances, and what's fair and just in light of all the evidence.
But we do place some values on things that are inanimate, things that don't give us love, things that don't interact with us at all, material things.
We place values of millions and millions of dollars on material things and we don't think twice about it.
If we were to hear about a painting that Reynolds had damaged and experts had testified that the value was so many million and the other expert said it's so many million over here, few people would have difficulty saying, "Well, if that's what the experts say it's valued, then that must be what it's worth."
Here in this courtroom you're the experts.
You're the fact finders on what Jean Hall's suffering is in terms of money damages because of
the harm that they caused.
We will recognize professional baseball players who are -- any kind of athlete, for that matter -who may not be a good role model at all. They may be only able to hit, throw or bounce a ball. And millions of dollars for that professional athlete.
That's not pain. That's not suffering.
For each hour, for each day, for each month and year that goes by, stating the obvious, that she will never have Lamar again -- she hasn't had him for 15 years now, and it will be another 15 to 20 years, the remainder of her lifetime, that she will live with memories that they caused -- all I can do is suggest a number to you that I think is fair and reasonable in light of the evidence and considering the harm that Reynolds has caused.
In thinking about what I was going to tell you and trying to relate how that equates, I kept coming back to one thing from the evidence, and that thing was a willingness on the part of Reynolds to spend an amount of money to have an actor smoke their cigarettes in a few movies. And that sum was two payments of $250,000 each, for the sum of $500,000.
I'm going to suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that if they're willing to pay that for a
few movies, then certainly the harm that Jean Hall has suffered has been that much on a yearly basis for the last 15 years and for the remainder of her life expectancy. The total of that is going to be $15 million for what she's gone through, for the nightmare that she's been through and how the nightmare will continue for the next 15 to 20 years, the remainder of her life expectancy.
Now, it's within your power to say that's not enough or that's too much. And we are very confident that you will exercise that power as the jury to determine what is fair and just in light of all the evidence.
The last question is whether punitive damages are warranted in this case. His Honor, Judge Roundtree, will instruct you on the law which you must consider in finding whether punitive damages are warranted.
Punitive damages are for the purpose of punishing the wrongdoer to ensure that the wrongdoe does not do it again and to deter others who might consider acting in a similar fashion.
I'm not going to belabor what Mr. Smith has already gone over. Mr. Hyman, in 1986 the president of American Tobacco, which is now Reynolds, said
that he would not blame a smoker for smoking two packs a day. But we as a society, what we will do is hold a corporation accountable for its choices that demonstrate a reckless indifference to the safety and rights of people in our country and our community.
The evidence -- we must show by the evidence, by clear and convincing proof. Ladies and gentlemen, there is no clearer proof in any case that their conduct rose to the level warranting punitive damages in this case.
As Mr. Smith said, for the last 50 years what they've done is try to mislead you and the American public. They've ridden three horsemen throughout those decades. Those three horsemen are complexity, confusion and ambiguity. And it served them well.
Ms. Faulkner, one of the folks that went through jury selection with all of us and ultimately obviously did not serve, you may recall that she expressed some concern, maybe a little bit of -intimidated a little bit about being a juror in this case. And I think her question was, "Who am I?
What can I do?" And then a discussion that perhaps this case won't make any difference in the big scheme of things.
A kind man, one of 440,000 or so in 1995, died for their choices and because of his inability to beat addiction. I have news for you: You can make a difference. You have the power to do that which no one else in our society can do. You have the right to sit and say, "Enough is enough."
I am so proud to stand by this lady over here. Lamar Hall exhibited courage battling cancer. In this courtroom, her table where she sits with her counsel is the exact same size as the tables where Reynolds counsel sits. We are so very proud to stand shoulder to shoulder with her.
You, ladies and gentlemen, are called upon to have the courage to say, "Enough is enough, and we can make a difference, and we will make a difference." And you can do that by laying aside the complexity, ambiguity and confusion and telling Reynolds that which they refuse to acknowledge and do not want to hear: "Folks, the people in your boardroom are responsible for the choices that they made. Those choices contributed to the death of Arthur Lamar Hall. Our community, our society, our families, you owe us the truth. When you make something this dangerous, I don't care if it's legal. You tell us it's dangerous, and you tell us
as soon as you find out about it. We do not accept anything less than that."
Justice cries out for it. Justice demands it.
Make a difference.
THE COURT: Thank you, Mr. Avera.



REBUTTAL ARGUMENT
MR. SMITH: May it please the Court, since I know that lunch is waiting, this is going to be short, but it's important.
I want to go back just over the issues that I
think are -- that were raised that need to be addressed.
Number one, from the outset they have said this case is entirely about Lamar Hall. It's not.
The Defendant in this case is about R.J. Reynolds. It's R.J. Reynolds's conduct that has brought us where we are. Let's not forget that.
They said in their introduction to the jury, and they have said again today, you know, it doesn't matter. The implication I believe is that it doesn't matter what you do, it won't make essentially a difference. We'll still be selling cigarettes when this is over with.
I want to go back to what my partner said to you. It can make a difference what you do as to their behavior and it can make a difference today.
The first person they talked about was Dr. Proctor, a man who did not hide how he feels about tobacco companies from the outset. And then they began to attack him, and I just want to remind you what I told you from the evidence. The tactics never change.
Go back to the first meeting in 1953. What were they going to do with Dr. Werner? Smear and belittle. A tactic that has never changed.
They said Dr. Burns is biased against tobacco, and that was reflected his opinions. But I ask you this, I guess Joseph Califano, the HEW secretary; Dr. Terry, the Surgeon General; C. Everett Koop, the Surgeon General, every time anyone has made a finding adverse to tobacco in the last 50 years you can watch it, you have seen it, immediately afterwards what happens. They are attacked. They are discredited. They are belittled. Their reported.
In fact, the position -- don't forget this -every time the statement was made here about Dr. Burns is bias and his being on the Surgeon General, they said the same thing about every Surgeon General. In fact, that's an industry and that's -- the tobacco industry said that the number one problem to public health was public officials. Not the fact that they knew they were selling a product that was addictive and would kill people.
They say, you know, during his lifetime he never said anything about suing tobacco in reference to Lamar Hall. You've heard the history of how this came about. There's nothing to suggest that Lamar Hall had any idea or that anyone else
had any idea at that point in time that they could do what ultimately happened in the Engle case in 1994.
You know, they said that -- they put up some press releases and they showed you press releases and they say this is what was out in the area.
They forgot to put up, as their expert who had done the research, the Bradford County School response in 1964. And what was that? It was a place where he had grown-up, a place where he actually was a boy in school.
Their response to the 1994 -- excuse me, '64 Surgeon General's report was that the Bradford County Schools no longer allowed, what they had for the last 10 to 15 years, and that was smoking on campus. That was the generation to which this man actually belonged.
They say there's no evidence of his being influenced or relying upon advertising or anything else. And I've given you all that data.
I remind you of this: When he started smoking, he smoked what? Lucky Strike and Camel. What were the two most advertised products and the number one and the number two seller at the time?
Lucky Strike and Camel.
In '1974 when purportedly I think they've greed that that's around when he switched to Winston, what was the number one advertised product of R.J. Reynolds and what was the then number one product on the market?
Winston.
They've said, well, we don't know if he switched maybe it was because of these health concerns. Isn't it possible that why he switched was because they had been advertising filtered cigarettes to be something they were not? Safe?
They weren't, but the idea was the word filter. They say you can't believe what ads he saw. We know that he saw five every night. We put up that virtually every night of the week during prime time what shows were there were put on by the same industry. Tobacco.
So they're saying well you don't have that direct evidence. The Judge is going to give you a circumstantial evidence instruction. A circumstantial evidence means that you can look at the circumstances and you can determine from that evidence by the circumstances of that evidence what was going on.
We know that this is a man who essentially
every time they increased -- or every time a product moved to the top, this was a man who responded to that or certainly at some point in time responded to that, which was in direct response to what? The marketing strategies of the industry.
What did our marketing experts say? The only reason those strategies work is that you've got to have created a sense of doubt; a sense of doubt and controversy out there. You have to have made sure that there was an open mind about that, and that's what they did, and they did it for half a century.
They have said to you, their first approach, as I thought it would be -- I don't want to back up too much -- first of all, they suggest to you that he didn't have lung cancer.
Three medical doctors, two of them have one opinion. He died of metastasized lung cancer. That's the medical evidence in this case.
They said, well, there's some question and they put up these -- remember this, when he first came in there was a renal mass. We had Dr. Riggs explain very clearly, that renal mass never grew, never went -- it may have been cancer. If it was,
it was a word incidental lung, meaning it is a cancer that is so slow growing it was of no consequence.
Dr. Aplin says, it may very well not have been a cancer. It could have been a benign tumor.
What we know is that they found that he had a carcinoma. They then found that he had a paratracheal mass, which is a lung cancer. They then treated the paratracheal mass and they treated small cell carcinoma. And what happened?
The small cell carcinoma did just as it always does because it's chemo sensitive; it went away. When it went away, they knew that that was the good news but the bad news is it would come back and likely somewhere else, and it did.
There is no medical evidence, none, not one physician has said anything except that he died of small cell carcinoma of the lung.
Well, they say, well, there are some other factors out there that ought to be considered like, well, Dr. Thomas talked about carpentry.
Yet Dr. Thomas was asked a question, do you know the difference between the cancer rigged for carpenters who smoke and don't smoke?
No.
What we do know is we put on two doctors who opine the cause of his lung cancer. They said to a reasonable degree of medical certainty his lung cancer was the result of cigarette smoking, and they gave us not only their medical opinions but also the epidemiology which shows that small cell carcinoma, and Dr. Thomas agreed of all the forms of lung cancer, small cell carcinoma of the lung is the one most directly related, more than 90 percent of the time, to cigarette smoking.
So on the verdict form the first answer is an easy one. He had lung cancer and no evidence in this case suggests to the contrary.
Number two: Was he addicted. We presented evidence on addiction. We presented, and Dr. Burns said in the very beginning, the fact that a person can quit or not quit is not in and of itself dispositive of addiction.
This verdict form and the instruction you will get will not say could he quit. It says was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. Was Arthur Lamar Hall addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds? If so, was that addiction a legal cause of his death.
He was addicted, he couldn't quit smoking, he died of lung cancer, it was caused by smoking.
First two answers are easy. They're yes.
Then they say, well -- I don't want to leave this. I probably don't need to spend anymore time on it -- on this bronchoscopy.
Dr. Riggs says bronchoscopy would have been a surprise if it did show small cell carcinoma because that was a radiated area, and typically the behavior is it wouldn't be there. He would not have expected. And he also said, one other thing, if he had another form of small cell carcinoma, it grows so fast we would have detected it, it would have shown up, and it never did. Therefore, we know where the small cell carcinoma came from. It came from the lung. It metastasized to the brain. That's it. We know he was addicted because Dr. Werner says he was addicted.
Obviously their doctor who recently only believes that nicotine is addictive, despite the evidence to the contrary for a generation, but we know that his pattern was that he showed physical differences in his life, psychological differences in his life when he tried to quit smoking.
And the evidence is the fact that you can quit is not an issue of addiction. Therefore, we've answered both those questions.
Then: Did Lamar Hall reasonably rely to his detriment on R.J. Reynolds' concealment.
Now, remember the instruction. They concealed. They omitted. Did he rely to his detriment on R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's concealment or omission of material information?
Now, I want you to understand what's going on, so you don't get tricked. They didn't tell you, that's what omission and concealment means. That means it wasn't out there. So it's not like you can say, well, I relied on what wasn't out there directly, of course, but the circumstantial evidence is undeniable reliance.
What do we know? We know that because they never told the truth about their product, they never told that how deadly it was, in fact, they did just the opposite because they represented it in the way they did or never gave out the information, he continued to not only smoke, but he continued to buy their product.
So where it says, did he reasonably rely to his detriment, yes, he relied to his detriment in
the sense that he continued to smoke cigarettes that they were making because they never told the truth.
You can't say, well, if he had known -- the fact of the matter, he didn't know. The Court has found and told you that he didn't know and they said that the company knew the material was false and misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes or both.
The Court has instructed you that R.J.
Reynolds agreed to conceal. Was R.J. Reynolds Company's agreement to conceal or omit the information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature -- and then what does it say -- with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information.
Now, he tried to twist that as Arthur Lamar Hall's reliance. That the public and smokers would rely, and it was their intention that they would rely. Was that a legal cause?
If he smoked, if he smoked because of information they concealed, it was.
Was R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's negligence
a legal cause? That's it. Was the fact that they put out a product that either they didn't do what they were supposed to do or they did more than they should have done, was that a legal cause of Arthur Lamar?
Well, we know there's no question they were negligent because the Court's going to instruct you they hid that negligence. So since they were negligent and they smoked the product, and that negligence was part of, if you will, was part of the legal cause of his death, meaning what they didn't didn't do to the cigarette made him die from the result of it. Was that negligence absolutely something that caused his death?
Yes.
There's no reliance requirement there. It's simple. Was R.J. Reynolds' negligence a legal cause of his death?
Yes.
Why do we know that? Because it's their negligence that produced that product that killed him. It's their negligence that marketed a product that they knew to be unsafe and killed him.
Now, you know, it is interesting to me that
they talk about Dr. Thomas. Did you notice when they talked about Dr. Thomas they never mentioned the $4.6 million that Dr. Thomas has been paid to work for R.J. Reynolds and has never found a single time in which he found the leading -- the cause to be cigarette smoking.
They told you, and they ask you to consider these other risks, like Dr. Thomas said, well, you know there was these other risks of his mother and father. What do we know? They both smoked cigarettes. What do we know about the family member who was -- he smoked cigarettes.
So that's not a genetic cause. That is a fact that they smoked cigarettes and themselves were victims of this concealment.
You know, in 1964, and thereafter, since that time, they want to talk about that -- well, there's no showing, there's no evidence in this case that this advertising had any effect on him.
It had an effect on everybody else because we know the language that virtually everyone could speak the language -- who could speak the language was subject to this.
But what is the document -- excuse me, 209 in evidence says the following: Cigarette smoking
today poses a very great preventable public health menace. It is strongly habituating and habitual smokers subject themselves to a number of debilitating illnesses and early death. Despite this, cigarette companies have spent billions of dollars. In 1966, almost 300 -- inducing the people to take up this habit so dangerous to their health.
Folks, that's what this is about. They knew the truth. They presented this glamorous lifestyle to the contrary. They hid, not because some expert said it, but because the Federal Trade Commission founded that they hid the health hazards of smoking from the American people, including Arthur Lamar Hall.
They ask -- they talk about two witnesses. I won't spend much time on it except to say that Mr. Woodard -- I think Mr. Woodard's testimony was pretty plain. He's an elderly man. He was not here. We know the date he testified to.
I just remembered this question being asked:
Did Mr. Hall talk about smoking in any way, shape or form? And the answer to that question from Mr. Woodard was: No, sir.
Obviously -- I mean, there may be some
confusion there. He's an elderly man. I understand that.
The nephew said, well, he did remember maybe in middle school some statement about cancer sticks he thinks. And the nephew obviously was very moved by this, but he also said, you know, he couldn't remember someone who had been like his father, within the four years, the date of his death, that's not a strong memory. I'm just saying to you we can't rely on it.
But even if it were true, anybody would know that if there was anything serious about that statement at the time, it's not even suggestive.
They say, well, there had been warnings about it. Well, yes, there have been warnings out there and what did the Federal Trade Commission say about the warnings? That the efforts of the tobacco companies were undermining the effect of this. That's what we have in evidence.
MR. MURPHY: Your Honor, preemption.
THE COURT: Go ahead.
MR. SMITH: Document 57. I'm not going to show it. It's going back with you. It's in evidence, that they were -- that their efforts were undermining the warnings about health
hazards.
You know, it's interesting today, nicotine -Reynolds agrees that nicotine is addictive. Yeah, they do agree today that it's addictive. They agree in this lawsuit it's addictive. They agreed to this after Engle that it was addictive.
But they never agreed nor disclosed that it was addictive during the life of Lamar Hall, not once.
They talk about, well, that Mr. Hall tried to quit and he relapsed. That means that he's just like the great majority of smokers. That doesn't mean anything different than the fact that once you are addicted, it is difficult to quit, it is virtually impossible to quit on a first try. It is difficult to quit on several tries. And 55 percent of the time you never quit. Because of what? The addiction to cigarettes.
They say that, well, he put them down in 1994 and he quit. In 1994 he put them down in January. His family already observed he wasn't feeling well. And in June of that year he was diagnosed with lung cancer. That doesn't mean it wouldn't have never relapsed under normal circumstances.
He went into chemotherapy and radiation and he
died from smoking cigarettes and having lung cancer.
They say, well, we tried to tell you that he meets the -- that he must be addicted because he didn't quit.
No, we tell you that he's addicted because we had a doctor come in here and use the DSM-TR and say that that is, in fact -- that he meets the criteria for nicotine dependence and that it was, and to her reasonable degree of medical certainty addicted, and then I ask you to use your common sense and look at the length of time he smoked and the amount he continued to smoke over that period of time, the times he tried to quit unsuccessfully, and even what he said at the time to other people, don't pick them up, I'm hooked, they're so addicting.
He wants -- the counsel for Reynolds wants to suggest to you the following: That it may be true that we were untruthful and that we concealed, that we omitted and we did so with the intent that it would be relied on, but that wouldn't have mattered to the man.
There's nothing to suggest that anybody, including the millions of people, would not have
behaved differently if they had told the truth about their product instead of deciding in 1953 to create forever the sense of controversy and to lie about the product and its dangerousness. And you're going to be instructed about that.
Dr. Goldberg says -- Dr. Goldberg said in 1994, he explained very plainly that the studies now suggest quite the contrary, that there is absolutely a link between advertising and appealing to you smoking, not because just he says it. They marketed in 1975 as their -- that was their number one idea in marketing in 1975 was to get young smokers.
We didn't put that in to suggest to you that that alone was the problem or that related directly to him. We put that in so you would see that when they told people in the 1966 cigarette advertising code, they weren't truthful.
When they tell people, and they have said it during the course of this trial, when they've had executives say, we don't market to young people, they were untruthful.
What we're showing you is that they were untruthful. Every time they could have been told the truth, they weren't telling the truth. In
fact, when Edward Morgan stood up, we didn't put in the youth marketing to 14 to 17 year old just to show you that they did it. We know they did it. But also he went on the air and said we don't do it while they were doing it.
I told you before, the credibility of an individual or anyone else can be based upon were they credible in the past. And we know, and we're going to have instructions in this case, that they were not people who revealed -- in fact, they concealed material information from the American public including Mr. Hall.
They suggest to you that we're not taking responsibility. Well, the last thing they did yesterday was get up and plead -- read a pleading to you by which Mrs. Hall accepted comparative responsibility. That's what's in the pleadings.
They're the company that doesn't accept any responsibility for anything that's happened. They suggest to you then, well, wait a minute, you know, this is $15 million. That number represents a lot of money.
Years ago, they would pay an actor $500,000 just to feature their cigarette in a couple of their films. That's what my partner was talking
about. Let's put it in a perspective.
Mrs. Hall got on the jury -- excuse me, got in front of this jury and told you what this has done to her life. She told you she had never been in a courtroom until this trial started. She told you what her life with him was like, and she told you what her loss has been like; what it was like to be with him when he was going through chemo, when he was going through radiation, and when he died. She told you what it has been like in her life since then for 15 years and the rest of her life.
I told you in opening statement that she fell in love with him when she was 15 years old and she's never fallen out of love with him.
The fact of the matter is, the amount of money that we ask for in this case is based on what value do we place on losing the most valuable thing in our life forever. We've all said, I wouldn't give a million dollars for that person.
I wouldn't give -- bottom line is, you have to make the decision. But think about losing. Think about -- let me rephrase this.
I want you to consider what we all consider putting on the value of valuable things. And the things we think are of value and the things we
think are greatest value, and those things we think are the greatest value, I submit to you, nothing is more than the love of one's life. And that's the value that we're asking for in damages because that's the value of the loss she has suffered.
Put up punitive damages, please.
They spoke to you about punitive damages. There's a difference. Compensatory damages, is for you to give to Mrs. Hall a fair amount for what she's lost. That's compensatory. To compensate her.
Punitive damages are for a different reason. You will get an instruction that punitive damages are for the purpose of, as we know, they are punishment for behavior. They are related to his harm, but the instruction you saw earlier says that in making that award, you may consider, you shall do it on the basis of the harm to this individual within this class of people. That's not a question.
But you may consider the reprehensibility of their conduct. Now, what does that mean? That means how many people, other people, have they hurt by their conduct. Well, we'll know that.
440,000 people die a year from cigarette smoking and they did during his lifetime. We know that every 71 seconds someone dies. We know that -- I think the unrelented testimony of one witness,
Dr. Proctor, was that 100 million people died in the last century from cigarette smoking.
And you've heard -- so you are allowed to consider the breadth and the magnitude of the damage they've done as to others in assessing the reprehensibility of their conduct.
Did they lie to one person? That's one thing.
Did they lie to a small group of people, or did they lie to every single American family for 50 years? That's what the issue is.
What they say is we -- the Judge is going to instruct you, and you may find that we were negligent, that we concealed, that we omitted material information, but we shouldn't be punished.
I submit to you that what you will find here is that you are allowed to determine how broadly they did it, and then you are to assess that as it relates to the harm to Mr. Hall who, of course, the harm to Mr. Hall is he lost everything there is. He lost his life.
We'll talk about clear and convincing evidence. Clear and convincing evidence, there's going to be an instruction that they lied -- or excuse me, that they concealed or omitted information. There's going to be an instruction that they were negligent. There's going to be an instruction that they had material information, that they didn't conceal it, that they knew about the health effects of their product, and there's going to be an instruction that they did it with the intention -- remember when you read this -that they did it with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. That's the law.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I conclude, I conclude with addressing what they talked about. Mrs. Hall never came in here asking for sympathy. Mrs. Hall, a woman got married at 16 in Bradford County, Florida, sits in this courtroom seeking justice against R.J. Reynolds.
And I agree with counsel, that that is the beauty of our system. That is the great American system because we now put in your hands the ability, not to act out of sympathy, but to act out of a sense of justice.
We submit to you that justice in this case is very simple. Arthur Lamar Hall was the man of his generation. He was born in 1938 at the end of the depression. 1953 he was smoking cigarettes. He was already working. He provided for his family.
He didn't read and write well, we know that, but he worked hard all his life.
He could do anything he tried to do except one thing. He was the American dream. He was the man of the family man, the church man, took in everything we want in our society. That was him.
He had one thing he couldn't do and that was he could not beat his addiction to cigarettes.
He was -- in fact, from 1953 to 1995, the personal victim of the biggest conspiracy that you will ever hear about in this courtroom. Today is the day that his widow, 15 years after his death, gets justice on his behalf.
Thank you.
