MR. BASS: Good morning, members of the
jury.
THE JURY: (Collectively.) Good morning.
MR. BASS: This is the last time that we're going to be together. You're going to hear from Mr. Denney after the defendants have a chance to talk to you, but you're not going to hear from me anymore after I sit down in a couple minutes.
I want to thank you. Thank you for your patience. Thank you for your attention. Most of all we thank you for your service.
Mr. Ted Hallgren thanks you for your service as well.
On Tuesday evening you deliberated after hearing a couple weeks of evidence. You deliberated and you returned a fair verdict, a just verdict. You fairly compensated Mr. Hallgren for the loss of his wife, his best friend of 54 years. But you also recognized
that your duty did not end there. Based upon the conduct and the evidence that you heard, you recognized that defendants needed to be punished for the harm they caused Claire Hallgren.
We're back here because you recognized that their conduct was egregious, that it was reckless, that it was intentional, that it was gross, that it was flagrant. You recognized that their conduct had the most serious of consequences to Claire Hallgren. Because of that conduct they deserve to be punished for what they did to her. That's what this morning is about. It's about punishment, punishment for the harms that they caused Claire Hallgren.
The Judge is going to read you the jury instructions. And that's -- what he's going to tell you is, you are to decide the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment and as a deterrent to others. That's what this morning is about.
The amount of punitive damages must be based solely on the actual harm suffered by Claire Hallgren. That's what this morning's about, punishment and deterrence.
Now, yesterday you heard from two defense
witnesses and you saw that the defendants were trying to show you that they're a changed company. What they're really trying to tell you is we're changed and therefore we don't need to be deterred. We don't need to be punished.
They're probably going to tell you that the compensatory verdict that you awarded was punishment enough, that they're taking that award very seriously.
But, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, even though the defendants brought you what they consider their guiding principles and beliefs now, we brought you, through the course of this trial, what their real guiding principles and beliefs are and were, money.
In 2010 alone, the most recent financial records that we have of these defendants that are publicly available, Philip Morris sold over 21 billion dollars worth of cigarettes. In that same year RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company sold ove 7 billion dollars worth of cigarettes. That's their true guiding principle and belief.
What are there other true guiding principles and beliefs?
Well we brought you that evidence during
the course of the trial as well, and we brought it in the form of their own words. They showed you their nice website now in 2012. Ask you what impact that had on Claire Hallgren. In fact, ask yourselves when you're thinking about the evidence that was presented yesterday, what any of that, any of that, has to do with Claire Hallgren. Because that's what we're here today to talk about. And that's what we're here today to do, to punish for the harms caused to Claire Hallgren.
What were their guiding principles and beliefs?
They put them down in their internal company documents, the documents that they wrote that they didn't think anybody else would see. The documents that they shared amongst themselves ir secret that they never thought would see the light of day, that's their true guiding principles and beliefs.
Happily selling an addictive product, controlling the nicotine with the optimum amount to keep people smoking, targeting the youth so they can line up replacement smokers, that is their true guiding principles and beliefs, not
what they were forced to do, come clean. That's not their true guiding principles and beliefs.
You know that because you saw the internal documents that bear their true feelings.
Throughout the defense presentation over the past three weeks they liked to ask you, what does anything that you're going to see from the plaintiffs have to do with Claire Hallgren?
Well, we brought you that evidence, and by your verdict you told us what that had to do with Claire Hallgren. You told us that their conduct was the legal cause of her death, and it was.
Well, now it's my turn to ask you the same question, what did you hear yesterday that had anything to do with Claire Hallgren? Nothing.
It was too late for her. It was too late for her by the time they were forced to come clean.
And ask yourselves, if they weren't forced, do you think that anything would have happened?
What do we see from Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds?
Well, both companies are obviously impressed with their website, their guiding principles and beliefs. Both websites went online well after Claire Hallgren was dead. Both websites went on
line after they were forced to admit what they knew for years.
Mr. Geraghty talked to you about the MSA, the Master Settlement Agreement. He spent a lot of time on it, about what it was, the end result, and he listed things for you that the MSA says the defendants can no longer do, no advertising on billboards, not sponsoring music events, no transit ads, things like that. 1998, after Claire Hallgren died, what does that have to do with Claire Hallgren? Nothing. And that's what this morning is about.
You heard about -- you heard them bragging about public disclosure of documents. The internal documents that contain their secrets, after they were forced to give those up. Too late for Claire Hallgren.
They talked to you about payments to the states, but that was for reimbursement from state-funded healthcare costs. And these payments began after Claire Hallgren died. And as Mr. Denney covered with Mr. Jupe, not a dime, not a dime, not a penny, actually, ever went to Claire Hallgren for her suffering, ever went to Mr. Hallgren for the loss of his wife. Has
nothing to do with Claire Hallgren.
And let's talk about the MSA. Even though it didn't happen during Claire Hallgren's life, let's understand what that was. It was a lawsuit. And as a result of the lawsuit that's what forced these defendants into these things. That's why they're talking to you about them now, they're bragging about them now, hoping that you will give them credit for doing something that they were forced to do in hopes of mitigating a punitive damages award.
Those restrictions from the MSA, that's not something they're doing out of the goodness of their heart. Don't forget who we're dealing with. We're dealing with people who compared users of their products to rats in cages. Those are their guiding principles and beliefs.
But they're going to -- as you saw yesterday and I expect defense is going to do, they're going to stand up here and say, well, we're different now, we're different now. They have been setting that up from the beginning of the case, actually. Mr. Geraghty stood up before you, one of the first things he said in opening statement was, there were some things that were
said by some company executives 30, 40, 50 years ago that were wrongheaded. They were things that none of us would ever say now. That's what he said to you in the beginning.
They brought in company witnesses. They showed you the websites. They walked you through and said, these are the things we've been trying to do, these are the things we're doing now. We agreed in a unified public health message. We publicly admit that nicotine is addictive. We publicly admit that cigarettes cause cancer. But what happened, what happened on cross-examination when Mr. Denney posed the most important questions of the afternoon to these witnesses?
When somebody -- as I've said, the purpose of punitive damages is to deter. When somebody -- when deterrence is an issue, deterrence for future conduct, the person that needs to be deterred needs to understand that what they did in the first place was wrong. Did you see that from the witness stand on cross-examination when the only questions that really mattered were posed, when the hard questions were posed?
You saw these witnesses become uncomfortable. You saw them become evasive.
You saw them not answer questions. Why?
Because they can't even admit that marketing to youth is unconscionable.
Dr. Borgerding said it was inappropriate. Inappropriate? On the spectrum of words when you're considering the context of marketing to kids, it's simply inappropriate? No. It's the worst. It's unconscionable. In fact, there might not even be a word in the dictionary for it. There might never be a word for it. But all he could say, it was inappropriate.
That's the type of people that they brought you. That's who they chose to come down and speak on behalf of the company to try and give you a glimpse into what they're doing now.
They're trying to show you, look, we're doing all these good things, our guiding principles and beliefs. Yeah, we're back in alignment with public health.
Mr. Jupe stood before you -- we showed you the Waxman hearings in 1994 -- and said, yeah, I don't think Mr. Campbell was being untruthful.
They have not changed. And how do we know that?
We saw it from the witness stand.
What are some other things that Mr. Jupe said? He said, we tried to partner with the Surgeon General. That's what he said. We tried to partner with the Surgeon General. We don't agree that in the '50s, '60s there was sufficient evidence regarding the cause of lung cancer in cigarettes.
Mr. Denney asked, did she have the right, Claire Hallgren have the right to hear the truth from the defendants? And Mr. Jupe said, well, that's a different discussion. He knows why he's here. He knows. He's testified before.
He knows this is the punitive damages phase. He knows why he's here, and he still can't admit that the things that they did were wrong.
So how can they come in here and tell you that they've changed? It's business as usual for Philip Morris. It's business as usual for RJ Reynolds. And that is why they need to be deterred. That is why they need to be deterred.
One of the things Dr. Borgerding said, he said, for many years there was an open question about the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. Does that sound familiar? Where
have you heard there's an open question or more research is needed before? Where have you heard those things? Over the course of the last three weeks.
Is anything different with these defendants?
That's what you need to think about, I submit to you. That's the question you should ask yourselves. We already know about all the conduct. We know you all think they need to be punished for the conduct, for the harm that they caused to Claire Hallgren. That's what the jury instructions say. But deterrence, deterrence, they need to be deterred.
Think about the things you've heard, not on direct examination. Think about the things you've heard on cross-examination when Mr. Denney put the important questions, the important questions that would exhibit a recognition that things are different. Think about how these witnesses answered or didn't answer those questions. Think about the excuses they made. Dr. Borgerding offered an excuse, calling the Reynolds' scientists of old classically trained scientists.
How can a company convince you that they are
reformed, that they don't need to be deterred from future misconduct if they can't even admit that they were wrong in the first place? To change you must know and admit what you did was wrong. And the company witnesses would not and could not admit those things.
So how do you punish and deter? I told you I wasn't going to be up here for very long, and I'm not. How do you do that? How do you punish and deter? You send a verdict that they will hear and that they will feel.
We told you about their guiding principles and beliefs, money. The Judge will tell you what you can consider.
In making this determination, you should consider the following: The nature, extent and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances. We know all about that. And each defendants' financial resources. We know all about that.
As I previously instructed you, the Judge will tell you the amount of punitive damages must be based only on actual harm suffered by Claire Hallgren. Again, this is about Claire Hallgren.
So how much is an appropriate amount that's going to punish them for the harm they caused to Claire Hallgren? How much is an appropriate amount that when they see it come across the desk at headquarters they're going to stop and take notice and think?
Well, it's got to have a relationship, we submit to you, to your compensatory award. And so we submit to you that between these two defendants, the punitive damage award should be 18 million dollars, 9 million dollars apiece. 9 million dollars apiece is punishment for the harm they caused Claire Hallgren and for deterrence in the future. Make them realize that if they haven't changed they need to start thinking about it.
Is that an amount that's going to financially ruin these corporations? Of course not. That's not the purpose of punitive damages. It's a drop in the bucket, as we've seen, for these defendants.
Is that an amount that's going to make them stop and think? I don't know. I don't know.
We can't know that, but it should.
Why? Because it sends a message. It sends
noontime, I can tell you, if they have no verdict by noontime, we'll reconvene here and I will just tell them if they want to order lunch that they can do it.



MR. DENNEY: Yes, sir. May it please the Court?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. DENNEY: I'm sure you all are tired of being thanked by now, but I want to tell you that it has been an honor and a privilege to bring Ted's case before you. Thanks for your time.
I want to start out with what the law is that the Judge is going to give you.
Let's make sure there's no mistake about this. The very first sentence you're going to see on the jury instructions is, you are to decide the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment for what they did, and as a deterrent to others. That's what the law is in this case. To punish them for what they did to Claire Hallgren and to send a message, to deter others, not just these guys, but others, from doing the same thing again.
That's the law.
I can -- I think I can sum up what Mr. Geraghty and Mr. Burton's arguments are or behalf of Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds like this. Don't hold us accountable, let us get away with it, Claire's not worth it.
MR. BURTON: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DENNEY: And I think they said -Mr. Geraghty said, because time moves forward Well, isn't that easy for these companies to say. But did time move forward for Claire Hallgren?
You heard a lot about -- both of them said it and -- that they did a lot of things in the '30s, '40s, '50s and '60s, but why do they keep leaving out the '70s, '80s and 90s, when you heard all of the evidence in this case?
This went on for decades, until the attorneys general of the states of this country put a stop to it. And they brought these guys in here, the representatives of their company to try and suggest to you that they're these wonderful companies that just had a eureka moment and decided to put things on their
website because they thought it was the right thing to do. That's baloney.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. DENNEY: The government made them do i
It's not true. The government made them do it, and you know that. They brought these guys in here to speak for the company, and they sat there right on the -- right in that chair, and I asked them to look all of you in the eye, and I did that because I wanted you to know that they haven't changed.
Like Mr. Bass says, if you can't even acknowledge that what you all saw during this trial is wrong, how in the world can you come in here and say you've changed?
And they told you they've always cooperated with the Surgeon General. They looked you in the eye. They were under oath, folks, and they told you that. They looked you in the eye and they said they've always told the truth to the public, under oath in this courtroom.
They just -- they don't get it. They don't get it. Both of these companies have stood up before you today and said that $500,000 is
enough to send them a message. Well, let's think about that for a minute.
Philip Morris, based on the last financial records we have, made 21.6 billion dollars in revenue. 21.6 billion dollars in revenue. This trial started on January 9th. That means if those numbers hold true today, they've made close to 1 billion dollars while Ted Hallgren has been coming here every day and we've been presenting the case to you. And they stand before you and say $500,000 is enough. Come on.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object to the commentary.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. DENNEY: Do you think that's enough to get their attention? That is a drop in an ocean for these defendants.
Mr. Geraghty, before he sat down said, ask yourself what the purpose would be to award a verdict for punitive damages, which, as you now know, is to punish and deter others, punish them and deter others.
Well, the purpose would be to hold them fully accountable for what they've done, fully
accountable, and to deter others in this country from doing the same thing.
And the only way that we can punish them -we can't bend them over and paddle them, but the only way we can do it is by a money damages verdict, that's it. And isn't that a good thing? Because money is all they care about or understand.
That's all I have, Your Honor.
