MR. GERAGHTY: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURY: (Collectively.) Good morning.
MR. GERAGHTY: As you know, my name is Bill Geraghty. And on behalf of Bert Harris and Philip Morris USA, I would like to thank you for your jury service in this case.
It has been a long trial, no question, more than two weeks, and our legal system depends on good people like you who are willing to give time away from their family and their work to help us resolve a civil dispute like this.
And I know, I think I can speak on behalf of everybody, we all know you were very attentive during the course of the trial. You took lots
of notes, and we appreciate that very much. So let me just say on behalf of everyone, thank you very much.
Now, we are getting close to the end of the case, and it is going to be time for you to retire to the jury room and deliberate.
Judge Langford is going to give you a set of instructions -- he already read them to you -and a verdict form, and then you will be asked to decide the issues in this case.
But before you head off to deliberate, I would like to take this opportunity to summarize the evidence that we've all seen and heard in this courtroom over the course of the last two weeks.
Recall that when I addressed you in my opening statement, I told you that Mr. Bass and Mr. Denney were going to spend a lot of time talking to you about statements that Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds made, many of which were made 30, 40 and in some instances more than 50 years ago.
And I told you in my opening I would not try to defend those statements. Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds said things that today none of us
would say or think. But if that is what this case were about, we could have all gone home twc weeks ago.
But you know that's not what this case is about. This case is about Claire Hallgren and only Claire Hallgren. The plaintiff bears the burden of proof to you by the greater weight of the evidence that something that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said or failed to say had a direct connection and a substantial impact on Claire Hallgren's decisions. You'll see those words, direct and substantial in the instruction for legal cause.
And, ladies and gentlemen, over the course of the last two weeks, there has been no evidence of that. Now, let me make a comment about the findings that you heard read to you by Judge Langford. And there is no debate about this.
Those findings don't tell you how to answer any of the questions you will be asked to decide on that verdict form. And that's because by your verdict in this case -- you, ladies and gentlemen, you, the jury, decide whether those findings have any meaning any applicability to
Claire Hallgren's life, and any meaning in the context of this case.
Because after all, this case is about Claire Hallgren, not the general public, not all cigarette smokers.
And let me make a comment about sympathy. Ladies and gentlemen, every one in this courtroom feels a tremendous amount of sympathy
MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor, it's irrelevant how they -- whether or not Philip Morris feels sympathy or not.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. GERAGHTY: Ladies and gentlemen. Everyone in this courtroom feels tremendous amount of sympathy to Mr. Hallgren for the loss of his wife. No question about it. We're all human.
But as the judge instructed you, those natural feelings of sympathy can play no role in how you decide the issues in the case. You have to set that sympathy aside and decide the issues in this case based solely on the evidence you've heard in this courtroom and the instructions that are given to you by Judge Langford.
And you all at the very beginning of the
case took an oath that you would be able to do that, and I have no question that you will.
Now, I want to remind you what I told you this case was about two weeks ago when I gave you my opening statement. Two words. Control and responsibility. Control and responsibility.
And I showed you a series of questions that
I	suggested you think about on the issue of control as you listened to the evidence in this case, as you heard the evidence over the last two weeks.
Who was in control of Claire Hallgren's life-style choices? Who was in control of her efforts to quit smoking? Who controlled whether Claire Hallgren was motivated to quit. Whether she was determined and persistent in trying to quit?
Was Claire Hallgren addicted? And if she was addicted, was her addiction so strong, so powerful -MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. False framing of the issues.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. GERAGHTY: Was her addiction so strong, so powerful that it overcame, overpowered a
committed effort to quit on her part?
Did Mrs. Hallgren rely to her detriment -and you'll see this word "rely" in the instructions, I'll remind you later -- on anything that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking?
And what I told you in my opening statement was when you knew the answers to these questions, you would know who was in control.
We've heard a lot of testimony about the lifestyle choices that Claire Hallgren made during her life. She smoked cigarettes, she drank alcohol. She made these decisions. No one else.
She was a strong and intelligent person who chose to live her life the way she wanted to live it, and that included smoking cigarettes, even though she heard and understood the warnings that were all around her.
You know that Mrs. Hallgren enjoyed smoking cigarettes. You heard the evidence. Smoking stimulated her, it relaxed her, it helped her feel at ease in social situations. She enjoyed smoking cigarettes after dinner, with coffee and
with alcohol. That is the evidence you've heard, ladies and gentlemen.
And like many people, Claire Hallgren understood that these lifestyle choices came with risks. But she chose to engage in those activities anyway. And even after she was diagnosed with lung cancer, Claire Hallgren expressed no regrets. No regrets.
She told her husband she had had a good life. She lived her life the way she wanted to live it, and she had every right to do so. No question about that.
But unfortunately, as you've heard during the course of this case, Claire Hallgren's lifestyle choices resulted in serious consequences. And now the plaintiff, her husband, wants you to hold Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds responsible for the decisions that Mrs. Hallgren and only Mrs. Hallgren made.
Plaintiff is asking you to award him millions of dollars for the decisions that his wife made over the course of the years.
Now, let me take a minute to talk to you about the burden of proof. The plaintiff bears
tVip VnirHpn trv nivwp	qitioIp nnp
issues in this case with the exception of the last one, which I will get to later, which is called the greater weight of the evidence.
And what does that mean? That means the more persuasive and convincing effect of the entire evidence. It doesn't mean how many witnesses. It doesn't mean how many documents. The persuasive and convincing force and effect of the evidence.
And ladies and gentlemen, we have presented to you persuasive evidence that Claire Hallgren was always in control. And I'm going to walk you through that evidence as we go through the significant events in her life.
Now, the first question you're going to be asked to decide -- I'm going to put it here on the Elmo. And unfortunately it is not as clear -- here's the question, and Mr. Denney said it's a two-part question.
Was Claire Hallgren addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?
So there are two parts. Was Mrs. Hallgren addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? That's
part one.
Part two, was that addiction, was that claimed addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?
And what I want you to focus on initially, at least, is this question is not asking you whether cigarette smoking was the medical cause of Claire Hallgren's lung cancer. You know there's been no debate in this case that cigarette smoking was the medical cause, but that's not what that question is asking you.
MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. That's false framing the issues and misstating the law. THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. GERAGHTY: The plaintiff has the burden to prove two things to you. First, they must prove that Mrs. Hallgren was addicted to cigarettes, number one. And in addition to that, they have to prove to you that the claimed addiction was a legal cause, a legal cause of Ms. Hallgren's lung cancer and death.
So first you have to decide whether Claire Hallgren was addicted. And let's start with what we know. Addiction is a concept that is used in all sorts of ways today. It has become
fashionable, even commonplace to point to the things we like to eat and like to do.
MR. DENNEY: Objection. Golden rule,
Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled, go ahead.
MR. GERAGHTY: It has become fashionable commonplace to point to things we like to eat and like to do and say we're addicted to those things.
In voir dire, we heard about addiction to shopping, addiction to coffee, addiction to the internet and, of course, addiction to cigarettes.
Is that all it takes, ladies and gentlemen?
You simply say, I like to do it, I do it a lot, that means it's an addiction?
The plaintiff in this case offers you a mathematic formula for addiction. You smoke a certain number of cigarettes for a certain number of years and you're addicted.
We offer you a medical definition. A medical definition that you heard Dr. Rosman tell you yesterday is used every single day in this country to diagnose people with addictions, not only to nicotine, but to all other types of
potentially addictive drugs.
The law leaves it up to you as to how you ultimately define addiction. You won't see anything in the instructions from Judge Langford on that issue.
We offer you a definition that actually asks you to look at, did the person have control over use of the drug or did their entire life revolve around use of the drug? And we submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that in a court of law, a mathematical formula is not enough. A real medical definition is what should be applied.
Either way, that's just the beginning of what you have to decide in this case. You have to decide if Claire Hallgren's claimed addiction was a legal cause of her lung cancer and death.
You have to decide, if there was addiction, was the addiction so strong, was the addiction so powerful that it overcame Claire Hallgren's free will and made it impossible for her to quit?
MR. DENNEY: It misstates the law, and that's my objection.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR DF.NNF.Y: Bolstering of the issues
MR. GERAGHTY: If Mrs. Hallgren could havs quit smoking whenever she was motivated to do so, then addiction is not the legal cause of her death.
MR. DENNEY: False framing of the issues. Misstates the law.
THE COURT: Overruled. You'll have rebuttal.
MR. GERAGHTY: And we know the plaintiff cannot meet this burden because you know, ladies and gentlemen, Mrs. Hallgren could quit because she did, in fact, quit.
You know that Mrs. Hallgren quit smoking for six months in 1968. You know she quit smoking cold turkey. You know that for the next 26 or 27 years, she controlled where, when, and how much she smoked. And you know that ultimately, in October of 1995, she quit again.
Those are the facts. Those are the facts of Claire Hallgren's life.
And remember, I want to remind you what the plaintiff said at the very beginning of this case, and Mr. Denney repeated it. The plaintiff told you that Claire Hallgren -- the plaintiff told you that Claire Hallgren was responsible,
responsible for her own injury and death.
And they made that statement at the very beginning of the case when they knew two things. When they knew, number one, everything you hear about Claire Hallgren during the course of this case; and number two, when they knew everything that they were going to tell you in this case about Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
Yet knowing those two things, they still told you she was responsible.
So what does it mean to be responsible? It means they've admitted, first, that Mrs.
Hallgren's decisions were a direct and substantial cause of her lung cancer and death. That's the definition of legal cause.
MR. DENNEY: That's false framing.
MR. GERAGHTY: That's this first -MR. DENNEY: Objection. False framing the issue. It's not what the admission says.
THE COURT: Overruled. Go ahead.
MR. GERAGHTY: That's this very first question you're being asked to decide. What else does this mean? It means that Mrs.
Hallgren could have quit smoking in time to avoid her lung cancer and death.
MR. DENNEY: Objection. False framing of the issues. It's not what the admission means.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GERAGHTY: Why did they admit these things, ladies and gentlemen? Well, they had to. Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both told you, addicted or not, cigarette smokers are still responsible for their own decisions.
And every single one of the experts you heard from in this case told you that addicted or not, every single cigarette smoker can quit smoking so long as she exercises her motivation to do so. This admission means Claire Hallgren was in control. Claire Hallgren was in control.
MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. Misstates the law. It's false framing of the issues.
THE COURT: Overruled. Plaintiff will have rebuttal soon.
MR. GERAGHTY: Now, I'm about to walk through the evidence, and we will walk through the timeline of the significant events in Claire Hallgren's life. And when we do that, I want you to think about four key points that are going to come up in the course of the
significant events in Claire Hallgren's life.
Claire Hallgren knew smoking was dangerous and addictive by at least the 1950s, when she gave specific and direct warnings to her children.
Number two, Claire Hallgren, not the general public, but Claire Hallgren was not influenced by something Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said or didn't say. There has been no evidence of that whatsoever.
Third, Claire Hallgren controlled where, when and how much she smoked.
And finally, you know Claire Hallgren quit smoking cold turkey for six months in 1968, and then she quit smoking again in October of 1995.
Remember these key facts. They're going to come up in the course of the timeline.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is the same exact timeline I showed you in my opening statement. And when I gave my opening statement, that's a preview of what I was representing to you the evidence would show. And now after having sal through two weeks of evidence, everything on this timeline, everything on this timeline we
have proved to you I'm going to walk you
through it and show you each of those points.
Before I do so, I want to reiterate something I said in my opening. Nothing I say about Claire Hallgren is intended to be a criticism of anything she did or didn't do in the course of her life.
Everyone has the right to make decisions for themselves, even decisions that we, with the benefit of hindsight, would say were not in her best interests.
MR. DENNEY: Objection. Golden rule.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GERAGHTY: Everyone has free will. That is a fundamental principle upon which this country was founded. You have the right to make decisions in your life. And with that right comes the obligation to accept responsibility for the consequences of those actions. Not partial responsibility. Responsibility.
So let's get started. You know that Claire Hallgren was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1922.
And other than that, we know very little about her upbringing and childhood. All we know is that she was raised by her older sister and guardian, Dagney McCullum, who was also smoking
Camel cigarettes.
The evidence you heard from Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings is the single most important factor that will determine whether someone starts smoking cigarettes, is if they have a family member or friend who smokes. So it should come as no surprise to any of us that Claire Hallgren smoked cigarettes.
She meets her husband, Mr. Hallgren, in
1938. He is 18 years old, she is 16 years old.
Mr. Hallgren testified that when they met, she was smoking about one half pack of cigarettes, about a half pack of cigarettes or ten cigarettes.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Hallgren testified that that was approximately the amount she smoked on average for almost the entire time they were married. For the 50-plus years they were married together, he said she would on average smoke half a pack of cigarettes, and at times, she might smoke up to one pack.
And, ladies and gentlemen, that's exactly the same thing that Claire Hallgren told her own doctors. And when we get to some of the medical records later on in the timeline, I'll show
those to you. We showed you a composite yesterday of all those records.
The point I'm trying to emphasize is Claire Hallgren was not a chain-smoker. She was not a heavy smoker. Her life did not revolve around smoking cigarettes every minute of every day.
Now, you know that in 1942 Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren are married. He goes off to the war and he returns in 1946. Their son Peter is born in 1946, and their daughter Sally is born two years later in 1948.
Now, let's drop below this bar here and talk about the evidence you heard about what was happening here in the United States with respect to cigarette smoking long before Claire Hallgren was born.
You heard this from Dr. Cummings. People in this country were referring to cigarettes as coffin nails, to cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends, to nicotine smoking as an addiction or addictive. Dr. Cummings told you people had been using the term addiction and addictive to refer to cigarette smoking for well over one hundred years.
You heard that in 1899, the Florida -- the
State of Florida banned the manufacture and sale of cigarettes as the, quote, worst form of tobacco addiction. These things were not secrets kept from the American public.
And we know that Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren knew them, too, because if you go above the timeline, remember what Mr. Hallgren told you when he testified. He had heard the term cancer sticks and coffin nails. His son Peter said he had heard them, too.
Mr. Hallgren understood that smoking a cigarette was like another nail in your coffin. That's the evidence you heard from Mr. Hallgren.
So let's move forward, and let's go from the late '40s into the 1950s. You know in the late '40s and 1950s, Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren enjoyed smoking cigarettes, enjoyed drinking alcohol. They enjoyed life. You heard that straight from Mr. Hallgren himself.
He told you cocktails, dinner, the nightly news were an everyday occurrence in the Hallgren household. That's the testimony you heard from Mr. Hallgren. He said when he returned home from the war, he was looking for more excitement in his life so he bought an aimlane
And he told you initially his wife was not real excited about the idea of having an airplane, but he said she had an attitude of if you can't beat 'em, join 'em, and she learned to fly, and she enjoined flying, too. That's the way they were living their life. Cigarettes were a part of their life at this point in time.
Now, I don't want to belabor the point.
You've heard lots of evidence, Mr. Denney referred to it that in the early 1950s, studies were published that associated cigarette smoking with lung cancer. You saw the newspapers, you saw the magazines. No question about it.
Now, were the Hallgrens aware of that information? Were they aware of that information? Well, we know they were intelligent. We know they were well-read. We know they get a newspaper every single day.
But ladies and gentlemen, we don't have to guess or speculate about what Mrs. Hallgren knew, and that's because we know what she told her children just a few short years later in the late 1950s. You heard this testimony from Sally Hallgren. Claire Hallgren sat her two children, Peter and Sally down at the kitchen table, and
she said to them, I don't ever want you to smoke. I don't ever want you to smoke.
And then she showed them something. She took out a cigarette, she lit the cigarette, and inhaled the smoke and then she blew the smoke out through a Kleenex tissue.
And she showed them the residue, the tar, the tar on that Kleenex and she told her two young children, you don't want this in your body. You don't want this in your body. And she said to them, if you start smoking cigarettes, you get hooked on them. Hooked.
That was the word she used.
Sally Hallgren told you, yeah, my mother told us cigarette smoking was addictive. And then she also, at this time, as you'll recall, she was smoking filtered Salem cigarettes, and she showed her children the filter, and she said, see, look at the residue on here. Even a filter doesn't stop it.
So, ladies and gentlemen, did Claire Hallgren know certainly by this time that cigarette smoking was dangerous, that it was addictive, and that a filter wouldn't protect you from the harmful components of smoke? You
bet she did. You bet she did.
So that's the late 1950s.
Let's move forward now to the 1960s. You heard -- this is the deposition of Sally Hallgren in the early 1960s. As a young teenager, even though her mother had given her this very graphic warning, Sally Hallgren starts to steal cigarettes from her mother's purse.
But of course we know she doesn't tell her mother. She said, of course I wouldn't tell my mother. She would have disapproved. She would have disciplined me. And we said, well, why is that?
Well, because of all the things she had told me about cigarette smoking a few short years earlier.
That's in the early '60s. Now I have indicated on here that Claire Hallgren is smoking half a pack. Mr. Hallgren is smoking a pack. And the reason I have that down here is because you've heard testimony from Sally Hallgren that she believes her mother may have been smoking as much as a pack and a half of cigarettes per day, and she says that because my mother bought a carton of cigarettes per week.
And a carton is 10 packs per week.
But what Sally Hallgren had forgotten is that in the same period of time, there's two smokers in the house, Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren. They're both smoking cigarettes.
And you heard the testimony, Dr. Cummings told you, they're smoking Marlboro cigarettes at this point in time. So there were two people who were smoking ten -- a carton of cigarettes per week. That's the evidence you heard in this case.
What happens next? January of 1964, you heard the Surgeon General of the United States issues a landmark report that says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis. Front page news on every single newspaper in the country, including the Chicago Tribune. We showed it to you several times.
You know that in 1964, there were only three television stations; NBC, ABC and CBS. Every single one of those television stations had a special broadcast devoted to the findings of the Surgeon General's report so every single American, including Claire Hallgren, was told in 1964 smoking causes lung cancer smoking causes
chronic bronchitis.
Two years later, in 1966, Congress mandates that the first warnings appear on cigarette packages. And from that point forward, every single package of cigarettes carries the government mandated warning "caution, cigarette smoking may be dangerous to your health. Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren are aware of this mounting information. They think to themselves, maybe we should quit. Mr. Hallgren testified that he had quit for as long as two years at one point in the early 1960s, but cigarette smoking has been part of their daily ritual. They enjoy smoking and they continue smoking until one day in about 1968.
In 1968, Mr. Hallgren buys a new Cadillac, and you heard what he told you from the witness stand. He decided he didn't want to smell up his new car with cigarette smoke. So what does Mr. Hallgren do? He quit smoking right then, right there, cold turkey, and never has another cigarette again.
The evidence you heard is that Claire
Hallgren also quits cold turkey at the same time. She quit smoking for six months in roughly 1968.
Now, I want to pause here, ladies and gentlemen, because this is a very critical point in the story you've heard during the course of this trial and in Claire Hallgren's life.
The fact that she quits for six months is important because of what you heard from Dr. Neal Benowitz. Dr. Neal Benowitz was the gentleman who testified by videotape. We played his deposition.
You heard Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both tell you Neal Benowitz is the leading authority on nicotine and nicotine addiction in this country. He was the senior scientific editor of the 1988 Surgeon General's report.
You know, ladies and gentlemen, that he testifies against Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds all the time. You heard the videotape. That was me cross-examining him. But it was important that we play that testimony for you because we know he would tell you the truth about nicotine and nicotine addiction.
MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. That's
improper argument.
THE COURT: I'm going to sustain that objection. The jury will disregard that last remark.
MR. GERAGHTY: We know -- I'll rephrase, Your Honor.
It was important that you hear from Dr. Neal Benowitz because we knew he would tell you the facts, the actual facts about nicotine and nicotine addiction.
What did Dr. Benowitz tell you? When a cigarette smoker quits smoking, after 72 hours, all the nicotine in their body is gone. After two or three weeks, the majority of the withdrawal symptoms have passed.
After three to four weeks, those brain receptor changes, you heard about, return to normal. And remember, Claire Hallgren quit smoking for six months. Six months.
So at the time she made the decision to resume smoking cigarettes in 1968, all of the nicotine was out of her system. Those brain receptor changes had returned to normal. The withdrawal symptoms are all gone.
And what do we know about her at that point
in time? In 1968, she's a 46-year-old adult.
She has two children who are in college. Ten years earlier, she had told her children everything you needed to know about cigarette smoking.
Every cigarette she picks up from that point forward carries this warning label on it. And remember, ladies and gentlemen, the evidence you heard from Dr. David Burns. Dr. David Burns told you had Claire Hallgren simply stayed quit in 1968, she would not have developed lung cancer. She would not have died in 1995.
That's the plaintiff's own witness who told you that.
So let's move forward on the timeline. This brings us to the early 1970s. And let me refer you to below the blue bar here. You heard that in the 1970s, the warnings on cigarettes labels changed. They're strengthened. They say, "Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
In '71, cigarette ads are taken off of television and radio. And in 1972, warnings appear on all cigarette ads.
So what's happening in Claire Hallgren's life? As of about 1970, both children have left the home. Peter and Sally Hallgren have left home and moved on. And the plaintiff relies heavily on their testimony in this case. But candidly, they told you that after they left home, they saw their mother once, maybe twice per year. The only person who is with Mrs. Hallgren day in and day out from this point forward is Mr. Ted Hallgren.
And what did Mr. Ted Hallgren tell you?
Well, we know at this point in time Mr. Hallgren has quit smoking, and he doesn't like smoking.
So the environment, Claire Hallgren's environment as a cigarette smoker has changed. The environment has changed.
Mr. Hallgren told you he did not push this subject of cigarette smoking with his wife because it was a, quote/unquote, sore subject.
And after time, he just began to overlook it.
The evidence you heard is that Claire Hallgren is independent and capable, and she didn't like her husband telling her what to do.
Although Claire Hallgren doesn't quit, she reaches an accommodation with Mr. Hallgren. He
doesn't want her to smoke in his car, she doesn't smoke in his car. He doesn't want her to smoke in their house, she doesn't smoke in the house, with the exception of a bathroom with an exhaust fan.
He doesn't want her to smoke around him at all. She doesn't smoke around him or, frankly, any of her family members from this point forward.
She doesn't smoke in restaurants, she doesn't smoke when they go to the homes of nonsmokers. The evidence, ladies and gentlemen, you've heard is that from this point forward, from about 1968 to 1995, 27 years, Claire Hallgren did control where she smoked, when she smoked and how much she smoked.
And that is important, ladies and gentlemen.
Dr. Rosman told you, control is important. This shows Claire Hallgren was in control, not the nicotine in cigarettes.
What else did you hear from Mr. Hallgren? Well, Mr. Hallgren told you that from about 1968 until 1994, almost the same exact period of time we're talking about, his wife never quit smoking for even one day. You saw the testimony several
times.
And this is where it was read in the trial.
So this is an indication to the trial transcript page number, that this was what was read to you.
"Question: Okay. Now we'll move into the time period of say '68 to, say, '90. Well let's go to '94. During this time, did your wife ever quit smoking for any period of time; a day, a week anything like that?"
His answer was: "I don't think so, no."
"Question: Okay. So from '68 to '94, at no point in time in those years did she ever quit for any period of time, as best as you can recall?"
Mr. Hallgren's answer was: "No, no."
That's the sworn testimony taken under oath of the plaintiff in this case.
Now, that brings us to about 1975, and you heard that in 1975, Mr. Hallgren has turned 55. They retire and move to Florida. They move to Florida to do the things they enjoy doing. Golfing, boating, going on cruises.
Mr. Hallgren told you he and his wife spent a lot of time together. They enjoyed spending time together. And if you'll recall, he said in
his testimony, my wife didn't smoke that much around me. That was his testimony. She didn't smoke that much around me.
You heard the testimony. They would go boating. She didn't smoke cigarettes when they went boating. They would play 18 holes of golf She might have a cigarette during 18 holes of golf. She continued to exercise control of her smoking during this period of time.
As Dr. Cummings told you, you heard it from Dr. Cummings himself, he said that cigarette smoking didn't prevent Claire Hallgren from doing any of the things she enjoyed during in her life.
And, ladies and gentlemen, that is not someone who has lost control of her smoking.
Now, we're at about 1980 on the timeline. You heard that in 1980, Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren move here to Sebring, and I'm going to pause here for a minute. And I want to remind you of the testimony you heard from Dr. David Burns. Do you remember Dr. Burns testified?
He said -- I asked him this question: "You agreed that had she quit" -- and that's Claire Hallgren -- "as of Tamiarv 1st 1980 more
likely than not she would not have developed lung cancer in 1995?"
His answer is: "Yes, that's correct."
That's the testimony of Dr. David Burns, the plaintiffs expert. And if we were to go back, Dr. Burns told you, if we went back over all these significant mile posts, if Claire Hallgren had quit smoking in 1964, she would not have developed lung cancer.
If she had stayed quit in 1968, she would not have developed lung cancer. Dr. Burns told you, if at any point over this period, up to 1980, if she had quit smoking cigarettes, she would not have developed lung cancer and died.
And what do we know was going on in this country during the same period of time that Dr. Burns said that? Well, you heard the testimony from Dr. Cummings. This is the testimony of Dr. Michael Cummings.
I	asked him: "Now, in 1979, in the 1979 Surgeon General's report, the Surgeon General reported that 30 million Americans had quit smoking between 1964 and 1979, right?"
"Answer: That's true."
"Question: That's about a 15-year period?"
"Answer: That's right."
Later I asked him: That was an era, according to the Surgeon General, of unprecedented quitting in this country, right?
Answer: That's right.
Ladies and gentlemen, 30 million people in
15	years. Two million people per year from 1964. Two million people per year quit from 1964 to 1979.
But of the evidence you heard, ladies and gentlemen, is if you don't try to quit, if you're not motivated to quit, you're not going to quit. The evidence you've heard in this case.
And during this period of time, we know, according to Mr. Hallgren, his wife doesn't quit for one day.
That brings us to 1985. Let me adjust my boards here. You know that in 1985 there's rotating warning, a series of rotating warnings, four warnings that are put on cigarette packages from this point forward. One of those warnings says, bluntly, "cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy."
Were these warnings telling Claire Hallgren anything she did not already know? Of course not. She had known the risks for decades, from the time she sat her children down at the kitchen table.
Now, we've heard some evidence that Mrs. Hallgren may have smoked light cigarettes at around this period of time, maybe in the mid-'80s, for the last five or ten years of her life. The evidence, ladies and gentlemen, frankly is razor thin. Sally Hallgren saw her mother smoke a light cigarette on one occasion in a mall, doesn't know what brand it was.
Now, remember the testimony you heard from Mr. Hallgren. That's not what he said. Mr. Hallgren, you heard, sat down, sat down the night before he gave his deposition in this case in March of last year, and he thought long and hard about the brands of cigarettes his wife smoked, and he actually wrote up a list.
And this list written by Mr. Hallgren is in evidence. It's PMU12635. And there is no light cigarettes anywhere on this list from Mr. Hallgren. When he gave his deposition the very next day, he said the same thing. I don't
remember my wife ever smoking light cigarettes. She never told me she was smoking a light or so-called low tar cigarette.
And then what happened after the deposition is significant too, ladies and gentlemen, because he filled out something called an errata sheet.
Mr. Hallgren actually sat down within a month after his deposition and read the entire deposition, and he had the opportunity and the right to make any changes to the deposition that he wanted. This is that errata sheet that he filled out in his own handwriting, it's PMU014769. It's in evidence in this case.
And you'll see Mr. Hallgren actually did make a number of changes. He indicates the page, and the change he believes should be made. At no time when he did that did he ever indicate that, oops, I made a mistake. My wife did smoke light cigarettes. And he signed this document, ladies and gentlemen, under oath.
But now today in this courtroom, you heard him say last week, oh, my wife smoked light cigarettes.
Now, even if you believe there's credible
evidence that Claire Hallgren smoked light cigarettes in the last five or ten years of her life, let me ask you very pointedly, do you really believe that Claire Hallgren somehow thought those cigarettes weren't dangerous?
Mr. Denney showed you twice a slide. He put it up there on the board. He said that is one of the ways by which she tried to quit smoking. One of the ways by which she tried to quit smoking.
Ladies and gentlemen, we know she cut down and ultimately quit smoking in 1995. The reason she did that was because she believed cigarettes were dangerous. All cigarettes. Unfiltered, filtered, light cigarettes. That has nothing to do with the issue in this case.
Now, that brings us to 1991. You know in 1991 Claire Hallgren has back and leg pain, and she goes to Texas to be evaluated by her daughter. I showed you this medical record in opening.
One of the doctors that examined her, Dr. Sethi. This is January 18th, 1991. Claire Hallgren told her she was smoking about half a pack of cigarettes a day. That's in 1991.
You know that, ultimately, her daughter Sally Hallgren says the problem, the back and leg problem is you have a problem with your back, and they performed back surgery. Sally Hallgren performs back surgery.
You know that the hospital prohibited smoking, and you know that for the five days that Claire Hallgren was in the hospital, she did not smoke cigarettes.
As I've told you and as the evidence shows, when Claire Hallgren needs to control her smoking, she controls her smoking. And in all the medical records we have from this visit to the hospital, there is no reference of her having any withdrawal, and there is no reference to her being prescribed Nicorette gum or the nicotine patch.
At this point in time, ladies and gentlemen, you could only receive Nicorette gum by prescription. So if it were given to her, it would have to appear in the records, and there is no reference to it.
Now, let me pause here for a minute. You heard Mr. Denney tell you that Claire Hallgren tried to quit many times. You heard Mr._
Hallgren telling you she tried as hard as she could to quit. But what hard, tangible evidence have you heard that supports that?
She told her husband there were many things she enjoyed about cigarette smoking. And apparently, Claire Hallgren told her children something very different. Is it surprising that she would tell them different things? Of course not.
But, ladies and gentlemen, you know that actions speak louder than words. Let's look at what she actually did. You heard that Claire Hallgren used Nicorette gum and used the nicotine patch. But if she did, that could have only have been in the last years of her life, because we know that by 1991, this late in time, she's not using either one of those.
You know that Sally Hallgren, her daughter, a doctor, prescribed medications for her mother for cholesterol, for antibiotics, for allergy medications. But what's the testimony that you heard from Sally Hallgren about her mother and quitting smoking?
"My understanding from your prior deposition is that you never prescribed any smoking
cessation aids for your mother; is that right?"
"Answer: Correct."
"But you were certainly able to prescribe smoke cessation aids if she had asked, correct?"
"Yes."
"Did your mother ever ask you to prescribe any smoking cessation aids for her?"
"Answer: No."
Mrs. Hallgren never asked her daughter for any help, her daughter, who was a doctor.
You also know that right here in Sebring, when Mr. and Mrs. Hallgren moved here in 1980, there were smoking cessation classes, stop smoking classes offered from 1980 forward. We showed some of them during the examination of Dr. Cummings. They're in evidence, PMU48136 There's a composite of every single one of the ads and articles about these stop smoking clinics.
Mrs. Hallgren never attended a single stop smoking clinic. That's the evidence that you heard. So you have to ask yourself, was Claire Hallgren truly motivated to quit? She was strong and independent, and nothing that her
husband or her daughter said convinced her to
try to quit. And certainly, nothing that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds might have said would have influenced her decision either.
The fact is, Claire Hallgren wanted to smoke. At this point in time, it was something she enjoyed, something she was not willing to give up.
And ultimately, we know that in October of 1995, Claire Hallgren quits smoking. We know that because Mr. Bass told you that in his opening statement. And Dr. Cummings told you right here on the witness stand, Claire Hallgren quit smoking in October 1995, before she was diagnosed with lung cancer.
And we've put all the medical records in evidence, ladies and gentlemen. But there are four medical records, five medical records, as a matter of fact, of four different doctors where Claire Hallgren told them all that she quit smoking in October of 1995, before she was told she had lung cancer; Dr. Mina Bhatt, Dr. Alessandro Ferrero, Dr. B.C. Bhatt, and Dr. Shah, four different doctors, she told them all the same thing.
And when Claire Hallgren quit smoking in
October of 1995, we know she quits cold turkey. There's no mention in any of the medical records of nicotine gum, the nicotine patch or any kind of stop smoking aid.
More importantly, Claire Hallgren quit smoking without any fanfare. You heard Mr. Hallgren say he didn't really know she had quit until the day she was diagnosed with lung cancer.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's not surprising because, remember, now, for many, many, many years she hasn't been smoking around any of her family. And again, both her daughter and her husband recognized at the end of the day this was Claire Hallgren's decision and no one else's.
You know that on November the 1st, 1995, Claire Hallgren is diagnosed with lung cancer. And in the few weeks before she passes away, I referred to this earlier, this is her daughter Sally Hallgren. She was asked this question.
"Did she" -- referring to Claire Hallgren -"express any regret about some of the decisions she had made or lifestyle choices at the end of her life?"
Her answer: "No. She told my father that she had had had a good life."
That's what Claire Hallgren told her husband. And you know that several weeks later, on November 26th, 1995, Claire Hallgren passes away at the age of 73 from lung cancer. And that's the story, ladies and gentlemen. That's the whole story.
Your Honor, this would be a good time to break.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
THE COURT: Please be seated.
We continue with closing argument by Philip Morris. Mr. Geraghty.
MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you.
Good afternoon again, ladies and gentlemen. Hope you all had a nice lunch.
When we broke for lunch, we had walked through the time line, the very same time line that I had showed you in my opening statement.
And as I just demonstrated, all of those things on that time line we proved to you, all of those events; that Claire Hallgren quit smoking for six months in 1968; that she controlled her smoking for the next 27 years, where she smoked, when she smoked, how much she smoked; that she quit again in October 1995.
Now, as I said earlier, we are going to walk through the verdict form question by question.
And I'm going to show you that first question again. It's a little -- I'm going to read it again for you.
"Question number 1: Was Claire Hallgren addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? And
if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?"
So first, was she addicted? You heard from Dr. Rosman yesterday; he told you applying the DSM-IV she did not meet the diagnosing criteria as being nicotine dependent. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is the standard we believe should be applied in a court of law.
We walked through her life and you now know all the facts. Claire Hallgren was not a heavy smoker. She wasn't a chain smoker. She enjoyed smoking cigarettes. I just told you a moment ago she quit for six months in 1968. According to her husband, she didn't try to quit again for more than a day for the next 26 years. She controlled her smoking. She quit again in October 1995. Does that sound like someone who was hopelessly addicted?
The answer, ladies and gentlemen, is of course not.
But even if you accept the plaintiff's definition of what it means to be addicted, even if you accept that definition and you conclude that Claire Hallgren was addicted, that's only the beginning. The second part of the question
is critical. Was Claire Hallgren's claimed addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?
If Claire Hallgren could quit smoking whenever she was motivated to do so, then addiction is not the legal cause of her death.
MR. DENNEY: Objection, that misstates the law.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead, sir.
MR. GERAGHTY: If Claire Hallgren could control her smoking, then addiction is not the legal cause of her disease.
MR. DENNEY: Same objection, Your Honor.
MR. GERAGHTY: Was Claire Hallgren a mindless, hopeless addict, someone who had lost her free will? Or was she someone who always had control over her smoking? Could she have quit whenever she was motivated to do so?
Ladies and gentlemen, we know the answer to that is of course she could, and that's because she did. We just talked about it.
1968 she quits cold turkey for six months.
You heard the testimony of Dr. Neal Benowitz. When Claire Hallgren chooses to resume smoking
in 1968, she's 46 years old. She's an adult.
Every pack of cigarettes has a warning on it that she understands means smoking can cause disease, smoking is addictive.
Ten years earlier she had told her children everything you need to know about smoking.
Dr. David Burns told you right from that witness stand had she stayed quit in 1968, she would not have developed lung cancer, she would not have died.
Plaintiff has tried to tell you during this case that nicotine is like heroin or cocaine.
You now know that is not the case. Dr. Rosman told you that yesterday and Dr. Benowitz also told you that on the videotape.
You may remember I asked Dr. Benowitz, I asked Dr. Benowitz to rank nicotine among potentially addictive substances.
Here's Dr. Benowitz's testimony.
"Question: Haven't you also commented that the stimulating effect of nicotine is more like that of caffeine than cocaine?
"Answer: It's a little more intense than caffeine but much less so than cocaine."
I then asked him, "And on the spectrum you
would just put it closer to caffeine on the spectrum?"
His answer was yes.
This is from one of the world's leading authorities on nicotine and nicotine addiction.
The man who wrote the 1988 Surgeon General's Report.
I told you that the issue in this case -the issues in this case were control and responsibility. Control and responsibility.
And all the experts told you that even addicted smokers, even addicted smokers like Claire Hallgren can quit whenever they are motivated to do so. That's the evidence you heard. You heard that from several different people. You heard it from Dr. Benowitz and you heard it from Dr. Cummings.
What did they tell you?
Both Dr. Cummings and Dr. Benowitz told you 60 million Americans have quit smoking in this country. 60 million Americans. Dr. Cummings told you millions of these people were, quote, heavily addicted. Those were his words, heavily addicted.
Dr. Cummings told you that quitting smoking
was like learning to ride a bike. That's what he told you. You fall off the bike, you get right back on and start pedaling. He told you everyone, including Claire Hallgren, can learn to ride that bike.
And what did they all tell you? They all told you that motivation is the key to success in quitting smoking.
You may remember that during the course of Dr. Cummings' examination we talked about a brochure that he had written for the American Cancer Society. I want to remind you what he wrote in that brochure. He said, there is no magic cure. There is no magic cure. The keys are motivation, determination and persistence.
And where did all the experts tell you that comes from? It comes from within each individual. It comes from within the smoker herself, not from nicotine gum, not from the nicotine patch. That's what all of the experts told you in this case.
Mrs. Hallgren is no different than the 60 million Americans who have quit smoking. 90 percent of them quit cold turkey, and we know that because that's what her family told us.
Her own family told us she was intelligent, she was capable, she was strong-willed. She always had the ability to quit.
Even if you ultimately decide that you prefer the plaintiff's definition and conclude that she's addicted, Claire Hallgren proved to every single person in this courtroom that she could quit whenever she was motivated to do so.
And it's for that reason that all of the experts will tell you, whether addicted or not, cigarette smokers at the end of the day are ultimately responsible for their own decisions, their own actions. You heard that from Dr. David Burns.
This is Dr. Burns' testimony.
"Question" -- these are the questions I asked Dr. Burns -- "In each instance the smoker has to decide for himself or herself that they want to quit smoking, right?"
His answer: "Yes. The responsibility and the action for cessation," which means quitting, "reside with the smoker."
I then asked him, "And even if they are addicted, the smoker is still responsible for his or her own decisions, right?"
His answer was: "The smoker and any other addict retains responsibility for their smoking decisions, that's correct."
That's the testimony of Dr. David Burns, ladies and gentlemen.
The evidence has shown without question Claire Hallgren was always in control of her lifestyle decisions, including her decision to smoke cigarettes, not Philip Morris, not RJ Reynolds, not the nicotine in cigarettes. Her decision to resume smoking in 1968 and not to make a concerted effort to quit for the next 26 years was the one and the only legal cause of her lung cancer and death. And for that reason, ladies and gentlemen, the answer to question number 1 should be no. The answer should be no.
And if you answer no to that question your verdict is for the defendants, the case is over, and we all go home.
But if you disagree with the evidence you've heard, if you disagree with the evidence that we've presented and you go on, I want to show you questions number 2 and 3 and I want to discuss them at the same time. Again, it's a little hard to read, but question number 2 says:
"State for each defendant whether its negligence was a legal cause of Claire Hallgren's lung cancer and death."
And then there's -- you can check boxes for Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds. That's number 2.
Question number 3 says: "State for each defendant whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by each defendant were a legal cause of Claire Hallgren's lung cancer and death.
And again there's a line for Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
Now, when you see the instruction for legal cause, you'll see the words "direct" and "substantial" in there. And, ladies and gentlemen, you haven't heard any evidence that anything Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds did had a direct and substantial impact on Claire Hallgren other than simply making and selling cigarettes made from tobacco with nicotine. That's what you've heard. And, ladies and gentlemen, that in and of itself is an insufficient basis, not a sufficient basis to establish liability.
Cigarette smoking is legal in this country, and it's been legal for hundreds of years.
That's a decision our government has made. And this case is not about whether that decision should be made by anyone else.
Now, what evidence did you hear? You heard Dr. Cummings tell you that Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds should make cigarettes without nicotine. But what was the evidence you actually heard? Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds did, in fact, make nicotine-free cigarettes and cigarettes with reduced nicotine. The evidence you heard was people didn't smoke those cigarettes. Dr. Burns told you in this courtroom just about a week ago that he didn't agree today that cigarettes should be made without nicotine. So the two experts you've heard from, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns, don't even agree today in 2012 on that issue.
The only thing you've heard that would constitute negligence or a defect is the fact that cigarettes contain nicotine.
And, again, we presented evidence to you from Dr. Benowitz, the authority on nicotine, and let me remind you what he told you.
These were all questions I asked Dr. Benowitz about nicotine in cigarettes. He
told you nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco.
He told you Mother Nature puts nicotine in tobacco. He told you that tobacco has been grown for well over 500 years, before Columbus discovered the New World tobacco has always had nicotine in it.
He told you, contrary to what you heard from the plaintiffs, nicotine is actually removed during the manufacturing process. That's what Dr. Benowitz told you. There is less nicotine in a manufactured cigarette than in a tobacco leaf taken from a farm in North Carolina,
Georgia, or north Florida.
Most importantly what he told you was cigarettes made from tobacco grown in your own backyard are addictive because they have nicotine in them. That's the evidence you've heard.
And at the end of the day, ladies and gentlemen, the overriding question is, what does this have to do with Claire Hallgren? What does the whole -- everything that Dr. Cummings told you have to do with Claire Hallgren?
Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds sold cigarettes made out of tobacco with nicotine in
them. Based on those facts, the answer to questions 2 and 3 should be no. The answers should be no.
Let me move on to the next two questions because, again, they go together.
Maybe I can put these both on there at the same time.
There's a lot of words here so let me see if I can go through this. Question 4 and 5 -- and I know it's hazy. I apologize for that. It says: "State for each defendant whether the concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of Claire Hallgren's lung cancer and death."
Question 5 says: "State whether the agreement to conceal or omit material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of Claire Hallgren's lung cancer and death."
These are those questions about reliance that I told you about in opening statement.
When you look at the instructions that Judge Langford is going to give you, you'll see
that it says very clearly in there that in order to be a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage, plaintiff must show that Claire Hallgren relied on statements by Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds that omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes. And the key word is "relied." That means the statements must have made a difference to her at the end of the day.
And ladies and gentlemen, you've heard no evidence of that in this case. Think back to what you've heard. You heard about President John Quincy Adams. You heard about Mark Twain. You saw the Reader's Digest articles. You know that the addictive potential of cigarettes was not some secret known only to the tobacco companies. Claire Hallgren herself told her children in the 1950s, you get hooked on these if you start smoking. That's what she told her children.
I'd like to address two subjects very, very briefly.
You heard Dr. Burns come in here and tell you about a 1975 Philip Morris study. And he told you that if he had known about that study
at the time it came out, it would have changed the course of public health and he would have made a different recommendation to the American public. This was on the issue of compensation.
All I want to remind you is, remember what happened during the cross-examination.
This is the Philip Morris document Dr. Burns showed you. Look at the date, September 17th, 1975. It was talking about differences in the size and frequency of puffs, larger volumes taken on Marlboro Lights. Four months earlier, four months earlier in the British Medical Journal, a published medical journal by doctors and scientists, peer-reviewed, researchers wrote exactly the same thing. They said, "Smokers tend to respond to changes in the tar and nicotine yields of cigarettes by altering their smoking pattern to regulate the nicotine intake. Puff size, puff velocity, puff rate, number of pulls per cigarette, proximity of puffs to tip, proportion of puff inhaled and depth and duration of inhalation are some of the more obvious factors."
This information was available to Dr. Burns and anybody else who cared to read it in 1975.
Those are the facts, ladies and gentlemen.
Dr. Burns said the '81 Surgeon General's Report would have been different. Well, the '79 Surgeon General's Report two years earlier said exactly what you heard Dr. Burns say in this courtroom. "Smokers should be warned in shifting to a less hazardous cigarette they may in fact increase their hazard if they begin smoking more cigarettes or inhaling more deeply."
That's the 1979 Surgeon General's Report.
"And most of all, they should be cautioned that even the lowest yield of cigarettes" -they're talking about light cigarettes -"present health hazards very much higher than would be encountered if they smoked no cigarette at all and that the single most effective way to reduce the hazards associated with smoking is to quit."
That's what the Surgeon General told everybody in 1979. That's the same thing Dr. Burns told you on the witness stand a week ago.
Now, I want to address one more thing that Dr. Burns said. And that deals with the
percentage of people who have quit smoking over the last 15 or 20 years.
One of you submitted a question in writing to Dr. Burns about whether the quit rates, the percentage of people who have quit smoking in this country have changed in the last 10 to 15 years, before 1999 until after 1999. And what Dr. Burns told you is simply dead wrong.
If you'll recall, Dr. Benowitz showed you the same exact statistics on quitting that Dr. Burns showed you. And this is what Dr. Benowitz -- this is the testimony of Dr. Neil Benowitz, the expert on nicotine, nicotine addiction and quitting smoking.
"Now, is this statistic that we see, the demographics of smoking in the United States, was that true in the 1990s, basically?"
His answer: "Yes."
"Is it true today?
"Yes. This hasn't changed much in the past 10 or 15 years."
That's what Dr. Neil Benowitz told you.
Those are the facts.
And the most important point of all, ladies and gentlemen, is none of this has anything to
do with Claire Hallgren.
We just walked through the story of her life. We know what information she had. We know when she got it. We know what she told her children. We know when she told them those things.
She told her children all of those things about cigarettes after The Frank Statement, after the creation of the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, after the creation of the Tobacco Institute. Mr. Hallgren said, my wife and I had never heard of those organizations.
That was his testimony under oath in this case.
This is the same board I showed you in my opening statement. And I put many of the statements that I knew you were going to hear in evidence during the course of this case. 1954 up to 1994. And I asked you a very pointed question. I asked you a very pointed question.
I said, would any of these statements, would any of these statements make any difference to Claire Hallgren? Would the story I told you, the story about her life, the story we walked through for the last 45 minutes before lunch, would any of that story have been any different
if these statements had not been made?
And now after sitting through two weeks of testimony, you all know the answer, ladies and gentlemen. The answer is of course not.
Because Claire Hallgren wasn't paying attention to anything that a cigarette company was saying or doing. She was living her life. We know that because her husband was very clear on the subject.
"Do you know if your wife ever heard any verbal statement about smoking and health by any cigarette manufacturer?
"Answer: No.
"No, she didn't, or -"Answer: No, she didn't hear any statement from a cigarette manufacturer."
This is Mr. Hallgren's testimony. And, ladies and gentlemen, it is 100 percent consistent with the evidence you've heard in this case.
I talked with many of you during voir dire, many of you, and many more people. Were you waiting to hear from Philip Morris -MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor, that violates the golden rule.
THE COURT: Well, I'll let you rephrase that part.
MR. GERAGHTY: During voir dire I posed a question, was anybody waiting for a cigarette company to tell them about the health risks of smoking?
MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. Can we approach?
THE COURT: Step up.
(A bench conference occurred as follows:)
MR. DENNEY: This is a direct violation of the golden rule. What happens in voir dire we're trying to get a fair jury. Now what he's trying to do is he's telling the jury, I asked you if you were waiting on anything, a tobacco company to tell you anything. He's trying to tie that into Claire Hallgren. That's a direct link between them and Claire Hallgren, so I move to strike those comments.
And I want to object, I don't want to keep leaping up, but it's a violation of the golden rule. I didn't do that. There's plenty of things I could have talked about, too.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, the jury, your instructions tell the jury they can rely upon
their common experiences and common sense ab these things. I'm simply reminding them that their common sense is going to tell them that nobody waits for cigarette companies to tell them it's time to quit. Nobody looks to cigarette companies to tell them about the health risks of smoking. That's the theme of their case and I'm entitled to present that to the jury.
MR. DENNEY: Mr. Bass, then, on rebuttal can get up and say, Mr. Denney asked many of you if you lost loved ones from smoking and you told us all about that. That's what he's going through.
It's the same thing. We would never do that, but it's the same thing. It's applying their experiences directly to the facts of this case to Claire Hallgren. It's a violation of the golden rule.
Now, if they do it, then I guess Mr. Bass can do it too, using his logic, that's what he's telling the Court.
THE COURT: I'm going to let him proceed.
While you all are up here, do you want to take a recess before we go on? I told you I would.
MR. BURTON: I think I can go ahead, just give me time to get set up.
THE COURT: That would be fine. Then we'll take the break between yours and the rebuttal.
MR. DENNEY: To preserve the record, I want to move for mistrial based on the comments that Mr. Geraghty made.
THE COURT: Noted for the record and overruled. Denied.
(The bench conference ended.)
THE COURT: You may proceed.
MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Like we discussed in voir dire, no one was waiting for a cigarette company to tell them about the health risks of smoking. Nobody was waiting for a cigarette company to tell them, you know what, it's time to quit. Claire Hallgren was the same way. She was making these decisions and only she was making these decisions. When she decided to quit, it was for her own reasons. It had nothing to do with whether a cigarette company had said anything or not. You know that now having sat through two weeks of testimony. Those are the facts of the case, ladies and gentlemen.
The answer to questions 4 and 5 should be no because there's absolutely no evidence that Claire Hallgren relied on anything that a cigarette company said when she was making her own lifestyle decisions. That's the evidence you've heard.
Now, let me move on to the next question.
This is question number 6. Again, I don't think you get this far, because if you answer question number 1, the case is over. But question number 6, without going through all the detail, if you get this far you're asked to assign a percentage of responsibility to Claire Hallgren,
Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
Let me move it over a little bit.
And, ladies and gentlemen, this question really requires you to decide what personal responsibility is all about. What does it really mean to say we're responsible when we make decisions about whether we choose to exercise, whether we diet, the kinds of foods we choose to eat, whether we drink alcohol and, of course, whether we decide to smoke cigarettes?
Again, we talked in voir dire about how people make these lifestyle choices. If you go
out one night and you drink a few too many light beers, you wake up the next day with a hangover and you look in the mirror -MR. DENNEY: Objection, golden rule, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. GERAGHTY: No one looks in the mirror and says, you know what, I'm only 75 percent responsible for that decision. No one says that. And is Claire Hallgren any different?
I would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, the answer is absolutely not. Absolutely not.
Now, the next issue I want to discuss with you just very briefly is the issue of compensatory damages. And I don't think you'll get to this question again, but if you decide that Mr. Hallgren is entitled to recover money for his wife's decision to smoke cigarettes, you have to decide what the amount should be for the pain and suffering for the loss of his wife.
You just heard Mr. Denney ask you a little while ago for millions of dollars in compensatory damages. Based on the evidence you've heard, this isn't a case involving
millions of dollars or even hundreds of thousands of dollars. And, ladies and gentlemen, that's all I'll say about it.
The final point I want to make is punitive damages, or the final point I want to address is punitive damages.
What you're being asked to decide is whether punitive damages should be awarded, not the amount. If you say yes to that question, there will be another phase to this trial, there will be additional witnesses and evidence presented, and there will be further arguments on those points.
If you decide that the plaintiff is entitled to recover money damages and you award compensatory damages, that makes him whole. Punitive damages are additional money in addition to and on top of whatever you believe is fair compensation.
The Court has instructed you that the plaintiff has a higher burden of proof. The standard is clear and convincing evidence, a much higher standard than the greater weight of the evidence. And the important thing I want to highlight is, the evidence to be considered is
only evidence that specifically affected Claire Hallgren herself.
Based on the evidence we've heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen, these companies had nothing to do with Claire Hallgren's lifestyle decisions, including her decision to smoke cigarettes. We've talked about it. You know that she was aware of the health risks of smoking when she demonstrated that fact to her children in the 1950s. You know that she wasn't paying attention to anything that a cigarette company was saying or doing during the course of her lifetime. In a case in which the plaintiff acknowledges from the very start of the case that the smoker is responsible for her own cancer and death, in a case in which the smoker demonstrates an ability to control her smoking for 27 years, ladies and gentlemen, simply put, punitive damages should not be an issue, period.
The answer to that question ought to be no.
THE COURT: You've used an hour and twenty minutes of your allotted time.
MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you.
Now, I'm almost done, ladies and gentlemen.
I'm going to sit down and either Mr. Denney or
Mr. Bass is going to have an opportunity to address you in rebuttal. Before that you're going to hear from Mr. Burton.
But I want you to think about these facts that I showed you on the board at the very beginning of my presentation. These are the key facts that will help you decide all of the issues in this case. And we have proved each and every one of these.
Claire Hallgren knew smoking was dangerous and addictive in the 1950s. She gave her children very specific and direct warnings about that in the 1950s when she blew smoke through the Kleenex.
Claire Hallgren was not influenced by anything Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said or didn't say. You've heard no evidence to support that at all.
Claire Hallgren controlled where, when and how much she smoked.
She quit cold turkey for six months in 1968 and she quit smoking again in October of 1995.
Those are the facts of this case. Those are the key facts of this case.
You know, we enjoy a tremendous amount of
freedom in this country. We have a right to make decisions, and to make decisions and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interest. And with that freedom comes the obligation to accept responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. In the end that's what this case is really about. Are we going to hold Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds responsible for the decisions that Claire Hallgren made, the decisions of an informed person who was able to control her smoking?
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you that the evidence in this case shows very clearly Claire Hallgren understood the risks. Her decision not to stay quit in 1968, again, her decision not to try to quit smoking for the next 25 or 26 years are the one and the only legal cause of her cancer and death in this case.
Ms. Claire Hallgren was always in control, and when you are in control, you are responsible. You are responsible.
And with that I'm going to sit down and Mr. Burton is going to speak with you for a while. And, again, when he's finished, the plaintiff will get you up and the plaintiff will
have the last word, and that's because they bear the burden of proof.
Now, I don't know if any of you -- I don't know what Mr. Bass or Mr. Denney are going to say, but I want you to ask yourselves as you hear whatever they say, ask yourself, what does this have to do specifically with Claire Hallgren? With Claire Hallgren specifically.
What direct and substantial impact does any of this have on Claire Hallgren and the decisions she made in her life?
Ladies and gentlemen, the evidence that you've heard over the last two weeks supports one and only one true verdict and that is a verdict in favor of Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
I'm done. I want to thank you very much for your time and attention during my presentation and again thank you so much for your attention and efforts over the past two weeks. Thank you.



MR. BURTON: Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. As you know, I'm Dal Burton. I represent RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. And I want to reiterate something Mr. Denney said and something Mr. Geraghty said, and that's thank you. You've been awfully patient today. It's been a long day. You've been very attentive.
I'm not going to take much of your time, but I do appreciate your time and attention.
Now, Mr. Geraghty told you that this case is not about smoking in general. It's not about smokers in general. It's not about whether cigarettes are legal or illegal. This case is about Claire Hallgren. Mr. Geraghty was right.
What he did with the time lines here is he walked you through her life; growing up in Chicago, moving to Florida. He reviewed with you the choices that she made. He reviewed with you her smoking history, her keen awareness of
the risks of smoking, her quit attempts, and most importantly, her choice to continue to smoke in the face of those risks.
He reviewed with you here on the Elmo the verdict form. He explained what it meant. He walked you through how it ought to be, in his view, completed. I share those views. I only have a little bit of time with you this afternoon so I'm not going to repeat that. I'm not going to repeat all those details. I may touch on a few of them, but I'm not going to repeat them. Suffice it to say I think the evidence has shown that Ms. Hallgren was not addicted and that even if she were addicted that her addiction was not the legal cause of her injuries.
Now, ladies and gentlemen even if you were to answer that first question yes, as Mr. Denney urged you to do, they still have to prove that they're entitled to recover damages. And the Engle findings, remember the Engle findings do not automatically entitle Mr. Hallgren to either compensatory or punitive damages. The Engle jury heard nothing about Ms. Hallgren. They heard no evidence. That's why we're here in
this courtroom and that's what you folks are going to do when you go back to the jury room.
So let me spend a few minutes, ladies and gentlemen, on the facts, the evidence in this case against my client, RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company.
You remember Dr. Cummings. Dr. Cummings came in, he was the first witness for the plaintiffs. He testified for two or three days.
And one of the things that he told you is he spent 30 hours, and what he did in those 30 hours is he reviewed the testimony of Mr. Hallgren, of Sally Hallgren, of Peter Hallgren, he reviewed the medical records and he put up a chart, the smoking history of Claire Hallgren. And from that I've extracted some information.
What that chart shows is, as Mr. Geraghty explained, we don't know why or when or what brand Ms. Hallgren started smoking. We know she was smoking in 1938 when she met her husband. We don't know why, where or what brand she smoked before that. We do know, however, she never smoked a brand manufactured by British American Tobacco Company.
We know she never smoked a brand manufactured by Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
We know from that chart that Dr. Cummings prepared that she smoked Reynolds cigarettes for a total of eight years. She smoked unfiltered Camels from 1938 to 1942. She smoked some combination of unfiltered Pall Malls and Salems from 1956 to 1960. That's what Dr. Cummings' chart said after he reviewed all the evidence,
Mr. Hallgren's deposition, his smoking chart, all of the information.
We know from that chart she only smoked one filtered brand, one filtered brand manufactured by my client, and that was Salem. And, ladies and gentlemen, we also know that she knew almost immediately that that filter didn't work. That was the cigarette she used in the demonstration. That was the cigarette that she turned around and showed her children the filter and said, see, it doesn't work.
We know, ladies and gentlemen, from Dr. Cummings' chart that she stopped smoking Reynolds brands in and around 1960. That was 30 years before her unfortunate death.
We know, and Mr. Geraghty touched on this, about what evidence is there that she ever smoked a light or low tar cigarette? I submit to you there is no credible evidence that she did. Mr. Geraghty went over that with you. The one thing I do know, there is no evidence that she ever smoked a light cigarette manufactured by my client.
And lastly, and Mr. Geraghty touched on this as well, we know, not from our witnesses, but from Dr. Burns, had she quit smoking in 1958 or '60 when she sat her children down and in 1964 when the Surgeon General Report came out, in 1967 or '68 when she quit, it is more probable than not she would not have gotten lung cancer from smoking and we would not be here today.
So with that background, those facts, let's look and see whether the plaintiffs have established whether that conduct as described on that screen was a legal cause, a legal cause of any of Ms. Hallgren's injuries.
Let's start with advertising. As I said, there's no evidence of what brand she smoked first. There 's no evidence of when she first smoked. There's no evidence of why she first
smoked. And there's no evidence that she ever saw or relied on a single ad for a Camel cigarette, a Pall Mall cigarette, or a Salem cigarette.
Did these companies advertise? Certainly they did. Certainly they did. But this case is about Claire Hallgren. This case is about whether Claire Hallgren saw and relied on those advertisements. There's no evidence in this case that she did.
Let's talk about filters for a moment. And I'll do this quickly.
Mr. Denney put up a chart that said, the filter lie, big black chart. You've heard a lot of evidence that this was something that was cooked up by the tobacco companies to trick everybody. The fact of the matter is is that she smoked one brand of filtered cigarettes manufactured by my client and it was the first filtered brand she ever smoked and she knew almost immediately that that filter didn't work. Was she confused? Was she tricked? Was she misled? Of course not. She knew almost instantaneously when she turned that filter around that it didn't work.
Let's talk about some of these documents, and Mr. Denney rolled through these documents very quickly. But in the context of my client and those documents, let's see what connection there is between those documents and Ms. Hallgren. Because remember, it's about Ms. Hallgren, they have to show a connection between the evidence and her injuries.
You saw documents from British American Tobacco Company. That's a British company. You saw documents. It's not a defendant. What is a document from a company in England whose product she never smoked, what is the connection with Ms. Hallgren? What is the connection between a Brown & Williamson document whose product she never smoked and Ms. Hallgren? She certainly never relied on any of those documents. She never used their product.
What is the connection between the Reynolds documents from the '70s and the '80s and '90s when she had quit smoking Reynolds' products 20 or 30 years before? Clearly she's not relying on those documents.
Those documents are talking about new products, on marketing efforts. She hasn't
smoked that company's product in 20 or 30 years. Simply put, there is no connection.
Let's talk about this claim for fraud and concealment. It really has two parts, at least as I've listened to the evidence. One is that Ms. Hallgren was individually misled about the risks of smoking. The second part of that is that these companies did not conduct or publish research on smoking and health.
Let's take the first of those. We know Ms. Hallgren knew about the risks of smoking.
She knew it was addictive. She knew it was risky. She knew she didn't want her children to smoke.
Let's put that in perspective, ladies and gentlemen. She knew that in 1958. That's five years before the Surgeon General's 1964 Surgeon General's Report. She knows then.
Now, the second part of that is, did these companies conduct good research and publish good research on smoking and health? And were their activities secret?
Let me start with the Plaza Hotel meeting.
Mr. Denney put up the big picture of the Plaza Hotel. Well, remember when I was examining
Dr. Cummings? We told the Department of Justice that we were going to have that meeting before we had it. After we had the meeting we told them that we met and that we were going to publish The Frank Statement. After we published The Frank Statement we told them we had published it, and we sent it to them. And we sent them the statement of RJ Reynolds. There's nothing secret about that meeting.
Let's talk about CTR and TIRC for a moment. They funded 500 million dollars in grants to scientists all over the world. Those scientists published 6,000 articles in peer-reviewed journals. 600 of those articles were cited in Surgeon General's Reports.
Now, Dr. Cummings liked to say, well, this research really wasn't about smoking, it really wasn't about smoking and health. Well, you'll recall Mr. Geraghty cross-examined Dr. Cummings on that 1963 articles. That's the article that said compared drug -- excuse me, heavy smokers with addicts. Funded by CTR with money from Philip Morris and RJR.
Let's talk about Larson, Haag and Silvette.
You remember this book right here, this book
right here, funded by TIRC and CTR. It was a compendium of all medical research that they could find up until 1959. Funded by CTR with money from Reynolds and Brown & Williamson and Philip Morris. It was given -- or it was turned over to the Surgeon General. And the Surgeon General relied on it to reach his conclusion in 1964 that smoking caused cancer.
Did the company stop funding Larson, Haag and Silvette then, even though the Surgeon General concluded that smoking caused cancer? Absolutely not. They published three more volumes, '68, '71 and '75, all funded by CTR, all publicly available, all good research.
And let's talk about the work that Reynolds did. You may remember, I examined Dr. Burns about this. You've seen some documents from Dr. Rodgman during the plaintiff's case.
Dr. Burns described Rodgman as a giant in the field of tobacco research. He told you that Dr. Rodgman had written the definitive book on smoking and health. He told you that he had no reason to disbelieve that almost half of the constituents in cigarette smoke, 4 ,000 constituents had been identified by Reynolds
scientists. He told you that the Reynolds scientists are the ones that invented the technology, the equipment to identify those constituents. This is Dr. Burns. And he acknowledged that Reynolds scientists had published articles that had been cited in 11 Surgeon General's Reports.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you that the plaintiffs have not carried their burden of establishing that any conduct by my client, or Philip Morris for that matter, as a legal cause of any claim for compensatory damages by Mr. Hallgren.
But there's a claim for punitive damages here. And I need to talk about that for a minute, because Mr. Geraghty alluded to it. I don't get a chance to talk again. Mr. Geraghty doesn't get a chance to again. Mr. Bass gets the last word because he has the burden of proof.
And so as he's talking to you when I sit down, and I promise you it will be soon, when I sit down, I want you to keep some things in mind. I want you to ask yourself some questions. And I think what he's going to do
when he's going to stand up, he's going to talk about primarily three things. He's going to talk about was Ms. Hallgren misled, and he's going to tell you she was. He's going to talk about a lot of these bad documents, as Mr. Geraghty said and as I said in opening, there's some bad statements in there, things we're not going to defend, things that wouldn't have been said -- shouldn't have been said.
He's going to talk a lot about the evidence.
And the third thing he's going to do, ladies and gentlemen, is he's going to talk about what I believe to be their real theory in this case, and you heard it from Dr. Burns and you heard it from Dr. Cummings, and that is, these companies had the ability to remove nicotine from the product in the '60s and '70s. It was technologically feasible to do so, we should have done it, had we done it, Mrs. Hallgren wouldn't have been addicted and if she hadn't been addicted she wouldn't have got the lung cancer. That's their theory. You heard that from the mouths of their witnesses.
So let's take those again in order. Was Ms. Hallgren misled? You've heard it over and
over again. She knew 50 years ago, 1958, it's over 50 years ago, that smoking was addictive, that it was risky, that it was dangerous and that she didn't want her children to do it.
Now, when Mr. Bass talks to you about that,
I want you to pull up in your mind that image of her sitting at the kitchen table with her children. Pull up that image of her sitting with her children smoking a cigarette, taking a drag on a Salem cigarette, blowing it through a Kleenex, showing them the Kleenex and saying, look, you don't want this in your body. You get hooked. This is dangerous. Don't do it.
Turning the filter around and saying, see, the filter doesn't even stop it.
Ms. Hallgren never was in doubt. There was no controversy. She was not confused. She knew since 1958 that this was something that was dangerous and she didn't want her children to do it.
Let's talk about the documents again, and I'll do this very briefly.
One of the documents that you were shown in direct today was a 1985 document from a scientist in Britain. What does that document
have to do with Ms. Sebring [sic], who lives in Sebring, Florida from 1975 until 1994?
The answer is nothing.
What they're trying to do is get you to take your eye off the ball. They want to make you mad. But as they show you those documents -and the same is true for Brown & Williamson documents and Reynolds documents -- ask yourself, what is the connection between the document they're showing me and Ms. Hallgren? What impact did it have on Ms. Hallgren? What is the connection with Ms. Hallgren?
If you do that and you listen to that, I submit you're going to find there is no connection.
Let's turn to this last item, this notion that the company should be punished, the company should be punished because they didn't manufacture and develop a cigarette in the 1950s or '60s or '70s with little or no nicotine or levels of nicotine that were so low not to be addictive.
Now, what I want to do now is I want to walk you through what the public health community was saying about that issue in the '70s, '80s, '90s
and up to today.
Let's start with the '70s.
You heard reference to Dr. Michael Russell. You heard reference to the Russell cigarette.
He was the one that came up with the notion that said, you know, people smoke for the nicotine, but it's the tar that's bad. It's the tar that makes you sick. So what you ought to do is you ought to raise the level of nicotine and put down the level of tar. That was the theory called the Russell cigarette.
Sir Richard Doll, knighted in England for his work in smoking and health, he adopted the same theory, let's raise the nicotine, lower the tar.
The Tobacco Working Group, you heard reference to that. That was a cooperative effort between scientists at the U.S. Government and tobacco company scientists. What did they look at? Raising the level of nicotine, lowering the level of tar.
It's exactly opposite from what these witnesses in this courtroom in that witness stand have suggested that we ought to have done and want to punish us for.
Let's move forward to the '80s.
Dr. Cummings referenced this statement, "This cigarette shouldn't be considered safe at all," by Dr. Ron Davis, director, Office on Smoking and Health.
You know what cigarette he's referring to?
He's referring to a cigarette without nicotine.
He's referring to a cigarette with nicotine levels so low that they're not addictive. He's referring to the cigarette that Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns want to punish us for not making.
And you know what, Philip Morris brought a company -MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor.
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns, that statement he just made, that's not the issue in the case.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. BURTON: Philip Morris bought a company, built a plant and marketed a denicotinized cigarette. And what did the public health authority do? They attacked them. Reynolds spent a billion dollars, a billion dollars, developing a brand new product that heated and didn't burn tobacco, reduced nicotine by
substantial levels, 50, 60, 70 percent, reduced constituents by 99 percent. What did the public health community do? They attacked it. They attacked it.
So let's move to the '90s.
You saw Dr. Benowitz's deposition. In 1994 Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Benowitz, they make a proposal. They say, you know what, maybe lowering the level of nicotine gradually over 10 to 15 years is what we ought to do to find a safer cigarette. Maybe that's with we ought to do. But you know what they said? Ooh, we need a lot of research on that. This is 1994, the year before Ms. Hallgren dies. Same idea they're proposing now that these gentlemen in the public health community when they're writing in the public health community they say, wait a minute, this needs more research. And the concern was compensation. They were concerned that if you lowered levels of nicotine, you would smoke more cigarettes, you would smoke more intensely, and you might actually make the situation worse.
So what did they say? We cannot make any public health recommendations. That's 1994.
Let's go to 2000.
Now, you heard Dr. Cummings, sat in this chair right here. Dr. Cummings in year 2000 was a relatively new witness. He hadn't been paid much money. And let's look at what he said in 2000 on this issue, whether we ought to be lowering nicotine, whether we ought to be requiring these companies to market only a denicotinized cigarette. What did he say in 2000, five years after Ms. Hallgren died, I can't advocate eliminating it. I can't advocate reducing it. What I think you really ought to do is raise it. Sound familiar? That's the Russell cigarette from three decades earlier.
Let's fast-forward to 2009.
Dr. Burns weighs in now. He joins Dr. Henningfield and Dr. Benowitz and what he says is, this idea of lowering nicotine, it's a good idea. But you know what, it needs considerable research. This is 2009, 15 years after Ms. Hallgren has died and the public health authorities are saying publicly, we don't have enough research. We don't know enough. We don't want people to compensate. We don't want to make the situation worse. So they cannot and
do not advocate elimination or reduction as a public health initiative. That's in 2009.
Now let's see what happened in this courtroom in this case.
As I told you, as you'll remember,
Dr. Cummings came here and said, get it out of there. It's technologically feasible to do it, that's what you should have done and you ought to be punished for not doing it. Well, 2012 Dr. Burns says, when I confronted him on cross-examination with his article in 2009, that proposal to reduce nicotine levels still needs research, 2012, 17 years after Ms. Hallgren died. Still needs research. He cannot advocate elimination or reduction as a public health initiative. Indeed, he went so far as to say it would not be a responsible policy to mandate to these companies that they sell only denicotinized cigarettes.
Let me say that again. He sat in that chair and told you that the very idea they want to punish us for would not be responsible public policy.
So what does all this mean for this case?
Well, I think it really means two things; one,
it means that the public health community has never been able to solve this problem. They don't know whether raising the level of nicotine or lowering the level of nicotine. They can't figure it out. In the '70s they said one thing.
In the '90s they said something else. What we do know is as of now they still think it needs more research.
But let me tell you what is going on here, ladies and gentlemen. Remember Dr. Cummings came in here, and he's testified now in 75 cases, been paid $750,000. Dr. Burns told you that he'd been paid almost 2 million dollars.
So what I submit they do is when they are paid as expert witnesses, they come into courtrooms like this and they ask folks like you to punish these companies -MR. DENNEY: Objection, Your Honor. Didn't ask anybody to punish anyone. Just presented the evidence. Object. It misstates the evidence.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Go ahead.
MR. BURTON: Ask folks like you to punish these companies for doing something that they're
not prepared to advocate. Dr. Burns told you honestly, I can't recommend this. It would not be responsible. So effectively, ladies and gentlemen, what they're asking you to do is punish us for not doing something 40, 50 years ago, 30, 40, 50 years ago that they're not prepared to advocate as a public health initiative today.
When they go outside and sign their name to one of these articles and talk to their friends in the public health community, they say the idea they talked about on this stand needs more research. That's what's going on here.
And, ladies and gentlemen, that brings us full circle, full circle to Ms. Hallgren. And by the way, let me step back for just a second.
Based upon what I just told you, I submit to you that a punitive damage award in this case is just inappropriate. I don't think you ought to get that far, but if you do, the answer to the last question on the verdict form ought to be no.
So that brings us to Claire Hallgren. And Claire Hallgren had a decision to make early in her life when she first saw cigarettes. That
was the decision she had to make. Do I start or do I not start? That was the decision she had to make.
By 1960 she knows smoking is bad for her.
She knows it's risky. She knows it's addictive.
She has another choice she's confronted with then. Do I continue to smoke or do I stop?
By 1966 she's decided to stop. She's a grown woman. She's 45 years old. She has warned her children very expressly about the risks of smoking. And we know she's been warned about the risks of smoking.
(Video clip was played.)
VOICE: We receive many warnings in our life, and sometimes they can save our life.
This message is brought to you by the American Cancer Society.
(Video clip concluded.)
MR. BURTON: Ladies and gentlemen, in 1967 when she had stopped smoking, she was confronted with that same choice again. Do I continue to smoke or do I quit? And we know what choice she made. We know it was an informed choice. We know she made it with full knowledge of the risks. And we also know that every time she
picked up a cigarette, whether it be 10 times a day or 15 times a day, she picked up a pack of cigarettes with a warning on it that said in varying degrees, this may cause cancer, this does cause cancer. She did that knowingly. She picked that package up with that warning every single time she picked up a cigarette.
Now, when I stood up here at the beginning and Mr. Geraghty stood up here at the beginning,
I told you, I told you that this was about Claire Hallgren and this was about the choices that she made. I believe the evidence shows that the choices she made, the choice to continue to smoke in the face of the known risks was the sole legal cause of her injuries.
That's what the evidence in this case has shown, and I submit to you that the verdict that you should return is in favor of the defendants.
Thank you very much.
