CLOSING ARGUMENT 
MR. MURPHY: Yes, Your Honor. May it please the Court, Your Honor, and Counsel, Mrs. Hall, ladies and gentlemen, we're almost at the end of the case. This is my last chance to talk to you.
I'm going to try to spend my time summarizing why Plaintiff has not proven her case to you.
Before I do that, what I want to do, in case I lose track at the end, I'm going to do something that's very important right up front, and that's to thank you. You know, there's a reason why we all stand every time you walk in and out. As I told you in opening and I told you in jury selection, our jury system is one of the things that makes our country great.
There's a right to trial by jury and that whole process only works when people like you show up. And you've done it and you've done it over two weeks and we all appreciate it. You've done more than your civic duty. That's one of the best things a citizen can do for their country. So
thank you.
Let me get to what this case is about and I told you what I thought the evidence would show in opening and now I'm going to talk about what the evidence has shown, now that we're in closing.
First thing, the evidence is established that Mrs. Hall did not prove that Mr. Hall's injuries and death were caused by smoking. The evidence also established that Mr. Hall was aware of the risk of smoking. He himself was aware.
The evidence shows that Mr. Hall could quit smoking. We know he could quit because he did quit. The evidence also established that Mr. Hall did not rely on anything R.J. Reynolds Company said or did. No one came in here and told you about anything Mr. Hall relied on.
Going back to opening again, we both agree that this case is about Mr. Hall. It's about Mr. Hall and no one else. This case is not about whether other people have been injured by smoking and no one else but Mr. Hall -- excuse me,
Mrs. Hall will get money if the Plaintiffs win this case. So it's not about any of those folks.
This case is also not about whether cigarettes should be sold. We talked about that in jury
the benefit of going last. They get to respond to what I just talked about and I don't get to respond to what they'll say. So when you're back in the jury room, and you're thinking about what they just told you, think about what I might have said if I had the chance.
Think about whether you should accept that full value, what they say, just because they get the last word. The reason they get the last word is because they have the burden of proof. And the evidence in this case shows they can't fulfill their burden.
Let's go back to that slide as I close, the first slide.
Mrs. Hall didn't prove that Mr. Hall's injuries and death were caused by smoking. This is not the case of a smoker who had a clear case of lung cancer caused by smoking where they found cancerous cells in his lungs and there was no question about the cancer. That's not this case. That didn't happen here. There are too many questions that Plaintiff can't answer about Mr. Hall's cancer and death.
Mr. Hall was aware of the risks of smoking.
This isn't the case of someone who didn't know the
risks. Those people may be out there. Mr. Smith may convince you of that, but that wasn't Mr. Hall. That's not this case.
Mr. Hall could quit smoking. That's what the evidence shows. This case isn't about a person who couldn't quit. Those people may be out there. Mr. Smith and Mr. Avera may talk a lot about them. That wasn't Mr. Hall. He did quit. That's not this case.
Mr. Hall didn't rely on anything R.J. Reynolds Company did or said. There may be people out there who heard those statements and believed them. There may be people out there who thought that was controversy. That's not Mr. Hall.
There's no evidence of that. That's what the evidence in this case shows.
And for those reasons, your verdict should be for R.J. Reynolds.
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I know this week -- these two weeks hasn't always been easy, but we all appreciate it.
Thank you, Your Honor.
