CLOSING ON PUNITIVE DAMAGES
MR. MURPHY: Yes, Your Honor.
May it please the Court.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. MURPHY: Ladies and gentlemen, I'm here on behalf of Reynolds to tell you they've heard your message. People in Winston-Salem got calls last night and we've heard your verdict on compensatories and we're not here to dispute that. We accept that. The new administration at Reynolds hears it.
The purpose of punitive damages as you'll hear the Judge instruct you is to punish and to deter conduct. I want to talk to you for a couple minutes about each of those. I want to start with deter and conduct.
In this case, deterrence is not necessary.
Reynolds is a new company. You've heard about the merger. You've heard about the new people in charge there, and you've heard about some of the changes there.
The old guard is gone. The names in those memos, the Keys, the Horrigans, people on the video that you saw, they're not there.
People like Dr. Figlar are there now. The messages that you saw, some of those documents, those aren't the messages of today.
Would you briefly put up -- this is Reynolds' message today that you saw when Dr. Figlar was there. I don't want to spend a long time going through this but this is what Reynolds is telling the public now.
Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable death.
Can we go to the next one briefly?
That no tobacco product has been shown to be
safe and without risks. They talk about migration. The nicotine in tobacco products is addictive but is not considered a significant threat to health.
Go to the next.
Quitting cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk for serious disease.
Remember from when Dr. Figlar was on the stand, Reynolds also tells its customers and links the Surgeon General's reports and other governmental reports and tells its customers to rely on those.
Reynolds' actions also are that of a new company. You've heard about its efforts in development; it's efforts on Premiere, it's effort on Eclipse.
Dr. Figlar showed the results, that for a tobacco company, considers promising results. You heard about Camel Snus, its efforts to give the information to those people that want to use those products and give them an alternative. That's the new company.
You've heard in this trial the difference in advertising now. Nothing on TV. You've heard about the agreements with Reynolds and the states,
changed advertising, it changed those organizations like CTR and TI. They no longer exist. There's no chance that those kind of statements can come from TI anymore. It's not around.
Another thing that we've seen in this trial, you have to take it backwards, go back to the beginning with Dr. Burns. You know, at the end of his Direct testimony he talked about youth smoking, and he talked about the encouraging signs there that apply to any smoking.
You can use again you common sense to hopefully see that that's a result of some of these efforts by Reynolds.
So the deterrence is there. Reynolds has received the message. They received it in the Engle verdict. You've seen what's said there. Reynolds knows that.
They've seen it in your verdict.
The other thing I want to talk about is punishment. And what's hard to do, as I stand here, it's not your fault by any means, it's the process, I don't know exactly why you awarded punitive damages, so I'll try and address a variety of those things.
Reynolds does make profits. You shouldn't punish them just for making profits. Net worth includes a lot of things. It's not simply just a pile of cash laying around. It's Reynolds, the buildings, tangibles, its intangibles and property, all of it goes into that.
When you think about an award for punishment, think about your compensatory award, and that Mrs. Hall, we accept that, was compensated for her loss in this case.
Again, $20 million, that's a Lottery winner.
That's a lot of money. I suggest -- you just have one line to fill out.
Can we put the Elmo on?
I suggest, as I told you yesterday, I still believe that $1 million is a lot of money. And if you're looking for something -- a way to make sense of the money to award, your total award was 5 million, and you found Mr. Hall 35 percent responsible. Maybe the other 35 percent would be an appropriate award. So I think that's 1.75 million.
Again, the Judge will tell you, you're entitled to put zero there. But based on what you did yesterday, may be one of those numbers would
be appropriate.
Again, we appreciate your time in going through this trial. We understand that you will be just. Reynolds asks that you also be fair.
Thank you, Your Honor.
