MR. WICHMANN: Thank you, ma'am.
Good morning, folks.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. WICHMANN: First, we want to thank you for your attention. It's been a long trial. There have been a lot of details, a lot of things to absorb.
I've noticed that each and every one of you has paid great attention, and we greatly appreciate that.
I would like to start by saying that we think you should consider the opening statements that the lawyers gave on the first day of trial as promises to you as to what evidence that they would bring to court in support of their case.
Now, I think you should ask what promises were made to you and what promises were delivered to you.
I told you in opening statement that we would prove that this case was about a 50-year-old business plan by these defendants that involved cold, calculated business decisions that caused an epidemic of disease in America.
Folks, how bad was it? You might recall Dr. Michael Cummings, who came and testified for two days. The man has dedicated his career to the public safety, health and well-being of Americans.
He worked at the Roswell Park Cancer Center, the oldest cancer center in this country. He was given all of the previously secret, confidential internal documents from the defendants.
He set up, established, the New York State Quitline to help thousands of addicted smokers to quit smoking.
He's now working at the medical university in Charleston, engaging in the same research, trying to help people who are addicted.
He's authored over 300 peer-reviewed articles on the subject of smoking and health.
I asked him, have you been able to quantify for us, in this courtroom, the number of smoking-related deaths in America? From 1953, when the link was first established between cigarette smoking and disease, and the year 2000, three years before Edna died.
His answer on the witness stand, under oath, was yes. And I asked him: What is that number?
And here it is, folks. Twenty million American lives, up in smoke. That's how bad it is, based on the decisions those CEOs and executives made at the Plaza Hotel in New York, back in 1954.
I asked him, over the years, tell the jury how much money the cigarette companies
have spent marketing their product that addicts and kills 20 million Americans from the 50's through the late 90's.
MR. GERAGHTY: I would object, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: And his answer?
$200 billion is what they spent.
You'll recall the evidence that they formed this group called the Tobacco Research Institute, as their public relations group, to go out and fight the charges that smoking was linked to disease.
For that group -- I'll talk a little bit more about them later -- Dr. Cummings said for them alone, they spent over a hundred million dollars. That, folks, is what this case is about.
Now, Baron, if you would, could you put up Slide Number 1 ?
As the Judge told you, the first question for you to determine is whether or not Edna Siwieck was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
And the reason why is because if you find
"yes" to that question and to the next question, she becomes a class member.
If you recall, she was born in 1921.
Just about a year after, women got the right to vote in this country.
We believe the evidence has established that she's a class member and she ought to be considered that way.
Now, you should consider why two major US companies would come to court in Broward County and tell you in opening statement that Edna Siwieck was not addicted to cigarettes, and not bring in one single expert or doctor in addiction medicine to say the lady was not addicted.
Did they bring you one expert or one witness to say that? With all the resources -MR. GERAGHTY: I would object, Your Honor. That's improper.
THE COURT: It's not proper to talk about the resources of any party in the case.
Sustained.
MR. WICHMANN: You'll recall, I told you in opening statement, that we would prove that Edna was addicted.
We brought for you Dr. Cummings, who, as I said earlier, used the Heaviness of Smoking Index that he used as a criteria to determine whether or not thousands of New Yorkers were addicted. He came to the conclusion that, yes, Edna was addicted.
We brought down Scott -- or I'm sorry,
John Hancock, Edna's grandson. He got on the witness stand and said yes, she was addicted. Then he broke down crying. And he talked about the consequences of that addiction and how it affected his family.
You may recall Dr. Lowell Adkins.
Dr. Lowell Adkins, a physician in Broward County for years and years and years, not a paid expert witness. He actually treated and cared for Edna during her lifetime.
The man stood up there and said she's a good Christian woman, and, yes, she was addicted. They just couldn't believe it.
MR. GERAGHTY: I would object, Your Honor. That's improper, as well.
MR. WILLIAMS: Yes.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: Dr. Adkins said we tried
our best to get her to quit, we pressured her to quit before her surgeries. We tried, we tried. She just couldn't quit. He said yeah, she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
And we also brought, if you recall, soft-spoken Dr. Chokshi, who never testified in court before, who took care of Edna during the later part of her life. And he told you, yes, she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
And both of those doctors said, under oath, that that addiction, smoking cigarettes, is what caused her COPD and death. I will get to that in a second.
Now, not only did the doctors that treated her tell you she was addicted, but you'll recall that the hospitals did also.
Both Holy Cross Hospital and Imperial Point Hospital.
And you'll have all those records that you can take back into the jury room to look at.
Both of them had billing codes that I put up, you can recall, here. I showed you all the billing codes. Dr. Cummings explained them. Both of those hospitals have billing codes for
nicotine abuse, tobacco dependence, that Dr. Cummings told you means addiction.
So somebody at the hospital believed -local hospital -- believed she was addicted.
But the defendants told you in opening statement, no, she wasn't addicted to cigarettes.
Could I have Slide 2, please, Baron?
Over the years, the defendants had great scientists working in their companies, looking into their products to find out if cigarettes were addictive, to find out if cigarettes caused disease.
And here is just a snapshot of what their own previously secret internal documents said on that subject.
1969 (sic), cigarette smoke should contain sufficient nicotine to supply the necessary requirements of the smoker with respect to this compound.
That document was marked "secret," "confidential." American public didn't know that. They didn't tell the American public.
They told the American public otherwise. They told the American public for almost 50 years,
there's no proven link. If there is, we'll fix it.
Another one, their own internal document from 1963: Moreover, nicotine is addictive.
We are then in the business of selling an addictive drug. In their own language, their own previously secret, confidential records.
Cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects, their scientists said, including emphysema, which is a form of COPD. They knew that back in 1963. They didn't tell the American people that. They told the American people there's no proven link.
And they sold their product, and they made their money and they spent money marketing their product, knowing that, knowing people were smoking, getting addicted and dying.
That's what the case is about.
Another one: Certainly the nicotine level of Brown & Williamson cigarettes -that's now Reynolds -- was not obtained by accident. We have a research program in progress to obtain by genetic means any level of nicotine desired. "Any level of nicotine desired."
You heard the evidence from Dr. Cummings about how they engineered the modern cigarette to maintain just the right amount of nicotine to hook people.
It's like a fisherman. The fish sees the bait. The fish doesn't know there's a hook inside the bait. The fish eats the bait. Some of them get away because the hook only gets on the outside of the lip; but if the hook gets any deeper, the fish is dead.
Edna started smoking -- they told you no, no, she didn't smoke when she was a kid. There's no evidence of that. I showed you the medical records. We went through them.
We did simple math with Dr. Cummings.
You can take the medical records back. They show 63 years of smoking, 70 years of smoking, 55 years of smoking.
Do the math. Take it all back. She started 13 or 14. I don't care, 13, 14, 15.
What difference does it make? Thirty years before the Surgeon General's warnings were first on the pack.
And they're saying she's not addicted?
She's just like the fish. She didn't get the
hook in the lip? She got the hook so far down, she smoked almost to the day she died.
Look at this one, 1972. Without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. No one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine.
That's why they engineered the modern cigarette the way that they did. Get that nicotine in there, hook those people, those Americans, and then look for replacement smokers, and then look for new customers after the previous ones die. The ghosts of those 20 million people.
Finally, I told you in opening statement -- and I know that my Latin was off, but there it is. It's going to be in evidence.
Previously secret, 1972 internal document from the cigarette companies: Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions. Nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking.
In other words, it's the essential ingredient; that's why people smoke.
Can we go to the next slide, please,
Baron?
Here we go again, 1973. The physical effects become of overriding importance and desirability to the confirmed smoker.
They talk about putting hungry rats in cages in 1977, to do these nicotine tests.
And here's one in 1982: Most of those who have smoked for any significant time would like to stop, but many -- but not most -- many of those who would like to stop smoking are unable to do so.
Last but not least, in the lower right-hand corner, this is from an internal, previously secret cigarette company document.
They're going to stand up here and tell you this is all about choice, this is America,
Edna had the freedom to choose.
Well, how much choice does a 13-, 14- or 15-year-old girl have, 20 or 30 years before the Surgeon General warnings are on the pack? How much choice does she have? That's a question you're going to have to answer.
And then what has been the cigarette companies' position on choice?
Here it is: The entire matter of
addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. We can't defend free choice if the person was addicted.
Dr. Cummings explained to you -- he drew a line, talked to you about free choice and no choice, and then constrained choice and how nicotine affects the brain, and the brain gets addicted and it has to have the nicotine, and that's what affects choice.
And they knew it then, in 1980, but they came in here, in opening statement, tell you here today -- no, no, this woman, who started when she was a teenager and smoked almost her entire life with constant nicotine to her brain, a pack a day, a pack-and-a-half a day, half a pack a day, 20 cigarettes, 25 cigarettes, ten cigarettes, every single day, nicotine baiting her brain, this woman, not addicted. She had plenty of choice; all she had to do was just say no and put it down.
Think about that internal document when they tell you that. Here's one.
Number 3, please.
I told you these were cold, calculating
decisions made at the highest level of these companies.
You might ask yourself why. Why,
20 million dead Americans, 400 billion in marketing their product.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I would -MR. WILLIAMS: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GERAGHTY: Object, Your Honor. This
is -MR. WILLIAMS: The second or third time, too, Your Honor.
MR. GERAGHTY: This is -THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: In 1972, one of their internal -MR. GERAGHTY: I have a motion.
MR. WICHMANN: One of their internal documents. Okay. You're going to get this. Take it back, look at it. Stamped "confidential," stamped "secret," like all those documents. I know you all were probably getting sick of it while I was talking about it with Dr. Cummings. It seemed like it went on forever.
I said: Here is another one, Doctor.
What's that say about -- up there?
And he would say: Oh, that's a little bit vague; but if you look at the next page there it is, "confidential," "secret."
I went through that whole thing with him. When did -- when did this hit the light of day?
Oh, not till the late 1990's; not till 2000.
What were they writing back then? If we move towards reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business.
Here's another one from 1977: Right there, that defendant, Philip Morris. Without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse -- PM, Philip Morris -- would collapse and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees.
And here's one from 1982: We cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could.
That is to say, if the exit gate from our
market should suddenly open, we would be out of
business almost overnight.
Almost overnight. So that's why they
misled the American people, and that's why they designed this business plan for over 50 years, because they knew that if the truth came out, people might not get addicted and people might not die, but they wouldn't make money and they wouldn't make the profits.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I would object.
MR. WICHMANN: And that's what they did.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GERAGHTY: Motion.
MR. WICHMANN: They put profits over human lives.
How far were they willing to go with this plan?
Baron, can you play the clip?
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: I would like you to rise; and those who will be testifying, as well, I need you to rise.
VOICE: If you would raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you're about to give is the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth?
VOICES: I do.
VOICE: Please consider yourself to be under oath.
VOICE: I'll begin my questioning on -VOICE: Virtually all of you touch on it and just "yes" or "no" -(Video clip stopped.)
MR. PHILIPSON: Can we just start that again?
MR. WICHMANN: Yes.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: I would like you to rise; and those who will be testifying, as well, with you, to rise.
If you would raise your right hand. Do you swear that the testimony you're about to give is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
VOICES: I do.
VOICE: Please consider yourself to be under oath.
VOICE: Let me begin my questioning on
the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive.
Let me ask you first -- I would like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it; and just "yes" or "no." Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
VOICE: Mr. Johnston?
VOICE: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine, clearly, do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxication.
VOICE: We'll take that as a "no." And, again, time is short. If you could just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive; we just would like to have this for the record.
VOICE: I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
VOICE: I believe nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not
addictive.
VOICE: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
VOICE: Mr. Campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge -(Video clip stopped.)
MR. WICHMANN: Ladies and gentlemen, that was in 1994. 1994. In front of Congress, on CNN, on C-SPAN.
Edna's not here, she's not here to tell you whether or not she saw that. But you heard from her grandson, John, that she watched the television.
One of the questions you're going to have to answer is: Did she reasonably rely on any tobacco industry statements after 1982?
There's one right in front of Congress, on CNN, in the newspapers all across this country.
And let's go to 4, please. Let's talk a little bit about their plan and how they executed it.
In 1953, you remember, Dr. Cummings told
you the first links were made scientifically between smoking and disease.
So one of the documents that you'll have back there in evidence, marked "secret," "confidential," says there's only one problem, and that's confidence and how to establish public assurance, and, most importantly, how to free millions of Americans from the guilty fear of smoking.
They knew that there was some scientific evidence out there; they had to do something about it. So they all met -When I say "all," I mean, the CEOs, including Philip Morris, Reynolds, Brown & Williamson, at the Plaza Hotel, around the holidays, and they came up with A Frank Statement to cigarette smokers.
Remember Dr. Cummings went over this exhaustively? You'll have it back there. They made certain promises and said there's nothing wrong with our products, and the health and safety of our consumers is of paramount importance to us. Nothing wrong with our products. If we ever find that there is, why, we'll take it out.
Okay. Now, John Hancock told you that Edna was living in Bridgeport, Connecticut, at the time. We went over the two Bridgeport News newspapers from 1954, and both carried a full-page ad of the Frank Statement.
The cigarette companies promised to the American people -- that was also in 458 newspapers all over the country at the time -nothing wrong with our product; if there is, we'll take it out.
Talked about white papers in 1954. The so-called scientific evidence to put out in the public domain that there was no link between smoking and disease.
1955, after they put out the Frank Statement, they turned around and patted themselves on the back. You'll see that evidence back there.
Dr. Cummings told you, they said, well, the first big scare is starting to wane.
Folks, in America, when they heard about the link between smoking and disease, cigarette sales started to dip.
After the Frank Statement came out, and after cigarette companies began their
offensive, their campaign of doubt, confusion and lies, cigarette sales went back up.
And you remember the chart that we showed. Every time cigarette smoking in this country goes up, so does lung disease and lung cancer and death.
They formed the Tobacco Research Institute, and we'll get to that in a second.
Major activity, according to their PR people,
Hill & Knowlton, is to defend the tobacco industry from whatever source, whatsoever.
1958, the individuals we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer. By "causation" we mean any chain of events that finally lead to lung cancer.
Can you put up the next slide, please?
So what did they do, knowing that? They formed their industry group, the TIRC, which was set out there to deliberately mislead the American people. Again, patting themselves on the back.
No question, the TIRC was a successful defensive operation. What they're defending against, ladies and gentlemen, they're defending against the truth, and they knew that
they were lying as a defense; and they knew what they were defending against was the health and safety of the American people.
They talked about psychology. We have to give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. Why? You saw the previous slide. So they didn't go out of business, so they could make more money.
And this one, I think, is classic. The 1972 internal secret memo, talk about their campaign of doubt and confusion to block the truth from the American people.
It says: It has always been a holding strategy, creating doubt about the health controversy without actually denying it.
That was this constant drum beat from the cigarette companies, that there's no proven link and we're looking into it.
Well, they weren't looking into it; they already knew. They had looked into it back in 1953, back in 1954, and they already knew it.
Let's see what they told the American people. What you just saw were the previously secret documents. Let's see what they told the American people, in a snapshot, for ten years,
between 1975 and 1985.
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health; it may not be. We just don't know.
VOICE: I don't know. Frankly, I think that smoking may be hazardous; it may not be.
VOICE: Smoking may be hazardous; it may not be. No one, including TV7, knows for certain.
VOICE: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
VOICE: I don't know if cigarettes are bad or they're not bad.
VOICE: We don't know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking.
VOICE: I am saying that the science to date and over a hundred million dollars of our industry indicates that there is no causal link.
VOICE: I'm not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor
involved with some people.
VOICE: Well, you know, you know the rabbit runs through the briar patch. It's pretty hard for them to look back and see which briar stuck him.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. WICHMANN: Ten years, ten years, that's what they were blasting the air waves with.
Dr. Cummings told you that that campaign alone, for those ten years, they spent $100 million, telling that nonsense to the American people.
MR. GERAGHTY: I would object, Your Honor, to the commentary.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: 1975 to 1985. So that's three years after 1982, those messages still were being sent out to the American people.
Now, in this country, we have a chief medical officer who is in charge of the health and safety of the American people. That is the US Surgeon General.
Can we go to Number 5, please?
Can you focus on Mr. Dwyer for one
second?
Dr. Cummings told you that beginning in 1964, when the first Surgeon General's report came out linking cigarette smoking to lung disease and calling cigarette smoking addictive, that the cigarette industry attacked the US Surgeon General, the US Government.
He told you that during that campaign of attacking the US Government, the US Surgeon General, cigarette companies spent more in a day than the government spent in a year, on that message.
What did they say in 1979?
Could you play Mr. Dwyer, please?
(Thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:)
VOICE: It was suspect from the start.
HEW Secretary Califano launched his anti-smoking campaign a year ago, with all the zeal of a reformed sinner.
And now, in an apparent attempt to bring some science to the side of his new evangelism, the former three-pack-a-day secretary told the Surgeon General, prepare a new report. Its
issuance and internal HEW memo said, and I quote, would be a media event, close quote.
Turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. America, beware, if Joe Califano ever gives up drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most intimate.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. WICHMANN: That was their response to the US Government, to the US Surgeon General issuing a report saying that their products -warning the American people about their products? That was their response.
There was another one in 1988. Sometimes they preemptively attacked the Surgeon General.
Dr. Cummings told you it's no secret that there's no secrets in Washington. Somehow they found out before the Surgeon General's report was even released what the Surgeon General was going to say.
So they issued a press release the day before the Surgeon General's report even came out. What did they call it? Claims that cigarettes are addictive are irresponsible and scare tactics.
Now, how could they say that to the American people in 1988, when they knew all the way back in 1953 and 1954, the opposite?
That's why we're here in this courtroom. Again, all the way up to -- show us the slide again, please -- 1994. That was a year before Edna Siwieck became sick with a cigarette-related disease.
You already saw the clip, we're not going to play it again; but a year before then, the CEOs of the major tobacco companies were swearing, under oath, that there were no health risks associated to their products.
Could you put 6 up, please, Baron?
MR. PHILIPSON: I'm sorry, did you want the Waxman lung cancer, or no?
MR. WICHMANN: No. Number 6, please.
MR. PHILIPSON: Okay.
MR. WICHMANN: The second question that you are going to have to decide to determine that Edna Siwieck is a member of the class is on the board in front of you: Was her COPD a legal cause of her death?
Now, we brought you down Dr. Chokshi, the soft-spoken family doctor. Doesn't have a dog
in the fight. Treated her, saw her, tried to help her. He said, yes, she had COPD and that COPD was from smoking.
Dr. Adkins, again, who came down -- I can't imagine a man with a better bedside manner than him -- he really cared for his patient. He also treated her. He said, in 1995, he diagnosed her with COPD from cigarette smoking.
And you're going to have all the records back there. I'm not going to show them to you again. I showed them to you earlier.
COPD. What is COPD? You heard Dr. Cummings tell you it's living like having a pillow over your face, trying -- and trying to breathe.
I showed you the Vitas Hospice records one year before she died; patient wants some help breathing. She needed oxygen. Even with the oxygen, she couldn't breathe properly.
And that's because cigarettes that they manufactured -- particularly the ones that Edna smoked with the filters -- required her to inhale deeper and get all those toxins in the cigarette smoke farther up in her lungs and
scar her lungs day after day, year after year, as a result of the nicotine that they put in their cigarettes to get people addicted.
Now, do you have Slide 7?
This is one called "The Illusion Of Filtration." Talked about the filters. The testimony was Edna liked them because -And they were marketed to women -- you'll see the ads -- because they were between the cigarette and their lips, and the female smoker would not get tobacco on her lips.
Also, the companies told the American public this was a safe way to smoke. I just explained to you why it wasn't and why it contributed to the epidemic of COPD in this country.
I'll focus on one that summarizes everything, and that's the 1966 memo right there in the middle, at the bottom.
One of the internal documents that you'll have back there, previously marked "secret," "confidential," tells the whole story: The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration.
You heard from Dr. Cummings, filters
don't make a difference.
You heard testimony in this case from the US Surgeon General, COPD remains a leading cause of death in the United States.
In 2005, one in 20 deaths had COPD as the underlying cause. Importantly, the evidence indicates that in the US, COPD could be almost completely eliminated by the elimination of smoking.
You heard that from Dr. Cummings. That came from the US Surgeon General.
COPD remains a major health problem that is increasing. This is from 2010. But evidence indicates COPD could almost completely be prevented with the elimination of smoking.
That report also, as Dr. Cummings told you, talked about nicotine addiction.
The US Surgeon General said it again,
2010: Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in smoking. Cigarettes are addictive. Nicotine is the drug that causes addiction. The pharmacological and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
What does that tell you? That getting hooked like the fish means having to live with the pillow over your mouth, your face, constantly needing assistance towards the end of your life to even breathe.
But they didn't want to talk about that in opening statement. They told you -MR. GERAGHTY: I would object, Your Honor, to that commentary.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: It was about Frank's asbestos, the husband's asbestos. That's what they told you that they would bring in and prove to you.
Again, when you go back there, consider what the lawyers told you in opening statement as a promise, and ask, did they deliver.
Well, let me tell you what they delivered. They brought in one doctor,
Dr. Cox, the radiologist.
He got up on the witness stand and said, well, I looked at all the films before coming down here today -- charged $20,000 for that -a picture tells a thousand words.
He said there is one film, he said, and
that one film shows Edna had asbestosis. Of course, conveniently, there was no corresponding medical record for it due to records retention policies.
But he also said something that I thought was very interesting. He said, oh, we radiologists, we never diagnose anything. We just look at the films and we just call it like it is. So, no, I wouldn't expect any of these films that I looked at to have reports that would say anything at all about what Edna Siwieck was suffering from.
Can you help me with the ELMO, please, Baron?
MR. PHILIPSON: Sure.
MR. WICHMANN: Again, I told you before, we brought in the treating doctors, who said she was addicted and her addiction caused COPD.
We brought in the records from the hospitals, diagnosis of COPD, tobacco dependence. You can take all those back.
They brought down one doctor who said:
No, we radiologists, we don't determine disease. We just look at the films.
Well, I don't know where that guy is
from. I don't know where he comes from, but here in Broward County, that's not the way -MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I would object to the reference here. This is -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: Motion.
MR. WICHMANN: Here's -THE COURT: I sustain the objection. You should ignore the remark of the lawyer.
Go ahead, Mr. Wichmann.
MR. WICHMANN: Here's a Holy Cross record -- a hospital right up the street -- for Edna Siwieck, and it is portable chest x-ray.
It is a radiologist down there reading it.
Look what he says: Eighty-year-old female with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
A picture tells a thousand words -MR. GERAGHTY: Could he read the impression, what the radiologist -THE COURT: Sir, sir, don't interrupt.
You can do what you wish in your closing.
MR. WICHMANN: Here's another one, Holy Cross. Impression: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. By a radiologist who is
reading -- look right up here -- a chest x-ray.
Just what their $20,000 expert said couldn't be done.
Here's another one. Holy Cross Hospital: Chest, two views. Clinical information:
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Right there in the report. Dr. Eisenberg.
Their expert came down and told you, a picture tells a thousand words and he saw it but nobody else saw it.
If you take all those medical records back there -- and there's stacks of them from Imperial Point, from Broward General, from Holy Cross for this woman -- you will not find one single doctor entry in the hospital records that says Edna Siwieck had asbestosis. Not one single doctor.
So if a picture tells a thousand words, according to their expert, all the doctors in Broward must be blind. That's what they want you to believe.
Now, this would be like the scanners at the airport. Now, I imagine somebody could walk through an airport scanner once -And you remember you saw Mrs. Siwieck's
jewelry that came through her -- that was showing up on her chest x-ray. I imagine you could walk through an airport scanner once and, from human error, somebody looking at you might -- might miss something, okay?
But imagine if it was the chest that they were looking for something on, every time that person walked through the scanner from 1995 until 2003, when she passed, and didn't find a single bit of asbestosis. It's hard to believe, ladies and gentlemen; but you got to give them credit -MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object to the commentary again.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: And they came up with this Vitas Hospice record that they showed you right here during the last year of Edna's life.
There's not a single medical or hospital record during her care and treatment from 1995 up until now.
They pointed out to you this handwriting here, Dr. Perl, looks like it says "requests lab work for," and that's hard to read, but looks like "asbestos" to me. Dr. Perl.
They said, well, based on that, that's what she had. She had asbestos, despite the fact all those other doctors missed it.
Well, this is what they didn't show you.
How about this? This is the death certificate for Edna Siwieck: Immediate cause of death: End-stage chronic COPD.
Well, guess who certified it? And guess who signed it? Right there, Dr. Mike Perl.
Same doctor.
THE COURT: You have a nine-minute warning on your hour, Mr. Wichmann.
MR. WICHMANN: I'm sorry, Judge?
THE COURT: Nine-minute warning on your hour.
MR. WICHMANN: Thank you.
The same doctor, who looks like he was requesting lab work for asbestosis. Well, look here, there's blank B, blank C and blank D.
Due to or as a consequence of.
The doctor can write anything else in there that they want. But he wrote the immediate cause of death, final disease or condition, resulting in death: End-stage COPD.
That's all they got, ladies and
gentlemen, to tell you that she didn't die from COPD. A leading cause of which is smoking, as a result of the epidemic that they caused.
Could you put up 7A, please?
Even so, ladies and gentlemen, the Judge instructed you -- and this is the law -I meant the concurrent cause instruction,
I'm sorry.
Well, we can talk about 7A while he's looking for it.
MR. PHILIPSON: Here you go. Sorry.
MR. WICHMANN: Concurrent cause is, COPD need not be the only cause; it may be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with something else.
So who knows? Maybe there was something. But it doesn't get around this instruction, as a matter of law, that COPD need not be the only cause.
If we can go back to the greater weight.
That's 7 -- 7A.
So where we are, in order to establish whether or not Edna was a class member, is whether by the greater weight of the evidence, which means the more persuasive and convincing
force and effect of the evidence in this case -- that means what's more likely right and wrong -- we brought in all those doctors, all the medical records, and we brought in the death certificate, all showing that she's a class member.
I imagine they're going to tell you she smoked because she liked it. Well, that's the way they engineered their cigarettes. You recall menthol, that's not natural. They put that in the cigarette because it gives the smoker the cooling effect in her throat.
Licorice, there isn't no licorice in tobacco. They put that in there, for taste.
Dr. Cummings told you, urea, they put that in there. Ammonia, they put that in there, all because inhaling the carcinogens and the toxic smoke and the nicotine is not natural.
So, of course, they wanted to make her like smoking their product. But that doesn't take away from the fact that it's their product and they're liable for putting it on the market.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, that's a misstatement under Your Honor's instructions.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: Now, you'll also recall that we played for you the videotaped deposition of the R.J. Reynolds corporate representative who talked about direct mailing coupons to Edna Siwieck and her redeeming them at BJ's Wholesaler in 2000.
Well, that proves two things: One, the woman was so badly addicted -- by then she was nearly blind, in a wheelchair, on oxygen -- and she's getting her nicotine directly from the companies.
Did she rely on a statement or statements that they may have made? She got her nicotine by direct mail, at a discount, from the defendants. If that's not relying on your product, I don't know what is.
Now, they also brought up that they want to blame Edna, that she was a gambler. She liked to gamble.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: Well, ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you that they gambled.
They gambled with 20 million American lives.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. WICHMANN: They want to make the case about Linda. Twenty-one-year-old conviction. That's not a good thing. She fudged on her resume. That's not a good thing.
One thing that is crystal clear is that when Edna needed Linda the last year of her life, her only child was there for her.
And I'm not going to put all the Vitas records back up; we went through them the other day. She bathed her; she changed her diapers.
The records that you'll have to take back there show she took excellent care of her right up until the evening her mom died and she was in bed with her mom, holding her mom's hand.
Mr. Geraghty put these up (indicating).
A happy Edna; a happy Linda and Edna.
And this one, I think, tells the whole story. There they are together. That's before that last year of Edna's life, when Linda stopped -- put her life on hold and took care of her mom.
You saw Linda on the witness stand; she's right over there with her -- with her son,
John, and you ask yourselves what effect, if any, that year had on Linda.
I'm just going to put one Vitas Hospice record up that you didn't see from before.
This tells you, I think, what you need to know.
The primary caregiver is greatly disturbed emotionally. The primary caregiver will have, quote, a lot of work to do to move on with her life when the patient, Edna, dies.
How much time do I have, Your Honor?
THE COURT: You have an hour and a half. You've gone one hour.
MR. WICHMANN: Okay. Folks, I think what I'm going to do is let you hear, after Mr. Geraghty and Mr. Williams talk, from my colleague, Mr. DePew, because I think you've heard from me probably more than you would like to. Okay?
Judge, I'm going to reserve the remainder of the time for Mr. DePew.
THE COURT: All right, sir.
MR. WICHMANN: Thank you, Judge.
MR. DePEW: Can I have one minute with Mr. -THE COURT: Yes.
MR. WICHMANN: One thing that I forgot to mention, Judge.
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. WICHMANN: You're going to be asked to award damages. We have agreed and stipulated on an amount. The agreed, stipulated amount for the funeral expenses is roughly $100,000, for the funeral and medical expenses.
We are going to ask you to consider the elements that I just discussed with regards to the damages for Linda, her loss of companionship, her loss of her best friend, and what she is today versus what she was before.
We have conceded some responsibility. As the Judge has said to you, it's going to be up to you to consider it like a pie and divide up the responsibility between Edna and the two companies behind us. I'm going to leave that up to your discretion.
And, also, last but not least is we are going to ask you to consider punishing these defendants and awarding punitive damages to them.
Because I was about to forget and my
colleague reminded me -Would you put up the youth marketing slide?
Twenty million deaths, including Edna's.
A 50-year business plan: A campaign of misinformation, doubt, to cause an epidemic of disease.
All they had to do was tell the American people, in 1954, the truth. But what did they do? They marketed their product to youth.
In fact, R.J. Reynolds, in particular, marketed to the 14- to 24-year-old age group. They represent tomorrow's cigarette business; they will account for a key share.
Can you show us the other one, Baron?
If this company is to survive, we must get our share of the youth market. This will require new brands tailored to the youth market. The fragile, developing self-image of the young person needs all the support and enhancement it can get.
Remember we showed you documents going back to 1925. They were targeting youth to get youth to use their products: Young people, 14 years old, 15 years old, 16 years old, 17 years
old. They called them replacement smokers.
See the chart at the top? Their own internal document, again, marked previously "confidential" and "secret."
These corporate defendants were calling American kids "replacement smokers." They were looking for a market to replace folks like Edna. And you heard from Dr. Cummings, that conduct hasn't changed.
We would like you -You will have, as one of the questions, whether or not to award -- whether their conduct was bad enough to award punitive damages. We would like you to check that as "yes," so we can come back and give you some more evidence on that.
Again, it's been a long trial. I thank you again for your attention; and you'll hear from Mr. DePew. Whatever I didn't cover, he'll cover. And I thank you for your attention.



MR. DEPEW: Thank you, Your Honor. May I have a five-minute warning before my -THE COURT: Sure.
MR. DEPEW: Thank you very much.
Ladies and gentlemen, I finally get to talk to you. I have been waiting so anxiously.
My name is Brian Depew. I am one of the attorneys that has the privilege of representing
Linda Hancock. My job is to speak for people who cannot speak for themselves. I've been doing this a long time, 32 years. So let me tell you a little bit about how I'm going to handle this part of the rebuttal. Each of the attorneys in this case have described basically what a jury system is and how important it is, but did you know that very few countries even have a jury system? We're one of the few. And for good reason. Juries like this are important, because when you speak, you write history, forever. That means this case is very, very important.
MR. GERAGHTY: I would object, Your Honor, to that kind of comment.
THE COURT: Overruled. You are on rebuttal, Mr. Depew.
MR. DEPEW: Yes.
So this case, as they have said, is about whether or not even the most basic rules of safety have been violated. There have been findings in this case that, in fact, they have, and for good reason. No one, no one in our society is entitled to create needless endangerment in our community. And you as the
jurors, remember this, you as the jurors are the guardian of the safety for this community.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object to this argument.
THE COURT: That's not proper argument, sir. That's improper argument.
Sustain the objection. You'll disregard the comments of the attorneys.
MR. DEPEW: Thank you, Your Honor.
In short time you'll be going back to the jury room and begin your deliberations. You're going to have questions to answer. You're going to be asked to follow the law, and then you're begin your deliberations. So what I'd like to do now is sort of focus on the deliberations as I respond to some of the comments made by defense counsel.
So there were some big themes in their closing arguments. One of them was, interestingly enough, well, what is all this hubbub about nicotine occurs naturally? And by the way, we take nicotine out.
Well, go back and think about the evidence of this. When you're debating this issue in the jury room, you can remind each other of what the
actual testimony was regarding nicotine occurring naturally. Dr. Cummings, a world authority on the processing and design of cigarettes described how meticulously these cigarettes are manufactured. They are scientifically designed to deliver an exact, precise amount of nicotine. And how do they do it? He described it. And when I learned this,
I	was shocked.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object to the personal comments.
THE COURT: It's not the personalities of the lawyers that control. It's the evidence from the courtroom, all right.
Go ahead, Mr. Depew.
MR. DEPEW: What they do is they use what's called recon, reconstituted tobacco. They literally take the tobacco leaves and they suck out everything so what they're left with is pulp, just like a piece of paper, there's nothing in it. And then what they do, after they take this pulp out, and he described this process here on the witness stand, they spray it back in, they add back in everything that they took out, the nicotine, the toxins, the
carcinogens and they add a little extra. They add flavorings. They add ammonia, which does what? It actually makes the nicotine more readily available into the human brain. It gets there quicker.
There's nothing natural about this. They literally, literally had their hand on the dial and they could dial up and down the nicotine in these cigarettes. And, in fact, they could, if they wanted to, dial all the way to zero. They did it one time. You heard them talk about these nicotine-free cigarettes, Eclipse,
Premier. They test marketed them. That's when they turned the dial down to zero. And guess what happened to those experimental cigarettes? They went the way of the dodo bird, they're extinct. You can't find them. Why? Because they couldn't make a profit. So what they decided to do is keep the thumb on the nicotine scale and keep their customers coming back, just like Edna Siwieck.
Now, the other issue that came up was Edna wasn't actually addicted, that she enjoyed this and that there was no evidence of it. And this may come up in your deliberations, and some
among you might want to remind the other jurors of some of the evidence.
When did Edna Siwieck begin smoking? It's in the medical records documented multiple times, she began smoking at around the age of 15, 16. These dates aren't exact. Now, ask yourself, at 15 or 16 -- she was born in 1921.
This was about, what, 1939, 1940. Was she making a fully informed decision based upon the information that they had total exclusive control of when she had her first cigarette?
By the time she was 19 and became a regular cigarette [sic], was she making a fully informed choice? They had total control over this information. They could have shared it with everyone and put all their cards on the table and said, Smokers, here's what we know. You know what I know, make your decision. But that's not what they did.
They spent untold amounts of money designing every aspect of this product, this defective product, down to the point where they actually got smokers to enjoy the packaging. There was testimony about Edna even enjoying the wrapper, the untaking of the wrapper off the box, the
opening of the cigarette. That was not by accident. That was by design. Every single aspect of this product was controlled for one purpose, and that was to deliver over and over again a needed amount of an addictive drug. They knew what they were doing. Edna Siwieck was the perfect customer. She believed in that product and eventually she needed that product to the point where at the end of her life she had to have her daughter give her a cigarette while she removed her oxygen. At that time of her life she was slowly suffocating from COPD.
Do you actually think that she was enjoying this smoking experience or that she needed the smoking experience?
Now, they said that part of the proof that Edna was not addicted was, well, she never tried to quit. In fact, I have the quote here, I believe it was from Mr. Geraghty, who said there was no evidence. Well, let's actually look at the medical records.
Can I have the Elmo?
Here is the medical record just to establish -- this is dated November 2001.
Medical record documenting that she smoked a
pack a day for 65 years. And this is in November. Well, if you do the math, she was about 15. And there are multiple entries along that line.
So that's just one that talks about her start date. There's another one here that talks about a 60-year history of smoking.
And below it it says "Stopped two weeks ago."
So here's a long-time smoker trying to stop smoking.
But what did the doctors say about the quit efforts? Here's a record, 1995, March of 1995, where a doctor in the history says, "She has smoked approximately a pack and a half per week until two months ago when she stopped completely."
That's the first documented quit attempt.
Little bit of discrepancy on the amount of smoking she did at the time, but it documents clearly her first quit attempt.
Subsequent to that first quit attempt, subsequent to that there was a billing record, there was a billing record for her treatment while in the hospital, and you can see here the
billing code for secondary diagnosis, right here, 305.1 tobacco use disorder. So we have a long-term smoker, we have a documented quit attempt, subsequent to that she's being diagnosed as a nicotine addict. But the story continues.
In a hospital record of September 1, this is from Holy Cross, I'll have to zoom out on this.
You can see the date up here. September 2001 from Holy Cross Hospital. This note, "Still smoking." So first failed attempt.
Here's a hospital record from Holy Cross Hospital, another one from November of 1999. Here's an entry here, diagnosis COPD, cigarette abuse.
Here is a record from Dr. Chokshi dated November of 1999 documenting his diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, continued cigarette habit. Advised to quit.
Another hallmark sign of an addicted smoker, smoking against a doctor's advice. Another document of nicotine addiction.
Here is one from November of 1999 where we now have her on oxygen, you'll see this O2 right here, "on oxygen at home; orders, no smoking."
Yet another completely different document indicating a diagnosis of tobacco use disorder. And this is dated 2001. Right up here, 2001.
Now, what about other quit attempts? Here's the second quit attempt. This is from a document of November of 2001, Holy Cross Hospital record dated November 2001. "Past history of heavy smoking. She just quit smoking three months ago."
This same quit attempt, this same quit attempt was documented in doctor's handwritten notes right here, same admission, "Quit smoking
2	months ago."
So she's making an effort.
But what happens after that? That was November. Within days we have another record here, "Cigarette smoking chronic obstructive pulmonary disease."
Now, here's a document 2002, September of
2002,	"Personal habits," you see it right here. Checked "Smokes."
So she's back smoking again.
Here's a St. John's Nursing Center record. See if I can zoom in on this. That highlighted section you can see where they found a lighter
in her room. "Instructions, the patient not to smoke in room. Cigarettes and lighter taken away from room."
So if that's not the hallmark of an addicted smoker, I don't know what is.
More documentation of the frustrations encountered by her health care providers. "Cigarette smoking, not quit."
And finally, another failed attempt documented. This one now in August of 2002. "She is a widow now but used to be a heavy smoker of over 2 packs of cigarettes per day. She is now smoking less, but quit about 1 to 2 weeks ago."
And of course we know the story after that, she took it up again.
So to answer the question about whether or not she was an addicted smoker, the medical records speak loud and clear. This is not from a witness. It's not from a family member. These are multiple independent at different times health care providers documenting the difficulty that they're having to help her control her nicotine addiction.
THE COURT: Five minutes, sir.
MR. DEPEW: Lastly I want to talk about this asbestos.
You recall that Dr. Cox was questioned by Mr. Millard regarding the dust. Here it is right here. I wanted to bring this testimony back to your attention, because what we have here is another defense based on dust, but this time it's being thrown in your eyes.
MR. GERAGHTY: I object, Your Honor, to the comment.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. DEPEW: This is the testimony of Dr. Cox on the witness stand regarding this, quote/unquote, asbestos diagnosis. Here was the question. "Now, I'm going to hand those to you. And I know you've referenced a couple of radiologist reports here a moment ago. And in any of those did anybody say she had asbestos? Was that ever a diagnosis made for this patient? "Answer: No.
"At any time?
"No."
It continues on.
"Is there anywhere a diagnosis of asbestos -- asbestosis?
"No."
Mr. Millard continued.
"Was there any mention of a physician being concerned about asbestosis-related disease?
"Other than fibrosis?
"Question: Other than fibrosis where someone said, we believe this woman has been exposed to asbestos, a significant symptomatology for that, we're going to treat her for it, is that anywhere in those records?
"No, the records only refer to fibrosis without specifying a cause.
"And we understand there's a number of different things that can cause fibrosis, true?"
And he answers, "That's correct."
And here it is right here, Mr. Millard follows up, "And smoking can cause fibrosis, true?
"Answer: Minimal, true."
So the whole arguments about these X-rays and these reports showing fibrosis means that fibrosis is a general finding that can be caused by many things. It could be asbestos; although there's no evidence she was ever exposed to it, but it could be smoking.
So those are the types of defenses that they brought to you.
I'm in my last few minutes here so what I want to do is sort of skip ahead to my final comments about Linda, because there were some comments about Linda.
I've been doing this for a long, long time and I've had the opportunity to have sort of a front row seat to the -MR. WILLIAMS: Lawyer's personal statements, Your Honor, are improper.
THE COURT: Stick to the evidence, sir. Sustained. Stick to the evidence.
MR. DEPEW: In this courtroom you have been witness to one example of the daily drama of everyday life, the lives of Edna and Linda.
What we know is that everyone follows their own path, you and me, and that includes Linda as well. And along that path she, like all of us, has stumbled, but she, like all of us, never left her mother's side and literally walked her hand in hand to the end of her life. And I would submit to you that was her moment of redemption. And whatever has happened in the past, it does not deserve your speculation, as
has been suggested. What deserves -- is deserved in this case is an honest assessment of someone who lost many, many years of a good relationship with her mother because she had to witness her mother slowly suffocate to death as a sole and exclusive cause of her exposure to nicotine cigarettes that made her an addict and could not control herself.
Some are successful, many are not. This is a story of one that was not successful.
Thank you very much.
