MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court?
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
You know my name is Bill Geraghty and I represent Philip Morris USA. You've met Jack Williams. He represents RJ Reynolds. And on behalf of both of us and our clients let me say we thank you for your service here in this case.
We know you've all paid attention to the evidence. You've been extremely patient during the proceedings and, unfortunately, during all the interruptions that we had, and we really appreciate it.
If it weren't for people like you who are willing to take the time to serve, our system of justice simply wouldn't work. So thank you very much.
We're getting close to the end of the case, and I'm sure that brings a smile to all of your faces, but your work is not quite done.
Judge Tuter has instructed you on the law that you will apply in this case and he's read you the verdict form, but after all of the lawyers are done talking, he's going to hand you the verdict form and by answering those questions you'll resolve this case for the parties.
And before you go back to deliberate, this is my last opportunity to speak with you and to summarize the evidence that we've all heard over the last week and a half. And now, as I get started, I want to remind you of a few things I told you during my opening statement about a
week and a half ago.
I told you that Mr. Wichmann would spend a lot of his time talking about documents and statements made by Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds over the last 20, 30, 40, 50 and even 60 years.
And I told you one week ago that I would not try to defend all those statements. Many of those documents say things and express ideas that today neither you nor I would say or think. And I told you we wouldn't debate all that.
But I also told you if that were all this case were about, if all the plaintiff had to prove was that a Philip Morris executive or an RJ Reynolds executive had said something inappropriate, then we wouldn't have spent the last week and a half together. But we did. And that's because the plaintiff has the burden to prove much more than that; that's because this case isn't about all cigarette smokers. It's about Edna Siwieck. It's about her life and her decisions. And almost every question on that verdict form, when you get it from Judge Tuter at the end of this case, will ask you specifically about Edna Siwieck, not all cigarette smokers, not the general public.
Now, you've heard about certain findings.
Judge Tuter read them to you during his instructions and you heard Mr. Wichmann mention them briefly. Those findings don't tell you how to answer any of the questions on the verdict form in this case. You decide, ladies and gentlemen, through your verdict whether those findings have any applicability to Edna Siwieck, her life and her decisions. And that's because you are the only ones who have heard Edna Siwieck's story. And you heard pretty much everything you needed to know from me and Mr. Williams through the questions that we asked the plaintiff's own witnesses. And that's an important point.
Mr. Wichmann made a deal out of the fact that we didn't call a certain number of witnesses. This case isn't about who called more witnesses. It's about what evidence you find to be -- and these are the words the Judge used, the most persuasive and most convincing.
And you heard most of the things you needed to know from me and Mr. Williams through the questions we asked the plaintiff's own witnesses and, in particular, Linda Hancock. That's why,
ladies and gentlemen, the entire defense case took only three and a half hours. We didn't think you needed to spend any more time here before you could take that verdict form and decide the issues in this case.
Plaintiff's counsel spent most of his time talking to you about things that had absolutely nothing to do with Edna Siwieck. In fact, when Mrs. Hancock was on the stand, Mr. Wichmann didn't even ask her a single question about her mother's cigarette smoking. Yet here we are in a case in which they want you to award her money for her mother's lifetime of decisions to smoke cigarettes. And she's on the witness stand and not a single question is posed to her by her own lawyers about her mother's cigarette smoking. Think about that when you consider the evidence you've heard over the last week and a half.
Mr. Williams and I asked all of the questions. We were the ones through our examinations that told you the story of Edna Siwieck's life. We told you that story.
One last thing I'd like to mention before we start to walk through the evidence you've heard over the last week and a half, many of you may
feel sympathy for Ms. Hancock for the loss of her mother at the age of 82. We're all human; it's only natural to have those feelings. But Judge Tuter will instruct you that you have to set those natural feelings of sympathy aside and decide this case based solely on the evidence you've heard from that witness stand and from the instructions the judge has given you.
And I know you all took an oath at the very beginning of this case and I know you all took that oath seriously, so I have no doubt that each of you will be able to do that in this case.
I told you a week ago Tuesday that this case was about two words.
Can everybody see that okay?
"Control" and "responsibility." And I told you -- I asked you that as you listen to the evidence over the last week or so, ask yourself a series of questions as you listen to the evidence, who was in control of Edna Siwieck's lifestyle choices?
Who was in control of her efforts to quit smoking?
Who was in control of whether she was
motivated to quit, whether she wanted to quit smoking?
Was Edna Siwieck addicted, and if so, was her addiction so strong that it overpowered a committed effort on her part to quit?
And finally, did anything that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds, anything they said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking have a direct and substantial impact on Edna Siwieck's decisions?
And those terms "direct" and "substantial" come right out of the jury instruction you're going to get from the Court.
And I told you a week ago Tuesday that when you could answer these questions, you would know who was in control and ultimately who is responsible in this case.
And, frankly, as to that latter question, you heard the answer to that at the very beginning of the case. Judge Tuter told you before we even started the voir dire process and he reiterated it again this morning in his instructions, the plaintiff has admitted that Edna Siwieck was at fault for her own death because she never tried to quit. They admitted
she was a legal cause of her own death. And they admitted that, ladies and gentlemen, at a time when they knew every single thing they've told you about Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds during this trial.
Think about that as you listen to me summarize the rest of the evidence.
You'll recall that I spent a lot of my time during my opening statement a week or so ago walking you through what I call the significant events of Edna Siwieck's life. And that's because, again, this case is about Edna Siwieck. And I'm going to walk you through all of that evidence again because every single thing I told you in my opening statement has been proven to be true in this courtroom over the last week and a half.
I told you that there would be two sources of evidence. First, evidence that was created long before this lawsuit was ever filed, things that Edna Siwieck herself told her medical doctors and her friends and family. And I told you the second source of information would come from depositions and testimony from primarily Linda Hancock, the plaintiff; and her son John
Hancock Junior, the people who have a direct financial interest in the outcome of this case.
I told you you would have to decide what evidence you choose to believe. Judge Tuter just instructed you that you get to decide whether you find the witnesses to be believable or whether you believe that some of the statements they've made are colored by the fact that they have a direct financial interest in the outcome of this case.
And you can accept or reject that testimony in whole or in part; that is your job as the jurors and your job alone. And it's an important job, because as I told you at the very beginning of this case, Ms. Hancock and her lawyers have told you things during the course of this trial that are directly contradicted by what Edna Siwieck said many years before the lawsuit was filed. And I'll mention those as we go through the evidence.
And when deciding whether you should believe Ms. Hancock's testimony on disputed issues of fact, remember and consider the fact she has been convicted of a felony. Three days ago, on Monday afternoon, she told you she had made
false statements in her resumes about her education and her work history in order to obtain employment. And she did it as recently as 2007. And as a matter of fact, on Friday -excuse me, Monday afternoon, she tried to tell you that her mother only had an 8th or 9th grade education. She tried to tell you that and she only admitted to you that her mother -- no, no, my mother did graduate from high school -- after I confronted her with the truth. You should consider all of that as you think about the evidence you've heard in this case.
So let's start walking through the evidence you've heard about Mrs. Siwieck. Here's the timeline, and I'm going to tell you, this is the exact same timeline, the exact same timeline that I showed you a week ago Tuesday. And we're going to walk through most of these things.
Some of these things aren't really germane to the decisions you need to make, but we're going to walk through all of these issues and I'm going to show you we proved everything I told you we were going to prove.
And just orient yourself again. Remember, everything above this blue bar here in the
middle, they relate to events in Edna Siwieck's life. And everything below the blue bar relates to things that occurred in the United States related to cigarette smoking and health.
You know that Edna Siwieck was born August 3rd, 1921 in Mont-Carmel, Prince Edward Island in Canada. She was part of a big family. She had two sisters and three brothers.
And you know now that she was born with dislocated hips and that those hips were surgically fused together when she was a very young girl. And you now know why that's important. That explains, ladies and gentlemen, why she had difficulty walking in the last years of her life and why she ultimately needed a walker and a wheelchair.
Now, we don't know that much more about the early years of Edna Siwieck's life. What we do know, and remember, I asked Ms. Hancock this question, we know that at about the age of 14 or 15 she and her sister stole a cigarette from her father's pack of cigarettes. We also know that her parents had a strict rule that forbid their children from smoking and that Edna Siwieck hid the fact that she smoked that cigarette from her
father. So she wasn't smoking at that point in time on a regular basis.
I then asked Ms. Hancock and she confirmed exactly what I put on this board. My mother did not become a regular smoker, a daily smoker of cigarettes, from what she told me, until she was about 19, 20 or 21. That's what Linda Hancock told you on Tuesday.
You also know that basically every member of her family was smoking cigarettes, her mother, her father and four of her five brothers and sisters. You heard Dr. Cummings tell you the most powerful influence on whether someone will start smoking cigarettes are family and friends. That's the evidence you heard.
Now, let's drop below this blue bar for a minute. And I want to -- before I get to this point I want to just remind you, before I started asking Dr. Cummings questions, did you hear that the State of Florida had actually banned the manufacture and sale of cigarettes in 1899 because the Florida Department of Health had found cigarettes to be the, quote -- you saw the document -- the worst form of tobacco addiction in 1899? You know that long before
Edna Siwieck was ever born people referred to cigarettes and cigarette smokers as coffin nails and nicotine fiends. Those terms mean cigarettes will kill you and if you start smoking, it's going to be hard to quit. That's what you heard.
In the 1930s and 1940s you saw the articles in Reader's Digest Magazine that said that nicotine is a drug, nicotine is the reason why people smoke cigarettes and cigarette smoking can shorten your life.
This is in the 1930s and 1940s.
This was no secret to the American public, despite everything Mr. Wichmann wanted you to believe. And even Dr. Cummings on the stand, I asked him the question, I said, look, nobody needed an internal tobacco company document from Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds to know these things. Now, he didn't want to admit that question, but he had to. He had to because he knew that was the case.
Now, if we move forward into the early 1950s, you heard evidence that some of the first scientific research is being published that links cigarette smoking specifically to lung
cancer. And Mr. Williams is going to talk about this in more detail so I'm only going to just touch upon it.
Were the Siwiecks aware of this information?
Well, after sitting through this trial, of course you know the answer, yes, they were.
What was the evidence you heard?
In the early to mid 1950s they were in their mid 30s, they were educated and intelligent.
They watched the news and read the newspaper every single day. Mr. Frank Siwieck had a habit of coming home in the evening, reading the newspaper and discussing the significant events of the day with his wife while she was preparing dinner. There's no question. They were aware of the fact that cigarette smoking could cause disease.
You know in 1957 the family moves down here to Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Edna Siwieck works in beauty salons. Her husband Frank Siwieck is an electrician who works at construction sites. And you've now heard that during the years he was working as a construction worker he was exposed to asbestos dust. And he brought that asbestos dust home on his clothing and every
single night Edna Siwieck shook out his clothing, removed all the dust and dirt and laundered his clothes. And at this point she had been doing that for the better part of 10 years. That's the evidence you've heard.
You've also heard that they were smoking cigarettes and that Edna Siwieck was smoking filtered menthol cigarettes.
Well, the one thing I think there is absolutely no debate about at this point in time is you now know Edna Siwieck thoroughly enjoyed everything about cigarette smoking. Linda Hancock told you all of these things. I don't even need to repeat the list. And this isn't even everything that she said, but this is the list of all of the things Edna Siwieck loved about smoking cigarettes.
You heard Edna Siwieck was a very happy person, she enjoyed life, and there is no debate she enjoyed cigarette smoking her entire life.
That brings us to January of 1964. We're below the bar now. You heard that in January of 1964 the United States Surgeon General issues a landmark report that concludes cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis, which
is a form of COPD.
This was front-page news right here in Fort Lauderdale. Mr. Williams will show it to you.
It was on every single news station. Every American heard this. You saw the clip from Harry Reasoner on CBS News. He looked out over the American public, he looked directly in that camera and he said, "Nobody is going to forbid you to smoke, but nobody is going to tell you it's good for you either." He said, "The decision is up to you, the decision and the health that may depend on it."
With this massive coverage of this story, every American, including Edna Siwieck, was told smoking causes cancer, smoking causes disease.
Two years later in 1966 you heard that Congress passes a law that requires the very first warning label to appear on every single pack of cigarettes. It says, "Caution:
Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." It goes on every pack, filtered, unfiltered, menthol, nonmenthol. You name it.
From this point forward every pack of cigarettes Edna Siwieck buys carries a government-mandated warning.
About the same time, in 1967, you heard that her father, a man named Ben Arsenault, a life-long smoker, dies from a combination of heart and lung disease. But remember what Ms. Hancock said, she goes, oh, he died of heart disease, on the stand.
I said, ma'am, you signed written interrogatory answers under oath that said he also died of lung disease.
She said, Oh, yeah, I forgot about that.
Why do you think she didn't want to admit that to you on the stand? Of course Edna Siwieck would know why her father died and what the cause of her father's death was, but it wasn't until I confronted her with statements she had made before this trial that Mrs. Hancock admitted that to you.
With all the media coverage and what was happening with her father, that very personal warning, there's no question Edna Siwieck knew cigarette smoking was dangerous. But despite all of that Linda Hancock and her attorneys want you to believe that somehow she was not aware of the health risks of smoking. You have to decide if you're going to believe that claim.
Well, what's the evidence you heard?
Well, in the same period of time, 1966,
Linda Hancock told you right from this witness stand she saw that warning and she understood that warning to mean that cigarettes were harmful. She was 19 years old. She was living in her parents' home. She was smoking filtered cigarettes. And she believed cigarettes were dangerous.
Now, let's talk about her father. I asked her point blank and, frankly, I don't think I got a straight answer. I asked her, your father quit smoking at about the same time warnings went on packages of cigarettes in the late 1960s.
She said, Well, I don't really remember. I don't know. Maybe yes, maybe no.
Why do you think, why do you think Linda Hancock would not want to admit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that her father had quit smoking at the same point in time? Because she knows you would conclude that there was no reason why her mother couldn't have done the same thing if she had tried.
We're here in the late '60s. Her daughter
knows smoking is dangerous. Her husband knows smoking is dangerous. There is no question Edna Siwieck understood the health risks of smoking at this point in time.
Let's move into the early 1970s. And I'm going to start below the bar. You heard in 1970 the warnings change on cigarette packages. The new warning says, "The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." The language has changed but the message is the same: Don't smoke, and if you smoke, quit. That is what is being told to the American public.
A year later all cigarette advertisements are taken off of television and radio. And one year later, in 1972, warnings appear on every single cigarette advertisement in a newspaper, magazine and on a billboard.
And we know, ladies and gentlemen, that these warnings were getting through to smokers at this point in time despite what Mr. Wichmann just told you. You heard the evidence from Dr. Cummings, between 1964 and 1979 30 million Americans quit smoking; that's 2 million people per year, during the period of time that
Mr. Wichmann told you the cigarette companies were denying that cigarette smoking had been proven to cause cancer. These smokers, they're exposed to the same information as Edna Siwieck, many of them are addicted but many of them quit and they quit for good because they decide they no longer want to take the risk that they might get sick. But you now know that Edna Siwieck makes a different choice. She decides to continue smoking because she enjoys smoking. She makes no effort to quit. That's the undisputed evidence you've heard in this case.
Mr. Wichmann and Dr. Cummings tried to tell you that this wasn't her making these decisions, it was the nicotine in cigarettes. Nicotine made her make those decisions. Well, remember what you heard from a Dr. Neal Benowitz. At the very end of our case we played about a 15-minute clip from Dr. Neal Benowitz. We played that clip because I heard everything Dr. Cummings had said and I thought, ladies and gentlemen, you needed a dose of the truth. Dr. Cummings told you Neal Benowitz is the author of the 1988 Surgeon General's Report on nicotine addiction.
He told you he is one of the world's leading
authorities, one of the world's leading authorities on whether cigarette smoking is addictive and the methods by which it can cause addiction.
And he told you there was nothing about the nicotine in cigarettes that prevents a cigarette smoker from seeing this warning, understanding what it means and making the decision that they should try to quit.
By the mid 1970s warnings have been on packages of cigarettes for more than 10 years, her husband has quit, but she decides, I'm healthy, I enjoy smoking, I want to continue to smoke.
Let's move forward to '85. You heard that there is now a series of rotating warnings in 1985. One of them says specifically, "Cigarette smoking causes emphysema." But you now know after being here a week and a half that warning didn't tell Edna Siwieck anything she didn't already know.
1988. You heard her husband, Frank Siwieck, is diagnosed with an asbestos-related disease. You heard the testimony. I mentioned earlier that Mr. Siwieck was an electrician, he worked
at construction sites and for many, many, many years he was exposed to asbestos dust at work. Linda Hancock testified that her father came home from work every night covered in dust, including asbestos dust. She called him a dirty and dusty construction worker.
And she said, every night my mother laundered his clothes separate from the rest of the family's laundry.
So Edna Siwieck herself was exposed through the dust that her husband brought home on his clothing.
Asbestosis, as you now know, is a fatal lung disease caused by exposure to the asbestos fibers. It causes many of the same symptoms as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, including shortness of breath.
Now, in 1991 you heard Mr. Siwieck filed a lawsuit against several asbestos companies asking for money damages because of the lung injury he suffered from caused by his asbestos exposure. You heard he passed away in 1995. After he passes away Edna Siwieck takes over the lawsuit and continues to pursue the lawsuit.
And the premise of the lawsuit, ladies and
gentlemen, is that her husband died from a lung disease caused by his exposure to asbestos.
And I'm fast-forwarding here a little bit, but after her mother ultimately passes away Linda Hancock herself becomes the personal representative of her father's estate and she continues to pursue that same lawsuit asking for money damages because of her father's death caused by asbestos.
Now, we're still in 1995 in the timeline here. And you've now heard that in 1995 Edna Siwieck is told that she has mild COPD. At about the same time, she's treated for peripheral vascular disease or what is called PVD. Fortunately for her, you heard it's a blockage in her artery of the right leg, she has surgery, the surgery is successful, she recovers.
She has no breathing problems. She's not taking any medications for COPD. And so she's in pretty good health for a 74- or 75-year-old.
But her doctors tell her, you know what, you should consider quitting smoking. And so after smoking cigarettes for nearly 50 years and enjoying everything about cigarettes, Edna
Siwieck considers quitting smoking for the very first time in her life. Linda Hancock admitted this to you. This is her testimony. This is from Tuesday morning. "Your mother did not try to quit smoking for the first time until after she was diagnosed in 1995, right?
"Answer: Correct."
She had never tried to quit smoking in more than 50 years, tried for the first time in 1995.
And the evidence you heard, ladies and gentlemen, is she did, in fact, quit smoking for about two months, right? I showed you the medical record. You saw this record from her doctor Tabry. And even though he sort of fought with me a little bit, ultimately Dr. Adkins admitted to the same thing. But this is Dr. Tabry. This is March the 20th, 1995. This record is in evidence.
And, ladies and gentlemen, we put all the medical records in too. You don't need to look at thousands of pages of medical records to decide the issues in this case. We've put together 15 or 20 of the most germane medical records. They're in evidence. It's Defense Exhibit PMU 018194. This record is part of it.
Edna Siwieck told Dr. Tabry -- here's what he wrote: "She has smoked approximately 1.5 packs per week," which you now know is three or four cigarettes a day, "until two months ago when she stopped completely." That's what she told her doctors. And the fact that she quit smoking for two months is important because, again, you heard Dr. Benowitz tell you the effects of nicotine are temporary. Dr. Cummings didn't want to admit these things, but Dr. Benowitz told you that after you quit smoking, nicotine leaves the body in 72 hours. Most of the withdrawal symptoms pass in one to two weeks. Those nicotine receptors that Dr. Cummings wouldn't admit were temporary,
Dr. Benowitz told you they return to normal in three to four weeks after you quit smoking.
That's what you heard from Dr. Neal Benowitz.
So when Ms. Siwieck quit smoking for two months, all the nicotine is out of her system, any withdrawal symptoms she might have had are gone and the nicotine receptors, they are back to normal.
And we do know based upon the evidence that
at some point thereafter Edna Siwieck decides to resume smoking, but she cuts down substantially on the number of cigarettes she smokes per day. And I showed you this record as well.
This is a questionnaire that Edna Siwieck herself filled out long before the lawsuit was ever filed. November the 19th, 1999. "Do you use tobacco products?"
She said yes.
She was asked, "How many cigarettes per day?" And she wrote in her own handwriting "four to five daily." Four to five daily.
And it appears that that's the amount she smoked based on the medical records we have for most of the rest of her life.
Now, we're still here in 1995. We're in this middle bar here. And remember what Linda Hancock tried to tell you, she tried to tell you when Mr. Wichmann was asking questions, my mother's health just went down the tubes in 1995 when she was diagnosed with mild COPD. Well, what did she say when I started asking her questions? She told you in 1995 my mother was vital and healthy. Vital and healthy. She had no shortness of breath, no breathing problems at
all, none whatsoever. None whatsoever. She continued to enjoy her life. That's what Ms. Hancock told you.
Now, let me be clear, ladies and gentlemen. We know that her husband died in this period of time, and I don't mean to suggest that Edna Siwieck didn't grieve the loss of her husband whom she loved, but what you've heard is by nature Edna Siwieck was a very happy person. And Linda Hancock admitted to you on Tuesday, after her father's death she decided she was going to continue to enjoy her life and do all the things she loved to do, including smoking cigarettes. She told you her mother was independent, she had friends, she socialized with those friends. She travels, she gambles and she smokes, all things she loves to do, all things she loves to do.
Knowing that she's not going to live forever, Edna Siwieck decides, I'm going to enjoy my golden years. She had every right to make that decision. Most importantly, you've now heard that Edna Siwieck did, in fact, control where, when and how much she smoked. You know she quit. You know she cut down. As I
told you just a moment ago, she's smoking four to five cigarettes a day, four to five cigarette as day. The experts told you that the key issue in terms of addiction is control. If you can control your use of a substance, you're not hopelessly addicted.
So why didn't Edna Siwieck quit? Well, what's interesting about that, ladies and gentlemen, is Mr. Wichmann never asked his own client that question. I had to ask Linda Hancock that question. And now, ladies and gentlemen, everybody in this courtroom knows the answer. Apparently Mr. Wichmann and the other lawyers who represent Linda Hancock didn't want you to hear that answer.
Edna Siwieck didn't want to quit smoking.
That's the evidence you heard right from Linda Hancock herself. It's that simple. And she didn't want to because she enjoyed smoking cigarettes.
You know what her attitude was about smoking. I showed you the list of things she enjoyed. In the last few years of her life when she was only smoking a few cigarettes a day, she told Scott Reikerd, cigarette smoking is the one
thing I still enjoy.
And you don't have to take my word for it.
We can look exactly to what Scott Reikerd said.
And remember, Scott Reikerd is a close dear personal friend of both Linda Hancock and Edna Siwieck. He is the only witness that the plaintiff called in this case that does not have a financial interest in the outcome.
And what did he say? This is the question and the answer that I asked Mr. Reikerd. "And in the last years of her life, Edna Siwieck said cigarette smoking is the one thing I still enjoy, didn't she?
His answer, "Yes." Yes, from one of her closest friends.
Frankly, at this point in her life, 78, 79,
80 years old, Edna Siwieck didn't want to give up something that she enjoyed and that she was only doing a couple of times per day. And you know that Linda Hancock's attitude about her mother's smoking was exactly the same. You know she was smoking cigarettes too. She was smoking cigarettes with her mother. This is the same board I showed you during my opening statement.
I told you this is what the evidence was going
to be.
Scott Reikerd asked Linda Hancock, you know, why aren't you doing more to encourage your mother to quit smoking?
Her answer was, "It's her life." "It's her life."
And she said, you know what, if cigarette smoking is the one thing she enjoys, then that's the one thing she should have. That was the attitude of both Edna Siwieck and Linda Hancock.
And that's why Linda Hancock continues to buy cigarettes when her mother could no longer drive a car, that's why she continued to smoke cigarettes with her mother, that's why she continued to light cigarettes for her mother when her mother could no longer light them herself. And that's why Linda Hancock told you on that witness stand under oath, you know what, my mother was never really motivated to quit smoking, never really motivated. That's from the plaintiff in this case.
So let's move forward to 2001. You know that Edna Siwieck turned 80. She had an 80th birthday in August of 2001. And she was doing pretty good as of that time. You saw the
photographs. Scott Reikerd told you flat out,
Mrs. Siwieck was doing pretty darn good for an 80-year-old woman. But you also know that over the years she had started to develop other significant health problems. You heard all about them. I don't really need to repeat them.
She had bad hips, made it impossible for her to walk. Macular degeneration, she was losing her sight. Hypertension, hypothyroidism, scoliosis, osteoporosis, none of this had anything to do with her lung disease or with her cigarette smoking, none whatsoever. That's the undisputed evidence in this case.
Then when we get to a year later, August of 2002, what was the evidence you heard? She was involved in a car accident. She suffered a bad injury to her chest. She was hospitalized.
Shortly after she gets out of the hospital her hips give out on her, she falls, she fractures her left hip. Those events both occur in August of 2002. And I asked Ms. Hancock this question on Tuesday, I said, you know what, when those things happened, that's when your mother's health really took a turn for the worse.
She said, yeah, that's right. That's
exactly what happened.
And that's exactly what her medical records say.
These are the Vitas Hospice records. This is a month later, September 18th, 2002. The doctors wrote down the same thing in their notes. "A month ago PT," you know that means patient, "was in car accident and has been declining since."
That's what her doctor said.
Her breathing becomes progressively worse.
She needs oxygen on a more regular basis and you know she started to have in-home hospice care.
Eventually on September the 16th, 2003 Edna Siwieck passes away at the age of 82 and with a long list of other health problems that have absolutely nothing to do with her lung disease or cigarette smoking. And while COPD is certainly listed as the cause of death on her death certificate, you now know that there was never a pulmonary function test ever performed on Edna Siwieck and no autopsy was done. That's the evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen.
And you've now heard from Linda Hancock that when her mother passed away, her mother
expressed no regrets whatsoever about the fact that she had smoked cigarettes or about any of her lifestyle choices. Edna Siwieck never blamed Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds for her illness. She lived a long, happy life. She enjoyed her life and enjoyed smoking cigarettes until the very end. And that's the story, ladies and gentlemen, that you've heard over the last week and a half. Everything on these boards we have proved.
I showed you this board in my opening and I told you I thought they would be largely undisputed. Well, you know what, they are absolutely undisputed at this point in time.
Edna Siwieck made no effort to quit until after 1995, after she was diagnosed.
She controlled her smoking in the last years of her life. She quit and she cut down when she wanted to.
Edna Siwieck enjoyed smoking her entire life and said smoking was the one thing I still enjoy. And she never said, I want to quit smoking. And you now know that she had many other health problems at the end of her life that had nothing to do with cigarette smoking.
That's the evidence you've heard in this case.
Now, what I'd like to do with the remainder of the time I have, ladies and gentlemen, is I would like to walk you through each of the questions on the verdict form that Judge Tuter is going to give you and explain how the evidence fits in with each of those questions.
And I want to make one important point before I start showing you those questions.
The plaintiff bears the burden of proof on each and every one of those questions. She must prove to you by the greater weight of the evidence that she is entitled to prevail on each one of those questions. Plaintiff has to show you more persuasive, more convincing evidence than this mountain of evidence that we've presented to you over the course of the last week and a half. And simply put, ladies and gentlemen, they haven't done that. They haven't done that.
Let's start with question number 1. If we could put that on the board, please.
I'm just going to highlight this. All right. Hopefully you all can read that from
here, but you'll see it. It says, "Was Edna Siwieck addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was that addiction a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or COPD?
That's the first question.
Now, this looks like one question, but there are really several issues, three issues that are part of that question. And I put them on a board here and I'd like to walk you through the evidence you've heard about each of these issues.
I've discussed each of these issues in my opening statement.
First you have to decide, was cigarette smoking the medical cause of Mrs. Siwieck's lung disease?
If you decide yes, then you ask, was Mrs. Siwieck addicted? And finally, if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her COPD? And I'm going to walk you through each one of these.
If you answer no, if your answer to any one of these issues is no, your verdict is for the defendants, this case is over, your work is done and we go home.
Now, let's talk about the first issue. Was cigarette smoking or exposure to asbestos dust the cause of Edna Siwieck's lung disease? What was the evidence that you heard? Well, certainly there's no question Edna Siwieck smoked for many years, but you now know that she was also exposed for many years to the asbestos dust brought home by her husband on his work clothes.
Mrs. Siwieck inhaled asbestos dust every single day that she laundered her husband's clothing. You heard Scott Reikerd testify, we brought him back on Tuesday afternoon, he told you that Edna Siwieck was worried that she had been exposed to asbestos. She was worried because she knew her husband had died from asbestos exposure and she believed she had breathed in those same asbestos dust fibers from his clothing.
And ask yourself this, ladies and gentlemen, who better than Edna Siwieck to know whether she was exposed to asbestos? Who better than Edna Siwieck?
You also know that her husband, Frank Siwieck, ultimately was diagnosed with pulmonary
asbestosis, a fatal lung disease caused by exposure to asbestos. And you know that asbestosis causes the same symptoms as COPD.
What evidence did the plaintiff bring you?
Think about that for a second. You heard from two of her treating doctors, Dr. Lowell Adkins and Dr. Rajiv Chokshi. But Dr. Adkins didn't even remember that he had treated Frank Siwieck and that he had diagnosed Frank Siwieck with pulmonary asbestosis. He had forgotten that. I had to show him the medical record and show him that he had diagnosed her husband with that condition. But he told you he remembered Edna Siwieck perfectly well and, according to Mr. Wichmann, he remembered that we were trying hard to get her to quit in 1995. But he doesn't remember that her husband died from an asbestos-related disease when he was his patient too? That's what you heard from Dr. Adkins.
Now, Dr. Chokshi, to his credit, told you, you know what, I don't really remember Edna Siwieck. All I can tell you is what I see in my medical records. That's what he told you. He told you the truth, I'm sure.
But he had no idea that Edna Siwieck had
ever been exposed to asbestos. He didn't know anything about it. And that's the sum total of the evidence that the plaintiff has presented.
And what did we present? We brought you Dr. Cox. Dr. Cox, you saw him Tuesday afternoon, very tall guy, a radiologist from Daytona Beach, board certified. He specializes in chest films. He diagnoses emphysema, which you know is the physical manifestation of COPD, and asbestosis on a weekly and monthly basis in his practice. He showed you the actual CT scan taken of Edna Siwieck's lungs. He showed you the scarring and he showed you each of the hallmark features of asbestosis. He put all of those pictures of her lungs on the screen and said, look, this is what emphysema would look like. There's no emphysema here. But he showed you all of the hallmark features of the scarring and the fibrosis caused by asbestos exposure.
And the plaintiff never brought you a single witness to challenge anything Dr. Cox said.
Dr. Adkins, Dr. Chokshi, they never saw that CT scan, never. And frankly, I was surprised by some of the things that Mr. Wichmann said earlier. He said nobody ever commented on the
fact that there was pulmonary fibrosis in Edna Siwieck's lungs. You know what, he was just wrong. We showed those records during Dr. Cox's examination.
If we could show those again.
He tried to tell you that the doctor actually saw COPD. He highlighted the clinical information. Dr. Cox told you the clinical information is simply what they tell the radiologist they think the problem is.
This is Dr. Eisenberg, Holy Cross Hospital, linear changes present within the upper lobes, lingula and right middle lobe compatible with at atelectasis or scarring. There are some nonspecific areas of plural thickening, pleural thickening.
What did Dr. Cox tell you he saw? Pleural thickening.
This is Dr. Eisenberg, no dog in the fight, according to Mr. Wichmann. He saw the same things.
And he saw it on another X-ray, if we could show the next one. This is two months later.
This is November the 8th, 2001. Prominence of lung markings is seen particularly in the lower
lobes. Dr. Cox told you that prominence is the scarring. "Impression," this is his actual radiologic impression, not the clinical information that Mr. Wichmann highlighted for you, "Prominence of the interstitial markings most likely related to underlying pulmonary fibrosis." That's what the doctor right here in Broward County at Holy Cross Hospital said.
Mr. Wichmann, I mean, it was a real quick move here on the thing, let's not show the jury what he really said in his diagnostic impression, but that's what he said. And I showed it to you and Dr. Cox showed it to you on Tuesday afternoon. That's the evidence you've heard.
And you'll see it in evidence, I'm not going to bother with it, but Dr. Chokshi also wrote that she had pulmonary fibrosis. It's in the records. If you want to wade through them, you'll see it, it's there. Dr. Chokshi said that.
Now, the doctor who was actually taking care of Mr. Siwieck in the last year of his life was a Dr. Mike Perl. The plaintiff didn't bring you Dr. Perl. As a matter of fact, they never even mentioned him until Mr. Wichmann's closing
argument. I mentioned Dr. Perl when I was examining Dr. Cox. In the last few days of her life Edna Siwieck asked Dr. Perl to have her tested for asbestos. Showed you the record.
I'll show it again.
And he is the doctor that signed the death certificate, no question about it. September 12th, 2003, Dr. Perl, this stands for "requested lab work for asbestos and a Geri-Chair. Patient will pay for lab work. Patient will go," should be to own, "doctor for lab work."
But you know, ladies and gentlemen, the tests were never done because just four days later Edna Siwieck passed away. So why we going to bother with the test after she's dead.
That's the evidence you've heard in this case.
It is plaintiff's burden to prove to you that Edna Siwieck died from a smoking-related disease, that cigarette smoking was the medical cause of her lung disease. There was never a pulmonary function test done. There was never an autopsy done. The plaintiff has simply failed to carry her burden of proof.
And if you determine that to be the case, then the case is over and we all go home. But
if you decide that cigarette smoking was the medical cause, then you move on to issue number 2: Was Mrs. Siwieck addicted?
I told you at the outset of the case that the Court would not give you a definition of addiction, and you didn't hear Judge Tuter give you any such definition. It will be up to you and your common sense to determine what you believe it means to be addicted. You get to decide that in this case.
Dr. Cummings told you he had a very simple definition. If you smoke cigarettes on a daily basis, you're addicted. That's what he told you. But you also heard every single case in which he's ever testified, and we're now talking hundreds of cases, the cigarette smoker, he testifies is always addicted, always addicted.
He told you, he's testified, you smoke one cigarette per day, you're addicted. That's not a real definition that should be sufficient in a court of law, ladies and gentlemen.
I told you the real issue. Was Edna Siwieck able to control her cigarette smoking? You heard her story. She never wanted to quit. And you know that in the last six or seven years she
was smoking just a few cigarettes a day. If she had this kind of control after years and years of smoking she always had that kind of control. She wasn't hopelessly addicted.
But even if you decide she was addicted, you still have more work to do, this last question.
The plaintiff bears the burden to prove to you that her addiction was the legal cause of her COPD.
So what does it mean for something to be a legal cause? Well, I think you saw the language up there. Frankly, ladies and gentlemen, it's complicated. You will see the words "directly" and "substantially" in that instruction. There must be a direct connection and a substantial impact before something can be the legal cause. But rather than go through all the words in the instruction, I think I'll try to see if I can explain it with an example.
Imagine someone walks across the street and they get hit by the bus. The bus is the medical cause of their injury. But to know the legal cause, you need to know more than that. You need to know, did the bus have the right-of-way? Was the person talking on her cell phone? Was
she texting? Did she look both ways? Did she know that the bus was coming and yet still decide to cross the street? You need to know all of those things to decide legal cause.
And the question really boils down to one issue for purposes of this case, was Mrs. Siwieck's addiction so strong, so substantial in the terms of that instruction that it prevented her from making a committed effort to quit in time to avoid her injury?
You already know the answer to that question. The answer is absolutely not. She never wanted to quit.
Linda Hancock told you that Tuesday morning, 48 hours ago. Here is her testimony under oath, ladies and gentlemen.
"You don't believe your mother was ever really motivated to quit smoking; isn't that true?
"That is correct.
"And you don't believe that she ever really wanted to give up smoking cigarettes; isn't that right?
"That's correct."
That's Linda Hancock's testimony under oath
48 hours ago in this very courtroom.
And then I asked her this question. "You never heard your mother say at any point in her life, 'I want to quit smoking,' never heard her say those words."
"I never -- correct, I never heard her say 'I want to quit smoking.'"
That's the undisputed testimony in this case, ladies and gentlemen.
What is also undisputed is what all of the addiction experts told you about the statistics regarding quitting. Dr. Benowitz,
Dr. Henningfield, Dr. Cummings, they all agree with this, 60 million Americans have quit smoking in this country, 60 million. 90 percent of them did it without any assistance whatsoever. And the experts told you the keys to quitting are motivation, determination and willpower.
And where do those qualities come from? They come from within the individual herself. That's where they come from.
But the experts also told you, if you aren't motivated to quit, if you don't want to quit, you are not going to quit. It's that simple.
Dr. Benowitz said no smoking cessation aid, not nicotine patch, not the gum, not the Chantix, can replace motivation to quit smoking. That's what Dr. Benowitz told you.
The plaintiff has talked on and on about nicotine and addiction. They've tried to tell you that nicotine is as addictive as heroin and cocaine, but after hearing the evidence, you all know that that is simply not true. Remember again what Dr. Benowitz said. Dr. Benowitz, I asked him this question straight up. Here is exactly what he said on videotape Tuesday afternoon. I asked him, "Haven't you also commented that the stimulating effect of nicotine is more like that of caffeine than cocaine?"
His answer, "It's a little more intense than caffeine but much less so than cocaine." A little more intense than caffeine but much less so than cocaine.
That's from the world's leading expert on nicotine addiction, world's leading, even according to Dr. Cummings.
THE COURT: One-hour warning, sir.
MR. GERAGHTY: I told you earlier that
everything from my opening statement proved to be true. I've walked you through the timeline, but I think I need to modify that statement on one key point in this case.
I told you you wouldn't hear any evidence that Edna Siwieck was any different from the 60 million Americans who have quit smoking in this country. But you know what, you did hear evidence that she was different. Unlike the 60 million people in this country who quit, Edna Siwieck didn't want to quit smoking. That's what you heard. And if you don't want to quit, you're not going to quit. And frankly, ladies and gentlemen, you don't need to be an addiction expert to know that. It's plain, simple common sense.
Mrs. Siwieck woke up every day for many years knowing that smoking came with serious risks, knowing that that bus could cross that street at any moment, but she nevertheless decided to continue to smoke. Given those undisputed facts, the one and only legal cause of Mrs. Siwieck's COPD was her decision to keep smoking and not to try to quit. Your answer to question number 1 should be no for that reason
as well. And if it is, we all go home, the case is over.
If we could put question number 2 up.
The next question on the verdict form asks,
"Was Edna Siwieck's COPD a legal cause of her death?"
And I'm only going to say a few things about this issue. You've already heard in 1995 when she was 74 and diagnosed with mild COPD she had no symptoms, she was on no medications and she enjoyed her life. For the next five or six years her COPD did not have a significant impact on her day-to-day life. She traveled, she gambled, she socialized with her friends, she smoked cigarettes, doing all the other things she enjoyed. It wasn't until 2002, the car accident and the fall that her health really took a turn for the worse. You heard about all of the other health problems that she had at that point in her life. The evidence you've heard is that Mrs. Siwieck did not die prematurely from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease caused by smoking and for that reason the answer to this question should be no too and the case, again, should be over.
But if you disagree with the mountain of evidence we've presented to you during this case, then you move on to the next question.
If we could put number 3 up, please.
How much time do I have, Your Honor?
THE COURT: You've gone one hour.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. Thank you.
Let's do 3, 4 and 5. I'm sorry. I'm going to try to speed this up so that I stay within the time frame the judge gave me.
These questions all really go together.
They have different language, but they all ask, was the negligence in number 3, was the defective cigarettes in number 4, and 5 refers to gross negligence, but they say, and I'll read 3, "Was the negligence on the part of Philip Morris USA and/or RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company a legal cause of Edna Siwieck's death?"
And I'm going to address these all together, but based on everything you've heard so far, there is no direct connection or substantial impact between any conduct by Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds that was the legal cause of harm to Edna Siwieck other than the fact that these companies manufacture and sell cigarettes. And
they cannot be held liable for that alone in this case.
The judge gave you instruction, I'll put it on the board. The judge told you the manufacture, advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities.
So you can't answer yes to these questions based on these things. And frankly, that's all that you've heard from the plaintiff.
Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, advertising and selling cigarettes.
So let's take a look at what you've heard from Mr. Wichmann. He talked about filters. He talked about additives and ammonia. And he talked about menthol. And I'll address each one.
Dr. Cummings talked about all three of those things during his direct examination, but you didn't hear the story straight until I started asking him questions on cross.
What did he say about filters? He told you filters don't reduce the health risks of smoking. But remember, plaintiff brought you another expert, a Dr. William Farone, he is a
former Philip Morris scientist. He testifies routinely against cigarette companies, but even though he testifies against them, remember what he told you. He told you he was proud of the work that he had done at Philip Morris. He said that filters were a good idea and that they do, in fact, reduce the health risks of smoking. He said that Philip Morris has been sincere and dedicated in its efforts to develop filters and reduce the health risks of smoking. That's what Dr. Farone told you. And he said the same thing about RJ Reynolds.
Additives. What did Dr. Cummings admit to you, albeit reluctantly, about additives? He said cigarettes with additives cause cancer and are addictive and cigarettes without additives cause cancer and are addictive.
And Dr. Farone said the same exact thing.
Finally, menthol. This is the one I'm puzzled that they continue to bring up. Dr. Cummings tried to tell you during his direct exam that somehow menthol makes cigarettes more addictive. But in the two days Mr. Wichmann had him on the stand did he forget that he himself had done a study on menthol that had come to the exact
opposite conclusion? I showed the study to him.
I put it up there on the screen, and he said, yeah, I agree, my study showed that menthol smokers quit more often than nonmenthol smokers. Yes, and I agree smokers of menthol cigarettes smoke fewer cigarettes than smokers of nonmenthol cigarettes. That's what Dr. Cummings told you.
And again, Dr. Farone, the chemist from Philip Morris, agreed to the same thing. And it's not surprising Dr. Cummings said all these things. You saw when I questioned him, he is an advocate who wants to help plaintiffs win big verdicts. He'll say things in the courtroom even though every other expert disagrees. And at the end of the day all you need to remember is what Dr. Benowitz told you about cigarettes.
I asked Dr. Benowitz a series of questions.
He told you nicotine is a naturally occurring substance in cigarettes. He told you you wouldn't have a cigarette without nicotine.
And finally, he told you nicotine is actually removed during the manufacturing process. That's what I asked him.
"And in the course of the manufacturing
process, from the point it comes from the leaf all through the process, nicotine actually is taken out of the cigarette, right?
"Yes."
What are we talking about, ladies and gentlemen?
He is a medical doctor and an expert in nicotine pharmacology. He summed it up best when he said, you can take tobacco, grow it in your backyard, roll it in paper and it would be addictive. He told you Mother Nature puts nicotine in cigarettes.
The evidence you've heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen, is Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds do not add nicotine to their cigarettes. They don't do anything to make their cigarettes more addictive. They are inherently addictive and they have been for 150 years. That's what Dr. Cummings had to reluctantly admit.
The answer to questions 3, 4 and 5 is no.
Let's move on then to question -- I'm going to do 6 and 7 together too. And I'm not going to read these. Mr. Williams is going to talk about these questions in a little bit greater
detail so I'm just going to say something very brief.
These two questions are basically asking you, did Edna Siwieck rely on anything that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking? In other words, think about it this way, would the story that I just walked you through of Edna Siwieck's life turned out differently if Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds had said something different along the way?
And these questions say that it must relate to something that occurred after May of 1982, and you'll see that right in the question. The answers to both of these questions is clearly no. There is simply no credible evidence to suggest that Edna Siwieck was looking to Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds for information about smoking and health.
As I told you in my opening, the evidence shows, and Mr. Williams is going to show you the quotes, she never read or heard a single statement made by any of the organizations that Dr. Cummings talked about. She wasn't waiting for Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds to tell her she
needed to quit. And how do we know that? Well, because in 1995 her doctors told her to quit.
She still didn't want to quit smoking. So what makes any of us think that she would have paid a whit of attention to anything that Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds said?
That brings us to question number 8. If we could show that.
This question asks you, I don't think you're going to get this far in the verdict form, candidly, ladies and gentlemen, but if you do, you have to assign a percentage of fault for Edna Siwieck's death between Edna Siwieck, Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds. And remember, the plaintiff has already admitted that she was a legal cause of her own death.
But in considering this question, remember the questions I asked a number of you during voir dire about lifestyle choices. We smoke cigarettes. We drink alcohol. We choose to eat foods that we know are not healthy for us. If one night you go out and you smoke -- excuse me, you drink too many Coronas, too many glasses of wine, you wake up the next day with a headache and a hangover and you look in the mirror, do
you say to yourself, I'm only 80 percent responsible for that hangover?
No one says that, ladies and gentlemen. We say, you know what, man, I shouldn't have drank that much last night. That's what we say.
That's what everybody says.
Was anybody else responsible for the decisions Mrs. Siwieck made each and every day? Even Dr. Cummings told you, again reluctantly, that a smoker is fully responsible for the choice to quit. And you know Edna Siwieck never chose to quit. She chose not to quit. And so she is 100 percent responsible for that decision.
You can take that down now.
Questions 9 and 10 relate to compensatory damages. I don't think you'll get there. You heard that Mr. Wichmann told you there's a stipulation as to medical expenses. But the next question asks you to award damages for pain and suffering. And you have to decide whether she's entitled to recover money for her mother's decision to smoke and how much that should be.
All I want to say about that is this.
You've heard the story, Edna Siwieck lived a
long and happy life and she enjoyed cigarette smoking to the very end. Based on the evidence you've heard of a woman who lived to the age of 82 and did everything she wanted to do in life, there's no evidence to support an award of damages at all, at all.
The last question on the verdict form is about punitive damages. And let me address that just very briefly. You are not being asked today to decide the amount of punitive damages. The only issue is whether by clear and convincing evidence Ms. Hancock has shown you that she is entitled to recover punitive damages. If you decide yes, there will be another phase of the trial, another round of opening statements by the lawyers, more witnesses for all the parties, more evidence and another round of closings and deliberations.
The issue today is, has the plaintiff proven to you that she's entitled to punitive damages?
You should bear in mind three things, and I'll be very brief about it.
Any punitive damages would go directly to Linda Hancock and to no one else. The punitive damages would be money over and above what you
would already decide is fair compensation when you answer the compensatory damages question. So the issue is whether she should be paid more money to punish and deter the defendants. Second, the burden of proof on this question is much higher, clear and convincing evidence. It must be so clear and convincing that as soon as you hear it you immediately say, this is the right result.
Well, based on the evidence you've heard in this case, there simply is not clear and convincing evidence to support an answer to that question in favor of the plaintiff.
And finally, I want to emphasize that this question and this case is about Edna Siwieck, not all cigarette smokers and not the general public. Based on the evidence you've heard, you know that Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds had nothing to do with the decisions that Edna Siwieck made during her lifetime.
Your answer to that question should be no.
Well, all right, ladies and gentlemen, I am basically just about done. This is the last time I'm going to have an opportunity to speak with you. And I want to thank you for being so
patient whenever I've been before you addressing you or examining witnesses during the course of the case.
Mr. Williams will address you next. And after Mr. Williams I believe it will be Mr. Depew will have another opportunity to speak with you on behalf of the plaintiff because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof. I don't know what Mr. Depew will say, but he may show you more old documents. And as you listen to him, I want you to keep one question firmly in your mind as whatever he's saying, ask yourself, what does this have to do with Edna Siwieck?
What does this have to do with what you now know is the undisputed evidence about her life? That she never tried to quit smoking until after she was diagnosed in 1995; that she enjoyed cigarette smoking, enjoyed cigarette smoking her entire life and said -- never said, I want to quit; that she controlled her smoking and quit and cut down when she decided that's what she wanted to do; and that she lived a long and full life and that when she passed away at the age of 82, she had other health problems that you now know had nothing to do with her cigarette
smoking. Keep those undisputed facts in mind when Mr. Depew addresses you.
You know, in this country we enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom. Everyone gets to make decisions on their own. Everyone gets to decide how they want to choose to live their life. And we all know that with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. And in the end, ladies and gentlemen, that is what this case is all about.
Are we going to hold Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds legally responsible for Mrs. Siwieck's decisions, decisions she made over the course of 50 years about how she wanted to live her life?
Well, you know based upon the evidence you've heard, Edna Siwieck never held Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds responsible for those decisions and, frankly, neither should you.
The evidence you've heard in this case supports one and only one true verdict; that is a verdict in favor of Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds.
I want to thank you very much for being
attentive. You've been wonderful. Thank you.



MR. WILLIAMS: Thank you, Your Honor.
Please the Court?
Ladies and gentlemen, my name is Jack Williams, as you know, and I represent RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company. I know you had a quick lunch. I hope you had a good lunch.
THE COURT: I warned you about that last week.
MR. WILLIAMS: I too want you to thank you for serving as jurors and for helping us to
resolve this dispute. Now, as Mr. Geraghty told you, if you first determine that Edna Siwieck is a member of the class by answering questions 1 and 2 yes, then there will be several other questions for you to answer.
Mr. Geraghty has talked to you about why, based on the evidence you should not find Edna Siwieck to be a member of the class. He's talked to you about her control of her smoking, her joy of smoking, her pulmonary fibrosis, her asbestosis, and you'll recall the evidence from Dr. Chokshi and Dr. Cox on that.
But if you decide otherwise and you get to questions 6 and 7, I'm going to discuss with you the evidence of why you should answer those two questions no.
Now, there's a lot of verbiage, but I'm going to go over them again. And the more you see them, the more you'll be comfortable with them when it's time to deliberate and decide.
The question 6 will say this: "Did Edna Siwieck reasonably rely to her detriment on any statement made by Philip Morris or RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company after May 5th, 1982 which concealed or omitted material information
concerning the health effects of cigarette or their addictive nature, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her death?"
And then question 7 will be similar. It will say: "Did Edna Siwieck reasonably rely to to her detriment on any act taken in furtherance of Philip Morris and/or RJR Tobacco Company's agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature after May 5th, 1982, and if so, was such reasonable reliance a legal cause of her death?"
So both questions, to simplify a little bit, require that plaintiffs prove to you that Edna Siwieck reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement made by RJR or Philip Morris or on a statement that RJR or Philip Morris failed to make and that the reasonable reliance occur after May 5th, 1982 and that Edna Siwieck's reasonable reliance must be a legal cause of her death.
Now, along with these questions the judge has instructed you, and you'll see it again, of what legal cause is. And that will be something like this. "The agreement to conceal or omit
information is a legal cause of loss if it directly and in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such loss so that it can reasonably be said that but for the reliance, the los" -and there's a misspelling there -- "would not have occurred."
And so the plaintiffs must prove to you that but for the wrongful conduct of Philip Morris and RJR after May 5th, 1982, Edna Siwieck would not have died of COPD caused by smoking.
Now, Mr. Wichmann argued that RJR and Philip Morris knew and hid information about the health risks and addictiveness of smoking that internal company documents marked in secret and in company files prevented Edna Siwieck from making an informed decision to smoke or to not smoke. And he also said that due to the tobacco companies that the tobacco companies kept her smoking by a campaign of doubt and deception.
Now, the evidence in this case has shown you that no concealment by Philip Morris or RJR prevented Edna from making informed decisions about her smoking. You can't conceal something that's common knowledge or already known. The
evidence has shown that Edna Siwieck was fully aware of the dangers and addictiveness of smoking but she chose to smoke because she liked it.
The evidence also shows that Edna Siwieck was not fooled or misled my Philip Morris or RJR's statements or conduct. She was not tuned in to what the tobacco companies were doing or saying and she was not taken in by any campaign of doubt or deception. There's absolutely no evidence of that in this case. And remember that this case is about Edna Siwieck, one smoker, just Edna Siwieck. It's not about all smokers. It's not about some smokers. It's just about Edna Siwieck.
And this case is also not a detached evaluation of the conduct of Philip Morris and RJR. And I said detached evaluation. The question is whether RJR's or Philip Morris' wrongful conduct was a legal cause of Edna Siwieck's death. And the evidence has shown you that it was not.
Now, there's no question that you'll find some dumb statements in the files of Philip Morris and RJR. But the plaintiff
doesn't care whether those statements had any connection to Edna Siwieck's smoking decisions. They did not -- they didn't. But the plaintiffs want you to think that they did and they want you to think that because they want to make you mad. It's their plan that making you mad will mean you'll award more money and more money. That's the only reason why they show you a document talking about 14- and 24-year-old smokers dated in 1974 when Edna Siwieck is 53 years old.
Now, the law says, and you've promised to follow the law, that RJR and Philip Morris' wrongful conduct must have caused Edna Siwieck's death. And it did not. And we trust that you will follow the law and the evidence in this case when you deliberate.
Now, Edna Siwieck lived her life. She lived for 82 years and 80 of those years were mostly happy and healthy. And she lived her life the way she wanted to. And she smoked because she liked it and because she accepted the risks. Remember what Scott Reikerd said. Now, he came to testify for you twice. But the first time he came in, remember he was Linda's friend, he was
Edna's friend. She was about 80, 81 years old and she was smoking perhaps three or four cigarettes a day and he said something to her like, maybe you should stop smoking. And what was her response? What was Edna Siwieck's response? She said, It's my life. It's my life. And that tells you exactly what this case is about. It's about Edna Siwieck's life. It's about the way she lived her life and did what she wanted to do. And the evidence shows that she didn't rely on any statement made or not made by RJR or Philip Morris. That's what the evidence shows. And I'm going to talk to you a little bit about that evidence.
Now, you will recall that plaintiff's expert Dr. Cummings during his testimony and Mr. Wichmann during his closing argument this morning referred to a bunch of newspaper articles, press releases, CEO statements of tobacco companies saying that the tobacco companies were denying that there was a link between lung cancer and smoking or it hadn't been proved yet or there was a controversy or debate or something like that.
The question is whether after May 5th, 1982
Edna Siwieck was influenced or relied to her detriment on those statements. And the evidence shows that the answer to that question is no.
Dr. Cummings was the main witness who talked about the tobacco company statements. And you're going to have to take a close look to see who Dr. Cummings is. Remember, the judge told you that in evaluating the believability of any witness one of the things you have to look at, and it's buried in there somewhere, but it says whether the witness has any interest in the outcome of the case. It's about halfway down in the middle of that instruction.
And Dr. Cummings unabashedly told you that he doesn't like tobacco companies, that he wants plaintiffs to win this case. And he's supposed to be an expert. And an expert is supposed to be a person who has scientific or technical knowledge and who comes in here, sits on the stand and tells you about -- uses that scientific or technical knowledge to help you determine an issue that's not common knowledge. Some of it takes technical knowledge or scientific knowledge. But he's not that. He's not objective. He isn't fair. He's a warrior
against tobacco companies. You're not going to get straight objective testimony from him. It was slanted and it was distorted.
Compare Dr. Cummings to Dr. Chokshi.
Dr. Chokshi was the plaintiff's witness too.
When I asked Dr. -- Dr. Chokshi responded to Mr. Millard's questions and he responded to my questions. And when he didn't know, he said he didn't know.
And I need to correct something very quickly that Mr. Wichmann said this morning.
Dr. Chokshi said he didn't know whether Edna Siwieck was unwilling to quit smoking or unable to quit smoking. He didn't know which one it was, whether she was addicted or whether she enjoyed smoking. And he acknowledged on that stand that some people enjoy smoking and they don't want to quit. And he also talked about not only her obstructive lung disease, but also her pulmonary fibrosis, and he noted both and he said that he couldn't tell which was causing her symptoms because he did not administer a pulmonary function test.
He was a straight expert. He told it like it was. That's not what Dr. Cummings did.
There's also something else that I'm going to interrupt my presentation to you for to correct that I need to.
Mr. Wichmann referred to Nancy Montgomery, RJR's corporate representative, this morning and he told you about coupons that Edna Siwieck received for cigarettes. And she did, she received about $35 worth of coupons in 2000 or
2001.	But what Mr. Wichmann didn't tell you, in order to get those coupons like Nancy Montgomery testified, she had to in writing request them and tell RJR or Brown & Williamson, is who they came from, that she was over 18 years old.
Now, you heard me say 2000 or 2001 so Edna Siwieck was 79 or 80 years old at the time. So she had to in writing request those coupons and she received $35 worth of coupons, that's it.
That's not reliance. That's her requesting tobacco information, or for discounts.
But I want to get back to the thing you have to keep in mind is that Dr. Cummings never met Edna Siwieck. But the witnesses who actually knew Edna Siwieck told you and testified that she never relied or was influenced in any way by any tobacco company statements.
Several witnesses testified on the stand for you who actually knew Edna Siwieck and they told you she never complained about RJR, she never complained about Philip Morris and she never said that they withheld information from her. Remember John Hancock, her grandson who's here in the courtroom now. This was his testimony.
"Question: And your grandmother never said anything about A Frank Statement to Cigarette Smokers, did she?
"Answer: No.
"Question: You never discussed RJ Reynolds with your grandmother, did you?
"Answer: No.
"You had no discussions with her about Philip Morris?
"Answer: No.
"Question: And she never told you that any tobacco company withheld any information from her, did she?
"Answer: No."
Linda Hancock, the plaintiff, she admitted this.
"Question: Your mother never told you at any point in her lifetime that she had ever
heard or read a statement by the Tobacco Institute; isn't that right? You never had such a conversation with your mother.
"Answer: I don't think I did.
"Question: All right. And the same is true for the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, your mother never had a conversation with you where she ever told you that she had read or heard a statement made by the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, right?
"Answer: That is correct.
"Question: All right. Or the Council For Tobacco Research, right?
"That is correct."
And lastly, most tellingly, Linda Hancock, "Question: Ma'am, let me ask you again. Did you ever hear your mother say that she blamed the tobacco companies for her injuries, yes or no?
"Answer: No. No, she never did."
Ladies and gentlemen, those are the -that's the testimony from the witnesses who actually knew Edna Siwieck.
So the witnesses who actually knew her admitted that she never said a word about The
Frank Statement, TIRC, CTR, the Tobacco Institute, and she never wanted to sue tobacco companies at any time. This lawsuit is all about Linda Hancock. It's not about Edna Siwieck.
Now, I want to say a word about internal company documents. And the point I'm going to make and the evidence shows that the same information that's in the internal company documents is also public information. It is also commonly known information. The information was not a secret. That's the point.
Dr. Cummings showed you several what he called internal company documents, and Mr. Wichmann has as well, created in the 1950s, '60s and '70s and were in the files of Philip Morris and RJR. And Mr. Wichmann during his closing argument has tried to portray these documents as containing secret information and as having some impact on Edna Siwieck's smoking decisions.
Well, you'll remember on cross-examination that Dr. Cummings admitted that the same core information that was in the company documents was public knowledge, was common knowledge and
the evidence shows that Edna Siwieck knew it.
And when I say core information, I mean two things. I mean that smoking is addictive and smoking is dangerous. That information was in company documents, but it was public information and common knowledge at the same time.
I'm going to show you an example. This document entitled The Optimum Composition of Tobacco and Its Smoke dated November 2nd, 1959 was shown to you by Dr. Cummings and characterized as an internal secret company document of RJR. And it was implied that this document not being public in the 1950s when it was written, 1959, somehow affected Edna Siwieck's smoking decisions. But the evidence will show that it didn't. This document was written by Dr. Rodgman, who was a scientist at RJR, and he wrote in that document that eight of the polycyclic hydrocarbons isolated from the smoke are known to produce cancer in mice.
That's what he said in that document.
Well, what Dr. Cummings didn't tell you until cross-examination and which plaintiffs when they put up these documents are not going to tell you either is that in this particular
document that Reader's Digest published the exact same information eight days later in an article entitled The Search For Safer Cigarettes published November 11th, 1959. And here's what was said in the Reader's Digest, which we know that Edna Siwieck read and we know is a very common magazine for common folk.
"Scientists are convinced that the primary carcinogens are higher polycyclic hydrocarbons formed by the combustion of tobacco at high temperature, about 880 degrees centigrade, in the cigarette ember. They have identified eight carcinogenic polycyclics in tobacco smoke and are on the trail of others."
They say the same thing; one is in the company files, one is in the Reader's Digest.
The information is available. It's the information that counts and the information is not hidden. It's not secret.
Now, the fact that Dr. Rodgman's particular memo was not public had absolutely no influence on Edna Siwieck's smoking decisions. And this is just one example I'm showing you, because you don't want me standing up here talking to you all afternoon, but there are many others like
that. It's said to be a hidden company document in Philip Morris' or RJR's files and the same information is public knowledge, common knowledge in public and common magazines.
And we also talked during this period of time, and I want you to stay cognizant of, in the 1950s information about smoking and lung cancer is all over the news, it's all in the media. We talked about that during this case, not just Reader's Digest, but Life Magazine, TV. We showed you some of the public service announcements. That was no secret. That was widely held information in the 1950s. And there was no harm to Edna Siwieck simply because she didn't see Dr. Rodgman's memo. There's no connection there.
The issue here, ladies and gentlemen, is information, not whether Edna Siwieck saw a particular document in the files of RJR or Philip Morris, it's information that Edna Siwieck had and knew that counts. And the evidence in this case shows overwhelmingly that it was publicly known and common knowledge that cigarette smoking was dangerous and addictive and that Edna Siwieck knew that. She accepted
that and she smoked because she liked it. She enjoyed it and she wanted to.
Now, you will recall that we discussed also some polling information and survey information about what smokers believed with Dr. Cummings. And here is another document that we went over.
It's a Gallup Poll. And the question that was posed to people at the time -- this is from the 1989 Surgeon General's Report -- was: "Do you think cigarette smoking is or is not harmful to your health?"
And this is smoker's responses now. These are not nonsmokers. In 1978, 83 percent of the smokers said yes, I believe my smoking is harming my health. They knew it. But they decided to take that risk. And that's okay.
The number went up in 1985 to 90 percent.
And the question being asked smokers was: "Do you think cigarette smoking is or is not harmful?" And they responded yes, that they knew that smoking was harming their health.
And importantly, these numbers take into consideration whatever effect the information coming from tobacco companies had. The tobacco company conduct that Mr. Wichmann was talking to
you about and that Dr. Cummings told you about from the witness stand is not distorting what smokers believe about the health effects of smoking. They know it's dangerous, they know there are risks, but they decide to take those risks. That's what these numbers show.
So American smokers knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive and with that knowledge some people decided to smoke, it was a risk they were willing to accept, and Edna Siwieck was one of those people.
Now, the evidence in this case has shown that both before and during Edna Siwieck's lifetime there was an abundance of common knowledge and information on the dangers of smoking. And I'm not going to go through it again in detail. I'm just going to like hit the high points. This is like the greatest hits of it for you, because we went over it in the trial and you've seen a lot of it and you've heard about it.
But you remember I went through it in my opening statement. I went all the way back to Columbus and what he noticed about his sailors when he was going back to Europe, because they
smoked tobacco with the Indians, the Native Americans, and some of them had a tough time getting off of it when they were going back, and he noted that in his diary.
And then you'll remember I moved forward to King James, good old King James, and we looked at his stilted language. And he said tobacco was bewitching, but he said a little more than that. And I want you to take note, I'm not going to read that thing again, but he noted two things, it's harmful to the brain and dangerous to the lungs. And that's way back then. That's 1604. That's the counter blast. And even Dr. Cummings agreed with me on that.
Then we move forward in time and we talked about John Quincy Adams, who is our sixth president. We're in 1845, so we're still a long time ago. And note the word that he used to talk about his experience with tobacco. "In my early youth I was addicted to the use of tobacco and two of its mysteries, smoking and chewing."
This was 1845. This was common knowledge. This was what was known.
And then we move into the 20th century and we talked about a Florida Health Note in 1906,
July 1906. Again, "Today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction."
This was about 14 to 15 years before Edna Siwieck was born. This was common knowledge.
It was no secret. It wasn't hidden in some tobacco company document.
Then we talked about the common knowledge and the abundance of public information on the dangers of smoking and addictiveness during Edna Siwieck's lifetime, if you remember. We went over -- and she was born in 1921, as you'll recall, and we talked about Reader's Digest.
And here's an article in 1935 that we talked about. And I'm going to read this because I want you to hear this again.
"One would not like to think that one has become such a slave to tobacco that one cannot do without it, a drug which weakens the heart, damages the nerves, gives you cancer and catarrh," and that's inflammation of the mucus membranes, "and so on."
Then later it says, "The difficulty to my mind is not so much giving up smoking as going on giving up smoking."
And that means sometimes in order to quit permanently you've got to try again and again.
That's 1935. Edna Siwieck was about 14 years old.
And then with the evidence we moved into the '40s and '50s when Edna and Frank got married.
They got married in 1946. And we talked about the magazine articles. That's the way information was conveyed mostly in the 1940s -you had radio, didn't have Internet, didn't have a lot of TV -- magazines. And we talked about some of the articles that were in public circulation about smoking that Edna Siwieck subscribed to.
Got Reader's Digest. We've talked about that one a lot. How Harmful Are Cigarettes?
Got Time Magazine. And there's Khrushchev, Beyond Any Doubt.
And then the Life Magazine, which plaintiff showed you, Smoke Gets into the News. And that was the Wynder/Graham study, the mouse painting that you remember where the smoke condensate was painted on the backs of mice and those mice got tumors. That was 1953.
And then we talked about newspaper articles
in Florida newspapers talking not just about cancer, but also emphysema.
This is an article when the Surgeon General's Report was released Chronic Bronchitis and Emphysema. "Cigarette smoking is the most important of the causes of chronic bronchitis in the United States and increases the risk of dying from chronic bronchitis and emphysema, the committee said."
And we know this was in the Sun Sentinel -yeah, on January 12th, 1964 and we know that Edna and Frank Siwieck subscribed to the newspaper, to the Sun Sentinel.
And then as everybody has talked about in this case the Surgeon General's Report is released in 1964. It's front-page news. It's all over the news. It's on television. You saw Harry Reasoner talking about it during my opening statement. And it says in no uncertain terms, smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis, among other diseases.
And Linda Hancock told you that her dad,
Frank Siwieck, used to discuss the news during dinner and that was big news. That was huge news.
And we also talked during this period of time, we're in the mid '60s, about American smokers who had quit and the fact that millions had quit. By 1965, one year after the Surgeon General's Report was released, 17 million people had quit smoking.
And then we talked about the pack warnings on every pack of cigarette, menthol cigarettes, filter tip cigarettes, all cigarettes, "Caution:
Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
Now, we're in the mid '60s and the Siwieck household has three smokers and all of them knew that it was dangerous. Frank knew it was dangerous. Edna Siwieck knew it was dangerous. And Linda Hancock knew it was dangerous.
And you'll recall that Frank quit in the 1960s right about this time when the Surgeon General's Report was released and the pack warnings went on. And Edna Siwieck continued to smoke because she wanted to. And at this time Linda was about 19 or 20 years old and before she started smoking regular you remember the story about her dad catching her smoking and he got angry and he made her smoke a lot to make
her sick, try to make her sick and to make her stop. But she didn't, she decided to smoke.
So the entire family knew it was dangerous, but the point here is that nothing that RJR or Philip Morris said or did factored into any of these decisions. These were personal decisions and these were personal choices. Nothing RJR or Philip Morris said or did made Frank Siwieck quit smoking. Nothing RJR or Philip Morris said or did made Edna Siwieck continue smoking or Linda Hancock to start smoking. Those were their personal decisions. So there was no reliance here by Edna Siwieck on anything that Philip Morris or RJR did or said.
And then continuing through our timeline, we looked at some of the media in the 1960s and '70s. The media kept saying smoking is dangerous, smoking is addictive; if you're smoking, quit, if you haven't started, don't.
These are some of the articles -- I'm not going to go through them again, but you'll remember we talked about them during the trial.
MR. WICHMANN: Judge, if I can object.
Were these in evidence?
MR. WILLIAMS: Yes, these are in evidence,
Mr. Wichmann. Thank you.
And we also talked about public service announcements. And I believe you saw one during opening statement by Bill Talman. He's the guy who used to go against Perry Mason all the time.
And he talked about his cancer. And they had a lot of folks do those to tell people if you don't smoke, don't start, if you're smoking, quit. I, that particular person, had a smoking-related disease. This is what can happen to you. That was common knowledge during that time in the 1960s and '70s.
And then in 1985 the rotating warnings, which you've seen before. Every pack of cigarettes has one of those. One of which says that "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy."
And then we talked about the evidence showing that between 1964 and 1979 30 million Americans had quit smoking. And now today we're up to more than 60 million. And we also talked about that many of the smokers that have quit were addicted.
And Dr. Cummings showed you a pamphlet about if you want to stop smoking -- and I'm just
going to go over line 1, because line 1, you have to want to stop smoking. And Edna Siwieck did not want to stop smoking. And that's why she didn't quit. But millions did because they wanted to and they stopped.
But the point here is that it's nothing that RJR or Philip Morris did or did not do to control whether Edna Siwieck or anyone else did or did not stop smoking. The particular smoker, in this case Edna Siwieck, that's all we're here about, did not want to stop smoking and she didn't.
So ladies and gentlemen, there's more evidence and I'm not going to go through more of the common knowledge evidence because I think you've seen enough of it, but it was well-known that smoking is dangerous and addictive during Edna Siwieck's lifetime. There was an abundance of common knowledge and public information on that. And the evidence shows that she knew it, she knew smoking was dangerous and addictive for a long time but she continued to smoke because she enjoyed it. She never tried to quit until 1995 and she continued after 1995 not because she was overwhelmed by nicotine's addictiveness,
but because she enjoyed smoking.
You heard how she enjoyed the taste of cigarettes, the smell of cigarettes. She enjoyed it when a man would light cigarettes for her and that sort of thing. She enjoyed what I would call the rituals of smoking. That was all part of her life. And as we've said a number of times, it's about her life.
Now, let me sum this up. What does it all mean as far as questions 6 or 7 are concerned?
You'll recall that the judge instructed you on certain findings in the Engle case, and one of those findings was this, "Finding 5 is that RJ Reynolds and Philip Morris each entered into an agreement with one another and with the American Tobacco Company; Brown and Williamson Tobacco Corporation, individually and as successor to the American Tobacco Company; the Council For Tobacco Research USA and the Tobacco Institute to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention that smokers and members of the public rely to their detriment."
That was from another case. And that case
had nothing to do with Edna Siwieck.
And you have to first decide whether she's a member of the class before that even applies.
It's up to you to decide whether Edna Siwieck reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement made by RJR or Philip Morris or any statement that RJR or Philip Morris failed to make. And the answers, based on the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, to those questions when you get to Edna Siwieck to questions 6 and 7 should be no and no.
Now, the judge told you the fact that RJR and Philip Morris are corporations and big corporations must not prejudice you in your deliberations and that RJR and Philip Morris are entitled to the same fair and impartial consideration that you would give an individual person.
Now, Mr. Geraghty -- and I trust that you will follow the judge's instruction and the evidence in this case and based on the evidence and the judge's instruction that you will do the right thing. And the evidence in this case shows that you should answer the questions that you are asked that Mr. Geraghty discussed with
you, questions 1 through 5 and questions 8, 9 and 10, you will answer those questions in favor of Philip Morris and RJR and that you will answer the questions that I've talked with you about, questions 6 and 7 in favor of RJR and Philip Morris. And the answer to 6 and 7 based on the evidence should be no.
Now plaintiffs get the last word with you.
Mr. Geraghty and I do not get a chance to respond to their final argument. The evidence does and will speak to you, though, and when it does, the evidence that I have pointed out and that Mr. Geraghty has pointed out will show you or has shown you that the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was not a legal cause of Edna Siwieck's death and she didn't rely to her detriment on anything that Philip Morris or RJR said or did not say after May 5th, 1982.
The plaintiff, Ms. Hancock, should not get paid money for Edna Siwieck's informed decision to smoke or for any consequences -MR. WICHMANN: Your Honor, I object.
THE COURT: Receive compensation.
MR. WILLIAMS: Receive compensation for Edna
Siwieck's informed decision to smoke. Edna Siwieck never said she was wronged by Philip Morris or RJR and the evidence shows that she was not.
Now, Ms. Hancock, through her lawyers, is going to ask you for a whole lot of money. And the evidence in this case that you should not give them that, not even a small amount. Edna Siwieck was 82 years old and lived her life the way she wanted to. Her death was not the fault of Philip Morris or RJR.
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your time and attention, and Mr. Geraghty and I await your just verdict.
Thank you.
