MR. BELASIC: Good morning, ladies and
gentlemen. I thank you for your attention and what is
the last time that I'll get to respond to you. And I
want to mention that right off the bat. When I'm done
talking, that's it. I never get to say anything or tell
you or emphasize any of the evidence that you heard. Mr.
Migliori, he gets to go first and the last word at the
end.
I'll ask you to think, if you would, the
type of evidence that I would point out is what we
discussed. I don't get to respond to anything he said.
Now, thank you for your service. You have
been (inaudible).
This case is about a man that chose by his
own words to start smoking an legal product that from
almost the very beginning when he started smoking it, he
knew it could put him into the hospital and could cause
lung problems, who knew several years after the start
that it caused severe injury to his own wife, and who
knew in the first decade he smoked that it could cause
lung cancer and death to his loved ones who he 7 specifically said he grieved and watched them bear it.
Now, today he said he's not responsible.
And today he said that he was deceived.
Today his lawyer said he didn't make a
choice and he didn't know because no one told him that he
was specifically (inaudible) -- lung cancer on a certain
day.
We're going to review the evidence you
heard. Let me emphasize here that the key witness in
this case was Mr. Harford. And that's because Judge
Block said this is no longer a class action. It's not
about a group of people, a group of smokers, it's not
about whether the tobacco company did something wrong or
if they should have acted differently.
It's about Mr. Harford's claims. He's the
only smoker. And when he talked about the verdict form,
every question on the verdict form is about Mr. Harford.
It's not about should R. J. Reynolds have said something
differently in 1961 or 1953. Every question that you'll
be asked to answer is about Mr. Harford.
Let's start at the end with what
Mr. Migliori said. He said that you should award not
just $10 million plus those lost wages, not just 10
million, but he wants to get even more money for his
client in something called punitive damages. 8 And he just told you the reason that he
wants you to give not just 10 million, but even more to
Mr. Harford because he said CTR, Counsel For Tobacco
Research, TI, the Tobacco Institute and TIRC, the Tobacco
Industry Research Council said what he said are false
things.
And you heard Mr. Harford when he took the
stand. And I asked him have you even heard of any of
these organizations. Have you heard of CTR before your
lawyers filed a lawsuit? No, he never'd even heard of
them. TI, he'd never even heard of it. TIRC, he had
never even heard of it.
Now, you just heard the plaintiff's lawyer
say, that's his claim. That's what he stated as the
basis for getting millions of dollars for a man who chose
to use a legal product. And that man --
MR. MIGLIORI: Objection, Your Honor? It's
twice now violating a limine order.
THE COURT: Which one?
MR. MIGLIORI: Legal product. Twice.
THE COURT: All right. So you're advised,
Mr. Belasic. You're aware of what this is?
MR. BELASIC: It's not a violation of the
order, Your Honor. I'm allowed to say it's a legal
product. It is. Everyone knows that. 9 THE COURT: Objection overruled. You may
continue.
You can deal with it on redirect -- not on
redirect, but on rebuttal.
MR. BELASIC: The basis that he gave you for
punitive damages is that those three tobacco
organizations said something false.
We all know that Mr. Harford said he had
never heard of them. I will go down a list and show you
his testimony. He said he never heard anything.
When we asked this question, what does this
have to do with Mr. Harford, Mr. Harford's testimony --
not me. It's not a trick. It's not something I'm trying
to persuade you by yelling at you or something.
Mr. Harford said CTR, TIRC, TI had nothing to do with his
smoking.
And, of course, one of the first questions I
asked him was, you didn't start smoking because of
advertising. You didn't smoke because of advertising.
And he agreed.
He doesn't claim that he kept smoking
because of that. He didn't even claim that he didn't
want to quit because of advertising. And yet that's what
we heard again and again and again.
Counsel spent a lot of time criticizing a 10 tobacco company for having the nerve to say that a person
might be responsible for choosing to buy a cigarette.
Well, you know who was the main expert who
talked about the responsibility of a smoker. It was the
plaintiff's expert. It was Dr. Burns, the man who writes
articles and various Surgeon General's reports.
That's their expert, ladies and gentlemen.
And he said specifically smokers, including addicted
smokers, are responsible for their smoking behavior. He
said ultimately it's up to the individual. And
specifically said that addiction does not relieve --
doesn't eliminate a person's responsibility to control
their own smoking behavior.
Miss Baker asked him. He agreed it applies
to Mr. Harford in this case. And, of course, Mr. Harford
did control his smoking behavior.
We'll go through the evidence. But for
40 years or 35 years he says he didn't want to quit. He
didn't mean it. We'll go through the fact that there was
only a few occasions in 35 years where he ever tried to
stop for more than a few hours.
But then when he changed his mind and then
when he was motivated, he quit. Addiction didn't cause
him to smoke once he made up his mind, just like
addiction wasn't the cause of his injury. 11 You can debate about it. And we will talk
about the evidence whether smoking caused it. But we
know that addiction didn't cause it. Because when he
changed his mind, suddenly addiction didn't have that
power. And Dr. Burns, their expert, said that smokers,
including Mr. Harford when Miss Baker asked him, are
responsible for their smoking behavior.
Now, this is what Mr. Harford said in about
the first five minutes when he took the stand and I asked
him questions. He agreed he didn't start smoking until
he was an adult. Remember when we heard that for the
first time in this case? They never revealed he took a
few puffs at age 13.
I said, well, that's new. Why are you
saying that now? And he told me, well, you never asked
me when I was under oath at my deposition when my first
cigarette was.
That wasn't true at all. You saw me have to
read his sworn testimony. When did you smoke your first
cigarette, sir? He said, age 19, 1950. After I did that
he agreed, yes, that's when he started smoking as an
adult.
We know he was in the service and we know
why he chose to start smoking. He said he wanted to be
like the group. Most of the men were smoking. 12 But he agreed with me he had that choice and
he could have said, no, thank you. There's no way I want
to do that. I've never smoked before age 19. I don't
want to start now. That was his choice.
No one from R. J. Reynolds was inside his
head. No one from R. J. Reynolds could make that choice.
And that's when I asked him, advertising,
glamorous people in movies, did they cause him to start
smoking. He said no. Nothing R. J. Reynolds did or said
caused him to start smoking.
Now, I want to talk just a little bit about
the 1940s because Mr. Harford wasn't smoking then even
though he said he saw all those advertisements as a kid
and he saw movies. But he had chosen not to smoke.
And by the end of the 1940s -- by the end of
the 1940s he was 18 years old, legally an adult. He had
not smoked.
He grew up in an antismoking family. His
mom didn't smoke. His dad didn't smoke cigarettes. His
dad smoked a pipe. We know his dad didn't want him to
smoke because we heard that testimony from Mr. Harford.
And we know that his grandfather as he put it was deathly
against smoking.
Now, when Mr. Harford was 16, this song came
out. You heard Mr. Migliori make fun of it. And I'll 13 tell you why we put that up, what it shows. Even in 1947
when there weren't scientific surveys, when there weren't
scientific studies, even then the idea that smoking could
kill someone and the idea that you could become a
nicotine slave was so common that it was in the hit
song -- the number one song of that year.
Ask yourself, in order to get to a hit song
it's not going to be some unknown scientific formula or
chemistry. You're going to make a popular song and talk
about something, it's going to have to be pretty common.
I mean Brittany Spears isn't going to do something about
the theory of relatively or some strange, you know,
molecule or isotope we haven't heard of.
So in 1947 when we heard they sang the
chorus smoke yourself to death, go up to St. Peter, the
very lyrics that Mr. Harford said he remembers, at 16 he
was hearing that even on the radio that it could kill
you.
He never smoked in the '40s because it was
his choice. He changed his mind when he was an adult.
Now, Mr. Migliori covered some of this. And
he actually put down on one of his -- his father didn't
warn him about lung cancer and someone didn't say or warn
him about this.
Let's look though at what he actually said 14 and the information that he had. And one of the things I
want to point out, they say, well, if R. J. Reynolds had
published something, maybe if R. J. Reynolds had written
in a magazine or published in a newspaper that they agree
with some theory of causation, that could have made a
difference.
First of all, nothing on the verdict form
will relate to that question. You won't be asked on the
verdict form if R. J. Reynolds had said something at a
different time, would it make a difference. Those aren't
the questions.
But think about this: All of these warnings
came from the people that he loved, they came from the
people that he trusted the most, they came from the most
credible sources.
He doesn't claim to have ever heard -- and
let me repeat because Mr. Harford was very clear. I ran
down a laundry list. These are things that R. J.
Reynolds said, a statement about smoking and health? No.
American? No. Brown & Williamson? No. CTR? No. He
doesn't claim to have heard any of these statements that
Mr. Migliori is playing. They don't apply to him.
But what he did hear was from his loved
ones. His own father in '51, that's the very first year
he started smoking, says, they're no good for you. And 15 he said, well, that means nothing to me. Well, it means
they're no good for him.
And then I asked him what did it mean. And
he said, I thought my father was telling me that I
wouldn't be able to quit.
All right. 60 years later we're in a
courtroom -- 63 years later we're in a courtroom and he
wants $10 million because he said smoking was difficult
to quit.
Doesn't deny that he did quit. Doesn't deny
that when he made the choice to quit, he hasn't smoked
for 22 years.
And he told me on his own that 63 years ago
he thought his father was telling him he wouldn't be able
to quit. But he says, no responsibility for that choice.
Now, the same year -- or after that, the
year after, '52, he goes into the hospital in Japan for a
full week. And he says very clearly he believed smoking
was causing the bronchitis problems, the throat problems.
It's not something we're making up or found
somebody to say. That's from the plaintiff himself. So
62 years ago, 1952, he knew and believed that smoking was
causing lung problems that were bad enough to lay him up
for a week in a hospital.
He said, well, I didn't know I could get 16 lung cancer, so I had no reason to quit. And now
62 years later he asks for $10 million.
The mid '50s, his wife. No one he loved
more than his wife. He saw firsthand what smoking was
doing to her. And we know that he didn't just see it.
She told him. She said smoking was causing her health
problems. He said it got worse and worse and worse, and
that in 1964 she quit.
And when I asked him, he said the symptoms
were so bad -- in his own words he said they were
borderline COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Now, she wasn't diagnosed with it until 2011. But in
1956 it was so severe that she told him it was harming
her health, and that she was going to start cutting back
and she quit for good.
Their argument -- Mr. Harford's argument is
your own wife can tell you that the same product that
you're using is causing a disease so bad that she can't
breathe, that she's coughing, and that he was reasonable
in saying, I had no idea. I had no idea it could happen
to me. I had no idea.
Use your common sense. Use your common
sense. Think about whether or not that makes any sense.
So from 1956 to 1964 he said he continued to
discuss his wife's health problem. So again year after 17 year he knows that the person he loves most he can
physically observe the damage that it's doing, and he
argues that meant nothing to me. She wasn't a doctor. I
had no idea.
I submit the opposite. The best warnings
are from loved ones. The best warning is what we
observe. The best warning is what he can see with his
own eye.
Now, he's saying he wouldn't quit when he
knew it put him in the hospital 60 years ago. He
wouldn't quit when he saw what it did to his wife. He
wouldn't quit when he saw his uncles dying of lung
cancer.
But counsel said if R. J. Reynolds had
published an article in the New York Times and said, we
now agree that the statistics that the Surgeon General is
using proved causation, that he would have quit then.
For a man who says he never even read the newspaper, ask
yourself if that makes sense.
Now, 1961. Could there be a more direct
warning? His own doctor said the product you are using
is causing a lung disease. He says Dr. Rose told him
that. He said you have bronchitis year after year. He
said Dr. Rose told him that was the cause and suggested
that he quit smoking. 18 That's 1961. That is 30 years before he got
cancer, way more than Dr. Burns admitted would mean that
his risk of lung cancer in the future would go back to
normal if he had just taken his doctor's advice.
Now, R. J. Reynolds couldn't make the
decision whether to follow his doctor's advice. And
R. J. Reynolds wasn't there to say, don't believe your
doctor.
And Mr. Harford says that he doesn't
remember anything -- any statement by R. J. Reynolds.
And yet his attorney said that meant nothing to him. He
wasn't a doctor.
And when I asked him, Mr. Harford, he said,
well, I didn't listen to him because he was a
chiropractor. I went to him for a prescription. That's
his position.
Now, starting in the early '50s when he was
in the service, he found out that Uncle Caleb had lung
cancer and it was caused by smoking. There were two
others in the '60s, his Uncle Edgar and his stepbrother.
But you think what he's saying. Three
people in his family -- this is in the '50s and '60s.
That's 50 to 60 years ago. A half century ago he
believed -- he said he grieved them. That was his words.
He said, I was so busy grieving their death from lung 19 cancer that he was told was caused by smoking that he
said again the warning meant nothing to him. He ignored
it.
What could be a more dramatic warning than
seeing a loved one die? What could be a more direct
warning than having your own loved ones, people that you
relied upon say smoking caused their lung cancer?
And there's no dispute about that.
Mr. Harford said that his family members told him that
smoking killed those three loved ones.
And he said, well, they weren't doctors.
When he comes into court today he said, well, they
weren't doctors so that doesn't matter. I was okay with
ignoring all of that.
And I asked him, well, wait a second.
Didn't Uncle Edgar -- didn't your cousin tell you that
Uncle Edgar's doctor had determined it was caused by lung
cancer? And he admitted it.
I don't know what their explanation is for
that. Could there be a more direct warning? This is a
half century ago. Now he wants 10 million because he
chose by his own admission. He never tried to quit after
these warnings.
We'll talk about when he tried to quit. He
doesn't even claim that when his doctor told him to quit, 20 that he did anything. He doesn't even claim that when
Uncle Caleb and Uncle Edgar, when they were buried that
he did anything. He doesn't claim that he reacted to any
warning.
But his lawyer says, well, the whole reason
he smoked is because something Reynolds said, which his
client said on the stand he didn't even recall, he's
never heard of it.
And we know he saw the pack warning. He
told me that hazardous, he didn't understand what
hazardous meant after he was in the hospital in '52 and
thought that smoking caused his lung problems, after the
doctor told him that smoking caused his lung problems and
after he heard that his own family members were getting
lung cancer caused by smoking.
Now, they say this is blaming the victim.
R. J. Reynolds didn't sue Mr. Harford. Mr. Harford is
suing R. J. Reynolds and pointing out the fact --
pointing out the facts that Mr. Harford agrees to and
admits to that he freely gave under oath on the stand.
That's not blaming the victim. That's what
their own expert, Dr. Burns, said, the smoker is
responsible for his smoking. And claiming I need a
definition -- does not mean that he can't quit. We know
he did. It doesn't mean it alleviates his 21 responsibility.
He saw these warnings and he did nothing.
Now, his lawyer says, well, if the warning was earlier,
he would have quit.
Really? What happened in real life? He
didn't respond to any of the warnings. He doesn't even
claim that when the warning went on the pack that he quit
for even an hour. He doesn't claim that. He doesn't
claim he ever made an effort to quit because of a
warning.
I asked him why did you ignore the warnings.
And he told me things like I didn't ignore my wife. I
helped my wife when she tried to quit. And I said, but
you ignored her warning. And he said, she's not a
doctor, et cetera.
Couldn't have been more clear in 1970.
Dr. Burns agreed that if he had chosen to quit, then his
risk of lung cancer would have gone back to normal.
And in 1985 did he see the warning? Did he
try to quit then if he sees a warning? His lawyer told
you -- his lawyer argued that if the word "lung cancer"
had come out, he would have changed it.
But we know that's not true because he had
three loved ones that died of lung cancer. And every one
of them, his family warned him it was the cause. And he 22 did nothing. And when this warning came out. It didn't
cause him to change anything.
Now, I asked him twice. Mr. Harford
continued to say, if I knew it could cause lung cancer, I
didn't think it would happen to me. If I knew it could
cause lung cancer, I didn't think it was cancer. If we
told him it was cancer, maybe he'd say, well, you didn't
tell me it was adenocarcinoma.
But can anyone dispute after his testimony
that he knew beginning in the 1950s that smoking could
cause serious risks to his health, that smoking would put
him in the hospital personally in '52, it would cause his
wife to be so ill that she would cough and be unable to
smoke? Can anyone deny that, the effect of seeing three
loved ones buried from lung cancer?
He told me twice he intended to smoke until
and unless he got a disease. And he doesn't deny it. If
he didn't get a disease, he would be smoking today. He
wouldn't be suing for $10 million. He'd be smoking.
He told me twice he intended to smoke until
and unless he got a disease. And, in fact, he said if he
got a disease, his attitude was the doctor could heal it.
I said, why didn't you just follow your
doctor's advice and was talking about how did that -- how
can R. J. Reynolds be responsible for the decision that 23 happened exclusively between him and his doctor when he
admits he never heard R. J. Reynolds say anything denying
the health risks.
And his explanation was -- he said, well, I
continued to smoke and I thought he could heal me, he
said, maybe I could get some penicillin.
We're going to talk about when he really
quit smoking. But under Mr. Harford's testimony, part of
the testimony he just said he would smoke till he got
sick. And when he got sick, he would quit.
And when he got better, he never returned to
smoking. He said he changed his mind and made a
commitment and suddenly addiction didn't have this power.
That's what he says. It's not something that R. J.
Reynolds made up. It comes from Mr. Harford.
Now, I'll just briefly mention one of the
things that I talked about is when he worked for the
American Tobacco Company and Swisher & Sons, that that
was in the 1960s. And that was already after he had been
hospitalized, knew about the bronchitis. It was after
the first time in the service with Uncle Caleb and the
lung cancer. It was after his wife was six.
And he didn't say, well, I'm not going to
sell that. And he didn't say, when I make my pitch to
the customers, I'm going to say, look, it's been harming 24 me. I'm in the hospital. My own wife is so sick she
stopped using it. He didn't say that because that was
his job and he was selling cigarettes.
But now he is suing the same company that he
worked for because he made the choice that he wanted his
customers to make in the 1960s. And you know he was an
executive. Why are we quibbling about this?
He said, I was a member of the Young
Executives. When I joined Swisher, I joined a tobacco
organization called Young Executives. And it had cigar
executives, cigarette executives, candy distributor
executives.
He was a member of that group. And for ten
years his job was to sell tobacco. For the first two
years, '60 and '61, he was selling cigarettes, the very
cigarette that he's now suing for millions of dollars
for, Paul Mall, Tareyton.
The next eight years he was selling tobacco.
And he was an executive. He was the division manager.
He had seven salesmen reporting to him. He covered all
the way from Chicago in the west to West Virginia and
western Pennsylvania in the east, all the way from
Michigan in the north to Kentucky.
One of the most populous regions in the
country, he was in charge of those sales. He's not an 25 executive. Doesn't make any difference.
Are you kidding? He's selling -- he's
selling cigarettes. He's now suing his own company.
He's suing his company for he says for not telling him
what his own doctor warned him about, a warning that he
never gave to his customers. He's suing for what he did.
And it doesn't make sense.
You ask yourselves can he seriously say that
he was tricked by advertising when he was in the business
of putting the ads up, as he said, making the pitch to
for the various companies?
This wasn't a man who was a 9 or a 12-year
old. He was in his 20s or 30 years old, a tobacco
executive in the Young Executives group who was
responsible for advertising.
He knew what advertising was. And maybe
that's why he told me he never smoked because of
advertising. There was no claim in this case that if
R. J. Reynolds stopped advertising, he would have quit
smoking, no claim in this case. And he didn't even try
to testify.
Remember who they put up to talk about
advertising? It's long ago. It was the very first
witness, Dr. Cummings. Dr. Cummings showed you
advertising. Dr. Cummings showed you what CTR and the 26 other groups said in the '50s.
First thing we asked him is it has nothing
to do with Harford; right? You're not claiming that it
caused him to smoke or continue? And he agreed.
And then when Mr. Harford got up, he said he
never even heard of those groups. His lawyers sued
because of companies that he had not even heard of. And
for the unknown companies that he had never heard of he
wants $10 million.
We know he quit. And we know more
importantly that he has never even wanted to smoke a
cigarette again. That's not an addicted smoker. That's
not what their experts told you.
Addicted smokers are supposed to have
repeated cravings for many years because they told you
their brains are rewired so that they crave cigarettes
and will relapse years down the road.
There may well be other smokers who could
bring that claim, but Mr. Harford is not one of them.
He's not that smoker. By his own admission he has not
wanted to smoke since he quit.
Now, why did we spend the time on whether he
quit in 1985? First of all, he had never said that he
quit smoking 'in 92 because he was spitting up blood
until this lawsuit. 27 In 1992 did Dr. Scanlon say he was spitting
up blood and that's why the patient came to me? No.
Dr. Scanlon said he wasn't a smoker. He had quit years
earlier.
This is a version of events that exists only
in a lawsuit for $10 million. Before this lawsuit was
filed when he saw Dr. Scanlon or Dr. Dickerson or all of
those other doctors, he never told them.
Plaintiffs agree there isn't a single
medical record from that time period in the '90s when he
got lung cancer that say he's a smoker. All of them say
he quit years earlier. So this story that he was
spitting up blood, it never existed until the lawsuit.
But here's a simple question. Who would
know best whether he was spitting up blood and quit for
that reason or whether he quit in the '80s or whether he
always tried to quit? It's the eyewitnesses
And the eyewitnesses are his stepdaughter,
Lana Roberto, and his granddauther Gina Marasco.
Now, I didn't bring the stepdaughter to
trial. We had to read her testimony. You got to see
Miss Marasco. The eyewitnesses who lived with him in the
'50s and in the '60s and in the '70s and in the '80s for
those four decades, either Lana or Gina, lived with him.
And they say they never saw him try to quit smoking. The 28 testimony was clear as a bell. They never saw him try to
quit.
Does that make any sense? If he was trying
to quit -- addicted smokers are supposed to be making
multiple serious efforts. That's what Dr. Burns said and
that's what Dr. Werner said. But they didn't know about
the eyewitnesses and they didn't talk about the
eyewitnesses.
They don't corroborate the story. His own
family members, they love him. They have no reason not
to tell the truth. They don't back up his story. They
say he never even said that he wanted to quit.
Again, Gina Marasco and Lana Roberto say,
well, I assume he quit in '92. I don't know. Did you
ever see him smoke in the '80s? And his granddaughter,
who saw him, as she saws, often, said she never saw him
smoke again after he came to Florida.
When did he came to Florida? He was here
for a year in '82 and '83. And when did he come to
Florida? '84, '85. That's the eyewitnesses. That's the
eyewitnesses.
And we know this was his own writing. This
wasn't something a doctor wrote down. Mr. Harford in his
own writing said, I quit in 1985 and he signed it.
What is his explanation? What is his 29 explanation? He has none. He says, I don't know why I
wrote that. Really?
You saw Mr. Harford. Mr. Harford is a very
vibrant and healthy 82-year old man.
Now, his psychiatrist threw up her hands and
said, Mr. Belasic, he's 82. I don't know. I don't
remember the deposition. He's 82. That's what
Dr. Werner told me.
And that's right. He is 82. And no one is
attacking him or pretending that he should know exactly
what happened 52 years ago.
But he told me he would never forget the
year he got cancer. '92 he says is burned in his brain.
He will never forget the year he spit up blood and got
cancer. Who would?
So I asked, well, then if that's the year he
quit, it's the easier thing in the world. Doctor, I quit
smoking when I got cancer. He has no explanation.
Well, if this just happened by accident,
then why -- then why did he put in his own handwriting
again that I quit when I was 55? If he was smoking in
'92, he would have been more than 50 years old. That's
his own handwriting for a second time
And why did he in a telephone interview -- a
telephone interview say again, I quit in 1985? And why 30 did he tell a different doctor he quit smoking 19 years
ago? Now, why is that important?
Well, whether he quit in '85 or '92, we know
he had the ability to quit because he did. He's never
smoked again.
This is not one of those cases about a
smoker whose addiction prevents them from quitting.
Dr. Burns admitted it, Dr. Werner admitted it. Everyone
knows he has not smoked for decades.
But think about the difference. Think about
the difference. Would he tell all of his doctors in the
'90s when they were treating him he's not a smoker? Why
would his own relatives never see him smoke after the
1980s? Why would he then tell his own doctors 15 years
later before the lawsuit I quit smoking in '85?
And then when he comes in and sues for 10
million, he changes for the first time his story. And he
says, I was smoking when I got lung cancer. And my mouth
was filling with blood and I was throwing it up.
You have to be the judges of credibility.
But it's undisputed that he never told that story to
anyone before the trial started. And Dr. Scanlon said he
wasn't a smoker when he came to him. That doesn't make
any sense.
Now, obviously if he's going to sue for 10 31 million, that's a better version of events to say you're
quitting because your mouth is filled with blood. You'll
have to decide. But there's no evidence that that
happened.
And it's completely contrary to his own
handwriting. And he won't take responsibility for that.
He says, I don't know.
And his attorney says, it doesn't matter at
all. I think it does. You'll decide if it does.
That's his own doctors. His doctors who
treated his lung cancer say he quit in the '80s. His
handwriting says he quit in the '80s.
Why did he quit in the '80s? Remember when
Dr. Werner came in? She's the psychiatrist who she
does -- she smoked for 20 years. She said -- she claims
she didn't remember when she quit. She doesn't remember
when she went to medical school. Even though she smoked
for 20 years, she obviously was smoking in medical
school. And she filled out the checklist and said he was
addicted.
I asked her, isn't it true -- and she had
read that Mr. Harford had said that in -- back in the day
the thing that made him want to quit was someone insulted
him. Someone insulted him. He came in from smoking and
someone said how bad he smelled. He wasn't happy. He 32 was insulted.
And he said, like a lot of smokers would, I
didn't notice it. And the guy made another insulting
remark. Told him pigs don't know they stink.
Dr. Werner agreed, yep, that's what he
reported. And he felt like a degenerate. He said that
in his words, a degenerate. And Dr. Werner agreed that's
what he had said.
Now, today he doesn't tell that story, the
story that Dr. Werner heard that he said under oath
before the trial. That's not a health reason for
quitting, but it sounds like it was very powerful. And
Dr. Werner admitted it was.
So he quit in the 1980s. He told his
psychiatrist, he told it under oath that it was because
he was insulted.
Let's talk about the medical question. Did
he have a primary lung adenocarcinoma caused by smoking?
And let me say right off the bat plaintiff
tries to imply that what R. J. Reynolds is doing is
attacking Dr. Scanlon. No one is attacking Dr. Scanlon.
Dr. Scanlon came in here and said, I remember very
little. What I remember was in about ten pages of his
medical records. Remember he held those up?
And he doesn't know or remember what the 33 other doctors did. He explained why he wrote what he
wrote.
And no one is attacking him or saying that
he didn't think what he wrote was true at the time.
That's not the issue.
I'm going to review the evidence that
Mr. Migliori left out. I'm going to point out how the
evidence is simply the opposite of what Mr. Migliori
suggested.
But first remember that it's the plaintiff
that has the burden of proof. R. J. Reynolds does not
have to prove that it was something else. R. J. Reynolds
does not have to disprove.
And back when we were in front of
Judge McCoun that's one of the first things he told you.
You've all taken that oath and of course you've been
instructed by Judge Block.
The plaintiff's burden of proof is
important. You all agreed to hold it to them. They have
to prove every one of their claims, including this one.
Here's one thing that Mr. Migliori didn't
mention. He said that Dr. Scanlon -- and think of this.
Think of all the different doctors that you heard in the
medical records, all the different doctors that he saw.
And the plaintiffs, they could have chosen to bring 34 whoever is available, whoever they wanted to talk to.
The only doctor, the only one who actually
treated him is Dr. Scanlon. And Dr. Scanlon would not
say that smoking causes lung cancer. Let me repeat that.
Dr. Scanlon would not say that smoking causes lung
cancer.
It was right at the end. Mr. Migliori was
winding up and was going to be prepared to have the
treating physician say smoking causes lung cancer.
That's the minimum you would expect in a case where it's
their burden of proof.
You bring in a doctor, you better have that
doctor be able to say that smoking causes lung cancer.
Not the case. That's not what Dr. Scanlon
said. The first thing that Dr. Scanlon said when
Mr. Migliori asked him about cause, he said that lung
cancer was associated with smoking.
Mr. Migliori explored that. He talked about
to statistical association. Remember that video they
showed where the old man from the American Tobacco
Company was talking in the 19 (inaudible), and he said,
we always agreed that smoking was associated, was a
statistical association. And the dispute was over the
statistics and cause.
They say that that's a lie now. They say 35 that's fraud. But in 2014 the plaintiff's own doctor
said the same words, lung cancer is associated. He calls
it an association, not a cause.
Well, Mr. Migliori explored it further and
then he said smoking was a risk factor. Now, where have
you heard that word before? Remember when the plaintiffs
ran the clip of five or six people from the Tobacco
Institute, the organization that Mr. Harford had never
heard of? One of them was a woman. Another one was a
man. And they said, we think smoking is a risk factor,
but not a cause.
And they say that's a lie. They say that's
fraud now. Mr. Harford admits that he never heard any of
those. The point is they say those are horrible lies.
But Mr. Harford's own doctor in 2014 said
under oath, I regard smoking as a risk factor.
The reason I put this down is, you saw the
reaction, and you remember the reaction of Mr. Migliori,
he immediately asked him again, Doctor, what is your
opinion on smoking as a cause of Mr. Harford's cancer?
And he said, I think it's a risk factor.
Now, that's not R. J. Reynolds. That's not
trickery.
As Mr. Migliori said, Dr. Scanlon has no
skin in the game. If you bring a lawsuit and you want 36 $10 million for using a product that you have the right
and the choice to buy and you say it caused a deadly
disease that you didn't die of, you bring a doctor in and
he says, I cannot say it was the cause of your lung
cancer, how have they met their burden of proof?
How can you find that they have met their
burden of proof when his own doctor, the only one that
ever met him, that at least looked at some of the
information, he says, no, it's a risk factor. I can't
say cause even when Mr. Migliori tries to get him to say
it.
And you know the issue in this case, was it
a primary adenocarcinoma, and the reason we brought
Dr. Kumar, one of the top radiation oncologists in the
country. They not only did a small test before, they did
a little needle biopsy with a small amount of fluid --
we're going to talk about that -- but they did what
amounted to a scientific test to determine if it was
adeno. That was the radiation treatment itself.
Everyone agrees that adenocarcinomas are not
sensitive to radiation and they rarely, rarely can be
cured. Under the best of circumstances three to five
percent is what the expert says. In fact, Dr. Scanlon,
his own doctor, said it was one to three percent, but in
his experience it was lower. 37 Now, that's out of all the adenocarcinomas
in the world. The ones that are one-centimeter, ones
that are nine. That's under the best of circumstances.
But this wasn't a typical adenocarcinoma.
It was huge. It was nine centimeters. It was wrapped
around the aorta. We knew that's near his heart, it was
near his spinal cord. It was outside of the lung, part
of it inside the chest cavity. And Dr. Kumar responded
that with those factors, it can't be cured.
Now, no one's saying that at the time they
wrote down adenocarcinoma, that they didn't think that's
what it was. But now you have this new factor. You have
the radiation. And we know that it could not have been a
nine-centimeter adenocarcinoma wrapped around the aorta
and be cured.
We're going to review the evidence. But
here's the important thing. Even their doctors -- even
Dr. Scanlon thought that it was such a large adeno that
it was not able to be cured. He agreed at the time he
made that determination because he told Mr. Harford you
got a nine-centimeter adenocarcinoma around the aorta, he
told him that it was incurable.
Now, thank goodness for Mr. Harford his
doctor was wrong. It wasn't untreatable. And so is it
crazy to point out obviously all of the doctors were 38 wrong. It was not incurable.
But why did they think it was incurable?
Because it was this adenocarcinoma they said.
What they have to prove in this lawsuit is a
lot different than what the doctors care about. The
doctors didn't care about whether the cell type was
perfectly correct. The doctors cared about treating him.
And thank God for him that he was able to be
cured. But we know the doctors got it wrong. And they
thought it was incurable because they thought it was
adenocarcinoma.
So logically how could it have been an
adenocarcinoma? Well, that's why we brought our expert,
Dr. Kumar, the only radiation oncologist.
Mr. Migliori said, why did R. J. Reynolds
bring these witnesses? Mr. Harford had dozens of
doctors. His choice who to bring. He didn't bring the
doctor or the lung specialist that it turns out is most
important in your decision. He didn't bring his
radiation oncologist.
And Dr. Scanlon never even talked to him and
none of their experts talked to him. He didn't bring his
own doctor who could have answered the question.
So we brought one of the top radiation
oncologists in the country. What Dr. Kumar told you is 39 not an opinion. It's a scientific fact.
And he said it is scientifically impossible
for this to have been an adenocarcinoma because it is
scientifically impossible to cure a nine-centimeter
adenocarcinoma with radiation alone.
He told you another fact, that in 1992 they
couldn't give as much radiation to the chest without
killing the person as they do today. He's the only
person that knows the machinery, that knows the
technology.
They wouldn't let Dr. Burns or Dr. Scanlon
operate that machinery. They're not qualified, licensed,
board certified.
Dr. Kumar is. He said there's not enough
radiation in '92 or 2014 to cure an adeno without killing
the patient. He said it has to be something else. He
said it was absolutely not possible, that it was not
physically possible -- that there was no dose known to
mankind.
And here was the science. And this was
basically -- Dr. Kumar wasn't just a doctor. He's also a
scientist. And he explained when you're a radiation
oncologist, all you do for a living is take cancer
patient, 6,000 cancer patients that he's seen, and figure
out how to get as much radiation onto the tumor with the 40 correct angle, correct dose, correct field. That's what
he does for a living.
He says this is not -- this isn't an
opinion. This is textbook science. To cure a
one-centimeter tumor it took 6,000 rads. A
two-centimeter tumor, 6,600. Three centimeters you saw
7,000. Four centimeters, 7,400.
So he showed a little demonstrative exhibit.
This orange ball is four centimeters. This orange ball
is about the size that you could cure with radiation
alone. If this was an adenocarcinoma, the only expert on
this issue says could not have been bigger than this and
been cured today.
But look what he says was the maximum dose
in 1992. The most that you give is 6,600 rads at two
centimeters. The most that you could cure with radiation
alone if it was an adenocarcinoma is about half of the
size of this.
Now, we know his tumor wasn't anywhere close
to this. We know his tumor wasn't half this size. We
know his tumor was nine centimeters, nine centimeters.
Dr. Kumar says this softball is just a tiny
bit less than nine centimeters across, this softball. As
he put it, there is no possible dose, there is no way
that this tumor can be an adenocarcinoma because the 41 patient would be dead.
Now, thank God for Mr. Harford and his
family that he's alive, but it couldn't have been an
adenocarcinoma.
This isn't speculation. It's straight
science. There's a formula for how much you can give a
patient. It's not I'm guessing what it is. This is what
doctors in his field (inaudible), the most that they
could have cured would have been an adeno half this size
but this was his tumor. It's impossible.
And what did they have to say on this? They
have nothing to say. They don't call a radiation
oncologist.
Dr. Scanlon said, I don't know what the dose
is. Dr. Scanlon did not say, well, it was a
nine-centimeter adeno and can be cured. Dr. Scanlon says
very clearly, I'm not an expert on that issue. I'm going
to tell you what I wrote down.
This is scientific fact. They say nothing
to dispute it. It can't be an adeno and be cured. It
can't be a nine-centimeter adeno and be cured.
And their claim is that they can prove it's
a nine-centimeter adeno and be cured. That's impossible.
That's scientific fact. It's not just an opinion.
And so your answer on Question 2 should be 42 no. And your answer on Question 3 has to be no because
it could not have been an adenocarcinoma caused by
smoking because it was this size and you can't do it.
It's impossible.
So they don't actually dispute his
testimony. They call him a liar. And you saw
Mr. Migliori, he said, well, that's the opinion a hundred
thousand dollars -- exaggerated. He said, that's the
opinion a hundred thousand dollars will buy. He got up
here today and he put down the 80 to $100,000 and he said
we bought an opinion.
I mean, let's not mince words about it.
He's saying that I paid someone to lie. That's his
argument.
Well, let's look at his credentials. First
of all, this was only the third time he's ever testified.
Why would he lie about something? He's been reviewing
cases since the 1990s. He's only testified at trial
three times.
They brought in experts that testified in
trial 50 times. Dr. Burns has been paid $3 million. Not
an expert in radiation oncology. He is not qualified,
he's not licensed -- he doesn't know the dose. They
wouldn't let him run the machine. He got paid $3 million
over time. 43 I didn't get up there and call Dr. Burns a
liar, but that's not the issue.
Look at his qualifications. 6,000 radiation
oncology patients. The plaintiff's expert has treated
zero patients.
As a profession he plans and administers the
radiation therapy, the dose, the angle, the number of
times you're giving it, what he calls the field to make
sure it doesn't harm the aorta, the spine, the heart.
That's what he does for a living.
Dr. Scanlon, Dr. Burns, they don't do that,
they're not qualified. They're not board certified.
They're both pulmonologists.
When it comes time to actually give
radiation, they get doctors like Dr. Dickerson and
Dr. Kumar.
Now, let me ask you this: Would a man who
the National Cancer Institute picked to be one of the top
investigators of new ways to treat lung cancer, do you
think that a man who's devoted his life to treat 6,000
patients, who does research on ways to heal it, and the
National Cancer Institute trusts him to be the principal
investigator to find new ways to heal, do you really
think that guy would come in here and lie for 800 bucks
an hour? That's what they're suggesting. 44 Remember, he was a fellowship at the
American Cancer Society. The American Cancer Society is
about as antismoking as you can get. And they call him a
liar. He's the one who's published a hundred different
times, given lectures.
No one asked Dr. Burns or Dr. Scanlon for
their opinion on radiation oncology. No one asked them
for an expert opinion, isn't it true it's impossible to
have an adenocarcinoma that big because it couldn't have
been cured? It had to be another type of cancer. No one
asked them their opinion. They're not in that field.
Now, Dr. Scanlon came up and Mr. Migliori
walked him through what he called clinical history, how
much he smoked and how he presented and that he threw up
blood.
In a couple questions Dr. Scanlon said the
cell type, it might tell us if you have a cancer. It
doesn't tell us if it's an adeno. You have congestion
and smoking and throwing up blood, it could be anything.
And then he said, well, we had an x-ray.
And she asked him, did the x-ray tell you what cell type
it was? No. And then she said, did the CT scan tell you
what cell type it was? No. That wasn't disputed.
Again Dr. Scanlon said he only remembers
what was in a very small number of patients in his 45 records. But here's what Dr. Scanlon said (inaudible).
Who performed the x-ray? Why didn't the
plaintiffs bring that doctor in? He doesn't even know.
They chose not to bring him. Was there a report on the
x-ray? We don't have the report and he doesn't remember.
Now, the only thing they took from the lung
was a needle that they put into the lung and they call it
needle aspiration. And that refers to fluid, fluid off
the lung.
And their own expert, Dr. Burns, said you
put that little needle in, you don't get tissue. You get
some liquid that might have a few cells in it. That's
all they did.
You can look at all the medical records back
in the jury room. Everything they described, the only
thing they actually took was this little needle that
Dr. Burns said had some fluid in it.
Now, was there a report? Dr. Scanlon
doesn't remember. We asked Dr. Scanlon, well, who was
the pathologist? Who did that?
Shouldn't that person have testified, ladies
and gentlemen? They chose not to bring that doctor.
They brought the doctor who doesn't know who did it.
Now, Dr. Scanlon admitted I like to have a
core biopsy. That's when the needle goes in far enough 46 you can actually get some tissue so at least you have
some tissue from the lung, and the pathologist can look
at it under a microscope and try to figure out what cell
type it is.
Emily Baker asked him, did you get a core
biopsy? He said, well, I like to get one. I don't know.
Is there any record of a core biopsy? Of course not.
Every time they described it, the only thing they had was
this needle who got liquid. No core biopsy, no core
evidence.
Now, Mr. Migliori with his questions when we
put our doctor up assumed that happened.
Assumptions aren't burden of proof, ladies
and gentlemen. There's no evidence there was a core
biopsy. We have no idea what it showed. There's nothing
in the records and Dr. Scanlon didn't know anything about
it.
Pathology. Now, pathology is when they do
look at something taken from the lung under a microscope.
The only thing they had was a little bit of fluid in a
needle. So there's no dispute, ladies and gentlemen, a
doctor called a pathologist looked at it. And a doctor
called a pathologist reached a diagnosis.
Who was he or her? Should that person not
have come in? That's the person who thought or decided 47 what the cell type might be. The plaintiffs didn't call
that doctor.
There's no pathology report, so we don't
know if the doctor said that it's part of the adeno and
part of another type of cancer. We don't know anything
about it.
And Dr. Scanlon freely admits he looked in
his records. He doesn't remember the report.
Dr. Scanlon said, it's a good idea to do a staining test
because that can help you, but he has no idea whether
those were done
You can look at all the medical records.
They never say the staining tests were run on the
materials. And he admits we have no tissue sample.
Now, Dr. Scanlon, he said he made the
diagnosis that was incurable. It was an incurable
adenocarcinoma. And that was wrong. It wasn't
incurable, and the most obvious reason, that it wasn't an
adenocarcinoma.
Dr. Kumar said there are cancers that can be
nine centimeters, the size of a softball, and be cured
with radiation. And Dr. Kumar said those cancers aren't
the ones that are caused by smoking. Smoking related
adenocarcinoma cannot exist -- it cannot be nine
centimeters. It had to be something else. 48 Well, Dr. Scanlon knew the name of the
radiation oncologist, Dr. Dickerson. He didn't talk to
him before he came. And of course the plaintiffs chose
not to bring --
THE COURT: It's been directed, Mr. Belasic,
as you know, not to speculate about why people are not
being called to testify. Just bear with me.
MR. BELASIC: All right.
THE COURT: They have to make a
determination based upon the evidence in this case. The
plaintiff has the burden. They can decide whether there
is sufficient evidence to support the plaintiff's burden.
But I caution them not to speculate about
why people haven't been called into the courtroom. For
all we know, these doctors are dead. Do not speculate.
Continue.
MR. BELASIC: And, of course, I'm not asking
you to guess or speculate. But I'm pointing out the
expert in the key field, Dr. Dickerson, he didn't come to
testify. He didn't come to testify.
And, of course, Dr. Scanlon said he didn't
have any information on dose or the field or the
information or the type of radiation and he didn't talk
to Dr. Dickerson.
And yet when our expert came, Mr. Migliori 49 attacked him and said, why didn't you talk to him.
Didn't you know you could do that? And Dr. Kumar had to
explain why that would be inappropriate. Not just
inappropriate, it's against the law for us to --
MR. MIGLIORI: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained. Don't go that way.
Don't talk about the law firm. Keep your eye on the
ball. Continue with your -- how much longer do you have,
Mr. Belasic?
MR. BELASIC: Dr. Kumar --
THE COURT: How much longer do you have?
Take a pause. It'll do you well.
MR. BELASIC: Dr. Kumar will -- I think,
Your Honor, that I will be about 30 or 40 more minutes.
THE COURT: All right. Go ahead.
MR. BELASIC: Dr. Kumar had to explain why
he didn't do that. But what's important is Dr. Scanlon
didn't do that. And he was the plaintiff's only expert
in a field that is not --
MR. MIGLIORI: Your Honor, I thought the
objection was sustained.
THE COURT: I thought the objection was
sustained also.
Continue to something else.
MR. BELASIC: On this issue of diagnostic 50 tests we know that the only thing we have was a fine
needle aspiration that has a significant error rate.
The testimony was the bronchoscopy -- a
bronchoscopy is when they go down the central tube of the
bronchus, and they can snip some tissue out.
And until this trial -- until this trial
there was no evidence that a bronchoscopy had ever been
done. And no one involved in this trial had ever heard
that until Mr. Harford testified.
And Mr. Harford said not in response to my
question, but in response to Mr. Migliori, Mr. Harford
told us that for the first time he said a bronchoscopy
was done. That was his testimony under oath. I was just
sitting there watching. And he said, quote, that that
bronchoscopy was inconclusive.
We don't have any records of it. All we
have is what the man who is suing says. He says there
was a bronchoscopy and it was inconclusive.
That's the gold standard. That's where you
actually get tissue. No one disputed that that would be
a better marker. And Mr. Harford said it was done and it
was inconclusive.
Now, Dr. Scanlon says he only rests on what
he wrote in the records. When he wrote down the cell
type, when he wrote down adenocarcinoma, he made it very 51 clear he didn't look at the material under a microscope.
He didn't do any testing.
He relied on the pathologist's report. But
he doesn't have the written report. He doesn't remember
who the pathologist was. He didn't talk to the
pathologist.
So when the plaintiff says, well,
Dr. Scanlon didn't go over the diagnosis -- it's a little
bit of an overstatement. He says -- what Dr. Scanlon
says is he relied on the pathologist's report that said
adenocarcinoma. We don't know what the pathologist said.
Just like eagle eye on the radiation oncologist.
And, of course, in the end Dr. Scanlon
says -- would not say that smoking caused Mr. Harford's
lung cancer.
Now, on this issue Dr. Scanlon and Dr. Kumar
agreed that they had never seen any patient with
adenocarcinoma that large cured by radiation alone.
Dr. Scanlon said in fact he had never seen a patient with
adenocarcinoma Stage III survive for 22 years. So if you
ask Dr. Scanlon is there any precedent for this, he
readily agrees no.
If you ask Dr. Kumar is it scientifically
possible for that tumor to be an adeno, he said,
absolutely not. It was scientific fact it could not have 52 been adeno. It was too big to be cured by radiation. It
had to be some other type of tumor that he says was not
caused by smoking. And no one disputes that specific
testimony from Dr. Kumar.
One last thing on medicine. The man -- the
doctor who did radiation oncology who actually treated
the plaintiff is Dr. Dickerson. And he said, this is --
if you look at the date, December 1992, this is after the
radiation was done.
Now, how does he describe the tumor? Does
Dr. Dickerson, the man who treated him with radiation,
does he say it's a primary adenocarcinoma as you are
required to determine? No. Look what he called it, a
very large cancer involving the lung. Dr. Dickerson did
not say it was an adenocarcinoma.
Dr. Scanlon could not say that smoking
caused the cancer, whatever it was.
That's a failure of a burden of proof.
That's plaintiff's own doctors. It's not tobacco
lawyers, it's not tobacco witnesses.
His next one. All he could say is it was a
large bronchiogenic carcinoma. That's a lung carcinoma.
We heard how many different types of carcinoma there are.
Dr. Dickerson -- you can look in the
records -- after the radiation was done, no, he didn't 53 say it was an adenocarcinoma.
Now, the issue was was Mr. Harford addicted.
Questions 1 and 2, was he addicted, and was addiction a
cause of his primary lung adenocarcinoma? I'll say right
off the bat obviously there is no definition you're
required to use.
And if you think right off the bat, well, he
has to be addicted because everyone who smokes that long
is addicted, well, then I remind that you there's two
parts of the question. Was he addicted? And if so, was
the addiction -- not just the cigarettes, not just the
smoking, was the addiction a cause of his cancer? And
there's two parts to it.
I'm going to tell you at least what the
evidence was on was he addicted. Now, they brought
Dr. Burns, Dr. Werner and Dr. Cummings. And they
described how addicted smokers act and what the criteria
for addiction are.
One of the first things that Dr. Burns and
Dr. Cummings said, addicted smokers relapse. And
Dr. Cummings said, if you're addicted, you can continue
to relapse even after that first year or two.
Now, there may be other smokers who like
that, but that wasn't Mr. Harford. He never smoked
against once he made up his mind for the first time. 54 An addicted smoker makes many, many serious
efforts to quit and doesn't quit. Mr. Harford said he
really never wanted to quit before he made his mind up.
And we know that's true because he said, well, I probably
did. And I had to read him his sworn deposition
testimony again. I said it thousands of times, but I
probably never meant it.
An addicted smoker has desires to smoke
after quitting. And Mr. Harford never wanted to quit
again.
An addicted smoker has significant
withdrawals. And Mr. Harford said -- and I again had to
read his sworn testimony -- that when he stopped for
24 hours, it never really affected him that much.
And, of course, none of his doctors -- none
of his doctors were asked to come in, right, to talk
about withdrawal. There was no testimony from any
doctor -- any one of his doctors that he was addicted.
Dr. Burns gets paid $3 million. This is
more than 50 trials for him. He said, when I look at the
records he's addicted.
But his own doctors never wrote in their
medical records that he was addicted. They never
diagnosed him that he was addicted. And they did not
testify in this trial. 55
And addicted smokers often need professional
help. And we know he quit cold turkey.
Now, of course, Mr. Migliori said, well,
(inaudible). Dr. Burns gets paid $3 million.
Dr. Werner, who has testified two or three dozen times.
All I'm going to say about them is neither
of them knew that Mr. Harford was testifying because
Mr. Harford did not testify until after Dr. Werner --
MR. MIGLIORI: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BELASIC: None of them knew --
THE COURT: Sustained.
Disregard those comments by counsel.
Next.
MR. BELASIC: Well, ladies and gentlemen,
consider the basis for their testimony. They read the
deposition. That's what they said.
MR. MIGLIORI: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. BELASIC: Your Honor, I'm entitled to
say the basis for the --
THE COURT: Just one second. Stop it, both
of you.
Go ahead.
You can refer to the deposition testimony.
MR. BELASIC: All right. They told you that
they based their opinion on what they read in the
SANDRA K. PROVENZANO, RPR
OFFICIAL UNITED STATES COURT REPORTER 56 depositions. All I'm pointing out is you then saw what
Mr. Harford said at trial. You saw something they never
got to read.
Now, Dr. Werner said she never read the
eyewitness testimony, stepdaughter, granddaughter, the
eyewitnesses. The stepdaughter lived with him in the
'50s and '60s, and the granddaughter in the '80s.
Dr. Werner said she never read them.
Dr. Burns never mentioned that testimony.
Dr. Werner told me she only read what the
attorneys gave her. They didn't give her the eyewitness
testimony.
And they both gave testimony completely
contradicted by Mr. Harford in this trial. And I'll give
you two examples. They said, well, he made many serious
efforts to quit. And Dr. Burns said with a straight
face. He made many attempts to quit that lasted three to
seven days.
But when Mr. Harford took the stand, he said
that the average time he would quit was overnight. And
that once 25 or 30 years ago he quit for a day. And that
once he thinks he quit for two days, but he's not sure.
That's not what Dr. Burns said.
And both of them said that he had evidence
of withdrawal. But Mr. Harford said that when he would 57 quit for those periods before he finally stopped, quote,
it didn't affect him very much.
They didn't have that evidence.
Now, we know that he didn't make repeated
serious efforts to quit because I showed you his own
sworn testimony. He said he probably didn't mean it.
And when he was asked the number -- the number of times
that he quit, it was overnight when he was asleep.
And think about that. Can you really try to
quit smoking when you're sleeping? Obviously, under that
standard all of us would be dieting or quitting coffee or
quitting smoking. When he was asleep.
But when he did quit, he says he remember
New Year's 25 or 30 years ago. And in his own words he
said he didn't want to make a commitment. He didn't make
that commitment until he quit for the final time. And
once he made that commitment, addiction didn't cause him
to smoke.
We know that he didn't ask anyone for help.
We know that he didn't ask his doctor for help. We know
he didn't throw away cigarettes. We know what he didn't
do. But we also know what he did, and that was quit.
I mentioned the eyewitnesses. Do the
eyewitnesses support the story and support the evidence
on addiction? Remember everyone explained addiction, 58 it's not something like a blood test or something
internal. It's based on his smoking behavior.
And so do the eyewitnesses, his stepdaughter
and granddaughter, do they confirm that he had
withdrawal? No. They say they never even knew he was
trying to quit.
Do they say that he had a serious desire to
quit, one of the criteria? They say they never heard him
say he wanted to quit. They never saw him throw
cigarettes away, they never saw him make an effort to
quit until he stopped.
Now, if in fact he made all these attempts
and if in fact he was going through withdrawal and if in
fact he was depressed and disappointed about failing to
quit, don't you think the two women that lived with him,
the stepdaughter in the '50s and '60s and the
granddaughter in the '70s and '80s would have confirmed
it? Don't you think that they saw him almost every day
when he wasn't traveling that they would have been able
to confirm? They did not. They didn't back his story.
And, of course, they never saw him smoke
once he moved to Florida in the '80s.
Now, when you think about addiction and what
caused him to quit, remember that the plaintiff's expert
said that 55 to 60 million people in America quit. 59 That's an enormous number. It means it's not a rarity.
It means it's one of the common things that people do.
60 million people, that's one out of every 5
that's been labeled as addicted, according to Dr. Burns,
and then quit. And addiction doesn't mean it's done all
the time. And we know that Mr. Harford did it himself.
That's why the 60 million people quitting is so
important. It means that addiction doesn't cause the
disease.
We know that most of them quit on their own,
90 percent. And we know that Mr. Harford quit on his
own.
Now, when you're asked to decide was
addiction -- this is not was smoking a cause. We talked
about that. But was the addiction itself a cause?
First thing we showed Dr. Burns is the
Surgeon General's report that he worked on. And it says
cigarette smoking, is addictive. And does it say
cigarette smoking, therefore, is a cause of the cancer?
No. It says, cigarette smoking is
addictive, and the individual smoker must decide whether
to continue that behavior.
And when Mr. Harford made the decision, when
he said for the first time he made a commitment when he
believed it instead of the thousands of times he said he 60 didn't, suddenly the addiction didn't cause him to smoke.
Now, Dr. Burns as we know said that even if
you are addicted, you're still responsible for quitting
and that you can quit. How can that be a cause?
Dr. Cummings -- remember at the very start
of the trial Dr. Cummings is going to admit that if
you're motivated and you stick to it long enough, the
success rate is a hundred percent.
Mr. Migliori said that's not true. And
Dr. Cummings says that's crazy. And then I showed you
the video and it said exactly that, that the success rate
in quitting for a motivated smoker that sticks to it is a
hundred percent.
And when Mr. Harford was motivated, not
saying before he went to bed he was going to quit, but
when he was motivated, whether it was because he was
coughing up blood or because he was insulted in 1985 and
quit then, once he was motivated, he quit smoking.
I'm going to ask you think about this: The
question says, is addiction a cause of his lung cancer.
When you typically think about something causing
something, what type of cause is it where if you change
your mind and take action, suddenly the cause doesn't
have any effect?
And here's an example. First I want you to 61 highlight the instruction that Judge Block gave you. To
prove that addiction was the cause -- I want to
highlight -- it has to be directly -- directly, not
indirectly -- and in a natural and continuous sequence
which produced or substantially contributed to producing
the disease.
Now, is addiction a direct cause? Think
about that. One day you're addicted, according to
Dr. Werner, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns. The next day
because you're responsible you stop smoking. Dr. Burns
said you're responsible for making that choice and you
can.
Suddenly addiction is no longer a cause.
What type of cause is that where simply changing your
mind and making an effort?
Think about an action movie where someone is
going down a mountain and they realize their car doesn't
have any brakes. Now, they're going to crash. Maybe
they'll sideswipe a car and slow it down. Maybe they'll
go into the ocean, but they're going to crash. The
brakes are out, and that is going to cause them to crash.
The person in that car can't say, I'm going
to make up my mind -- I'm going to make up my mind not to
get hurt, not to crash. No. They have no control over
it. They're being caused to be injured. 62 But the plaintiff's experts themselves say
that even if a person is addicted, they still have that
control. And Dr. Burns says they're still responsible.
And Dr. Cummings says when they make a committed decision
to quit, they are a hundred percent successful.
Now, whatever we're going to say about
Mr. Harford, the day after he quit, whatever they call
addiction suddenly had no effect. Did addiction cause
him to smoke or was it his choice to smoke, in his own
words, and his choice not to be serious about quitting,
when he told us that he never meant it thousands of times
until he quit for good. That's not a cause.
Even if they can prove that the smoking
caused the tumor and it was an adenocarcinoma, we know
from Dr. Burns' own argument it wasn't -- that addiction
wasn't the cause because he could and did quit.
I'm going to put up one more thing.
Remember that it has to be substantial. What does the
Surgeon General say? Does the Surgeon General say, well,
addiction causes lung cancer because it forces you to
smoke or it stops you from quitting? What does the
Surgeon General say? Does he say it's substantial?
This is the Surgeon General's report that
Dr. Burns told you he worked on. (Inaudible) -- even in
the best circumstances a measure of tobacco dependence 63 accounts for only modest amounts of variation in the risk
of relapse, only modest amounts.
They don't say that addiction is a
substantial cause of disease. They say it accounts for a
modest amount when it comes to relapse.
And look what the Surgeon General says is
important. The finding is consistent with the notion
that relapse is a function of multiple person factors.
It's the person.
And when Mr. Harford changed his mind,
didn't change his cigarettes, nicotine didn't change, his
brain didn't change, when he changed his mind he quit.
And addiction didn't cause him to smoke.
If you get to Question 4, as Mr. Migliori
said -- and I talked about choice. The plaintiff here
chose to smoke. The plaintiff here said that he did not
want to quit. He said in his own words when I said to
myself that I wanted to quit, I probably didn't mean it.
I said thousands of times. I didn't mean it.
That's what Mr. Harford said, not
something that (inaudible). When it came to control, we
know he said he didn't want to make a commitment. He was
on the stand. He was unwilling to make a commitment.
But when he did make a commitment, we know
that he quit. And he quit without a doctor's help, he 64 quite without nicotine patches or gum or drugs. He quit
on his own when he made a commitment.
And their own experts say that the smoker is
responsible. You could call the smoker -- and call him a
heavy smoker. Call it a habit. Call him a habitual
smoker. Call him nicotine dependent. Call him addicted.
In the end though it is a man or woman
smoking. And in this case it's Mr. Harford. And no
matter what label we apply to Mr. Harford, he was the
only one who could choose to start, and he did, and he
was the only one who could choose to quit, and he did.
Just like 60 million other Americans who bought
cigarettes and chose to quit, he did.
Now, no one in the tobacco industry or no
one who was a tobacco spokesman could make a choice for
him to start or a choice for him to quit. When he looked
at himself in the mirror he said, I'm not going to smoke
again. He was the only man who could decide to quit. No
one else was making a choice for him.
He made a choice. Not rare. It happens
tens of billions of times. And when he made that choice,
he didn't smoke. He's the one who's responsible.
They can talk about what R. J. Reynolds did
wrong, but in the end the only thing that made a
difference in his smoking was his own decision. 65 Now, we know he was surrounded by warnings.
I won't repeat it. But you know from '51 to '52 to '56
all of his relatives either getting sick or telling him
that it's causing the problems or lung cancer. His own
doctor warns him. He's in the hospital.
You can go through each and every one of
those. And when you see that the plaintiff's own expert
says he's responsible and that under the plaintiff's
testimony the only reason he quit was his own decision,
Reynolds isn't 50 percent responsible or 10 percent
responsible. They didn't have any 10 percent control
over what Mr. Harford did.
He made a hundred percent of the decisions
to start. And when he quit, he was a hundred percent
responsible for his success in quitting.
He's the only one -- remember what he said.
I said, why didn't you just quit when your wife quit? It
was '64. It was 50 years ago. Why didn't you quit then?
He said, well, you know -- he even talked
about helping. And she said, no. She had to quit on her
own. Well, of course. But so did he.
And he knew then in the '50s that it was
causing him damage. And he knew about lung cancer from
his family, but he made a choice. And he couldn't be
stopped, and he couldn't be forced by someone at R. J. 66 Reynolds. He made the decision and he made a hundred
percent of the decision.
And so if you reach comparative fault, you
find that Mr. Harford is a hundred percent responsible
for his own choices.
I'm going to go straight to the question of
reliance. Mr. Migliori mentioned that. Questions 5
through 10 on this -- Questions 5 through 10 on this
verdict form are going to talk about reliance.
I was only about a half hour into
questioning Mr. Harford when he just admitted that he
didn't rely. And I asked him, you weren't smoking
because of ads? I asked him, did you rely on
advertising? Were you aware of any statements by
Reynolds? No. Was he aware of any statement by American
Tobacco or Brown & Williamson?
He said he had never even heard of these
groups. All the time he spent talking on them, the hours
that Dr. Cummings spent on this, he never heard these
groups existed. They had no effect on his smoking under
his own testimony.
He never saw the Frank statement. I asked
him about did you see any statement by the tobacco
organization or tobacco representative? He didn't.
Now, as I understand Mr. Migliori's 67 argument, he said that he relied on advertising, which is
completely contrary to what you heard Mr. Harford say.
He didn't smoke because of ads.
He did say that after many years of smoking
he would choose his brand based on taste. There isn't
some claim that Winston tastes good is some sort of
fraud.
But Mr. Harford doesn't say that he relied
on that advertisement to continue smoking. He doesn't
say that he saw a statement in an ad that convinced him
not to quit. He said he didn't want to quit. He admits
that these statements didn't cause him to smoke or to
continue.
And if they had any evidence, Dr. Burns
would have said it. Dr. Burns would have said, well, he
saw a statement and that made him smoke or he saw a
statement and that made him not quit.
All Dr. Burns could say is he continued
smoking. And that's consistent with people
who (inaudible).
Maybe they could line up some smokers who
could come in and make that claim. But in this case they
have the wrong smoker because he admitted that he did not
rely on these statements.
And so from 5 through 10 under his own 68 admission he did not rely on a statement. And you should
answer Question 5 no
Question 6 will become unnecessary according
to the Judge's instructions. Questions 7 and 8 are no.
No statement and no reliance caused his adenocarcinoma.
If you get to the question of damages, I
just want you to consider some of Mr. Harford's own
medical records. And none of this is disputed.
First of all, we know he was cured. In
September of 1992 the radiation was over after three
months, from June until September. And shortly
thereafter he was told that he was making amazing
progress. And that the incurable adenocarcinoma that
they had incorrectly diagnosed was shrinking.
And he knew after three months that he was
having this incredible response. And he knew by 1993
that he was in remission and was headed for a cure. And
ever since then it has never recurred. It's never
recurred.
Now, he's 82 years old. He has lived
22 years since he was cured. He's an 82-year-old man.
He's fit and healthy for an 82-year old. He's driving,
he's taking care of himself, he's living on his own. He
drives an hour to visit his granddaughter. He does some
yard work. He exercises. 69 Here's what his records have said when he
was in his 70s. The patient says he's doing great. He's
back to working at Albertson's. He doing yard work,
cutting grass. He says he's doing great and doesn't lack
the energy.
And in this one -- he was almost 79 years
old in this record. And he says he's exercising once a
day, 20 minutes a day, outside work. He told me he still
uses the treadmill.
And no one is saying -- and don't let
Mr. Migliori suggest that when you get cancer, it's not
scary. And no one is saying that anyone wants to go
through radiation.
But he was cured. He has now lived to age
82. And he's living by his own accounts a happy and
productive life.
His statements on anxiety, he says he wasn't
anxious in 2007, that he wasn't concerned.
Now, he says for 22 years he has lived in
fear that his cancer will come back. Did you see any
testimony from his loved ones, from the eyewitnesses?
Wouldn't they know, the ones that lived with him all this
time, the ones that talked to him? Wouldn't his
granddaughter have been able to corroborate that?
He told me for the first time, and I asked 70 him about this. For the first time he's taking
antianxiety medicine. I asked him when was that. I was
taking it at my deposition, but I forgot to mention it
because he said he was only taking cholesterol and
hypertension pills.
He was diagnosed with lung cancer 20 years
ago. And during that time in 1992, there's no record
that he went on antianxiety or depression medication.
There's no record from his doctor that he was being
treated all during that time, including when he went back
to work in '96, nothing.
We know when he sold his house that he said
they let him live it in for a year. And he sold his
house and he promptly bought another house. That's what
we know.
Now, all of this time there's no evidence in
the medical records of any -- of any severe mental
distress. There's no evidence from his family members of
any severe mental distress.
And he had other cancer. He had prostate
cancer and surgery. And that must have been scary. And
he said he's had 40 or 50 incidents of skin cancer. He
says they're not related to smoking. So none of that
caused him to go on medication.
We know he loved his wife very much. She 71 died in 2011. And we know he didn't go on medication
then, and there is no record of that.
Now, what we have for the first time now he
says that he started taking antianxiety medication in
2013. Is that really caused by his lung cancer 20 years
earlier? For 20 years he never took it. It's when he
started having to testify in this case he said around the
time of the deposition he first took anxiety medication.
The final question, was Mr. Harford entitled
to punitive damages. Judge Block read to you it's a
higher and much more difficult standard. It's not just a
preponderance of the evidence. You would have to find
clear and convincing evidence. It has to be precise. No
confusion and no hesitation.
And in considering that, you have to look at
a choices he made. And the choice that he says to start,
the choice that he says he made not to quit, and the
choice to quit that when he made it to quit he was able
to, over 50 years.
The instruction on punitive damages requires
you to find that it was intentional misconduct and it was
intentional misconduct that caused Mr. Harford to develop
primary lung adenocarcinoma.
And here's the reason I bring that up. When
Mr. Migliori started off, he said that's the reason that 72 he's entitled to not just $10 million, but what would he
have asked for if the cancer hadn't been treated? What
would he have asked for if Mr. Harford had died?
He's asking for $10 million. He's been
cured for 22 years. But Mr. Migliori said more money in
the form of punitive damages because the Counsel For
Tobacco Research and the Tobacco Institute and the
tobacco industry said things that he said were false that
Mr. Harford said he never even heard of. He filed a
lawsuit and sued on those claims. He's never even heard
of them. Had no effect on him.
Whatever else we believe from the evidence,
we know it didn't have anything to do with those
organizations. And that's what Mr. Migliori stakes his
claim on. But you should find no on the entitlement to
punitive damages.
They say that the lies were whether or not
smoking caused cancer. We know that the dispute was over
statistics. You saw the video that uses statistics. The
Surgeon General said himself back at the time of the
controversy that statistical methods cannot establish
prove of a causal relationship in an association.
Fifty years later they brought his own
doctor, Dr. Scanlon, who said that smoking was an
association with lung cancer. He wouldn't say caused. 73 He wasn't committing fraud. And either were they when
they said this. Causation was a legitimate dispute.
The Surgeon General -- I read you most of
the figures (inaudible), much less be persuaded by
statistics, which is what they showed that the tobacco
companies (inaudible).
And then their own doctor said statistical
association. He wouldn't say cause. Their own doctor
said, I call it a risk factor. He would not agree with
Mr. Migliori that smoking caused Mr. Harford's cancer.
It was a legitimate dispute. It was not a
basis to give him even more money in the form of punitive
damages.
You know that an internal secret memo that
they didn't think would be read told the R. J. Reynolds
employees to make a safer cigarette, if at all possible.
Dr. Burns explained it's just impossible.
You cannot light tobacco on fire and have it be inhaled
safely. That's common sense.
They instructed their own employees to
cooperate with others. And what the plaintiff called
lack of cooperation is a lack of agreement. They did
show you someone saying that the '79 Surgeon General's
report, that they were trying to ban smoking or move
towards deciding to ban it. 74 And he had the nerve to say they opposed it.
But that's not the same thing that's entitling Mr.
Harford to more money.
He never saw any of those statements. He
said he never even heard of the group. That he'd never
heard a statement from R. J. Reynolds or American Tobacco
or anyone.
Finally, they argue that they deliberately
engineered cigarettes to be addictive and all these
modern advancements. Well, the only expert on cigarette
design was their expert. And Dr. Cummings said that
today's cigarettes are not more addictive.
And look what he said. We asked him about
role your own. You just buy your own tobacco and roll it
yourself. He said those smokers are more addicted than
the people who smoke commercial cigarettes.
And we know from the government's own study
that today instead of having people be more addicted,
there's a higher percentage of people that only smoke
occasionally. Basically it's a behavior change
consistent with less rather than more addiction.
Well, I'm about to wrap up. I'll leave you
with one thought on punitive. You heard from Dr.
Cummings and Dr. Burns all the changes that have
happened. That warnings are on the pack. That CTR, TI, 75 TIRC, they don't exist. They've been disbanded.
You heard the evidence yesterday. The
industry is now under FDA regulation. I read that to you
at the end. The FDA can regulate the cigarettes, the
marketing and the distribution.
The FDA can control the product standards
for nicotine. They can set the nicotine yield. They can
reduce, or they can eliminate the constituents in smoke
as appropriate. The industry is now a regulated utility.
There isn't anything that they call
intentional misconduct that was somehow intended to kill
or harm Mr. Harford, that Mr. Harford was affected by.
They say it was the statements of CTR that he never heard
of.
Now, in the end it is scientifically
impossible for it to be an adenocarcinoma. It's just a
matter of scientific fact. They didn't bring anyone to
dispute that.
His own doctor that did the radiation
doesn't call it an adenocarcinoma. And they didn't bring
any doctor in the field -- they didn't bring any doctor
who was a radiation oncologist or a pathologist.
Mr. Harford smoked for 35 years until 1985
by choice. And by his own testimony, he quit by his
choice. And whether we call him addicted, frequent, 76 habitual or a heavy smoker, in the end his choice
controlled whether he smoked and his choice controlled
when he quit. It's not something the tobacco companies
are making up. It's what Mr. Harford told you himself.
Ironically, after all of that he got a type
of cancer that was not an adenocarcinoma. And his own
doctor -- his own doctor came in here under oath and did
not say that smoking causes cancer, no matter how hard
Mr. Migliori tries. Dr. Scanlon said, cause, no. It's a
risk factor.
Thank you for your attention. I know it's
been a long trial. I'm at the end. I don't get to say
anything. Mr. Migliori gets a free shot at me. I ask
you to consider the evidence that I've discussed. And,
of course, you'll reach your own conclusions. Thank you.
