MR. ACOSTA: May it please the Court.
Good morning. We've been waiting a couple weeks here to get to this point, and I want to thank you. You know, you-all were paying close attention to everything that you could. A lot of evidence, a lot of facts. We don't know when we've presented too many or not enough, so we try to do what we think is necessary for you to understand the case. That's -- that's what the lawyer's job is. Of course, my job is to
represent Mr. Hargroves and ask you to consider not only his loss but what the defendant has done to his life, what R.J. Reynolds' predecessors, the American Tobacco Company and the Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company really took from him.
Now, I thank you. He thanks you. I know the defense lawyers are going to thank you too. I don't want to steal their thunder here, but they're going to stand up and thank you as well.
And we appreciate your paying attention to this.
So now is the time that I get to argue to you, as the Judge said, what we think you should do in the case. And, of course, what we think you should do is to enter a verdict that punishes the defendant for what these two companies did. And the things that they did were calculating, they were deliberate, and they were intentional. They did it to make a profit, and they put profit over the health of their customers.
And the evidence was so overwhelming on that, they don't really address it. The defense doesn't really address it. What you're going to hear probably from the defense is offense. Sometimes the best defense is an offense, so what they do is they come in and they are going to talk all about
Debra Hargroves and her, quote, choice.
But you have to consider that she was nine years old. Nine years old. And we've waved that around a lot, but that's the truth. She was nine years old when she started to smoke. And the medical records indicate that she smoked a pack a year (sic) since then.
Her brother remembers seeing her in a room, if you recall, when she was 12 or 13 with a pack of cigarettes and an ashtray, and she was cleaning her room. That's the first time he remembers seeing her smoking regularly.
So sometime in there when she's a kid, she is smoking. And her brother, you may remember, talked about how all the other kids in the trailer park where they lived were smoking too. And her mom was a chain smoker. That's the environment she grew up in.
She grew up in an environment that was different than we have today. This was a time when the cigarette industry started becoming aware that cigarette smoke was dangerous. You know, up until around 1950, that was pretty much an open question for the experts. For the experts. Not the consumer, but the experts. The cigarette
companies are experts in the field of their products. They are required to know what their products do, especially something that you inhale. You see? And they designed the cigarette for inhalation. It was their choice to do that.
Now, perhaps when they first started doing it, they didn't realize what they were doing, because lung cancer was almost nonexistent at the turn of the century. But later on, there started to be more and more studies, more and more studies, and they had a choice. They had a choice in 1953 about what to do. They made the wrong choice. Everybody knows that.
Even Dr. Gentry -- he was up here on the witness stand on Friday, I believe. He said, you know, we didn't put out a clear message that cigarettes caused cancer until 2004. We held onto that too long, he said.
They held onto it way too long. And they held onto it so they could make more money at the expense of people that smoked. We're not talking about today's cigarettes and today's smoker. You know, the cards are pretty much on the table today, although a lot of the people still don't know that they freebase nicotine; they don't know
what a nitrosamine is and how the cigarettes that they smoked back in the eighties and the nineties had 33 times the carcinogens in the bright tobacco.
When I read that list of percentages of bright tobacco in Kool, I did that so you would see that there was 38 to 40 percent bright tobacco in all the Kool cigarettes over those years.
That's almost half. And that's the tobacco that had these extra carcinogens in them. Dr. Gentry admitted it, admitted it. He just said that they didn't know about it until 1999. But Dr. Farone and Dr. Cummings said, Oh, no, they knew about it.
Dr. Gentry admitted that they postulated about the nitrosamines back in 1962. They are made when nitric oxide mixes with nicotine.
Nitric oxide is in the combusted gas of propane and burned in burners that they put inside the barns. They knew about it. They didn't do anything about it. Even if they didn't know about it, it's a defect. It's a defect because those cigarettes have 33 times more nitrosamines than they should have had. And Dr. Gentry said, We can take 90 percent of them out if we go back to the old way or we go to some sort of heat exchanger
where you don't have a propane burner inside the barn.
Well, you heard that lung cancer is a dose-response disease. Dose response means the more carcinogens you get in your lungs, the more likely it is that you're going to get lung cancer.
Well, they put a lot of the extra carcinogens, nitrosamines, the most potent ones, in the cigarette, and didn't do anything about it until 1999.
That's just one, one defect. There is a number of defects.
But what these companies did, I want to go back and suggest to you that back in 1953 they made a choice. They made a choice to tell people that cigarettes weren't hazardous. They made a choice to say there wasn't any proof. Now, Brown & Williamson had already done some research and found a carcinogen in cigarette smoke the year before that. Reynolds -And by the way, let me set this up, because I think there is something that you've got to understand. Our claims are for what the American Tobacco Company did and what Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company did. We don't have a claim for
what Reynolds did, although you saw a lot of evidence about that. Part of that happened because Ms. Parker in her opening statement puts up a picture of the Premier, this fake cigarette.
Talks about Premier and Eclipse and all the good things that Reynolds did.
So evidence came in about Reynolds. But Reynolds isn't in the claim. The claim is about what the American Tobacco Company did and about what Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company did. And the documents that are in evidence, there is a big cart full of evidence that's going to go back in the jury room with you for you to look at. And you can look at the documents that we've discussed during the trial. You know, during this argument portion, it's impossible -- I wouldn't go through those documents with you again. It would take forever. There is a lot of documents.
Everything that we discussed in this case was documented. It wasn't theory. It's what was in their documents. If you go back in there and you start pulling these documents, you're going to see. You're going to see what they did.
For example, there is one called The Crucial Role of Nicotine. That's the second part of the
title. It's like The Nature of the Tobacco Business and the Crucial Role of Nicotine, by Claude Teague, in 1972, I believe. That's the one that says, Happily for the cigarette industry, people become habituated to our products and they can't quit.
That's the way they look at it. And that's the way they looked at it in 1953, because there is another document that says the same thing back in 1953.
They had this meeting of all of the big cigarette companies, except for one,
Liggett & Myers. They had this meeting to agree to tell the public that their products weren't hazardous. They knew -- they knew that if one of them said otherwise, that the whole thing would fall in. Like Dr. Cummings said, the house of cards would have fallen down. Because a cigarette company that admitted that its cigarettes were a cause of cancer would apply to all the companies, and they didn't want that to happen.
So they had this agreement. Let's tell everybody that we're going to form the Tobacco Industry Research Committee, that we're going to form the The Tobacco Institute. And those will be
our spokesmen. Of course, they said a lot of things themselves, but those will be our spokesmen. And they sponsored these groups. They paid for them. They ran them. They had people on their executive committees. Executives in Brown & Williamson were executives in The Tobacco Institute and so forth.
These companies were telling people something that they knew wasn't true. They were lying.
There is a document in evidence from 1958, which is A Visit to the United States. That's the title of it. Some scientists from over in Europe came over to the United States, and they met with different -- different research directors in the various companies. And they report -- this is their report back then. This is in their words.
It isn't something that just got made up today.
Back then, this fellow that writes this report says, These people believe cigarettes really do cause cancer. But the executives in the company told people they didn't. Told them -- told everybody that they didn't.
It was a lie. And it's a lie that they -once they make that lie, then they have to -- they maintain it. Year after year after year, they
maintain the lie. And they maintain that lie so that they can keep selling cigarettes. And they maintain that lie knowing that kids are -- are their primary source of customers. People don't start smoking after they're 25 or so. It's teenagers that start to smoke. And in this case, nine years old started to smoke. Lives in a two-bedroom trailer in a trailer park in Lakeland with her mother, who is a chain smoker.
You know, Dr. Ford -- he was the fellow that was on yesterday, the defense witness -- he admitted that a nine-year-old is not mature enough to make a choice about smoking. A nine-year-old isn't mature enough to make that choice.
You know, one of the things that we have done in the case -- and I don't want you to think that it's somehow inconsistent. But the plaintiff, us, we admit -- we admit there is some fault on the part of Mrs. Hargroves. Some fault. And the reason for that is a person could quit 20 times, but somebody else might think you should have tried 21 times. You could go for a long period and try, try, try, try and try, and then get tired and say, You know, I'm just not quite ready yet. I'm going to try again. I'm just not ready right
now. And they might think, yeah, that person should bear some fault.
You're going to see on the verdict form that there are lines that you should fill in about the percentages of fault.
Can I have the Elmo, please?
It's No. 4 there. Put nine percent down.
She was nine years old when she started. But put what you think is right. I am certainly not here to tell you what to do. That's not the way this works. You make the decision. You heard the evidence. You saw the whole picture. The case was probably a little different than you might have anticipated when you were selected as jurors.
We can't -- it takes a whole trial to tell the story of what happened.
So that's how this portion works. And so we didn't come into court saying that the American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company are a hundred percent at fault. We didn't say that. We came into Court saying, Look, we'll take some responsibility, but the fact of the matter is, is that Reynolds, who is the successor and legally responsible for them, refuses -refuses -- to take any and blames Mrs. Hargroves
100 percent. One hundred percent. And you've heard the evidence that that's not right. It's not right.
This is a case -- it's really about good and evil, and what's good and what's not; what's moral and what's not. When a company knows that its product has 60 carcinogens in it, or more, or even less. It knows it has eight carcinogens in it.
It knows what a carcinogen is. A carcinogen is something that causes cancer. They knew that. They were gambling with the lives of their customers.
What did they do in 1955? They go on television and they say, There is nothing in the smoke that we can find that's harmful, but if we find something, we'll take it out.
They wanted people to keep smoking. They were going to look. They were going to look. Of course, they didn't tell people what they already knew.
Then again on television, 1964, when the Surgeon General's report comes out. Howard Cullman, he's on the Tobacco Merchants Association, so he is representing all the tobacco interests. And he's on Harry Reasoner, and he's
smoking away, and disagrees with the Surgeon General's report. And he says, Look, we don't think there is anything harmful in cigarette smoke. But if -- we're going to look for it. And if we find it, we're going to remove it.
Harry Reasoner says, You know, maybe we have been betrayed by an old friend -- speaking of the cigarette -- but maybe we should give them a chance to reform.
And that's what people did. They trusted in the cigarette company while the cigarette company was really gambling that they would find the answer and fix it. But they were gambling with lives. They knew what the results would likely be.
It's wrong. This can't be a country where we let corporations gamble with the lives of the people they are supposed to serve. It's wrong.
That's why we think you should punish them. And that's why -- it's how you deter other people from doing -You know, history repeats itself. If you don't do things to stop things, history -- people will forget. Five years from now, if nobody did anything, where would the cigarette industry be?
Their sales would be going right back up again. That's the nature -- it's the human nature. It's human nature. You have to step in sometimes and you have to do what's right.
This case is a vehicle for doing what's right. This case is a chance to say, Look, we don't think that this kind of conduct can be tolerated in our society. How do you tolerate lying to the public about things that you know are not true?
In 1972, on television again, on color TV,
Face The Nation -- that's a Sunday news show -what do they do? They come on and they said, It's not hazardous to your health. If we find something in the smoke, we're going to take it out.
They knew they couldn't take it out. There is a document in there. Alan Rodgman wrote it. He's a principal scientist at Reynolds.
Like I say, this isn't so much about Reynolds' conduct, but it shows you what the cigarette industry either knew or should have known.
And Rodgman says, Look, these -- these particular group of carcinogens, the polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, should be completely removed, down to the zero level. If we can get them down to the zero level, that's what it should be. But he says, We can't do that as long as the temperature is over 700 degrees. And the cigarette burns at 900 to 1,000 degrees Celsius.
That's 1500 degrees when you suck on a cigarette.
It's unbelievable heat. That turns the tobacco at the tip into chemicals. It makes it -- it keeps -- the heat, you know, it's up 4,000 chemicals, 6,000 chemicals. Many of them are toxic. And, of course, we know about the ones that cause cancer.
Well, he knew it too back in 1959. And he continued to know it. But they continued to go the other direction. They continued to tell people, No, it doesn't.
And what do they do? They have lawyers who set the policies, the health policies, for the company. The lawyers determine what research they should do and not do. You know, you would think that if they were going to do honest research, that they would let the scientists make those decisions. The lawyers do it so that they can protect the company from the discovery of the
information and keep it a secret. And, in fact, you saw one document indicating how the legal department at Reynolds had said, Look, there may be some bad records in our files. And Murray Senkus, who was very high up in Reynolds, writes back and said, Look, we can destroy records if you think that it will be helpful to our suits, and this is the way we can do it. Then he lists a number of ways.
There is another document that talks about how they would terminate their research if it looked like it was going to be detrimental to their position in litigation.
There is a document that says -And these are all in evidence. You can look -- you can look through these in these binders. And they are -- I believe they are in chronological order. So if you remember the time frame, you can look for them that way.
And -- but they were -- they were briefly shown through one of the witnesses. Probably most of these that I'm talking about went in through Dr. Cummings, who you may remember was the fellow that works at Roswell Park, helped write Surgeon General's reports, got a grant from the NCI, the
National Cancer Institute, to gather these 16 million pages of documents and review them and categorize them and so forth, who runs the state quit-line for addiction. He -- he's an epidemiologist. He teaches medical students. He has done a lot of things. He knows this industry, this product. He's made -- that's his life's work. And we're lucky to have him come down here and testify in this case. And you heard what he had to say about the cigarette industry and what they did. Every bit of it is documented. Every single bit of it.
The lawyers said in 1980 in a memo to The Tobacco Institute president, Mr. Kloepfer -- the lawyers tell us if there is -- if cigarettes are addictive, then we can't defend free choice. If they are addictive, we can't defend free choice.
The Surgeon General in '88 and '89 indicates that addiction, of course, influences and affects the person's choice about using the product.
That's what addiction is. That's what addiction is. It changes the brain. Nicotine changes -and when you're young, it changes it even more.
It grows receptors in the brain to stay there for the rest of your life.
So when a smoker is able to stop for a while, it's kind of like an alcoholic. You have one drink, and you're back on it. Well, that's what happens to a smoker, because you've got all these receptors up there and all of a sudden it's activated with nicotine, and now the brain is providing all the hormones that it would otherwise provide. If you don't have a cigarette, it shuts down and you don't feel right; you don't feel normal. It can cause depression. It can cause irritation and nervousness and so forth.
I know there was a question somebody asked.
I don't remember who, but it had something to do with the video and the seven hours of videotape.
If you remember the little short clip, it came from that. And it started in 1993 and ran through 2000. Those were home videos of special occasions, basically. Christmas, Easter, babies being born, that kind of thing. There were lots of different little clips. It wasn't like seven hours running, you know. It was lots of different clips from 2000 -- I mean from '93 to 2000 or so.
One of the things that I wanted to talk about is the jury instructions that you got a copy of.
And I want to go over just a little bit of it,
because it's important to understand how we view these instructions.
It says, The issues for your determination on the negligence claim of Plaintiff against Defendant are whether the American Tobacco Company or Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation, or both, were negligent in failing to exercise reasonable care in the design of their cigarettes, and, if so, whether such negligence was a legal cause of injury and death.
And then it defines negligence on the next page.
Negligence is the failure to use reasonable care. Which means the care that a reasonably careful person or cigarette manufacturer -- since that's who we have in the case -- would use under like circumstances. Negligence is doing something a reasonably careful person, or a cigarette manufacturer, would not do under like circumstances, or failing to do something that a reasonably careful person or cigarette manufacturer would do under like circumstances.
Well, I will argue a little bit about what -how that applies to our case. I have already talked about it a little bit with respect to
telling the truth, but there is -- there is more than that. But I need to go over this, because this is the second claim. And you will be asked on the verdict form about each claim separately.
The second one, it's called strict liability.
Oh, and by the way, I didn't read the last sentence up there. It says, The manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity. There is no question about that. It's lawful to sell cigarettes. That's not the -- that's not the issue. It's not the issue. The issue is whether the way they did it was negligent, you see. If this was a case where they were unlawfully selling cigarettes, it wouldn't be in this kind of court.
It would be against the law, and that's not -this is a civil case.
Down here. A product is defective if, by reason of its design, the product is in a condition unreasonably dangerous to the user.
And then that paragraph that I highlighted and have a little circle around or -- let me read that, because this is the key part.
A document -- I mean, a product is considered unreasonably dangerous because of its design if the product fails to perform as safely as an
ordinary consumer would expect when used as intended or in a manner reasonably foreseeable by the manufacturer. Then it says, or if the risk of danger in the design outweighs the benefits.
If the risk of the design outweighs the benefits, it's defective, because it's unreasonably dangerous. The defendant admits there is no safe cigarette, and that cigarettes are dangerous. They just don't want to take that extra step and say it's unreasonably dangerous.
But it is.
How in the world can the benefits outweigh the risk of danger? Everybody tells their kids not to smoke. Everybody who was a kid that's young enough, has told themselves.
The risk of use is not outweighed by the benefit. There aren't really any benefits. There might be at first. You know, it might be when you go out and, you know, you are at a bar or club and you're partying or you're with some friends and you have a drink on the weekend. Okay. That might be fun. But consider the risk that's involved when you become a regular smoker. The benefits can't outweigh that risk.
We talked about as safely as an ordinary
consumer would expect when used as intended. You know, we have very skillful lawyers on the other side. And Mr. Walker asked twice the witness, Did consumers expect cigarettes to be safe? That's not the test. That is not the test. Of course nobody expected cigarettes to be safe. The question is, did they perform as safely as an ordinary consumer would expect when used as intended?
Well, the cigarette industry is saying -- the experts in the situation are saying it's not dangerous, it's not hazardous. They're saying if we find something bad in them, we'll take it out.
They put filters on them. Why did they put filters on them? To make people think that they're a little safer. They make light cigarettes to make people think that those are a little safer. They reassured smokers. They gave them a crutch to keep smoking. They made people think back then -- it may not be true today, but back then they made people think. The average consumer. It says the ordinary consumer.
Now, Mrs. Hargroves was an ordinary consumer, but so were all the other people. So you have to look at this as a general thing, an ordinary
consumer would expect. And back then -Well, in fact, Dr. Ford, the last question I asked him, How many didn't know that smoking caused cancer in 1981? That's about -- what is that? About 17, 18 years into Debra Hargroves' smoking. He said, 32 percent, 15 million did not know in 1981. That was his answer. That was his answer. That's a lot of people.
So consumer expectations, you have seen -it's been bounced around in the trial, and that's the reason why, is because this test that you apply would be -- back then, we're not talking about today. We're talking about back then. What would the ordinary consumer -- what would they have thought?
How can the cigarette companies come in here and tell you that the consumer should know more about the product than they do? That's what they are doing. That's exactly what they are doing. They went on and on and on for years about how smoking was not unsafe, how it had never been proven that smoking caused cancer, you know, up until 2004, for Reynolds.
You know, obviously, you know, some time before that people said, Uh-Oh, that can't be
right, you know.
This company held onto it too long, like Dr. Gentry said. But for a long time -- for a long time people were hoping, thinking, you know, the cigarette company is going to figure out a way, you know. They are going to figure out a way, and everything will be fine.
But that didn't happen. And they knew it wasn't going to happen. That's why it was calculated and deliberate. See, they knew they weren't going to be able to do it.
So what did they do? They switched -Reynolds at least switches to let's make some kind of alternative product. And you saw the diagram that kind of looks like a cutout of a cruise missile or something, is how they designed this Eclipse cigarette. It doesn't sell. They spent a billion dollars doing that.
Dr. Gentry, their 2.6 million dollar man, who makes 2.6 million dollars a year, came in here to testify. A cigarette company executive right here on the stand. 2.6 million dollars at stake because, if the stock goes up, his income goes up. If their stock goes down, he loses money.
He's here to tell you all the good things
that he thinks Reynolds does. But like I said, it's not about Reynolds' conduct. It's what the American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williamson did.
You saw -- you saw this man named Heimann, right there. You saw those little clips of him.
He's the one that said we expect consumers to rely on our message about smoking. We expect them to.
He's the one that said cigarette smoking is not hazardous. The Surgeon -- he said -- this is a quote -- the Surgeon General was dead wrong, is what this guy said.
He was the CEO of the American Tobacco Company when Debra Hargroves was smoking Pall Mall cigarettes. Or if not the CEO then, he was pretty high up in the organization. I could be off on my years a little bit there. He retires in 1980.
His deposition is taken in 1986. He's produced to talk about things for the company.
He epitomizes what was wrong back in the fifties, sixties, seventies, eighties. The position that they took was dead wrong. It wasn't the Surgeon General that was dead wrong.
They say the Surgeon General is insulting science, etc., etc., etc.
The Surgeon General is the chief doctor of the whole United States. The chief doctor of the whole United States is dead wrong, according to Mr. Heimann.
Let me go back to this for a second. We have admitted -- I have already covered this, I think -- admitted that Debra Hargroves was a partial legal cause of her injury and death. And I think I don't have anything more to say about that right now.
This is the causation issue. The plaintiff has to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that the things that they did to the cigarettes were a cause to her injury. And they were. I mean, the second paragraph there says, In order to be regarded a legal cause of injury and death, negligence or a defect in the product need not be the only cause. Negligence or a defect may be a legal cause of injury and death even though it operates in combination with some natural cause or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the negligence or at the same time that the defect has its effect and if the negligence or defect contributes substantially to producing such injury and death.
So it only needs to be a cause, not the cause. It's kind of a lawyer semantic difference, but it's important, because if you -- if you think that we had to prove it was the cause and the only cause, and if we don't prove that, we lose, that's not right. All we have to prove is that it was one of the contributing -- substantial contributing causes, which obviously smoking cigarettes for 40 years causes lung cancer and death.
This is the damages issue. And I'm going to talk to you about damages in a minute after I finish talking a little bit more about the cigarette industry's conduct. And before that I do, I want to quickly go through what a few of the witnesses said. I took a few little notes, and I -- I know you-all took a lot more notes than I did.
But the first witness we had was Dr. Cummings. And you remember him. He's the one that said that the information out there put out by the cigarette industry was like wallpaper. It was everywhere. The advertising, the amount of advertising they did was unbelievable. Television advertising, which you don't see today. You don't
see it. Some of you may remember seeing billboards yourselves, you know, back before about 1995. But, you know, it's changed. Back then, it was everywhere.
And there were people doing all kinds of things. You saw some of the Kool ads, people skiing and smoking and so on and so forth. I mean, people were always portrayed as being active, healthy, young and energetic. They wanted young smokers to smoke. They wanted to sell their brands.
He's the one that talked about ammonia. So did Dr. Farone, which I'll talk about in a second.
But Dr. Cummings talked about ammonia and how it works and why it works and why it's in there. Why would you put ammonia in a cigarette? And some other things that they put in there. Those additives are in there for reasons. They are in there for reasons. And ammonia causes the nicotine to partially freebase, like crack cocaine, is what it does.
Dr. Cummings talked about the choice. He talked about how Debra Hargroves was addicted. We went through some of the tests for addiction.
Then Dr. Burns was shown to you by video. He
said that 60 percent of smokers start before age 16. It's like 80 something percent before 18.
He's the one that you saw those charts that explained the mechanism for causing cancer, how you start out paralyzing the cilia and start damaging the layers of skin and then how it starts invading the DNA, mutates the DNA.
In fact, I have a little -- a little board that we made up. I will hold it up real fast.
This is -- this is sort of the path it travels. You know, you start -- you get addicted to it. You smoke. Addiction makes you smoke more. I mean, that's the whole key to it.
Addiction makes you smoke more. What else do people do every 45 minutes? I mean, every -every 45 minutes a pack-a-day smoker has to smoke cigarettes, you know, all day long. It mutates the DNA and it causes lung cancer.
And then we had Anissa and Thomas Hargroves testify, because they remembered a couple times that other people didn't remember Debra Hargroves trying to quit smoking.
You know, she -- she made a choice in 1970 that she didn't want to smoke anymore. She tried to stop. That was her choice. And then she made
the choice to continue trying and trying and trying and trying. She smoked when she first got up in the morning. And Dr. Cummings said that was one of the key issues with respect to proving somebody is addicted, along with the amount of cigarettes they smoke. And a pack a day is plenty.
Her brother came down from Tennessee, Robert Kitchens. He was the former marine drill instructor. He said that the kids there in the trailer park, the kids could get -- they could go down and buy cigarettes at the store. The kids could.
Then Dr. Farone was shown to you by video.
He was the guy that worked at Philip Morris. And Dr. Farone -- you were shown these opinions of Dr. Farone. He was -- he had firsthand knowledge. He was right there, right on the spot.
The cigarette company defendants long had firsthand knowledge of unreasonable cigarette dangers while they were physically -- publicly denying it.
The cigarette company defendants knew how addicting cigarettes are and exploited addiction for profits. And that's exactly what they did by
freebasing it. While they're bringing the tar and nicotine numbers down by introducing low -- real low tar cigarettes at the bottom -- they kept the high ones on the market and they wind up with a lower average. But they didn't run it all the way down. They didn't -- they didn't attempt to wean people off. When Debra Hargroves started smoking Kools, until the end of the chart, which is in '98 or something like that, it remains flat. They didn't do anything else. They left it the way it is, because they needed to keep people addicted to nicotine. That's what the whole point was.
The Surgeon General, you may remember, said that what they did is they attempted to undermine the ability of people to stop smoking. And that's exactly what they did.
The designs and methods that the cigarette company defendants used to make cigarettes were developed to addict and to maintain the addiction of smokers despite unreasonable danger.
They're the ones that chose how to design the cigarette. And you saw how many different parameters there are that affect the design.
The vent holes -- the vent holes create free-base nicotine. They put vent holes in Kool
cigarettes.
The cigarette industry knew how to remove or reduce harmful agents in cigarette smoke but refused to do so.
They knew how to remove enough nicotine to make it not addictive. These cigarettes that they make, they are not tobacco grown in the backyard or rolled in paper. These are designed so that you can inhale them and get the smoke as far into your lungs as possible so you get the nicotine hit that gets up to your brain in seven seconds. They put all those additives in there to help people keep their lungs open and to inhale. That's what it's all about. That's what they did. They knew how to fix that. They knew how to fix that easily.
They just changed the pH of smoke. Changed the pH of the smoke.
They could make it taste good, according to Dr. Farone. They didn't do that.
There is lots of different things they could have done. They didn't want to do it, because they didn't want to take a chance that their main sellers, like Kools, would somehow lose customers. They wanted to keep the customers they had and let
them die, while behind the scenes we'll see if we can come up with something that is safer. But they told the public, No, we're not even trying to make a safer cigarette, because there is nothing wrong with the ones we've got.
I read to you from the New York Times yesterday. David Fishel, the spokesman for R.J. Reynolds, was quoted. That's what he said. That's what The Tobacco Institute said. They weren't telling the truth.
The cigarette companies continued to conceal and hide science and technology and to make it appear what was available to them for years is new today.
Well, that's because they keep -- they keep making it sound like we've got to do more research; we've got to do more research.
The defendants put on no medical evidence to dispute Debra Hargroves' addiction. Zero. She was addicted. They didn't dispute really that she tried very hard to quit. They played Ethel Bruce's videotaped deposition.
Now, Ethel Bruce wasn't really around Debra during the time that she started smoking, because Debra starting smoking in 1963 or early 1964, and
Ethel Bruce was in Atlanta and in 1963 moved down to Miami and was there for four years. It was after that. Ethel Bruce was kind of wandering out a little bit on when she knew what. But she said what everybody knew, she knew, of course, and maybe even knew before. And she was telling Debra every time she had the chance, you know, smoking is bad for you; don't do it.
It's not a question of being warned. This is a question of being able. By the time she is pregnant and having a baby in 1970, she's tried to quit smoking. And she tried again with the next baby and the next baby. And then she has electric shock therapy to try to stop smoking.
They didn't dispute that she died from smoking cigarettes. That's a given in the case.
Their own witness said she was too immature to choose at age nine.
The Surgeon General in 2010 said that the industry knew a lot more about the design than the public health officials. Of course, they did.
They had hundreds of scientists working on it.
Public health didn't have cigarette designers.
The Surgeon General said that the new cigarette designs were used by the tobacco
industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts.
That's what they did. And the documents show you that.
The Surgeon General said the use of additives, including ammonia, were used by the industry to create freebase nicotine and thereby enhance addiction.
That's what it was for. Free base increases the intensity of the drug. Kool and Pall Mall, we showed you the ingredient list. Dr. Cummings testified about it.
The Surgeon General in 2010 -- in the 2010 report said that the vent holes -By the way, these are defects. You tell people that your product does one thing and it doesn't live up to those standards, then there is something wrong with it. It's defective. You tell somebody we make -- we just made an automobile that you can -- you can withstand a crash up to 50 miles an hour, a head-on collision. You get in a collision at 35 miles an hour and you go through the windshield and you're hurt real bad, you would think there is something wrong with the car because the manufacturer told you that it
would protect you up to 50 miles an hour.
Well, when they tell you that cigarettes don't cause cancer and they tell you they are not addictive, and they really are, that means the product is defective. It's not living up to the standards that the company set for their own products.
The vent holes are a defect. The ammonia makes it defective, because it freebases nicotine. And these are all features of the cigarettes that were smoked by Debra Hargroves.
We talked about these nitrosamines and the direct fire curing that made 33 times more. They say now we can take out 90 percent of them. Well, that's a defect. They shouldn't have had those in there. Should not have had all those extra doses of carcinogen.
They said that they would remove the substance. We talked about that. That makes them defective.
That's Debra Hargroves around 2004. This is just before she gets sick. The little girl at her right shoulder is nine years old. Think about it. She's nine years old. That's when Debra Hargroves starting smoking cigarettes, when she was a kid
like that.
And the medical records say -- the medical records say she started smoking at nine, and smoked a pack of cigarettes since age nine. That was Debra Hargroves telling the doctors what her smoking history was when they asked her what her smoking history is. That's direct evidence of it. And, of course, that was done before there was any lawsuit.
Another picture of her.
You know, I have something of a conflict, because I know that this is the point where I have to ask for money. And that's all you can do in a case like this, is award money. You can't make somebody come back. And there is lots of analogies that could be made. And I know that some may think that, you know, if the plaintiff comes in and asks for a lot of money, that that -you will look greedy, and that isn't good.
But, you know, you can't let loss of life have a low value. You can't let it have a low value. Loss of life and what it does to people that lost. In the love affair of the century, according to Aunt Ethel, you lose your wife, there is no amount of money, no amount of money to fix
that. You know, Mr. Hargroves at age 55 loses his wife, who got lung cancer -Thank you.
-- who loses his wife with lung cancer at age -- she gets it at 49 and dies at age 50, has a 30-year life expectancy, you know, it's more than 30 percent of her life, more than a third of her life is gone; 25 years with his life expectancy of them together gone. You heard David say that she was his legs, you know.
You know, in this country, in our society, we don't allow people to kill people. We don't -and the reason -- we have to put a value on life that is not insignificant. Reynolds has to pay for that. They have to pay for it. It's not like a gift to Mr. Hargroves. It's the value of his wife's loss. Every day she's not there when he gets up in the morning and she's not there when he cooks dinner and she's not there when he goes to bed. You know, we treat people better than that.
His sons and he went overseas to fight for the country, and when you're in the service, you bring them back. It's important.
You could award $25,000,000 in this case, and that would not be too much. You decide how much
to award. It's not up to me. It's up to you.
But I have to tell you that, because I would be doing a disservice to the people that I represent, you know, if I told you that she had some low value. That isn't right. That isn't right.
But, you know, there is going to be probably thought -- there is going to be some range that you-all think about. You will come to an agreement about a number and, you know, what you decide is what it is. You're the ones that determine what's reasonable. You decide what it is.
And as far as punishment, you're going to -last question on this verdict form is whether or not punishment is warranted. If you check yes, there will be a very short little follow-up to this trial, and then you will deliberate again on the amount, and we will talk about that, if that happens. But you should punish them. Punish them for what they did. You can't tolerate killing
443,000	people a year and let that go on and on based on what they did, on lies, and let that happen. Punish them. Change history. Tell them they can't do that.
I will be back to talk again after they're
finished, after Ms. Parker and Mr. Walker finishes, and get a chance to answer some of the issues that they might raise.
Thank you very much for your attention.



MR. ACOSTA: Ladies and gentlemen, let me start where Ms. Parker ended. And I'm going to do that and then circle back to the beginning. Maybe do a couple things near the end and then circle back.
This is the jury instructions which you have.
And, you know, you're going to have to think about what the lawyers say in terms of, you know, our context, our memory. You might remember something
different than we do. If you remember something different than what I said, go by your own memory. I make mistakes. But I have tried to give you the real scoop.
This says, Punitive damages are awarded -- or warranted as punishment to the defendant as a deterrent to others. To others.
I didn't say it was a deterrent to Reynolds.
It's a deterrent to others.
And then it says, Whether the conduct -Well, let me read the whole thing.
The trial of punitive damages issue is divided in two parts. In this first part, you will decide whether the conduct of defendant's companies acquired by merger -- that American Tobacco or Brown & Williamson or both -- is such that punitive damages are warranted.
You didn't hear much talk about American Tobacco Company or about Brown & Williamson. These -- all these -- these documents, most of them are American and Brown & Williamson documents. That's the focus -- that's what the -that's the conduct you're supposed to consider in awarding or not awarding punitive damages.
You don't award an amount right now. You
just decide whether they are warranted.
And then it says, If you find by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant's companies acquired by merger were guilty of intentional misconduct or gross negligence.
And then it goes on on the other page, and it -- it says, Intentional conduct means that the American Tobacco Company or Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corporation or both -- it's not talking about Reynolds; it's talking about American or Brown & Williamson -- had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct. They had actual knowledge. And there was a high probability of injury or death. Well, they knew that. And despite that knowledge, it intentionally pursued the course of conduct that resulted in it.
Well, while Debra Hargroves is trying to quit smoking, they are trying to make it more addictive. That's what was going on. That's what the ammonia is in there for. That's what the freebase nicotine is in there for. That's what the vent holes are in there for. All of that was to make it more addictive.
You saw the Surgeon General's report from 2010. When I put it on this Elmo in front of
Dr. Gentry, I showed you right where it said vent holes cause freebase nicotine. I showed you where it said that the ammonia was an additive that made it more addictive. That was -- that was in that report. 2010.
And then it says, When considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm the conduct of American Tobacco Company or Brown & Williamson or both caused Debra Hargroves. You may also consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the alleged reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the acts of those two companies.
That's why there was a lot of the evidence about what happened to other people. That's why there was a lot of evidence about the Santa Clauses and all the other things that they did to create this atmosphere that caused people to continue smoking.
Remember, their sales continued to rise throughout that period, continued to rise into the early seventies.
So this case is about Brown & Williamson's conduct and the American Tobacco Company's conduct. We put lots of documents in about them.
They both knew that cigarettes contained carcinogens back in the very early fifties. They both joined the group. They were involved with The Tobacco Institute. They were involved with the Tobacco Industry Research Committee. They did it. They did not tell the truth. They were on the list of the -- of the man that visited from Europe that said that their research directors believed that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer, and then they denied it publicly.
You know, this is not like alcohol, or those other things. If -- just by way of example, if the people that made an alcoholic beverage said it won't cause cirrhosis of the liver and it won't hurt you, well, that would be different. But they don't do that. They don't say those things? They don't put anything in like acetone or some other chemical to give you a quicker buzz with the alcohol. They don't do that. People have known about alcohol for centuries.
The cigarette is a very sophisticated, highly designed product, as you saw. As Dr. Gentry, Dr. Cummings, Dr. Farone, they all agree this is a drug delivery device. It's exactly what it is.
And that's what their own documents say it is.
It's a drug delivery device to deliver a drug that addicts you.
This is not like a gun or a knife or some other -- or a car, you know. It isn't -- it's a separate, totally different thing. Those things don't kill 443,000 people a year on top of that.
This is a -- she said it was inherently dangerous. You can't look at a cigarette, if you have never heard of this stuff before, you look at a cigarette and you can't see that it's got ammonia in it or licorice or cocoa shells or any of the other ingredients that they put in.
And we put up on the screen the ingredients for Pall Mall and Kool. And Dr. Cummings was asked about those ingredients.
Now, Ms. Parker said, Well, they're up on our website. Well, they didn't have websites back then. This is new that's up on the website. This is new that their documents are up on the website. This stuff wasn't known back then, you know.
This is a case about Kool and Pall Mall cigarettes. That's what is your finding. You're not going to be finding that any other cigarette had a problem, although they share a lot of things in common. But we are not here about those.
You know, one of the things that she said was, Well, we didn't take the really bad ones off the market, because if we did, somebody -- she would have just switched to some other brand.
Well, isn't that like saying, you know, a woman leaves her purse on top of a car in the parking lot at the mall and somebody walks by and thinks to himself, Well, I'd better take it, because if I don't, somebody else is going to steal it.
That's exactly the analogy. You know, that shouldn't excuse Brown & Williamson and American Tobacco Company for what they did.
Let me say something about these two releases that she put up. You know, these are legal documents. These are legal documents that the hospital made her sign so she could go out and smoke. That's how addicted she was. The hospital wouldn't let her go out there without getting relieved of liability. So they make -- they make you one of these things so you can go out and smoke. She wanted to smoke so bad that she would sign this thing. In fact, it probably meant nothing to them, because they had to go out and smoke.
This one is signed she said before she got cancer. Well, that's not -- that's not right.
She woke up in April of that year and couldn't walk and couldn't walk and started stumbling and having really bad motor problems, and she started going to the doctor's office. They started trying to figure out what it was.
This is -- this is dated in -- it looks like 9/04. She was diagnosed in September of '04 with small cell lung cancer, with a -- it's called paraneoplastic syndrome.
If you read the -- there is a lot of the medical records on this. We didn't go through this in the trial because they admitted that cigarette smoke caused her death, caused her lung cancer and death. So we didn't put up doctors to explain in excruciating detail what this poor lady went through, along with her husband. But there is a syndrome that goes with small cell lung cancer that affects the brain. It's not cancer in the brain yet. What happens, if you read the records, it indicates that there is like an autoimmune response, and the brain starts degenerating, and that's why she couldn't walk. And it took them a long time to figure out that
she actually had small cell lung cancer. And when they find it in September, it's a four by two centimeter mass. That's like an inch and a half by an inch mass in her lung. And small cell lung cancer is -- it's the worst kind. It's not curable. It's not curable.
And that's diagnosed. And then she's in the hospital and signs another release when she's got small cell lung cancer. She was in the hospital while they are trying to figure this out the first time, and then they've already figured it out, and she has to sign another one.
While she was in the hospital, she tried the patch twice. The nicotine patch. Tried to quit twice. I think I showed you during the trial where she had discontinued the use of the patch the first time. I couldn't explain it, because when you publish documents, I can't talk like this. All I can do is read exactly what's on the document. So I know that sounds a little strange, but that's the rules. And we try to follow the rules.
So I read the document just as it was. And she discontinued the patch the first time because she -- you can't smoke and use the patch at the
same time. She couldn't stop smoking cigarettes. So they take her off the patch, and then she tries again a month or two later. Tries the patch again. She cuts down to one to two cigarettes -at least that's what it says in the record -until just right up to the -- near the very end.
Before that, one of the things that you didn't hear was much about Dr. Dukes. If you remember in the 1998 to 2003 time frame, that is when she is seeing Dr. Dukes, three times a week, 250 times during those years. Dr. Dukes was in here and testified how she was trying to quit smoking during that period. Ms. Parker didn't tell you anything about that. She was trying to quit during that period.
Dr. Dukes doesn't have anything to do with this case. She didn't know Mrs. Hargroves before any of this. And then she stops seeing her in 2003, before, you know, she ever got cancer. But she came down here and told you what she thought and what they did. And she counseled her and tried to help her quit smoking.
And it was -- she said -- I asked her, Was it throughout that five-year period?
Now, nobody's memory is perfect, but,
know, you were shown this page just a little while ago, not ready to quit. But the second page of that document says, Sooner, when ready to quit smoking.
Well, if she said I'm not going to quit or I don't want -- I don't want to quit period, it wouldn't say "sooner when ready," because when you say "sooner" -- when somebody says "sooner when ready," that means that she's going to get -she's going to be ready; she just isn't ready right now. It says, "Annually, sooner when ready."
But the other thing is, is that this doctor diagnosed her as being tobacco dependent. Tobacco dependent. Now, how, you know, this doctor has nothing to do with this lawsuit. But he thought she was tobacco dependent.
Now, they made a big deal about common knowledge. You know, this is common knowledge. Well, if it was common knowledge, you would think that the cigarette industry would have the same knowledge, but should even have more. How can they come in here and tell you that it was common knowledge if they didn't have the common knowledge? It's ridiculous.
There was some knowledge, and that's why we showed you the 1967 FTC report. Do you remember that report? The 1967 FTC report. And they quoted from another report about the level of awareness.
You know, what is it common knowledge of? That level of awareness is different for different people, and it's different over time. But back there in 1967, if you look -- that FTC report is in evidence -- 1967, if you look through the chronological record, you can find it in there.
That FTC report says that the '66 caution label was ineffective. It said that people didn't understand and apply the warning to themselves, that their level of awareness was low, and it was overcome by cigarette company advertising.
That's what was going on back then. They were advertising to beat the band. That's why their sales went up.
I showed you the 1964 Surgeon General's report. And in that report, what does it say? It says, Most people thought that it was the intelligent and desirable thing to do in 1964.
That's why not -- not enough people were quitting. That's why there started to be this
outcry from public health, let's get something going here.
Talk about Dr. Koop. It was -- he wanted to have a smoke-free society by the 2000, by the end of the century. Public health didn't want people to smoke at all. That's the position of the doctors in this country today.
Let me mention the AMA. Both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings talked about how the AMA was bought off. And what happened was the Surgeon General's report comes out and says, cigarettes cause cancer. The cigarette companies then give the AMA $10,000,000 to do a 15-year study so that more research is needed. The results aren't going to come out for 15 years. We won't be able to verify whether the Surgeon General was right for 15 years. That's what was going on.
There are some little things I'm going to just touch on real quickly.
You know, this textbook thing. If you listen carefully -- this was orchestrated very carefully -- those textbooks they showed were approved for use. There was no proof that they were actually used in those two schools. But it was represented that that's what happened. But
that isn't what -- there is no proof of that.
And I showed you one textbook which said, it's not addictive. I showed you the magazine from 1954 where all those cartoons were and all.
It says it's not medically addictive.
You know, if people thought it was addictive, they didn't know it was addictive in the sense that it creates receptors in your brain and becomes a physical addiction. It's not just a psychological thing. It's a physical addiction. People didn't understand that, and the cigarette industry denied it.
But there is a Brown & Williamson document in those binders from 1963 written by the vice-president and general counsel of the company.
It's Exhibit 1720. Exhibit 1720. And that's the
one that says -- he was -- he was referencing research that had been sent to him. We are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. In 1963. Moreover, it really has some bad side effects. It can cause cancer.
Look at that document. Look at that document. Brown & Williamson, vice-president, general counsel, had the information, believed it, and lied about it. That's what happened.
And, you know, sales wouldn't have gone up during that time period if it wasn't for their propaganda. It worked. That's how they overcame these, what they call, health scares.
There is documents there from Brown & Williamson talking about how they would reassure smokers of the health benefits. Some of those you saw on the screen.
You know, one of the things that is in there as well is a document from 1980. It's called the Nordine study. And it happens to be a document that belongs to Reynolds. But they knew that most smokers wanted to quit smoking, and they also knew that most smokers could not quit smoking.
Well, if you know that most want to but most can't and you keep trying to make your products more and more addictive by designing them with vent holes -- if you remember, Dr. Farone said that he invented a laser to do that. And you can't hardly see these vent holes. But they were shown by Dr. Gentry up on the screen. They create freebase nicotine. That's in the Surgeon General's report. That enhances the addictive effect. Its speed. That's what does it. You put a nicotine patch on your arm, it doesn't addict
you because all it does is maintain some nicotine in your blood. But that -- people can take those on and off. You can chew the gum. It's the same way. You don't get enough nicotine to sustain an addiction that way. But the cigarette is designed for that purpose. It's designed to be inhaled to give you the drug that sustains the addiction so you will keep buying the cigarettes. They knew that. That's the design of it.
And, yes, we admitted from the beginning that Debra Hargroves knew that by 1970, anyway, that smoking was bad. Now, how bad, nobody -- nobody knows what she knew.
You know, you should take exception to this business about Ethel Bruce saying that Debra tried to quit as a result of her mother's cancer. Back then, doctors didn't think or know that colon cancer had anything to do with smoking. She did try to quit back then. She tried in 1980. That's what Pastor Hollowell talked about. We know that she tried in '85. We know she tried in the late seventies with the electric shock.
Those are things that people remember. Those are the -- you know, you go back 25 years, nobody remembers what they got for Christmas. Nobody --
you go back ten years, you don't remember what you got for Christmas. How are you supposed to remember all these quit attempts?
Well, you know, those were -- those were big events. She was pregnant. I remember trying to quit, that makes sense.
We went down and looked through a window and there she is getting shocked. That's something you would remember.
Dr. Hollowell remembers -- this isn't disputed -- that she tried to quit to teach Sunday school. That's not disputed anywhere.
These medical records show -- there is five or six of them showing that she tried to quit over the years. You saw the one from '85.
There, another one from the same doctor,
Dr. Reese Morgan, in 1998 where he says you should use the patch. Mr. Hargroves remembering buying her the patch.
You've got the intake form from Dr. Dukes' office where she's using filters to try to quit smoking, you know.
This lady tried to quit smoking a lot. Now, you try to quit, and maybe you quit for a little while. When we use the term "quit," it's in the
context of permanently. When we talk about how many people are able to quit, it's like three percent a year for a year. That was a graph that was up there, you know. It's a very -- you know, it's very hard for an addicted smoker to quit.
You know, when they talk about all these people that quit, if you smoked a hundred cigarettes in your lifetime and then didn't smoke anymore, you were one of the 30 or 40, 50 million people that quit. That's how they do it.
Ms. Parker said, remember that document that said, All we need is a bigger bag to take money to the bank, and then she said, That came from London.
Well, if you recall, Dr. Cummings said that was from the conference attended by Brown & Williamson people, by Brown & Williamson scientists, and it was at the parent corporation of Brown & Williamson. They did research together. That's where some of the information came that the vice-president and senior counsel got to say that nicotine was addictive.
And you didn't hear -- you know, you heard this excuse about Dr. -- I mean, Mr. Johnston, the CEO, who swore in 1994 that smoking was not
addictive. And he references classic definition.
Well, I showed Dr. Gentry the 1988 Surgeon General's report where it says this is what they thought in 1964 and this is what we think today.
Well, in '64, it was a social versus personal harm, and cocaine and amphetamines were not considered addictive under the '64 report. But that report goes on to say, With all the new information we have, nicotine is addictive under either set of nomenclature.
So that guy was just being evasive.
But think about it. Nothing was said about the Brown & Williamson executive that was there. Nothing was said about the American Tobacco Company executive that was there. You know, when you compare cigarettes to coffee or Coca-Cola, those products don't kill people. They don't kill people. If you -- if you drink coffee, you can -people switch to decaf all the time. You don't hear -- you don't hear the same things about coffee that you hear about nicotine.
Half the people that drink coffee, you don't hear that they want to stop drinking coffee.
It's different. We're talking about nicotine. We're talking about a poison that Brown
& Williamson said in 1978 in these documents that the smoker knew very little about -- if you read that crucial role of nicotine document from '72, you will see that Dr. Teague, who worked at Reynolds said, We've played down the role of nicotine.
They played it down, because they didn't want people to know how important nicotine was, because they didn't want to take it all away. They -they could grow tobacco that doesn't have nicotine in it.
You know, this -- this legal business is, it's legal to sell a cigarette, which is defined as tobacco rolled in paper. The government doesn't tell them what to -- doesn't even tell them to make cigarettes. They don't have to make them. They chose to make them. The government doesn't tell them what to put in it or not to put in it. They just started getting regulated by the FDA in 2009, two years ago. That just happened.
And then this business about how the government got this letter, the FTC got this letter that says, Well, people don't smoke the same way that the machine does.
What the FTC didn't know is that they were
designing their cigarettes to get around the FTC measurements. That's what was -- that's what was happening, is they were designing around those measurements enabling people to get the nicotine dose they needed from any cigarette.
One of the reasons why people stopped smoking light cigarettes, if they tried them, they didn't like them, because they wound up having to smoke too many of them. They had to smoke more.
Because an individual has an individual dose requirement of nicotine. That was known back in 1959 in one of the reports in evidence that was signed by Alan Rodgman from Reynolds. We need to make sure we provide the optimum amount of nicotine to keep them addicted.
You know, this business about Premier and Eclipse, that's just a huge red herring. What does that have to do with this case?
Reynolds is wanting to make itself look good, but we're not suing them for what they did. It's what American and Brown & Williamson did. They didn't show that Brown & Williamson made a Premier or American made a Premier. They are legally responsible because they merged.
If companies couldn't be held responsible
when they buy out assets, a bad company could just avoid punitive damages by selling its assets and changing its name to another company. That's why it applies. It has to stick. That's -- that's why the law is that it's a deterrent to others.
That's what you're doing, if you think they are warranted. You know, it's the kind of conduct that warrants it.
Okay. I'm just going to show you these boards, go through them, and then I'm going to be done. Because their whole defense is choice.
That's the whole defense, is that she knew it was bad for her and she made a choice and that the cigarette didn't jump in her mouth. But the problem is she wanted to stop, and she couldn't.
We wouldn't have a case here if she didn't want to stop, you know. But when somebody wants to stop and they can't do it and they try and over and over again, there is something -- there is something wrong. And that's why we're here. And then you put all of it together, and you see -you see the scheme that these companies had was a scheme of deceit; a scheme of deceit to keep selling their product. And they made that choice.
Who made the choice to make and design and
sell cigarettes to consumers? Brown & Williamson and American.
Who determined who marketed -- to whom it was to market cigarettes to in the fifties and sixties, seventies? American and Brown & Williamson. They knew who was going to pick up smoking.
To determine levels of nicotine in cigarettes? Well, they determined the level that's in there, not the -- not the smoker.
To determine types of tobacco leaves used?
They determined whether you use this bright tobacco or not.
To determine the chemical additives used?
The smoker doesn't determine any of that.
To make a product that, when burned, produces smoke containing thousands of chemicals, including hundreds which are toxic and 69 which cause cancer? They made that choice.
To make a product that, when burned, produces smoke containing polonium? It's a radioactive substance. It gets in your lung and sits.
To add ammonia and ammonia compounds? All of these are Reynolds' choices.
For Debra Hargroves to begin smoking at age
nine? Nine years old.
To promote through television and print ads in the 1950s and sixties with endorsements from celebrities and sports figures and doctors and nurses? That's them. American and Brown & Williamson.
To deny for decades that nicotine and tobacco products for cigarettes is addictive? They denied it. That was their choice.
To hire a public relations firm,
Hill & Knowlton, to lobby and launch all these public recommendations campaigns to counter negative publicity about cigarettes? They made that choice.
To issue the Frank Statement? You know what that is.
To form the Tobacco Industry Research Committee as part of a propaganda machine? That's what they did. That was purely to go out and tell the public to keep smoking.
To create confusion and doubt for the public about the hazards of cigarette smoking? They created the confusion. Smokers didn't do that.
To engage in marketing to youth during the 1950s and sixties? They are the ones that did
that.
To decide what information it would share with the federal government? Well, they decided that, not the smoker.
When to admit to consumers that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases? Well, of course that's their choice. They wait until 2004.
To assure smokers that filters were safe or safer? That's their decision.
To design cigarettes that added menthol and other chemical compounds that made it easy to inhale? Menthol is an anesthetic. It numbs yours throat so you can suck the smoke down easier.
To add flavoring compounds which open the airways for easy inhalation? That's the bronchodilators of licorice and cocoa shells. Theobromine is created when it burns that acts as a bronchodilator. The broncho being the bronchus, the airways in your lung.
To use the results of the FTC method and cause the FTC to say in 2008, when it rescinded the test, The FTC will not be a smokescreen for the tobacco companies shameful marketing practices?
To determine the paper porosity of cigarettes' design? They make all these choices.
To determine the placement of the vent holes? They determine those choices.
To decide the use of reconstituted tobacco? They're the ones that did that.
All these choices are made so that they can sell more and more cigarettes.
To determine the size and content of the filter, to design cigarettes that create freebase nicotine? They did.
To use reconstituted tobacco to maintain nicotine blood levels? They did.
I have just got a couple more, a little bit different. These are things that you need to think about in deciding this case. And that is did Debra Hargroves know that ammonia created freebase nicotine vapor? Did she know that cigarette smoke contained 69 chemicals that can cause cancer in humans? Did she know that gas curing created more carcinogens? Did she know that millions of smokers wanted to quit each year and only five percent are successful? Those aren't the kinds of things that people expected. They didn't know those.
You know, when a cigarette company goes out and tells you some things, they have an obligation to tell you the whole truth. You know, there was a little grain of truth in a lot of what they had to say, but they didn't say the whole truth. And the reason for that is because they needed to deceive people and keep and stretch out this business. They wanted to stay in the conventional cigarette business as long as they could. And they were successful at it. You saw some of those articles in the New York Times talk about that.
She didn't -- she didn't know anything about additives that made it easier to open her lungs for inhalation. People just didn't think of nicotine as a drug; that her cigarette was designed to deliver a drug, freebase, a freebase drug, and that nicotine produces chemical and physical changes in the brain.
She didn't know they contained ammonia. She didn't know it was like crack cocaine. She didn't know it was designed to keep her addicted, that filters weren't safe.
You know, if the whole truth had come out, things would be different.
These companies didn't have any program to
help people quit smoking, American and Brown & Williamson, or even Reynolds. So when you get back into the jury room, we ask that you consider Reynolds through its subsidiaries, the predecessors, the American Tobacco Company and Brown & Williamson. Consider what they did in their role in the big picture and in the designing of these cigarettes specifically for the purpose -- and, like I say, we're only talking about Kools and Pall Mall -- to addict, to keep addicted, knowing that that addiction is likely to lead -- in fact, Dr. Cummings, I believe, said half the people get some sort of fatal disease.
Dr. Farone, I think it was three out of seven.
That's a lot of people. And there is no excuse for what they did.
So we're going to ask you to go and do what jurors do and deliberate and come to a fair and just verdict in this case and assign fault where you think it lies.
Thank you very much.
