MR. FURR: Counsel. Ms. Hausner.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
JURORS: Good morning.
MR. FURR: The only possible place I can begin is by thanking you for your service in this case and also thanking you for your patience, as
Mr. Gustafson did, because you certainly have had to be patient.
And there's a reason you've had to be patient. This case should have only taken a couple days to try. Instead here we are two weeks out before you get closing argument.
And there's a reason it took too long to try it, and that's because throughout this case you've had to deal with a series of issues that were really nothing more than distractions. They were issues that, once we worked through them, either had nothing do with Mr. Clark or really didn't go anywhere by the time we got done with it.
In fact, as I was thinking about them this weekend, I was reminded of the phrase "red herring." You know what a red herring is. A red herring is a concept that's introduced into a discussion that is designed to distract you from the real issues in the case. And I spent a little time identifying some of the red herrings you-all have had to sit through in the past two weeks.
The first red herring is that it has been suggested to you in a number of different ways that somehow Winston cigarettes were more dangerous or more addictive than other cigarettes that Mr. Clark
could have chosen to smoke.
Let's look at what the evidence actually was. (Hand raised.)
MR. FURR: Yes?
A JUROR: I have a hard time with just the lights -- pot lights over the screen.
MR. FURR: Oh. Thank you.
A JUROR: I had a hard time this morning. THE COURT: Okay.
A JUROR: I couldn't see.
THE COURT: Okay. Let's take them down.
A JUROR: I just wanted you to know.
THE COURT: I'll leave it to counsel to tell me when you want them up or down, but if a juror -A JUROR: -- it's not all of them, but it's actually -- it's just the pot lights.
THE COURT: There we go.
MR. FURR: Is that better?
A JUROR: Perfect.
THE COURT: Okay.
A JUROR: Yes.
MR. FURR: Great.
Let's think about what the evidence was. And we established all of this on cross-examination. The first one I established through
Dr. Cummings' cross-examination. I asked him was there any safer cigarette available commercially that Mr. Clark could have smoked during the years that he was a smoker, and he said no.
I asked him whether there was any cigarette on the market that Mr. Clark could have switched to that would have been easier to quit, and he said no.
You might remember in the beginning of this case -- you didn't hear it this morning, but there was an issue about levulinic acid and some suggestion that levulinic acid was an additive that had been used to make cigarettes more dangerous. I asked Dr. Cummings, "Is there any evidence that it was ever used in Winston cigarettes?" No.
This morning, by my count, you were told three times that Mr. Clark died because he didn't know that there were 2.5 times as many PAHs in Winston cigarettes as there are in Camels.
But you-all know what the evidence is because when I cross-examined Dr. Cummings on this issue, there was a single measurement made in 1956 that showed 2.5 times the amount of PAHs in the then blend of Winston cigarettes as in Camel cigarettes.
You've seen the documents and you have them in evidence that show that the blend of Winston
cigarettes and the design changed through time, and never again was there ever a measurement of PAHs elevated in Winston above the level of Camel cigarettes. There's just no such evidence of any elevation during the years that Mr. Clark smoked Winston cigarettes.
You also were told about ammonia. And it was suggested to you that ammonia was used to somehow make cigarettes more addictive. Once again, on cross-examination Dr. Cummings told you that, in fact, ammoniated burley tobacco was used in Winston cigarettes to decrease the amount of nicotine, not increase it.
Finally -- and this sort of is one of those overarching conclusions that really captures a number of these points. Dr. Cummings again told you that he himself had done studies that showed that roll-your-own cigarettes made with natural tobacco, no additives, are just as dangerous and addictive as Winston cigarettes.
So this is an example of all these design issues that sound bad when you first hear them, but when you learn the rest of the story through cross-examination, it simply doesn't go anywhere. Winston was just a normal cigarette, inherently
dangerous and addictive.
I'll skip this one because it wasn't addressed.
Also, again this whole concept that was floated by you again this morning, another red herring about cigarettes being designed to be more addictive.
Throughout the trial you heard lots of references to cigarettes being designed to be inhalable, and it was the inhalability that otherwise would not have been present that made them addictive and dangerous.
Well, you saw the Florida Health Notes. In 1906, seven years before the modern blend of Camel cigarettes was even introduced, cigarettes were generally to have -- known to be generally inhaled by people that used them.
And also, once again back to our big conclusion from Dr. Cummings, roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous and addictive as manufactured cigarettes. So all this discussion about inhalability again just went nowhere.
Dr. Cummings also told us that cigarettes today are no more addictive than cigarettes in the 1950s.
This is a big red herring. All these design discussions about the companies used ammonia or they did some other design change that made cigarettes
more addictive, in the end I said, "Dr. Cummings, is there any evidence that all those changes made cigarettes more addictive?" No. But we had to spend a fair amount of time wrestling that one down to the ground, also.
Advertising. A lot of discussion about advertising in this case. It's a red herring, because here's what you know the facts to be.
The advertising was legal when it was done.
And there's no evidence that Mr. Clark either began smoking or continued smoking because of advertising.
But talking about distractions that took up time that need not have been done, you-all spent -you looked at about a hundred ads during the cross-examination of Dr. Cummings. You looked at ads from the '20s, the '30s, the '40s, ads that could not have possibly affected Mr. Clark because they were ads before either he was born or decades before he began smoking. You looked at ads for brands that he never smoked. Most of the ads you saw were for Camels or Lucky Strikes. You looked at ads for brands from companies other than R.J. Reynolds.
And, finally, all the witnesses admitted there's no evidence that Mr. Clark ever told anyone
that he chose Winston cigarettes because of advertising.
Out of a hundred ads that you-all saw -- I know you can't parse all this together, but you'll have the evidence -- you'll see one ad for Winston cigarettes during the years that Mr. Clark smoked.
One out of a hundred. Total red herring. And we spent -- spent a couple hours with Dr. Cummings on this that need not have been done.
Finally, I want to talk to you about something else that happened during this trial that took a lot of time that should not have happened. And I want to talk about the testimony of some of the witnesses.
Now, you-all have your instructions.
Could I have the Elmo, please?
We're very lucky that the Court's instructions provide to you-all some guidance about how to evaluate the testimony of witnesses.
When you consider how to evaluate the testimony of witnesses, you might want to refer to Instruction Number 15, which is on Page 21 of your instructions. This was read to you, but I want to highlight a couple things.
Let me speak briefly about witnesses. In
evaluating the believability of any witness, you're entitled to consider the demeanor of the witness while they're testifying and the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, their interest in the outcome of the case, and, finally, the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all the evidence in the case and in the light of your own experiences and common sense. In other words, is some witness's totally -- is some witness's testimony completely inconsistent and an outlier with respect to the facts from all the other witnesses. Those are the legal principles that the Court has instructed you on.
Well, let's talk about what happened during this trial that took so long and was such a distraction.
The plaintiff's witnesses kept changing their story. Over 50 times I had to turn my back on you-all, walk over to Robin, pick up a transcript, and come and impeach their witnesses because they had changed their story from their deposition.
Twenty-nine separate times I had to impeach Dr. Cummings. And even when I impeached him
29	times, he still wouldn't answer my questions. He
kept offering gratuitous comments at the end of the questions and even began talking to you-all when we were at sidebar and the Court had to reprimand Dr. Cummings in front of you for doing that.
He was breaking the rules and he was improperly trying to influence you, and those 50 times that I had to go get a transcript, it must have taken two or three minutes each. Those are several hours of time that we did not need to have in this trial.
But the reasons those witnesses kept changing their story is because the true facts in this case really lead to only one conclusion, and that's a defense verdict.
Now that we've picked the -- all the red herrings off the floor and put them in a basket, I want to move on to what really matters in this case. Because this is a case about Charles Clark. That's what the case is about.
And I want us to go back to the metaphor of keeping our eye on the ball as we sort through this witness and look at the evidence that really relates to Mr. Clark. And I'm going to show you exactly what I showed you when I began my opening statement, the very first board that I showed you.
Is this okay right here, Your Honor?
THE COURT: As long as everybody can see it.
Mr. Gustafson, you can move if you need to.
MR. GUSTAFSON: Okay. Thank you, Judge.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. FURR: I'm going to move it in you-all's faces. As soon as I read it I'll move it back.
Mr. Clark began smoking with roll-your-own cigarettes.
Mr. Clark was warned constantly from the first time he picked up a cigarette that smoking was dangerous.
At the time Mr. Clark became a daily smoker, every pack of cigarettes he smoked had a warning.
Mr. Clark was exposed to multiple lung cancer risk factors: alcohol, asbestos, roofing tar and cigarettes.
Mr. Clark's life was controlled by his addiction to alcohol.
This case is legally barred because Mr. Clark was not a Florida resident when he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
I told you in opening statement these are really all the facts that you would need to decide the issues in this case. I'm really going to spend the rest of my closing demonstrating to you how,
under the legal instructions that you have and the questions that you have to answer, these facts control the outcome of the case.
I'm going to read one or two more here,
Mr. Gustafson, with the boards, in case you want to stay there.
I want to go to what I told you in the beginning of this case is probably the most important evidence in this whole case. This is an easy case. This is not a case about someone who began smoking in the '20s or '30s or '40s or who became a regular, daily smoker in the '50s. You heard the evidence. The fact witnesses tell us that the first time, first year that anybody can say that he was a regular, daily smoker was in 1968, and that was Patricia Clark's testimony.
We know from Glenda Huckaby, his first wife, that she, who spent every day with him, did not observe him smoking daily in the 1964/1965 time frame. He was in the military in 1960 -- 1967.
There's no evidence before you on how much he was smoking then. The first time that we know that he's a daily, regular smoker is in 1968.
And every pack of cigarettes he picks up as a daily, regular smoker has one of these warnings on
it. From 1966 to the end of 1969 they would have had this warning. From 1970 until the end of 1984 we had this warning, "The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." And from 1985, every pack he bought -- and from 1971, every advertisement he saw -- would have had one of these warnings.
This is actually a pretty simple case. This is a smoker who only was a regular smoker during the years that the warnings were right on the side of the package.
Now, perhaps as a result of the presence of those warnings, the plaintiff has admitted that Mr. Clark's acts or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of efforts to quit smoking were a legal cause of his death.
Now, I want to unpack that a little bit, because that's sort of phrased in legalese, the way we lawyers write things in documents. Well, let's think about what it has to mean. Ask yourself, under what circumstances would you admit that someone was a legal cause of their own death in this case?
First of all, you would never make this admission if he had not known that cigarettes were
dangerous and addictive. You would never make this admission. Because if he didn't know that cigarettes were dangerous or addictive, why would it be his fault for not quitting? You wouldn't make this admission but for that.
Second, you would never make this admission if he had not had the ability to quit. Because why would you admit that somebody's at fault for something -- for not doing something that they couldn't do?
Third, you would never make this admission unless Mr. Clark had the ability to quit at a time that would have prevented his lung cancer and death even if it were smoking-related. And we'll discuss that issue, but the point I want to make now is you would never make this admission if Mr. Clark could not have -- did not have the knowledge and ability to change the outcome of his smoking and lung cancer.
So when you think about what this admission really means, that's what it means.
Now, Mr. Gustafson discussed concurrent causes with you a couple times, and he explained to you accurately that under the law of Florida -- not from Engle cases, but from the law of Florida in general,
there's a legal principle in the law relating to concurrent causes that recognizes under certain circumstances there can be more than one factor that contributes to an outcome.
But that doesn't mean there's always more than one factor that contributes to an outcome. That's a question of fact, whether under the facts of a given case there were concurrent causes or whether there was a sole cause. That's a question for you-all to answer.
There's nothing about the fact that the instructions recognize the potential or possibility of concurrent causes that in any way controls whether you find that, in fact, as a matter of fact, based on the evidence, there were concurrent causes. So that's an important thing to keep in mind when you look at that part of the instruction.
Now, I want to summarize the case very briefly, and then I'll move to the specific legal issues that we're going to discuss.
You heard this morning that the plaintiffs are essentially making a request for $9 million. I want to respectfully suggest that $9 million not only has no basis in the evidence of facts of this case but also defies common sense.
And I want you to take a step back for just a moment and think about how we got to where we are where the plaintiffs are asking you to award $9 million, claiming that Mr. Clark did not know that smoking was dangerous.
We knew -- we know that the evidence demonstrates that Mr. Clark knew that smoking was dangerous before he became a regular smoker. In fact, he was drinking daily before he became a regular smoker, and that has profound implications for a number of issues in this case that I will explain as we go along.
But here's what we know. Mr. Clark would have received warnings in school and from the military, assuming he was reading what everybody else was reading. He had a choice. He could have quit and not become a regular smoker, could have chosen health, or he could have chosen to continue drinking daily and to continue smoking daily.
And we always have these coupled because, as you're going to see, the evidence demonstrates that his daily drinking is just inextricably intertwined with his daily smoking.
And perhaps this piece of evidence shows us more than anything else: the warnings he received
from Patricia Clark. Think about where we are. The plaintiffs are asking you to award $9 million because Mr. Clark didn't know that smoking was dangerous, and in 1971 Patricia Clark told the plaintiff, "You need to quit smoking. You have a baby coming, and we want you to be around."
Now, here we are 43 years later. Mr. Clark unfortunately never quit smoking, and he's not around. And 43 years after this warning was given to him from his wife, the family is in here suing the tobacco companies for $9 million. Defies common sense.
But that's just the beginning of it. Warnings from Rome News-Tribune, warnings from the Surgeon General, from his cigarette packages, warnings from PSAs in the media, warnings from his brother who quit smoking and stopped coughing, warnings from his children, warnings from his own body when he became short of breath and couldn't play sports as long with his family.
Every single one of these was a personalized quitting opportunity. He had a choice to make: quit drinking, quit smoking and choose health, or continue.
Instead, he continued to live in Rome, get
diagnosed with lung cancer while visiting Florida -and I'm going to show you the indisputable evidence of what was actually going on -- and sues R.J. Reynolds in Florida after being told 43 years previously, "You're not going to be around to raise your children if you don't stop smoking."
I'm going back to the computer, please.
Thank you.
Okay. Much like Mr. Gustafson did, I'm now going to walk through the verdict form and the issues you have to decide and identify for you the instructions that I hope will be of help to you and what the evidence is with respect to each of the verdict form questions.
Because the first verdict form question is:
"Do you find that Charles Edwin Clark was a Florida resident at the time his lung cancer manifested itself, that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and, if so, that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?"
Now, I'm going to try to unpack that for you.
I'll tell you that the instruction with respect to class membership is on -- it's Instruction Number 4. It's on Page 5 of your instructions. Mr. Gustafson
read that to you, so I won't read that same instruction to you, but I am going to show you what it means when you sort of parse out that instruction to show you what it is that the plaintiffs have to prove to demonstrate that Mr. Clark qualifies as a class member.
I think it's important to remind ourselves, because there were several times it was said to you, "Oh, the defendants didn't bring a witness to do this." The defendants didn't bring a witness to do that." The plaintiffs have the burden of proof to prove their claims, including to prove that he was a class member. That's on the plaintiffs to prove.
The first thing -- and I show these as hurdles because I want to capture that notion that the plaintiffs have to offer you evidence to prove these things. It's their burden. They have to get over these hurdles to become an Engle class member.
First, they have to prove to you that Mr. Clark was a Florida resident when he was diagnosed with cancer.
Second, they have to prove to you that Charles Clark died from lung cancer caused by smoking.
And, third, that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Clark's lung cancer and death.
Now, I have to show you something else, because this is a very unusual case because we have the Engle findings. It's important to know when you can and can't use the Engle findings and not lose sight of that.
And on this first question of class membership -- which Mr. Gustafson told you and which Instruction 5 shows you that if you answer no, he's not a class member, the case is over and you don't go any further.
But on this first class member -- class membership issue, it's very important to look at the instruction on Page 7 where you see that, "These findings are only binding on you and only relevant to this case if you find that Charles Edwin Clark was a member of the Engle class." And this is a continuation of Instruction Number 5 that appears on Page 6.
Now, the important concept there is that you simply cannot even consider the findings until after you determine whether he was a member of the Engle class.
Okay. I'm going to turn to the first hurdle, which is the plaintiff has to prove to you that Mr. Clark was a Florida resident when he was
diagnosed with cancer. And, again, I know this is a little tedious right now.
To move you through this quickly, we need to look at the instruction again to make sure we know exactly what the instruction is so we sort of tee this issue up properly. It's a little tedious, but you need to have the proper analytical framework as you go through this.
This is the first -- it's the second paragraph here that is the key instruction on residency, and that is, "A Florida resident is a person who has his true, fixed home and principal establishment in Florida and to which whenever he is absent he has the intention of returning. Florida residency requires both physical presence in Florida and the intent to make Florida one's home."
So that's the legal test that you apply to the evidence to determine whether or not Mr. Clark was a resident of Florida at the time his lung cancer was diagnosed.
The evidence is absolutely clear. You remember Ms. Hausner telling you that there was a period of time when Mr. Clark would travel back and forth between Rome, Georgia, and Florida to visit his family. Sometimes the visits would be extended.
He'd stay with them for a week or longer. Sometimes he'd do some work for Mack Johnson roofing company. But he was still going back and forth.
But then he got sick. The question is, was Florida his home when he got sick?
The claim is that he had moved to Florida in March or April of 1993 and began living permanently with the family in his new home. That's the claim that's being made today in litigation by witnesses with an interest in the case.
With all due respect, this question was answered by Mr. and Mrs. Clark 20 years ago on the day that he checked into the VA for treatment.
These are medical records. I've excerpted them to make them easier to read and combined them for you. The complete records are in your exhibits. I believe it's Composite Exhibit 12 that has most of the medical records, if not all. And here's what you're going to find. This question was laid to rest 20 years before this trial.
The top portion is an excerpt from a medical record. You can see on 9/12/93 where Mr. Clark signs a VA admission form saying that he has cancer of the lung that was diagnosed on 9/12/93. So there we have the date of diagnosis and manifestation,
signed by Mr. Clark.
Now, I don't know what all this discussion is about there were follow-up tests done and nobody was sure he had lung cancer. Maybe those were needed for treatment or to identify the cell type, but Mr. Clark tells us somebody told him that he had lung cancer on that date.
What else do we know? At the bottom of the medical record is the signature of Patricia Clark, as you can see. And what did she say on that very same date, on the date of admission? She wrote, in her own handwriting, "He has no work or place to stay."
Now, if he had been living with the family since March or April and working here since March or April, what possible motive could Patricia Clark have had to say that he had no work or place to stay on the date of his diagnosis of lung cancer? She had no motive to misrepresent those facts. This was 20 years before litigation. She could not have possibly imagined these issues would come up in this context.
Her statement in this context is the most reliable evidence you have on where he was living on the date of his diagnosis. And, frankly, I submit
to you the case should end right there. Because if he's not a resident on the date of his diagnosis, that alone defeats class membership. You should put a "No" right there and this case is over.
Unfortunately, I've got a lot more to say, just in case you don't agree with that. But I submit to you that those records answer the whole question for you right there.
Now, I want to talk to you about the testimony of Ms. Hausner, the personal representative.
Because Mr. Gustafson accurately told you what she said on direct examination, but what he did not tell you is what she had said during her deposition, that, once again, unfortunately, we had to spend a fair amount of time getting out her transcript and impeaching her with her prior testimony.
Because here's what she told us during her deposition: Before her father was diagnosed, he lived in Rome and visited Florida. And then -- and this really -- and this is totally consistent with the medical records we just saw -- she testified,
"He really only lived with us when he found out he had cancer."
She also said that the only time the family ever discussed her father staying in Florida was
after he had cancer, and that was -- the decision was made so that her mother could take care of him during his cancer.
She also told you that he always intended to live in Rome, Georgia. He preferred Rome to Florida, and that's what he intended to do.
When you take the medical records and Ms. Hausner's admissions during her deposition and combine all that, it's just absolutely clear that Mr. Clark was a visitor when he was diagnosed.
He also -- we read the part of the instruction about you're entitled to look at whether people perform the types of things people do when they change homes.
When you change home, what do you do? You change your registration of your vehicles, your driver's license. You register to vote. You open bank accounts. You move all your papers and other things with you. You find a place to stay.
There's no evidence that Mr. Clark ever did any of the things that someone would do if they moved somewhere and changed homes.
Finally, again -- and sometimes it's important to talk to fact witnesses that just really have no interest in the case, no interest in the case and
who do not receive any benefit one way or another based on their testimony.
Now, this morning you were told that the only time after his diagnosis that Mr. Clark went back to Rome was to visit his family one time. You remember that we read to you the prior sworn testimony of Glenda Huckaby, Mr. Clark's first wife, who had no interest in this case whatsoever. And here's what she told us -- well, I'm sorry. I skipped this.
Ms. Hausner also told us that her father preferred Rome, "Just like it's our home, like I still prefer Rome as my home." Absolutely clear he always wanted to go back.
So I got that out of order. But now to the Huckaby testimony that, by the way, was unrebutted, completely unrebutted.
She testified under oath that Mr. Clark visited her after he was diagnosed with cancer. You may recall she described how his physical appearance had changed, totally consistent with the diagnosis. And she told us that he told her he was separated from his family and his family was living in Florida but that he was living in Rome with his brother, and he told her that he wanted to get back together with her.
Does that sound like he's living in Florida with his family and has been doing so since March of 1993? Of course not.
And you heard the deposition. She wasn't even cross-examined on this. It's unrebutted. There was no cross-examination.
And I want to go -- on this point I want to go back to Ms. Hausner's testimony, because the context in which testimony is given is important. It's really important to understand. And we brought that out during her examination. Because several times she told us, "Well, yeah, I said that during my deposition, but I got it wrong," or "I didn't understand the question," or some other explanation that she -- she's entitled to offer us her explanation, but let's remember what the facts are.
During that deposition, sworn testimony, she had a lawyer representing the plaintiffs present defending her deposition. And perhaps more importantly, you heard that she was given the opportunity after the deposition to go back and create an errata sheet and go back and correct any answers that she wanted to, and she didn't correct a single answer. Didn't correct a single answer.
Ladies and gentlemen, when you take all this
together, I think the evidence is pretty clear.
Mr. Clark was a Georgia resident when he was diagnosed. In fact, as we heard later through other witnesses, he stayed in Florida to obtain health care from the VA in Gainesville that the Rome VA clinic didn't provide. The VA clinic in Rome wasn't equipped to provide the long-term treatment for a serious disease like this. It was more of a clinic-style operation.
And you heard he moved in with Patricia Clark so that he would have someone to take care of him, and Ms. Hausner admitted that he never intended to make Rome [sic] his home. He always intended to go back.
For these reasons, ladies and gentlemen -could I have the Elmo, please?
It's taken us two weeks to get here, but I respectfully submit that when you weigh all this evidence and evaluate the credibility of the evidence and the context in which the evidence was being offered, that when you get to this question you mark "No" and the case is over. You sign and date the verdict form and you bring it back and you go no further.
Obviously I have to go further now, because
there are other issues that you may deal with in this case.
One of them is medical causation. The plaintiffs also have the burden of proof to prove to you that Charles Clark died from lung cancer caused by smoking. That's their burden. It's not my burden to disprove it. They have to prove it.
Well, what do we know? Dr. Burns, their expert -- which, by the way, as you evaluate all his testimony, you're entitled to remember that he's been paid $2.5 million by plaintiff's experts [sic] to testify in lawsuits against the tobacco companies.
But Dr. Burns told us that every exposure, like air pollution or some other carcinogen in the environment, contributes to the risk of developing cancer. Every exposure.
And what do we know about Mr. Clark's exposures? We know he was exposed to alcohol, roofing tar, asbestos and cigarettes. I'm going to go through these quickly, but this morning you were told that alcohol increases the risk of lung cancer a little bit. Here's what Dr. Burns told you:
"Combined with smoking, alcohol creates a meaningful and substantially higher rate of lung cancer."
That's what Dr. Burns' testimony was. And we also know of the tremendously heavy alcohol exposure that Mr. Clark had, both heavy in terms of the intensity and duration. And that's why we bring his alcohol history to you, because of the danger it creates for him in a number of ways, including lung cancer risk.
Here's what we know. You know, there are several witnesses that came in here and said, well, they think their father was a social drinker. But both their paid experts, both their $1 million expert, Dr. Cummings, and their $2.5 million expert,
Dr. Burns, say that Mr. Clark was an alcoholic.
And it's undeniable. Again, the medical records reflect during Mr. Clark's initial evaluation for alcohol treatment he told the VA that by -- from age 16 to 18 he drank a six-pack weekly, but by 18 to 24 he was drinking a hundred to a hundred and sixty beers per week. A hundred to a hundred and sixty beers per week. And after age 44 he began escalating his binge drinking. In other words, very, very heavy alcohol consumption.
Dr. Cummings told you -- he did the math based on that medical record and told you that the medical records reflect that Mr. Clark would drink between
100 to 160 beers per week in his teens, 20s, 30s and early 40s. And those are medical records that were created at a time when no one had any reason to exaggerate the amount of drinking that Mr. Clark was doing.
Substantial exposure, long-term exposure, significantly elevated risk from alcohol.
What about asbestos? Let's get to the bottom of this asbestos story.
The first thing Dr. Burns told you is that asbestos is a very powerful cause of lung cancer, a very powerful cause of lung cancer. And you know that Mr. Clark had occupational exposure to asbestos while working as a boilermaker and a roofer. You don't have to rely on what we say. Just look to the medical records.
On 9/12/93 and 9/13/93, when he had been admitted after his diagnosis for lung cancer when his doctors are working him up, they note that he had asbestos exposure prior to 1987 in both records.
You also see medical records of a pulmonary consult by a pulmonary physician that says his occupation was a roofer for 30 years and that occupation entails exposure to a hazard, asbestos.
Finally, and this is another red herring, if
you will, you will recall that plaintiffs elicited during Dr. Burns' testimony that somebody in the medical record had made an error and written down two weeks of exposure to asbestos from the boilermaker occupation. Mr. Clark had two years working as a boilermaker. Everyone agrees that provides potential for exposure to asbestos.
And when I cross-examined Dr. Burns on this, he debunked this whole two-week thing. Actually, I -here's the cross: "Actually, his particular exposure was about two years long, wasn't it?"
Answer: "Well, it was potential exposure. He had all kinds of different periods in his life.
There was one period when he worked in an occupation where there is a greater frequency of potential exposure, yes."
"And when he worked for about two" -- excuse me -- "And that was when he worked for about two years as a boilermaker, correct?"
"Correct."
The bottom line is he had occupational exposures as a roofer, occupational exposures as a boilermaker.
And, perhaps more importantly, you heard during the reading of his treating doctor who works here at
the Gainesville VA that he could not rule out that asbestos caused Mrs. Clark's -- Mr. Clark's lung cancer; that the treater could not rule out that asbestos caused lung cancer. That was the sworn testimony.
Well, let's talk to you about his exposure to roofing tar. Here's what we know. I don't think this is in dispute. It does include benzopyrene, a potent human lung carcinogen. He worked for about
30	years.
Now, this morning you were told that, "Oh, he very seldom worked on industrial/commercial jobs." But the rest of the testimony was that he and his brother put roofs on half the buildings in Rome and that he never used protective equipment.
Now, Mr. Gustafson belittled the picture I'm about to show you, but that's because it's a powerful picture. Sometimes pictures speak a thousand words, as we all know.
Dr. Burns tried to minimize Mr. Clark's exposure to roofing tar. Here's what we see, a large commercial job, with Mr. Clark bent over, with no protective gear, with his head and lungs right in the vapors and fumes of the roofing tar. Our position is it speaks volumes about the types of
exposures to roofing tar that Mr. Clark had.
So I submit to you all that the plaintiff simply has not been able to prove which among his many or which combination among his many risk factors for lung cancer was actually the cause of his lung cancer. I mean, there's no test that can be done on someone that says, "Aha, here's what caused your lung cancer."
His experts offered you conclusions. They were there -- you know, they were being paid to testify, and they provided that conclusion. But nobody said there was some objective proof of what caused the lung cancer.
So I submit that for that reason -- can I have the Elmo again?
That is yet another reason why the answer to the first question on the verdict form should be "No," because that's the plaintiff's burden of proof to prove to you, also.
But it doesn't end there. The plaintiffs have to prove to you that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of Mr. Clark's lung cancer and death.
Now, you've heard it packaged several different ways, but really what it comes down to is there's a claim being made in this case that Mr. Clark smoked
against his will and couldn't quit, and by smoking against his will he was exposed to carcinogens that ultimately resulted in his cancer. That's the case that was offered to you.
Let's ask ourselves, are those really the facts? Are smokers helpless to quit smoking? Are they involuntary smokers? Do they smoke against their will?
Well, you've seen the answer to that. What we know -- and we did all this on cross-examination. I didn't need to bring an addiction expert, because we were able to establish all this on cross-examination.
We know that heavily addicted smokers in the United States have quit by the millions.
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns both conceded all these facts.
By 1965, the first year after the Surgeon General's report in 1964, 17.6 million people had quit. In the four-year period between '66 and '70, when the first warning label went on right after the Surgeon General's report, 13 million quit in four years. If we do the math, that was between 8- and 9,000 people a day. Thirty million quit, an average of 2 million a year, from '64 to '79. And
ultimately here we are today. There's 60 million former smokers in the United States.
It's such a big number it's just hard to wrap your mind around, what does 60 million really mean. And it also gave me a chance to talk about football.
So what I did was calculate how many swamps 60 million people would fill up. And the answer is you would have to fill up the swamp 678 times to get to the number of 60 million people.
Moreover, the rate of quitting is such that every month since 1955, on average, enough smokers have quit in the United States to fill up the swamp.
That's the level of quitting that has occurred in this country. Absolutely abundantly clear that being -- that smoking or even being addicted does not make you an involuntary smoker who lacks the ability to quit. Just ask the 60 million who did.
Not only that, Dr. Burns and Cummings said that 90 percent of those 60 million smokers who quit were addicted.
Now, we had this little -- another red herring side show, talking about the way nicotinic receptors in the brain are changed when someone smokes and becomes addicted. Once again, we had to unpack all that on cross-examination, because here's what the
witnesses admitted when we got to cross: that nicotine addiction does not permanently change brain receptors; that nicotine addiction does not interfere with a smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking; and that nicotine addiction does not interfere with a smoker's ability to make an informed choice to quit or continue smoking.
This brain receptor stuff is a red herring.
You heard eating chocolate, going shopping, everything we do in life changes the receptors in our brains. I'm sure this process right now is having an effect on all our brains. That's the way we -- that's just -- that's a description of how our brains function, not of injury to the brains.
Another red herring.
Here's what we know from Dr. Cummings, though. Again, sometimes the truth comes out in different contexts. What does Dr. Cummings say when he's outside of the courtroom?
Remember he wrote this Smart Move Stop Smoking guide for the American Cancer Society, where he tells smokers, "Do you have what it takes to stop smoking? Do you want to stop smoking? Are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine?
Are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments
after stopping? If you answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking."
Now, he came in here and tried to back off of that and say, "Oh, well, you know, I would never want to deliver a negative message to people trying to quit smoking."
But I asked him, "Do you tell smokers the truth?"
"Yes."
"And isn't it true that anyone can stop smoking?"
"No."
Another episode where I had to march over here, get the transcript from Robin, go back, show Dr. Cummings his prior testimony, which -- how did I know he had said that? Because that's what he told me when we were upstairs in Courtroom 4 trying a different smoker case.
So the question becomes -- and this is really the nub of the question for you-all -- I'm sorry.
I'm skipping, getting ahead of myself.
Again, it's important to remember that Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns said those 60 million people, 90 percent quit cold turkey. Those 60 million certainly included smokers who smoked
more than Mr. Clark, smokers who smoked longer than Mr. Clark. And they both told you -- and this is where we zero in on what this issue is really about -- that only Mr. Clark could make the choice to continue smoking or not.
In fact Dr. Burns, very colorfully, I thought, said, "It can be said very simply. A smoker has to stop lighting cigarettes and sticking them in their mouth." I mean, the cigarettes don't light themselves and jump in your mouth. The smoker has to make that decision.
So, again, why was Mr. Clark different? Why didn't he quit?
And this is a sad, unfortunate story, but it's just the facts. We talked about it during jury selection. We have to bring you facts that aren't the types of things we want to talk about in front of -- in public arenas if we didn't have to, but it's part of this process, as you-all recognized in the jury selection.
Here's what Dr. Burns told us.
"Dr. Burns, wouldn't you agree that the pattern of drinking described in Mr. Clark's medical records is consistent with alcoholism that developed at some point after age 16 and was a dominant characteristic
of much of Charles Clark's adult life?"
Answer: "Yes, I would."
I want to elaborate on that just a bit so we see what types of consequences the alcoholism had, how severe it was, and then talk about what that means for why he didn't quit smoking. Because that's what this is really being offered to you for.
Again, there are some fact witnesses that say he was a social smoker [sic]. Totally inconsistent with all the medical records that -- Charles Clark himself, you saw the entry, you saw his admission record where he told the VA physicians that he was an alcoholic and had severe problems.
The VA medical staff diagnosed him as an alcoholic. The medical records reflect it.
Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns agreed. We've already looked at some -- we looked at a few more records from the VA alcohol treatment center. He was a severe, long-time alcoholic.
And let's be candid. There's no way you can hide from your family that you're drinking a hundred to a hundred and sixty beers per week. This suggestion that he hid it from them by getting up and drinking in the middle of the night is completely implausible.
And as we just looked at on Instruction 15, you're entitled to use your common sense and what you know about the world when you evaluate whether evidence like that could possibly be true.
And, again, this is an episode that was resolved by me using another deposition transcript. The personal representative testified on direct examination that her father was a social drinker, but then I confronted her with her deposition where she submitted that she was not surprised that the medical records reflected that her father sometimes drank a case of beer at a time. The facts come out in the end, and it's frequently through cross-examination.
Another medical record from the VA. This shows you how early in his life his heavy drinking began.
He reported to the VA that he drank heavily in the military to the point of where he would pass out; that over time his binges grew up to six and seven days; that he used to drink with friends and that he now drinks alone; and that he lost his roofing partnership because of his drinking.
Now, as you heard, one of the things about alcoholism is it's a disease that is diagnosed in part on the consequences that it has in your life,
not just how much you're drinking but does the drinking cause you loss of control and consequences in your life. Here's an example. He's talking about his loss of his roofing partnership with his brother.
Here's another record from the VA related to his admission for treatment that says, "Loss of business, loss of house, self-respect and family," regarding the impact that his alcoholism had had on his social relations. This is from 8/20/93. It's in the medical records. You'll have access to it.
He's also asked, "Has your addictive lifestyle interrupted family relationships," and he said,
"Yes."
Now, one of the things I should mention is apparently the plaintiffs are attempting to convince you that he lived in Florida because when he was admitted and on the medical records he would provide a local address that was his wife's address.
And there's no dispute he did that, but that wasn't because he was living there. I mean, you can see what the circumstances had to have been. "We need a local address. How do we contact you? How do we contact a significant other?"
That had to be the circumstances, because you
already saw that Patricia Clark said he wasn't living there at the time he was diagnosed.
So that's the answer to this whole business about the address being in the medical records.
But, again, an example of the type of impact that alcohol was having on his life.
And not only that, he never did quit drinking.
Here we have a record from June 15th of 1994, so this is -- you know, this is the next year after his diagnosis. He shows up in the emergency room and he's intoxicated, in 1994. So he didn't quit drinking after his diagnosis.
And that's not surprising because you remember that when he first checked into the alcohol rehab program, the 28-day program, he left after a week and declined further treatment, said he would deal with it himself.
The fact of the matter is he never quit smoking because he never quit drinking. There was a lot of discussion about him continuing to smoke after being diagnosed, but it's because he kept drinking after he was diagnosed.
Here's what the experts admitted on cross-examination, that if you evaluate the records and the fact testimony, that what you find out is
that he began drinking regularly starting at age 16.
And even though we had to pull it out of them with depositions, they admitted that the first time we know that he's a regular smoker is at age 22. In other words, he became a daily smoker after he was drinking daily.
Now, has there been evidence that he experimented and that he smoked some? Of course. I'm not denying that. But the question is, when did he become so-called addicted?
Dr. Burns told you that based on his review of the evidence, the first time that we have facts that led Dr. Burns to believe he was addicted was somewhere between the ages of 25 to 30. Somewhere between the ages of 25 to 30. Again, my cross-examination of Dr. Burns. This was almost ten years after he'd become a regular drinker.
So why does that all that matter so much? Why does it matter when he started and that he was drinking regularly?
Because here's the testimony that you've got from Dr. Burns: Drinking alcohol substantially reduces the likelihood of quitting smoking.
Drinking alcohol sets the stage for relapsing back into smoking. People who want to stop drinking
should -- excuse me. People who want to stop smoking should stop drinking because of the disinhibiting effect of alcohol.
We cross-examined Dr. Burns. He told you, "I tell people, stop drinking if you want to stop smoking." Because drinking, as we all know, has disinhibiting effects and people lose the ability to control -- I shouldn't say lose the ability -people have less impulse control. We talked about people do all kinds of things they shouldn't do when they're drinking, and one of the things that sure happens is people stop -- don't stop smoking.
You're entitled to use your own personal experience and observations, where everybody knows about the connection between drinking and smoking, that people who only smoke when they're drinking, for example. That's the story of why he never quit.
Dr. Cummings basically agreed. Dr. Cummings told you that alcoholics who continue to use alcohol have a lower rate of quitting smoking; that if someone drinks alcohol, the alcohol lowers their inhibitions and they are less likely to resist the urge to smoke and thus have a greater risk of relapse.
And Dr. Cummings -- not just Dr. Cummings and
Dr. Burns. They admitted that the Surgeon General of the United States has reported that active consumption of alcohol enhances the risk of relapse to smoking after quitting.
When you put all these admissions together, here's what we have. Their experts admit that Mr. Clark was drinking daily before he became a daily smoker, that he knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke anyway, that he had the ability to quit smoking earlier but chose to keep smoking, and that his alcoholism substantially reduced his ability to quit smoking.
Let's put all that together and think about what it means, because you have a choice. There have been two different descriptions you've had in this case.
The plaintiff's description is that Mr. Clark was a tormented smoker who hated smoking and smoked only because he was compelled to do so by nicotine addiction.
Now, that's one description. Is that the case, or is it the case that Mr. Clark was an alcoholic who did not quit smoking because he chose to drink daily?
Well, let's ask ourselves what we know about
Mr. Clark and the likelihood that he smoked against his will.
Here's what everybody told you about Mr. Clark. What you always heard was he was his own person, a strong-willed, stubborn, independent, adventurous, thrill-seeking man who took responsibility for his actions, was able to make decisions and stick with them.
We certainly -- you know, there's been some talk about his education being the fifth grade. I mean, I thought we cleared that up. He got his GED when he was in the military. We established that already. We certainly all know that he was savvy enough to own and run his own business until his alcoholism cost him his business.
And what we were told over and over is that Mr. Clark did what he wanted to do. Mr. Clark did what he wanted to do.
In fact, his neighbor, Martha Padgett, told us that she heard Mr. Clark tell Mrs. Clark that he was a grown man and could do what he wanted with his smoking.
You know what, he had that right. That's how our society works. People get informed about the risks and they get to make choices and take
responsibility for the choices they make.
I'm not criticizing him for making the choice to smoke or drink if that's what he wanted to do.
But you can't escape the consequences and responsibility that comes with your decisions.
That's a core principle that we value above perhaps almost any other principle in the society we live in. And that's what freedom is all about; people get to make choices and take responsibility.
What we know is that he really did not want to quit, because we know he never took the threshold step needed to quit smoking because he never quit drinking.
And, you know, there was this suggestion this morning that there's only evidence of him trying to quit one time, in 1971. Patricia Clark's testimony, discussed by Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, was that she urged him constantly to see a physician for help quitting and did so virtually every time he tried to quit. Every time he tried to quit.
But he never did see a physician. Because, see, the evidence really demonstrates he didn't want to quit smoking. Because when you want to quit smoking, what do you do? You follow the advice of people around you. You try different approaches.
You might go see the doctor that your wife is urging you to see constantly. At a minimum you throw away your cigarettes, put your ashtrays away. You might go try the nicotine patch or nicotine gum. You will do something. You will do something.
Now, again, there's this side story, this red herring, about going to some drugstore and buying some box of something or other, and the suggestion being that it was a smoking cessation aid. We don't have any specificity about what that was. But what we know is, even though we had to use those impeachment transcripts again, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns admitted they saw no evidence of him using a nicotine patch or nicotine gum.
And here's perhaps the most telling admission in the course of this examination -- trial, excuse me. When Mr. Guest was cross-examining Ms. Hagen, he asked her this question: "And in fact that's what he said. Your father said, 'I do not want to quit,' right?"
And the answer was, "Right."
I posed the question to you about how is he different than the 60 million smokers who quit.
Let's summarize the evidence.
First of all, is there any evidence that the
cigarettes he was smoking were more addictive than other cigarettes? No, nothing.
Is there any evidence that his brain was affected differently than other smokers who quit? Nothing.
Is there any evidence that he was exposed to advertising different than the smokers that quit? Nothing.
You know, this argument that advertising misled people into thinking it was safe and kept people smoking when they otherwise wouldn't, the 60 million people that quit were exposed to the same advertising campaign. They made the choice to quit. Others made the choice to continue. That's the difference.
Was Mr. Clark exposed to tobacco company statements that were different than the 60 million smokers who quit? No.
Did he smoke more and longer than the 60 million smokers who quit? No.
The difference is -- and you know what the difference is between him and those who quit -Mr. Clark chose to drink heavily and continue smoking instead of quitting.
The bottom line is that Mr. Clark was an
alcoholic who did not quit smoking because he chose to drink daily for decade after decade after decade from the age of 18 on until the time of his death, as we've now seen.
Can I have the Elmo, please?
For those reasons, ladies and gentlemen, I suggest to you this is the third independent reason why the answer to the first question should be "No."
If you agree and you answer "No" to the first question, you will sign and date your verdict form, turn it in to the Court, and the case will be over.
Your Honor, this would be a convenient breaking point, if you please.
