                  PLAINTIFF'S CLOSING
          MR. ALVAREZ:  May it please this Honorable
     Court.
          THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
          You can put that wherever you want.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Miss Hess, counsel, counsel.
     Good morning.
          THE JURY:  (Collectively.)  Morning.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  The first thing I want to do is
     thank you all because it really hasn't escaped our
     attention how much you all paid so close attention
     to the testimony in this case.  We've watched you
     very closely and we seen how you look at every single witness; you take notes with every single
     witness, whether it was for a witness that we
     brought on or a witness that Philip Morris brought
     on, you all gave equal attention to both sides, and
     that's important, and we appreciate that.
          I'm going to split my time, my hour time with
     Mr. Paige.  I'm going to speak for half an hour,
     Mr. Paige will speak for half an hour.  We're
     sharing our time.  I got a check mark in
     kindergarten for playing well with others.  So
     we're going to go for a little bit, but it's not
     going to be cumulative testimony or evidence or
     argument.
          What you're going to hear is I'm going to be
     talking more about the addiction part of the case
     and Mr. Paige will address other issues that I
     think are also important, okay?
          But let's talk about what this case is about
     because it's a very, very narrow issue.  In a few
     moments after all the arguments over, the Judge is
     going to give you certain instructions, that's the
     law that you have to use.  Think of it as a
     standard operating procedure, it's a manual, it's
     the law that you all have to use to decide this
     case. Now, there's certain things that are not in
     dispute.  In fact, there's quite a few.
          The first thing is that cigarettes that
     contain nicotine are not addictive -- are
     addictive, that is not in dispute.
          The second thing is that smoking cigarette
     causes lung cancer, that's not in dispute.
          The third thing is that Stuart Hess died of
     lung cancer.  That's not in dispute.
          The fourth thing is that Stuart Hess' lung
     cancer was caused by smoking Philip Morris'
     cigarettes that contained nicotine.  That's not in
     dispute.
          The only real question is, was he addicted?
     And in a few minutes you're going to get some
     instructions telling you what the issue is, and
     this is what the instruction's going to say:
          "The issue for your determination is whether
     Stuart Hess was addicted to cigarettes containing
     nicotine, and, if so, whether such addiction was
     the legal cause of Stuart Hess' death."  Now,
     that's a lot of words, but I'm going to break it
     down for you very simply.
          What it means is was he addicted and was that
     addiction the legal cause of his death.  Okay. Now, it's undisputed that Mr. Hess died of
     lung cancer caused by smoking Philip Morris'
     cigarettes that contained nicotine.  That's
     undisputed.  So that portion, the bottom portion of
     the legal cause of his death, we think we've
     established that because the evidence is undisputed
     that he died of lung cancer from smoking the
     cigarettes that were manufactured by Philip Morris.
     So it's a very narrow issue that you're here to
     decide today.
          This phase is about addiction, not fault.
     Very important, you've heard a lot of evidence from
     both sides about what the tobacco company did, what
     Mr. Hess knew and did, you've heard a lot of that
     evidence.  It's not your place today to decide
     that.  The instructions aren't going to tell you to
     consider that.  In fact, they're going to tell you
     the opposite.
          You will not hear one word from the Judge's
     instructions that you're supposed to decide who was
     at fault, that's for another day.  Follow the law
     and the Judge's instructions and just decide if
     Mr. Hess was addicted to cigarettes, that's it.
          So when you go back in the jury room and you
     start deliberating amongst yourselves and you hear one of your other co-chairs say, well, you know, he
     should have done this and he should have done that,
     stop, that's not what we're here to decide.
          What we're here to decide is was he addicted?
     That it's today.  There will be time to discuss
     those issues, and we welcome that debate, we
     welcome that debate, we're just not going to have
     it today.
          If you find that he was addicted, you will
     later decide fault of the parties.
          The Judge's instruction on evidence in
     Phase I.  This is another instruction, this is
     another SOP, this is another manual, another
     operating procedure that you're going to hear from
     the Judge.
          Some of the evidence you have heard on the
     issue presented for your decision may also relate
     to other issues that are not before you.  You
     should consider such evidence only if it relates to
     the issue before you.  And the only issue before
     you is, was he addicted?  That's it.
          In other words, choice, fault, responsibility,
     that's not what this case is about today.  We'll
     have time to decide those issues later.
          Evidence of Stuart Hess' addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine.
          You know, I thought about this for a little
     while, and I said what's the best way to explain
     your job?  And I think the way you want to look at
     it -- there's a television show called CSI and they
     have CSI Miami, CSI Las Vegas, they have them all
     over the place now.  And what it is, it's a show in
     about an hour, crime scene investigators analyze a
     crime and try to solve it in an hour.  And we've
     had two weeks.
          But your job is similar to that.  Your job is
     to decide the mystery, decide the issue, put on
     your badge that says CSI Juror Broward County to
     decide this case.
          And there's three ways that's a tried and true
     method of investigation that every good
     investigator knows.  Physical evidence, the eye
     witness testimony and the scientific evidence.
     Those are the three foundations for a good
     investigation.  You can't have a good investigation
     without those three elements.
          And guess what?  You know you've solved the
     crime or the mystery or the issue when all three of
     those fit together like a puzzle.
          When the physical evidence, the eye witness testimony and the scientific evidence all fit
     together, you know you've solved the mystery.
          Well, let's look at some of the physical
     evidence in this case because the medical records
     are physical evidence.  They were made years and
     years before Mr. Hess died or before this lawsuit
     was even contemplated, before anybody hired
     lawyers.  The medical records are physical
     evidence.
          And what did they say?  They say he started
     when he was 15 years old.  Miss Hess recalls a
     conversation, he thought it was 12 or 13 years, it
     doesn't make a difference, let's assume he was 15
     years old, that's a long time to start smoking.
     Maybe nowadays people are offended by that, but in
     the '50s, it was normal.
          But if you look at the medical records, that's
     exactly what it says.  The patient has a long and
     heavy smoking history starting at age 15.  It's in
     the medical records, physical evidence, we know
     when it started.  He's a two to three pack per day
     for 40 years, in the medical records.  The patient
     has been a heavy smoker of three packs of
     cigarettes, in the medical records, physical
     evidence. When he was in the hospital 1993 for the
     bronchitis, he smoked in the hospital.  Now, you
     heard some evidence, well, maybe he did, he took
     the cigarette back.  Well, maybe that was one time.
     But when the nurse followed him to the atrium, she
     was suspicious of this guy, saying, hey, he's going
     to smoke, I know he's going to smoke.  Use your
     common sense.  That's the other thing you have to
     do, use your common sense.
          They documented in the medical records another
     piece of physical evidence.  Patient leaving the
     unit, found off the floor in the atrium smoking.
     Physical evidence.
          Told he had lung cancer, he couldn't stop.
     Chemotherapy, he couldn't stop, physical evidence.
     He smoked right through the majority of his
     chemotherapy.  It's in the medical records.
          But it's just not the records.  Miss Hess,
     like any normal family, the Hess family kept
     photographs of them through good times and in those
     photographs, what do we see?  Mr. Hess always with
     a cigarette in his hand; at his wedding, at the
     reception line with a cigarette in his mouth
     getting ready to light it.
          Now, they talked about that he was overweight -- well, they didn't say he was
     overweight.  They said he was obese.  Look, use
     your common sense.  Does that look like an obese
     man?
          We also have other physical evidence, the quit
     aids, they're here.  They're introduced into
     evidence, you can look at them, you can see them,
     you can read them, the Nicorette gum, the hypnosis
     tapes, the phase out, the hole punching machine.
     All those are physical evidence that he tried to
     quit.
          Now, the other part -- we talked about
     physical evidence.
          The second part, the second important factor
     to helping you as a CSI investigator to solve this
     mystery is eye witness testimony.  The first one is
     Dr. Ross.  Now here's a guy, he's a physician for
     40 years, 40 years.  This was the second time he's
     ever come to Court.  This guy's not a paid expert.
     He's not a slick, polished guy who comes in, done
     this a million times, comes in, that's not him.  He
     sees patients.  He cares about people.
          And he remembered Stuart Hess.  He knew this
     patient very well.  And, in fact, if you recall in
     opening statement Mr. Reilly tried to make it sound like they were in cahoots, that they were friends.
     They weren't friends.  He was just -- he was a good
     doctor who cared about his patient.  He cared for
     Elaine, he cared for Elaine's parents, he knew the
     family, but they never socialized together.  He was
     just a family doctor.
          And what did he say?  He said he was a
     chain-smoker.  He talked about how if Stuart had to
     wait in the waiting room for a little while, he
     couldn't handle it, he'd have to go outside to
     smoke.  If they put him in the examine room and he
     had to wait there longer than he thought he could
     bear, what would he do?  He'd go outside and smoke
     a cigarette and then come back.  Those are things
     that doctors don't forget.
          He knew from conversations, from his care and
     treatment of this man that he was tormented, and
     that's the word that he used -- that's not the word
     that we used -- that's the word that he used.  He
     used the word "he was tormented" by these
     cigarettes, "tormented."  In fact, he was taking
     Ativan and some other drug for anxiety, and he also
     prescribed it to help him with the addiction.
          And Stuart would come in and say, Doc, I can't
     take it anymore, I'm trying to quit, please up my dose.  That's why this doctor came in here, that's
     why this doctor remembered him, that's why this
     doctor came in and told the truth.
          And when they called him from the hospital in
     that 1993 admission said, hey, you know, the nurses
     called and said, doctor, you know, you got a
     problem with this patient here, he keeps going off
     the floor to smoke.  And what you heard him say was
     there's an order that I wrote, said let him go
     outside and smoke.  And the only reason I would
     given him that order was he was threatening to
     leave because he wanted to smoke.  So it was more
     important that he take his treatments and he stay
     in the hospital so I gave into him.  That's
     addiction.  That's addiction.
          An unbiased physician.
          The next one is Howard Dorfman.  This is a
     gentleman, I don't know if you recall him, we
     played his testimony by videotape.  This is a man
     who was Mr. Hess' business partner for ten years.
     He was also a smoker, he was also a smoker.  And he
     told us all of all the methods that they tried to
     use to quit, all of them, aqua filters, some
     extension filters, the gum, the fake cigarettes,
     the chewing tobacco, they tried them all and they couldn't quit.
          Here's a man that has no stake in this
     lawsuit, his ex-partner, who hadn't been together
     since 1983 has no motivation other than to tell the
     truth.  And what did he say?  He said he was a
     chain-smoker and he was addicted, another eye
     witness.
          Dawn Aaron Christensen, that's the young lady
     who lived in the neighborhood and was friends with
     the Hess' daughter.  She's now all grown up, she
     lives in Connecticut and guess what, she's a
     psychologist, she knows about addiction.  You heard
     it.  And what did she say?
          She said I remember as a child that this man
     was always smoking, always smoking.  And when he
     tried to quit the couple times that I remember off
     the top -- I couldn't even go over to the guy's
     house because he got so irate.  That's addiction.
          The son, David Hess, he was one of the first
     witnesses that you heard from, it's funny what
     people remember when you're a young kid, the things
     that stick in your mind about your father, and he
     told a story that I thought maybe was kind of brief
     but telling.
          He said, you know, I remember one day we were working on the pool pump, my dad was fixing the
     pool pump and he had both hands, he was working
     this, he was doing this, and his addiction was so
     strong that his cigarette was in his mouth just
     bouncing up and down, up and down, up and down.
     I'll never forget that.  I'll never forget that.
     He said he was addicted, that he tried -- in fact,
     he said how many times does my dad have to try?  He
     tried for years and years and years and years.
          And Mr. Paige is going to talk to you about
     some of those issues that are important but he
     tried to quit.  And he wasn't successful over all
     those years because of one reason and one reason
     only -- and it's not motivation and it's not cause
     he didn't want to -- it's because he was addicted
     to a drug, a highly addictive drug, nicotine.
          You heard video of Allison Gentille.  She said
     her dad was always smoking.  She did a project, she
     wanted to see how much money the family was
     spending on cigarettes and she figured out it was
     between two and three packs, she followed it for a
     week.  She added up, she did the math.
          And the next one, Elaine Hess.  Elaine was
     married to this man for 32 years.  He was smoking
     when she met him and he was smoking when he died. Before he stepped foot off that bed every morning,
     reached over for a pack of cigarettes every
     morning.  That's addiction.
          Dr. Ross said addicted, Mr. Dorfman says he's
     addicted, Christensen says he's addicted, young
     Mr. Hess says he's addicted, the daughter said he's
     addicted, the wife said he's addicted.  The eye
     witness testimony, addicted.
          Let's look at the scientific evidence.  That's
     the third method because everything has to fit
     together.
          THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, counsel.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Wow, okay.  I know I play well
     with others, but...all right.
          Nicotine is a highly addictive drug, just as
     addictive as heroin and cocaine, that's
     established.
          Surgeon General of the United States:  "The
     longer you smoke, the more likely you are to be
     addicted."  This man smoked for 40 years.
          Studies show the most predictive factor for
     addiction is how long after you wake up in the
     morning do you smoke a cigarette?  Before he got
     out of bed.  While he was still in bed he was
     smoking, and that's the most important predictor for addiction.
          He smoked two packs a day, that's an
     extraordinary amount of smoking, and he did two to
     three.  Dr. Ross said it, the medical records said
     it, Mr. Dorfman said it, Miss Hess, the son, the
     daughter, they all agree.
          17 million smokers every year try to quit, but
     only five percent, five percent are successful.
     That means 95 fail.  And you can go to one of these
     top clinics to stop smoking, their rate isn't --
     it's a little bit better, they think it's great,
     but it's only 20 percent, which means like 80
     percent of the people fail.
          Some smokers are genetically susceptible to
     nicotine addiction.  Who says that?  Dr. Glassman.
     And guess who else said it?  Dr. Nace yesterday
     said it.
          Let's talk about Dr. Glassman.  He was our
     psychiatrist, our addiction expert.  Remember, he
     was one of the first couple witnesses that we had
     on the stand, he was an elderly gentleman from
     New York, world-renowned expert on addiction,
     published over 50 articles on nicotine addiction.
          The lawyers were not going to tell him what to
     say.  In fact, if he didn't like a question that Mr. Paige asked him, do you remember what he said?
     That's not a good question.  Now, we didn't wind
     him up and send him here.  That's the test of a
     true expert, when he's here to educate you.  We
     didn't supply him with any medical research or
     articles on addiction.  He knew it.  He knew this
     material cold.
          He ran a smoking cessation clinic.  He says
     two packs of cigarettes is an extraordinary
     amount -- this is his word, it's "inconceivable."
     Mr. Hess was not addicted.  "Inconceivable."  And
     he uses the National Institute for Drug Abuse
     definition of addiction, NIDA, the government.  He
     said, listen, I use the government's definition and
     the government's definition, he's addicted.
          And when we asked him to a reasonable degree
     of medical probability, which, you know, means, you
     know the greater weight of the evidence, do you
     know what he said?  He goes, listen, I know you
     lawyers talk about greater weight than this, more
     probable true than that.  Let me tell you what I
     think it is.  99.99 percent addicted from one of
     the top experts on addiction in the world.
          Dr. Glassman's testimony makes sense, it's
     common sense.  A man who smokes two to three packs of cigarettes a day for 40 years is not addicted?
     Use your common sense.
          But who does Philip Morris call?  Dr. Nace.
     He's the gentleman that was here yesterday
     afternoon and morning.  He's not written a single
     article on nicotine addiction.  He's never done a
     single study or research on nicotine addiction.
     The lawyers had to send him the materials.  Could
     you imagine if Mr. Paige would have sent those
     articles to Dr. Glassman, what Dr. Glassman would
     have done?  He would have called Mr. Paige up and
     tell him don't ever call me again, I'm educating
     you, you don't educate me.  I'm the doctor.  I'm
     the expert.
          THE CLERK:  Five minutes, counselor.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  He only sees a handful of
     patients that are trying to quit, he ignores the
     definition from the American Medical Association,
     the American Cancer Association, the U.S. Surgeon
     General, the National Institute for Drugs, and even
     his own book.  He defines it in his own book, he
     doesn't use the definition.  It's incredible.
          So what does he use?  He uses the DSM-IV.  But
     do you know the problem with the DSM-IV is you're
     not supposed to use it for this purpose.  If you're a CSI investigator and the book says you're not
     supposed to use it for forensic purposes, do you
     know what that means?  It means you're not supposed
     to use it in a case like this.
          It's not meant to diagnose dead people.  It's
     meant to diagnose live people.  Do you know what it
     reminds me of?  That Bruce Willis movie The Sixth
     Sense where he plays a psychiatrist and he's
     treating this young man who's haunted by ghosts and
     the whole time in the movie you think that Bruce
     Willis is alive and you find out that he's dead.
          THE COURT:  All right.  You're ruining the
     movie for me.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  But the key part of that movie
     is a phrase.  When the young boy finally gets the
     confidence that he could trust Bruce Willis, he
     looks at him and he says, I have to tell you a
     secret, "I see dead people."  Well, the DSM isn't
     for diagnosing dead people.
          In fact, the DSM says that you're -- requires,
     look at the word they use, requires "obtaining a
     detailed history from the individual."  Dr. Nace
     didn't even know that.  We had to point that out to
     him.  He had to finally admit that there were
     flaws.  In fact, he said I'm going to have to write a letter to the editor about this.  He said it kind
     of jokingly, but do you know what, he realized that
     he used flawed material, a flawed criteria that
     wasn't meant for this purpose.
          Here's some of his famous quotes, I wrote them
     down.  "It's shaky, does not apply clearly, we're
     not there yet."  It's shaky.  I'll tell you what's
     shaky, his whole testimony was shaky.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Or at least his cross
     examination was pretty shaky.  Other sources say
     that the DSM-IV, not proven valid.  The evidence
     for the validity for nicotine dependence is
     limited, ill-suited for tobacco dependency.  That's
     what he had in his materials that the lawyers sent
     him.
          In a serious wrongful death case you better
     come to court with something reliable.  This is a
     serious case.  But do you know what, let's walk
     through the DSM.  There's seven criterias.  You've
     got to meet three.  He gave us barely one, right?
     But do you know what?  Mr. Hess met them all.  If
     not all, most of them.
          The first one, tolerance, as defined by either of the following.  When we asked him in his
     deposition, do you know what he said?  Maybe he
     meets it.  But he comes in here to court yesterday
     and says no.  The man has taught -- the man was
     smoking for 40 years, how could he not have
     tolerance to it?
          THE CLERK:  One minute, counselor.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  I'm going to borrow some time
     from my friend.
          The second one, withdrawal as manifested by
     either of the following, and it gives -- remember
     those eight things?  When you look at the eight
     things, that's why Miss Hess -- they never asked
     Miss Hess those questions.  He was irritable, he
     was restless, he had insomnia, he had a bunch of
     those things.  He had most of them.  But you know,
     if you don't bother to ask?  But he said no.  He
     met that one.
          A great deal of time is spent in activities
     necessary to obtain the substance.  Example,
     chain-smoking.  Now, here's -- this is the one that
     should have blown everybody away.  He's an
     addiction expert and he says, you know, I can't
     give them that one because I'm an addiction expert
     to nicotine, but I don't know what chain-smoking is.  Well, then you better find another line of
     work.
          But then again, if you're using a criteria
     that you don't know the words for, if you don't
     know what the chain-smoking is, why do you bother
     using this criteria if you don't know what it
     means?  How does that make any sense?
          And the substance use is continued despite
     knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
     physical or psychological problem that is likely to
     have caused or exacerbated by the substance.  What
     they're saying here is, listen, if you're taking --
     you know, this is bad for you, you've got a
     condition that makes it harmful for you and you
     continue to do it, right?  You know, that's fancy
     words for that.  I'm not a fancy guy, you know, it
     took me a long time to study to get through law
     school, I had to do it at night, you know, because
     I had to work through the day.  But let me tell
     you, I can read things like that and make sense of
     them, and that's what that means, okay.
          Now, they made a big deal about that he had
     this heart condition, the IHSS, do you remember all
     that?  It was bad.  In fact, the lady doctor came
     in and, you know, he asked them, is it serious? And she says, it's very serious.  Well, you know,
     to me, serious, I didn't know there was any other
     kind of seriousness.  It's serious or it's not,
     right?
          But listen to this.  If it's serious and he's
     got a heart condition that's bad and he continues
     to smoke when they told him he can't, guess what,
     you meet that criteria.  He had got bronchitis, he
     continues to smoke.  He's got leukoplakia and he
     continues to smoke in the hospital.  Boom.
          And by the way, number three, number six, they
     don't even apply to nicotine addiction, because
     this criteria is for all drugs, not nicotine only.
          But do you know what, forget about that.  We
     still meet five out of the six, using a dead man's
     book.  But they let him believe it was not
     addictive.
          And these are the records that we, the
     documents Mr. Paige is going to talk to you more
     about that.  They knew this was addictive and they
     duped him, they kept saying it wasn't.  And do you
     know what, that's the last thing that you should be
     telling someone who's addicted; that something's
     not addicted, because all an addict wants is an
     excuse to continue to justify that behavior.  And that's what they did.
          And Mr. Hess was in the majority of smokers
     believing it was a habit.  If you look at those
     numbers, this is 1982 through 1978, you know,
     smokers, 25 percent of them thought it was only an
     addiction.  Most of them thought it was a habit,
     they thought they could quit.  Those are polls.
          Philip Morris' three Cs:  Create, condone and
     confirm.  They created doubt about the safety of
     smoking, they condoned smoking as something
     glamourous and sophisticated, they confirmed that
     smoking was safe, the three Cs.
          And what did Mr. Hess do?  He's got the three
     Bs.  And what are the three Bs?  He bit, he
     believed and he bought.  He bit, he believed and he
     bought.
          I'll go through some of these 'cause -- do you
     know what, isn't it ironic -- that's a song by the
     way -- but isn't it ironic that Mr. -- Professor
     Schaller comes in, he's the historian, all right.
     He comes in for three hours, he shows us all these
     documents.  If you notice, we didn't object, in
     fact, we said from the first one, all, bring them
     all in, we don't care, right?
          But for 47 years Philip Morris refuted those very same documents, those very same studies, those
     very same reports, they said they weren't true,
     right?  But isn't it ironic that now they come into
     court and they want to embrace the very same
     documents that they criticized for 47 years.  Isn't
     that ironic?
          THE COURT:  Excuse me just one second.
     Deputy, we have no more room.  You need to stand at
     the door.  We can't allow anyone else in the
     courtroom.  Go ahead, Mr. Alvarez.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  To make the argument that Mr.
     Hess should have known that Philip Morris was not
     telling the truth, I guess what they're saying here
     is, you know, you shouldn't have believed us, you
     know, you shouldn't have believed us.  When we're
     telling you that it's safe, do you know what,
     they're going to come in to court and say you
     shouldn't have believed us, the manufacturer of a
     product, you shouldn't have believed us.
          Real quick about Professor Schaller.  This guy
     never did a lick of research for the tobacco -- he
     never did a lick of research on tobacco until he
     was hired by the tobacco lawyers.  He was a
     historian, he had nothing to do with tobacco.  All
     of sudden he gets hired and do you know what, he likes this gig, do you know why he likes it?  They
     paid him over the years over a million bucks, over
     a million bucks.
          And do you know what he does?  He never
     bothered to look at the internal documents of the
     company.  If you're a historian on tobacco, don't
     you think you should be able to look at the
     documents for the company?  It's -- you know, it's
     free, you know.  It's on the website, it's free,
     anybody can look at them, do you think for a
     million bucks, maybe you want to Google it and get
     on the computer and look at it, for a million
     bucks?
          So what did they do?  They come in and they do
     a character assassination on this man.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Stuart Hess was a good man, he
     was a working man.  And if he was anxious, he was
     anxious because he wanted to provide a good life
     for his wife, a good life for his son, a good life
     for his daughter, and he wanted to put them through
     college.  And if he was anxious, well, that's a
     good thing to be anxious for, to provide for your
     family.  I'll take that anxiousness everyday from any client.
          So what do they do?  They twist, they turn,
     they manipulate.  They put him under this
     microscope and make it seem like he's an
     irresponsible man.
          Remember, this is about addiction.  It's not
     about fault.  I can't wait to have that debate, but
     it ain't going to happen today.  You're going to
     get this verdict form in a little while and it's
     going to say:  We, the jury, return the following
     verdict.  And it doesn't say anything about fault,
     responsibility.
          What it says is:  Was Stuart Hess addicted to
     cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was
     such addiction a legal cause of Mr. Hess' death?
          And do you know what the answer to that
     question is?  Yes.  By overwhelming evidence.
          Thank you, Judge.


          MR. PAIGE:  Good morning.
          THE JURY:  Morning.      PLAINTIFF'S CLOSING  (continued)
          MR. PAIGE:  Good morning.
          I speak fast, so I have limited time now.  I
     didn't have any Red Bull, but I'll try my hardest.
     I know everybody knows the evidence and Alex
     pointed out you all paid attention and we do
     appreciate that.  We do -- Mr. Reilly, Mr. Brenner,
     myself we all do appreciate you being here.  We had
     a hard time, as you know, of picking a jury, there
     a lot of people, a lot of people came here and it
     was important to Elaine and to Philip Morris that
     we had six fair-minded people who would listen to
     the evidence, two alternates, and listen to all the
     evidence and do what was right and do what was
     fair.  And that's all we want.  You know, this is
     America.  This is the only place in the world where
     we can have six people and listen to the evidence
     and do the right thing.
          This is the only place in the world where a
     widow can come to court and take on a corporation
     like Philip Morris.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  One thing that comes to mind that
     Professor Schaller said that I think really sums up their entire defense, that Stuart made choices and
     Stuart should be accountable and Stuart is to blame
     and Stuart is the one who -- he's not here to
     defend himself.  But we know for years, for
     decades, for decades the tobacco companies had a
     simple motto, a simple motto that should not be
     accepted anywhere, anywhere, this is not right.
     And you cannot have a tobacco company in the back
     rooms with corporate men who are making money
     issuing shareholder reports that are in evidence
     and their motto, their slogan cannot be "doubt is
     our product" when they know that there's 400,000
     Americans every year dying.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  "Doubt is our product," and it's
     in evidence and I'm going to go through some of the
     documents -- is not an acceptable excuse to now
     blame Stuart Hess.
          And as Mr. Alvarez said, this is Phase I, this
     is to determine if he's a member of the class,
     that's it.  If he's addicted, he's a member of the
     class.  He smoked for 40 years.  He smoked, whether
     it was a pack and a half or three packs, he
     chain-smoked, he's addicted, he's a class member. You cannot exclude him.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Continue.
          MR. PAIGE:  The evidence does not support
     excluding him from the class that he clearly
     belongs to.  If he's not a class member, if he
     doesn't fit the definition, nobody is, nobody.
     Just because you can quit -- and I will tell you
     right now, in Phase II, I'm not going to stand up
     here -- we're not going to stand up here and say he
     doesn't bear --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.  Continue.  He has to
     finish his statement, counsel.
          MR. PAIGE:  We're not going to stand here and
     look you in the eyes, I will not do it, I will not
     look you in the eyes and say he bears no
     responsibility.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  Maybe he could have started trying
     to quit earlier, maybe he could have tried more.
     No, he tried a lot, he did try a lot.  He's not
     perfect.  Nobody's perfect.  If you have to be
     perfect to be a class member, we've got big problems.  So he's not perfect.
          And when we get to Phase II, as Mr. Alvarez
     said, we're more than happy to talk about who's
     more at fault, Mr. Hess or the conduct of the
     tobacco companies.  But right not it's --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  I lost my train of thought, and I
     have a lot, and you know I have sloppy handwriting
     so I'm doing my best and Mr. Reilly's making
     objections, and I do not hold it --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled, sir.
          MR. PAIGE:  And I don't hold it against him.
     And he's -- he's -- you know we get along, you see,
     and he's doing his job, and I respect that.  But I
     don't respect the evidence in the case which
     Philip Morris -- and we're going to show the clips
     of what they did and what they said, and to now
     turn that and try to exclude Mr. Hess from being a
     class member, it's not right, it's not right.
          And to think if he would have quit, because
     they're saying, hey, he didn't quit, he didn't try
     hard enough.  If he did quit, if he did quit,
     they'd say, okay, well, he wasn't addicted, he quit, or maybe he would have died, you can't win
     with that, you just can't win.
          And that's how they do it.  That's their
     motto, it's doubt, it's confusion and not accepting
     the obvious, and that's wrong and that should not
     be a basis for excluding Mr. Hess from the class.
          So some of the -- if you saw my notes, you
     would wonder how I'm reading this -- but some of
     the facts that are not in dispute are -- and I just
     want to go through these quickly.  There's 50
     million American smokers.  17 million of them try
     to quit each year.  70 percent want to quit.  17
     million try to quit each year.  Between three and
     five percent are successful, which means 95 to 97
     percent fail, and we know why they fail, because
     nicotine -- look, when we all came here, when we
     started working on the case, I had no -- nobody
     knew how addictive nicotine is.  You couldn't know
     unless you worked for Philip Morris and saw their
     documents.
          But we know now, we know now how addictive it
     is.  And that's why people try Chantix and they
     fail, they try medications.  People quit for a year
     and they relapse later because we know that
     nicotine is highly addictive.  It's as addictive as cocaine and heroin, there are high relapse rates,
     and that's the facts.  So we know that there's a 95
     percent failure rate, and we know that 400,000
     people die every year from this addiction.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
     Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  So was he addicted?  I'm not going
     to get much into it, you know -- oh, I have a board
     here -- or two boards.  Can -- can you see okay?
          THE JURY:  (Collectively.)  Yes.
          MR. PAIGE:  These are the Philip Morris
     documents.  So the issue is, if we know that 85 or
     is it 90 percent of smokers are addicted, which is
     in the DSM -- Dr. Nace, who didn't know the DSM
     very well -- the one part he disagreed with was the
     part that said 90 percent of smokers were addicted
     to nicotine.  He disagreed with it because it's not
     good for Philip Morris if that's the facts.  But
     that is the fact.
          And we know -- so is Stuart Hess one of these
     chippers, the light smokers that don't smoke very
     much, is he within the 10 percent or is he within
     the 90 percent?  It's absurd to say he's not
     addicted.  It just does not make sense.  But here's their documents.
          And the reason I think these are important is
     they say that -- it wasn't so much to prove that
     people didn't know smoking was bad for a while or
     people didn't know it was habit-forming, that
     wasn't the reason to show them.  It's just to show
     how addicting nicotine is.  This is the important
     part of these confidential memos that dated back in
     1959, all the way -- '69, do we really want to tout
     cigarette smoking as a drug?  It is, of course.
     1969 -- all are -- they're talking about why people
     smoke -- all are perhaps motives, but we hold that
     none are adequate to sustain the habit in the
     absence of nicotine.  They know people are smoking
     for the nicotine.  He's not -- he's not smoking
     because he loves the taste.  It's not like every
     morning he's waking up jumping out of bed because
     he has to taste the cigarette or he needs to hold
     it in his hand.  It's the nicotine.  Without
     nicotine, people are not smoking.
          If they sold a nicotineless cigarette, people
     would not smoke it.  In fact, there's a new quit
     aide now where they take the tobacco out and they
     just supply nicotine.  So that's what the patch is,
     that's what the gum is, that's what -- all these medications are to give people nicotine which
     they've become addicted to.
          They talk about the effect being the most
     rewarding to the individual under stress.  They
     know that.  They know nicotine is most rewarding to
     the addicts who are under stress and they're going
     to come to court and they're going to now criticize
     Stuart Hess because he's under stress in this
     world, in this life, who's not under stress?
          So maybe when he started smoking as a
     15-year-old and he smoked for the first 10 years,
     he wasn't under that much stress and he was still
     addicted, that doesn't meaning anything, it doesn't
     mean a thing.
          The product is nicotine.  The cigarette
     package is a storage container for a day's supply
     of nicotine.  Think of a cigarette as a dispenser
     for a dose unit of nicotine.
          These are their documents.
          1972:  Cigarettes are addicting.
          1978:  The reason for smoking is nicotine.
          Their research program, the high priorities we
     believe that we sell most is nicotine.  That's what
     it is.  I mean, it's not a secret anymore to
     anybody in the courtroom. People don't know this.  People walking around
     the street who come to court with preconceived
     notions about is it a choice, is it not a choice,
     they don't know all this that we know now.
          And the Surgeon General of the United States
     said it's not a choice.  And it's not a choice.
     It's in their manuals.  These are reputable doctors
     appointed by the president of the United States who
     are saying people smoke because they're addicted,
     not because they chose to.  It's a disease.  Nobody
     wants to be addicted to cigarettes.
          The only person or the only one who wants
     people to be addicted to nicotine is Philip Morris.
     They want you to be addicted to their product.  And
     now when you get addicted, they want to exclude you
     from their class.  You can't win with that.
          1988:  The Surgeon General of the United
     States does a big study on this topic and they find
     nicotine is a drug, cigarettes are addicting, and
     they're as addiction as heroin and cocaine, that's
     not in dispute.  It's in all the books.  That's the
     truth about nicotine, it's a poison.
          And Philip Morris would not agree with that.
     That's the craziest thing of all.  For 50 years,
     knowing what they knew, knowing all this stuff on their internal documents, knowing people were dying
     for 50 years, they would not once admit that
     nicotine is addictive.
          In 1994, they're talking about congressional
     hearings on this document that's in evidence,
     congressional hearings that were going on on this
     topic, and they're saying Philip Morris does not
     believe cigarette smoking is addictive.  Well, now
     the cat's out of the bag.  It's addictive.  We all
     know it's addictive.
          For 50 years, they say, hey, our product
     doesn't kill, we're going to do some research, if
     there's anything dangerous,  we'll take it out.
     The cat's out of the bag, they're not taking
     anything out, okay.  The product is deadly.  People
     are dying.  They make choices.
          And now they have one more doubt that they can
     try to sell, one more little bit of doubt.  They
     can come to you and say, look, okay, we're caught,
     we're caught, but Mr. Hess is not addicted, that's
     their last hope here.  They're going to exclude him
     by convincing you, by coming to you six people and
     hoping that you'll find that they're credible, that
     they're credible after saying that nicotine is not
     addictive to now saying that Mr. -- that Mrs. Hess' husband who is now dead was not addicted.  And
     that's not right.
          Could I see that instruction?
          There's a jury instruction, you're going to
     get this, and it talks about an addiction is the
     legal cause.
          THE COURT:  That's going to read "a loss," not
     injury on the top phrase.  That's misstated.  I
     didn't catch that yesterday.  It needs to be
     consistent.  "Loss" in both paragraphs.
          MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Thank you, Your Honor.
          So they're talking about if addiction is the
     legal cause of a loss or death, it substantially
     produces his death, which he died of lung cancer
     from smoking their cigarettes for years.
          But it says here "in order to be regarded as
     the legal cause, it need not be the only cause,"
     and that's important because if -- again, we're not
     disputing, but if you think there are other causes
     that contributed to his smoking, that he was
     addicted but he liked the taste, or he was addicted
     and -- you know, I mean, you know, they think
     there's some other thing that contributed in terms
     of their defense, it doesn't matter, that doesn't
     exclude him.  That's not the law. Addiction just has to be one of the
     substantial contributing causes to his death.  And
     it and clearly was.  He clearly would not have been
     smoking, he clearly would not have gotten lung
     cancer had he not been addicted.
           Now, this is a different world, and I just
     want to backtrack a little bit.  These are some of
     the advertisements you saw that were in the air
     when Stuart was younger and his parents were
     younger.  I just think it's important when you go
     back in the jury room, you know, we know today it's
     different.  It's different today.  People -- you
     know, people don't smoke, you don't smoke in front
     of your kids.  If your kids come home and they talk
     about smoking in school, you tell them no, you
     know, your kids -- if my daughter brought home an
     ashtray, you would be appalled by it, you would not
     accept that in today's society.
          But back then, you know, Lou Gehrig smoking,
     you know, that's a big statement; a doctor smoking,
     that's a powerful statement to an impressionable
     mind, a 15-year-old kid who's going to become a
     lifelong addict of their product.  That's
     impressionable, that's the advertising, that the
     the message they wanted to portray. Santa Claus smoking?  There's nothing more
     impressionable on a kid that Santa Claus, athletes
     and movie stars and doctors smoking.  So yes,
     Stuart Hess made a choice, he's an impressionable
     young kid who started smoking.  He didn't choose to
     become addicted.  That's not a choice, you don't
     chose something like that, nobody in their right
     mind would.  Here's an ad of Philip Morris back in
     the '50s that people would see.
          (Video clip played).
          VOICE:  Do you inhale?  Then light up a Philip
     Morris.  Take a puff, get a good mouthful of smoke
     and slowly let the smoke come directly through your
     nose.  Now light up your present brand and do
     exactly the same thing.  Take a puff, get a good
     mouthful of smoke and slowly let the smoke come
     directly through your nose.  Notice any difference?
          VOICE:  Yes.  But Philip Morris is so mild;
     while my own brand seems sort of harsh and burning.
          VOICE:  That's irritation.  And remember, the
     irritation you felt in your nose is the same
     irritation that occurs in your throat every time
     you inhale your own brand.  So for a more --
     Philip Morris, the one cigarette proved definitely
     less irritating, definitely milder than any other leading brand.  Do you inhale?  Then you certainly
     should.
          VOICE:  Call for Philip Morris...
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  We saw the commercials with
     doctors, with Lucy, I Love Lucy, it was just --
     that's the way it was back then, so you can't --
     the choice is his to start smoking at 15 years old,
     that's what they wanted, and now they're
     complaining about it.
          Here's a board and we just think that this is
     very typical of what went on here today.  Not
     today, but within the two weeks.  And I want to say
     that the phase -- we're talking about phases, and I
     don't want anybody to be scared, we only finished
     Phase I.  Phase II is going to be about one or two
     days.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  And Phase III will be about a day.
     We will be done with the trial next week, I
     promise, so this is not -- you know, we're just
     asking to do the right thing, follow the law, do
     what's fair, don't exclude Mr. Hess from the class
     or Mrs. Hess.  We are going to get through this trial timely, promise.
          But Stuart made choices and nobody's going to
     deny it.  I told you, we're not going to deny, you
     know, what he did, he started smoking, the warnings
     came out in '66, the cautions, and then they
     changed them to warnings.  And maybe he should
     have -- there were doctors who were smoking then,
     President Kennedy was smoking, people were smoking.
     Should he have tried to start quitting earlier?
     Would it have mattered?  You know, maybe he was an
     educated man, but he believed their doubt, you
     know, that's a balancing act.
          But he tried, in 1974, you know, there was
     enough doubt, he overcome it.  For 23 years, for 23
     years this man tried to quit.  It's undisputed.  We
     do have the physical evidence, and he tried it cold
     turkey, candy, gum, fake cigarettes, chewing
     tobacco, hypnosis, aqua filters, phase out,
     punching, prescription medication, Nicorette gum
     and the patch.  I mean, he tried to quit.  He
     wanted to quit.  That was his choice.  He chose to
     quit.  He chose to quit, and he failed, you know.
          He chose to lose weight.  He went to Weight
     Watchers, he got the bike, so he failed.  Does that
     make him a noncompliant person because he couldn't do in hindsight?  They're scouring through his
     medical records and saying, oh, he didn't lose
     weight, he's noncompliant.  This guy's a problem,
     he's a problem.  He's noncompliant.  He didn't take
     all of his medicine.  He didn't take all his
     medicine, he's noncompliant.  We're going to blame
     him now.
          Let's take him in court.  Hey, we lied, nobody
     will notice it.  We'll just start blaming Mr. Hess.
     We'll throw out all sorts of junk on him, all the
     weight he forgot to lose, we'll bring in this
     expert from University of Miami who thinks if
     anybody wants to lose weight, they can, it's really
     easy; and anybody who says they tried to lose
     weight and failed is lying, is not telling the
     truth.  Well, that's not so.
          He was a good man.  And whether he lost weight
     or not, whether he took his medicine, whether he
     ate a hamburger, whether he drank a martini's got
     nothing to do with the fact that he was addicted to
     nicotine.  And nobody could tell Mrs. Hess that her
     husband was not addicted to nicotine.  So what are
     their choices?  What did they do to -- what did
     Philip Morris do?  Because choice is a two-way
     street.  It's not a one-way street.  Why did he do what he was doing?  They don't want to take any
     blame.
          This is when the research first started coming
     out -- and all of this is in evidence, these
     documents are in evidence you'll see them again.
     But this is when the medical research started
     coming out and they decided to have a meeting, R.J.
     Reynolds, Philip Morris, and, hey, what are we
     going to do here, we got this horrible stuff coming
     out about our product, people are going to start to
     stop smoking, we got to do something.
          Well, so they met at the plaza, they created
     that TIRC, that research group, looked like an
     independent body at first.  They created Hill &
     Knowlton, I mean, this is really -- I mean think --
     you want to think about something today, think
     about today if corporations would do that; have a
     meeting, get a scientific body together, start
     issuing statements to shareholders that they knew
     was false, it wouldn't be tolerated, and it
     shouldn't be tolerated -- their conduct -- because
     it was 50 years ago when Mr. Hess was a kid.
          They issued the frank statement saying that
     there's no agreement, there's no proof that smoking
     is one of the causes.  They knew there was proof. There was proof from reputable doctors and they
     made a decision they were going to create doubt.
     Doubt was their product.  As long as they can
     create doubt in the mind of addicted smokers,
     people would continue using their product, that's
     what they wanted.  And we all knew why they wanted
     it.  And they knew what the results were, too.
     That's the sad thing.  They knew it was happening.
     And now, you know, we have ads on T.V. for reasons.
     But back then, they knew what they were doing.
          And we have -- and I've only highlighted some
     of the papers that are in evidence.  They're all in
     evidence, you could look through them again, but I
     know you all paid attention and knew pretty much
     what the deal was.  The next one, please.
          This is the Hill & Knowlton report.  This is
     from 1955:  "The cigarette health issue is still
     considered top news.  While there is growing
     tendency to emphasize the uncertainties and
     disputes in the issue, the end result is to keep
     the controversy constantly alive."
          They wanted to be a controversy.  They could
     not allow the real side, the true side to be told,
     because once people knew what they know now, people
     are not going to smoke, people aren't going to start smoking.  People -- they're going to have
     less addicts and less people using their products.
     Now I hear 18 percent of people smoke.  Back then,
     we know it was -- I think it was 57 percent of men
     smoked.
          The next document, the Brady memo from 1962:
     "To date the TIRC program has carried its share of
     the public relations load in providing materials to
     stamp out brush fires as they arose.  So whenever
     there was bad news, they would have TIRC issue an
     opposition, a different study that said something
     else, and then Hill & Knowlton would go and they'd
     do their thing and, you know, they kind of stamp
     things out.
          Surgeon General reports comes out in 1964.
     Mr. Reilly would have believe that they were so
     cooperative with the Surgeon General, they really
     helped, they really wanted people to know what was
     going on.  And we know when the Surgeon General
     report came out, they had a meeting, Philip Morris
     had a meeting, and the president said:
          "We must in the near future provide answers
     which will give smokers" -- like Stuart Hess -- "a
     psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue
     smoking and we got to point out the weaknesses in the Surgeon General report.  And the path for more
     research is needed."
          So they knew what they were doing, and now
     they're going -- hey, how dare Stuart Hess believe
     us?  Who does he think he is to come to court and
     say that he could have doubted this for 10 years?
     You know, that's what they wanted.  And they know
     from the polls, there were millions, literally, 10,
     25, 30 million smokers who were buying their junk.
     Doctors were smoking.
          This is after the Surgeon General report, this
     clip, you remember this.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  There is something toxic about tobacco
     which are removable by filter?
          VOICE:  Well, obviously, a filter takes out
     certain tar and nicotine.  I don't think the
     industry admits there are any bad elements.  If
     there are bad elements, through our laboratories,
     through the Surgeon General, through the A.M.A.,
     through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find
     them.  And if they are found, they will be removed.
     But at this point, we do not know.
          VOICE:  Do any of the research that the
     tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any part of the findings here or the conclusions as a
     whole?
          VOICE:  Well, without reading the report, I
     couldn't answer that to begin with.  I don't think
     the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the
     conclusions.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  And that's the same person who
     wrote the report.  And it's a plan.  These aren't
     dumb people.  They had a plan, they didn't think
     they'd get caught and all along they knew exactly
     what they were doing.
          The next one -- this is the memo where people
     started smoking filters.  They're telling people,
     hey, there's anything dangerous, we'll take it out,
     we're doing research.  What do you think a smoker
     who's smoking who's addicted who can't stop or who
     is addicted, if he's hearing, hey, the tobacco
     companies are doing research, the TIRC is doing
     research, if they find anything, they're going to
     take it out, the filters are helping, that's good
     news for an addict, that's not bad news.
          They're putting in their internal memos "it's
     the illusion of filtration that's important."  "The
     illusion."  Well, it's important for them for their business so people will keep smoking.  That's what
     they wanted, but that wasn't made public.
          The next memo we know about all the doubt they
     created, this is Hill & Knowlton.
          The next page.  Please, the next page.  Or the
     third page, I think; right, the third page, yeah.
          Where it says:  "The most important type of
     story is one which casts doubt on the cause and
     effect theory of disease and smoking."  The cause
     and effect theory, that's what we're talking about
     here.  What was the cause?  Did the addiction
     cause -- did the addiction cause his lung cancer?
     We know smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer.
          So they want to come in here and they want to
     cast doubt on the cause and effect theory of what
     caused Mr. Hess to die.  This doubt was not just
     made up.  This has been going on for decades.  This
     is their motto, "doubt is our product."
          And when you're talking about important
     issues, people are watching, people are interested,
     it's not right to come to court and tell
     intelligent people to doubt the obvious.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PAIGE:  The next one, please.  This is another one.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  We do talk to the question of whether
     or not cigarettes are hazardous.  We do not believe
     that cigarettes are hazardous.  We don't accept
     that, because when, as and if any ingredient in
     cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to
     human health, we are confident that we can
     eliminate that ingredient.
          VOICE:  Do you believe that cigarettes are
     safe?  Have they been proved to be safe,
     Mr. Cullman?
          VOICE:  I believe they have not been proved to
     be unsafe.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  The next memo, please.  And to
     this doubt thing, you know, they want to create
     doubt.  I mean, this is going on for decades, you
     know, from '64, there's '71, 1972, and they're not
     doing this because it's not working.  They know
     it's working.
          And Mr. Hess, he's seeing all this, and we
     know around 1974 he starts trying to quit.  There's
     nothing wrong with what he did.  But if you think
     there was -- and again, I'm not going to stand up here, Alex Alvarez, or Adam Trop, my partner -- is
     not going to stand up here and tell you that
     Mr. Hess does not share some responsibility.
          And there's going to be an opportunity to
     compare responsibility.  And we welcome that debate
     of comparing the responsibility of an addict who
     tried to quit with the responsibility of a
     corporation who lied and knew what they were doing.
     But that's not for today.
          The last clip, please.  This is 1986.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  We asked Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds,
     Brown & Williamson, Lorillard to appear on this
     program.  None would.  They told us to talk to the
     Tobacco Institute.  The Institute say Anne Browder
     would speak for them.
          VOICE:  The case is still open; the jury has
     not come in.
          VOICE:  It may not be harmful; you're not
     convinced?
          VOICE:  It may be or it may not be, we don't
     know.
          VOICE:  These pictures are from Superman 2.
     Marlboro, made by Philip Morris, is shown at least
     13 times.  I asked the Tobacco Institute while Marlboros were shown so often in Superman 2.
          VOICE:  Do you think cigarette manufacturers
     had something to do with that?
          VOICE:  Yeah, I think that --
          VOICE:  Cigarette manufacturers don't make
     movies.
          VOICE:  But what do you think, that the movie
     maker just showing Marlboro on his own?
          VOICE:  Perhaps the movie maker was a Marlboro
     smoker.
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. PAIGE:  You know, their expert, Professor
     Schaller, asked him -- you may recall, you may
     not -- you know, it's funny, I remember when I do a
     witness there's like one or two things I remember
     that I think were good questions and answers, the
     rest of it probably nobody remembers.
          But one thing I asked him, I said why, why
     would the cigarette companies for 50 years tell
     people like Stuart Hess if their product didn't
     kill, why would they tell people for 50 years that
     nicotine was not addictive?
          And he said there was two possibilities.  He
     said one, maybe they didn't believe it.  Maybe they
     didn't believe it was deadly.  Maybe they didn't believe it was addicting.  But the other option he
     says, he said, well, the other thing is they lied,
     they lied.  He said, those are the two choices:
     Either Philip Morris didn't know or they lied.
          And now the cat's out of the big, the gig is
     up, we all know the truth and they want to
     manipulate one more time.  They've manipulated the
     media, they've manipulated the science, and they're
     going to manipulate to try to cast doubt one more
     time and it's not credible --
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. PAIGE:  The evidence is clear in this case
     that Stuart Hess is a class member, that's all
     we're saying right now, is a class member; somebody
     whose death was caused from his addiction of
     smoking cigarettes.  It's clear.  We've had to
     fight for it for two weeks, and we think we've
     proved our case.
          It's not beyond any doubt.  It's by the
     greater weight of the evidence, which means more
     likely than not; you just have to believe that more
     than not, 51 percent of the evidence.  It's clear
     he was an addicted smoker.  And that's it.
          They examined his whole life, and I think it's clear.  And I want to say in closing, and I --
     hopefully I saved -- how much time is left?
          THE CLERK:  You're actually out of time,
     Mr. Paige.
          MR. PAIGE:  How much time is left for
     rebuttal?
          THE CLERK:  You have eight minutes left.
          MR. PAIGE:  So I'm going to sit down and I
     want to just say that I do thank you all and we do
     appreciate that you're here.  I know you're going
     to go back to your jobs, you're going to go back to
     your lives and, you know, maybe for a couple weeks,
     say, hey, I was in this crazy trial, I've learned a
     lot and it was interesting.  And that's fine.
          But as the years go by, you'll go on with your
     life.  Mrs. Hess will not.  She'll always remember
     20 years from now, 25 years from now, hopefully,
     she'll look back and say thank God the jury in
     2009, my jury, did not exclude my husband.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained of that argument.
          MR. PAIGE:  Please don't exclude him from the
     class, the evidence is overwhelming, and I thank
     you very much.


          THE COURT:  Plaintiff.  Yes, sir.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  How much time?
          THE CLERK:  Seven minutes.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Seven minutes?  All right.  I
     don't think I will go seven minutes.
          This is my last opportunity today to talk to
     you.  One of the issues is the legal cause, you
     know, he put it up on the board, I put it up on the
     screen and it's actually pretty simple.  It really is a simple concept.
          Of course he was addicted because if he
     wouldn't have been addicted, he wouldn't have
     smoked for 40 years, got lung cancer and died.
          Addiction doesn't cause cancer.
          Addiction causes you to continue to smoke.
          Smoking causes the cancer, and that's why you
     die.  Very simple.
          But, you know, don't get caught up in these
     slick word games 'cause that's what they are, slick
     word games, that the tobacco company has been doing
     for years.
          And let's play that clip.  And you're going to
     hear these same arguments and these same little
     slick, you know, arguments that they've made today,
     they made 40 years ago.
          (Video clip played.)
          VOICE:  Mr. Cullman, the conclusions are
     pretty stark and pretty solid.  They say quite
     flatly the judgment that cigarette smoking
     contributes substantially to mortality from certain
     specific diseases and to the overall death rate,
     then they have the rate ten times as high for
     smokers in the case of lung cancer and rather
     higher in other cases. VOICE:  Well, that's awful hard to define the
     word "substantial."
          (Video clip concluded.)
          MR. ALVAREZ:  It's hard to define the word
     "substantial."  That's the same little slick games
     that they're playing right now.
          MR. REILLY:  Objection, Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.  It's too
     argumentative.  Don't do that again.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  Okay.  There's a pattern here,
     and the pattern is to create doubt.  And I don't
     want -- we don't want doubt.
          We want the instructions clear so that you
     understand what you're supposed to do and how
     you're supposed to get there.  No ambiguities.
          This case isn't about Dr. Glassman's father
     and whether he was addicted to cigarettes or not.
     He died before I was even born.  It's not what this
     case is about.  It's not about all those things
     that Mr. Reilly talked about, could he have made
     choices, could he have done this.  Those are going
     to happen, it's going to happen in a different
     phase of the trial.
          Your job is to decide whether he was addicted.
     We've already established that he died of lung cancer, lung cancer for smoking for 40 years.  The
     question was:  Was he addicted?
          Mr. Reilly said that we tried to convince you
     that somehow Stuart Hess didn't get the message, he
     didn't get the message; that we were trying to
     convince you of that.  In fact, it's opposite.
          The fact is he did get the message.  He got
     their message.  He got the message.  The message of
     lies.  That's the message he believed.  And for
     them, after 50 years coming here and saying that
     they shouldn't have believed them is outrageous.
          Mr. Reilly said that the 7th criteria in the
     DSM that I must have forgot, I must have foregone
     somehow, that it said that the substance use is
     continued despite knowledge of having a persistent
     or recurrent physical or psychological problem that
     it's likely to have been caused, right.
          He says, oh, I must have forgot that, but I
     can read, you know, I can read, because the next
     word is "or" exacerbated by the substance.
          Well, why do you think that they told him he
     couldn't smoke?  For fear of exacerbating the IHSS,
     and that's exactly what their doctor said.
          I got their message.  This is the message.
     The message is he's not addicted.  He's not addicted.  He's just anxious.
          But the question isn't was his anxiousness the
     legal cause of his death?  'Cause if that were the
     case, you know, I've never seen a death certificate
     that said someone died of anxiousness.  People
     don't die of anxiousness.  That's not what this
     case is about.
          It's about a man who smoked for 40 years, got
     lung cancer and died.  And your job today to follow
     the law is to decide whether he was addicted.
     That's it.  And we've presented you with
     overwhelming amount of evidence, both physical, eye
     witness and scientific evidence that all matches
     together.
          THE CLERK:  Two minutes, counselor.
          MR. ALVAREZ:  There's a comedian named Jeff
     Foxworthy.  He's a funny guy.  He does this little
     spiel that, you know, "you must be a red neck if,"
     and, you know, you kind of fill in the blank and
     then he says you're a red neck.  They're really
     funny.  But as I was sitting here thinking about
     it, you know, we could use some of that here.
          And the reason I say that is if you smoke for
     40 years, you're addicted.
          If you smoke two to three packs for 40 years, you're addicted.
          If you can't stay in the hospital without
     going outside and smoking a cigarette, you're
     addicted.
          If you can't buy a shirt that doesn't have
     pockets for your cigarettes, you're addicted.
          If you're told that you have a heart condition
     and you got to stop smoking and you can't, you're
     addicted.
          And if you can't wait a few minutes in the
     lobby of your doctor's office before you have to go
     outside and smoke, you're addicted.
          And if you can't even get out of bed in the
     morning without reaching for some cigarettes,
     you're addicted.
          Thank you, Judge.
