MR. BOYCE: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. This really is the last time I get to talk to you. I know you've heard me say that before but this is really the last time I get to address you in this case so I want to tell you how much we appreciate your attentiveness.
Every time I stood up here, whether it was for an argument or a witness, I see six heads paying
attention, engaged, and it's something you should all be proud of. And I'll tell you right now I hope all of you have enjoyed your service as jurors half as much as I've enjoyed the opportunity to present Reynolds' position to you. That's all an attorney can ask for is that a jury pays attention, is fair and impartial and decides the case based on the evidence that applies.
And that's where I want to start my talk today.
The Judge told you yesterday and will repeat this shortly, but in this phase you may not impose punitive damages to punish Reynolds for harms cause to others whose cases are not before you. And that's why we have such a spirited warning.
You cannot punish Reynolds because teenage girls may smoke Camel Crush. It's not part of this case. That is part of the first phase.
In this phase you have to only look at the evidence that relates to Mr. Hiott. And that's why your punitive award, if any, goes exclusively to Mrs. Hiott.
And with respect to sending a message, I will tell you right now that Reynolds has already heard your message. Your verdict in this phase will not change what happened in Phase I. You've already
awarded $1,825,000 against Reynolds and that messa has been received. I take it seriously. Reynolds takes it seriously. Dr. Figlar takes it seriously.
That's why he was here today. The message has already been received.
You have spoken as to what happened to Mr. Hiott, who's responsible for it, and who should pay damages for it, and that's why I brought up the fact that you've already compensated Mrs. Hiott.
But here if you award any money in punitive damages it goes exclusively to Mrs. Hiott; not to Terrence. It just goes to Mrs. Hiott, who I don't see in the courtroom right now, but it's just her.
And that's what you have to keep in mind as you deliberate in this phase. You can only look at evidence that's connected to Mr. Hiott and you have to remember that your award goes exclusively to Mrs. Hiott.
Now, the second point I want to remind you about, we talked about in openings, and that is that your comparative fault allocation doesn't apply to punitive damages. Every penny that you award, if you award anything, will go to Mrs. Hiott.
But here's the tough part for me. You found that Mr. Hiott was 60 percent responsible and
Reynolds was 40 percent responsible. And here we're just talking about punishing Reynolds. You can't punish Mr. Hiott for the harm that he caused to himself. That 60 percent is off the table. And so we're looking at somebody who caused less than half the harm in this phase and I would encourage you to keep that in mind as you deliberate.
But that's why you have to look at Mr. Hiott, that's why the evidence has to be focused exclusively on him.
One of the instructions that you got during the first phase applies again in this phase and that's why you have to work together to come to a verdict. None of you should compromise your own individual views. You do not have to compromise your views of the evidence, your views of the appropriateness of punitive damages simply to reach a verdict.
If you guys cannot reach an agreement on punitive damages that's not going to change Phase I. You all have to make your own decisions on this.
You all have to look for evidence specific to Mr. Hiott but none of you should compromise your o views about what's appropriate for the sake of a verdict.
Now, when I talk about evidence specific to
Mr. Hiott you have to remember the time period that we're talking about. This is a man who started in 1966 or '67 and stopped smoking in 1994. Any evidence you consider for purposes of punitive damages has to come from that window. And one o: the problems that I face is -MR. VINIK: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I'll sustain the objection.
MR. BOYCE: Your Honor will instruct you aga on the law. But let me just tell you what it says so that you'll though what I'm talking about.
It says, Nor may you consider evidence of conduct that has no connection to the conduct that injured Kenneth Hiott. That's the instruction for this phase. And here's what I think this means. Again, you listen to the Judge on this.
The only reason we're in this phase is because you answered yes to question number four. And tha is the question on concealing a material fact. But we all know that words alone can't hurt someone. The only way question four hurt Mr. Hiott is if he went to get a pack of cigarettes because of it.
I don't know what the statement was or I don't know what was behind your decision there. The onl way that hurts Mr. Hiott in the real world is if he
acts on it and goes to get a pack of cigarettes.
And the Judge is going to tell you you have to consider mitigating factors. And I would suggest t you that one of the biggest mitigating factors in this phase is that regardless of what was behind your decision for question number four, that Mr. Hiott acted on it, went to get a pack of cigarettes, there was a warning labeling on that pack. Every single pack, every single cigarette, every cigarette he ever took out of a pack ever had a warning label on it.
And, so I don't know what was behind your decision but I do know that if Mr. Hiott acted on it and went to get a cigarette as a result, he got a warning. He got a warning in the '60s, in the '70s, in the '80s and the '90s, every time. 20 cigarettes in a pack, hundreds of thousands of warnings throughout his life. And I would encourage you to remember that as you deliberate on whether punitr damages are appropriate in this case or not.
The simple fact is cigarettes are a legal product in this country. They are a dangerous product but they are legal to make, legal to sell and legal to advertise. You cannot punish Reynold because they make cigarettes. That is not a
decision for you. That is not a decision for this courtroom. That's a decision our society has made, that cigarettes are legally sold and that adults can make up their open mind about whether to smoke or not.
So I would encourage you, again, to focus on what the wrongful conduct was related to Mr. Hiott. And here I would submit to you that Reynolds does not need to be punished for that conduct. The message from your compensatory award has come through and Reynolds is a changed company and we sa this from Dr. Figlar today.
All of the people that we spent so much time in this case talking about are long gone. They've been gone for decades. Reynolds now has an entirely new management system, entirely new level of transparency. You heard about the web site.
Reynolds admits that smoking causes lung cancer. Smoking is addictive, nicotine is addictive and then if you have any questions or any doubt, quit.
That's what Reynolds tells people today. And then they offer them products to help them stop if they want to.
They have the E cigarette. They have Premiere and Eclipse. Those are legitimate efforts to reduce
the health risks associated with smoking. If somebody doesn't like Eclipse, they can going to th E cigarette.
You heard Dr. Giakas explain some of the results he seen when people using E cigarettes as a cessation method, and Reynolds will be selling nicotine gum in the fall. And that's a way that people can stop smoking if they want to. Reynolds gives smokers advice on how to quit, gives them links and information if they want to stop. But they're transparent. They're changed, and their different.
I don't think Dr. Figlar tried to defend everything that Reynolds said over the years and I' not going to either. There's no doubt that some of those statements that he saw in this trial were misguided and wrong. There's no doubt about it. But there's nothing left to deter. Reynolds has already changed.
The FDA regulates just about every aspect of cigarettes. They regulate the manufacture, they regulate the ingredient. They haven't ever said take nicotine out or take this additive out.
And with respect to the addictiveness, I don't understand this debate to be perfectly honest with
you. From the moment the trial started we heard that what causes addiction is nicotine. There is no dispute that Reynolds has taken nicotine out of its products for decades. There's more nicotine in a tobacco plant than there is in a cigarette. They take it out in the manufacturing process. Their design innovations have reduced nicotine by 70 percent over the years.
And you heard from Dr. Figlar that nicotine can't be the only reason people smoke because Eclipse failed. It has nicotine in it. It failed in the market place. Reynolds has sold the Now product which is .001 milligrams of nicotine. Nicotine is what causes addiction. Reynolds has taken it out. They have reduced it time and time again across a wide spectrum of brands. That is a legitimate effort to reduce the addictive potential of cigarettes.
Just a moment on net worth. I don't understand why the Plaintiffs spend so much time on net worth I think it's an effort to distract you, make you think that Reynolds has money that they won't miss and this is a reason to give Mrs. Hiott more money here.
Again, this is money for Mrs. Hiott. She's
already been compensated. They're asking for additional money. I don't know how much. But they're asking for even more money for Mrs. Hiott. Reynolds is an American company. This isn't just an abstract concept. These are men and women with jobs.
MR. VINIK: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I'll overrule the objection.
MR. BOYCE: You heard that there are 4,000 employees in Winston-Salem, men and women who woi for this company every day trying to do the right thing, trying to reduce the risks of cigarettes and trying to do so in a way that is compliant with all of the federal regulation here. That's what Reynolds does today.
The product is legal. What these people do for a living is legal. Your views of the industry can't be part of your basis in this case. But these aren't just numbers that show up on a sheet from Dr. Raffa. They're jobs. They're farmers. They're factory workers. It's a legal company.
MR. VINIK: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay, I'll sustain the objection at this point, Mr. Boyce.
MR. BOYCE: The last topic I want to talk about
is what Reynolds has done in response to some of it criticism. We've heard all about youth marketing and I would suggest to you that this is just an effort to make you mad.
Where is the evidence that Mr. Hiott started smoking under age because of advertising? We did see any of that evidence. They talk about this in the abstract. It's always a statistic. What happens to a general population doesn't apply to Mr. Hiott. He started smoking because of his father and his friends. That's an entirely different situation.
What you think other smokers might have done o what you think other smokers would have reacted to in terms of advertising can't be part of this case.
It's got to be limited to Mr. Hiott.
The last point I want to make is this: Not only has your message in Phase I been heard loud ar clear by Reynolds, not only has it gotten through to the people that make decisions about that company, but you need to understand that this is your verdict going forward.
Plaintiffs are exactly right. This is your verdict. This is your opportunity. I would encourage you to remember the whole trial going all
the way back to the jury selection where we heard person after person say that they think smoking is a choice, that it's something that adults should do, make up their own mind for it, but it's a legal product that the risks are known. If adults want to smoke, that's okay in this country.
I would encourage you to remember what we talked about at the end of my closing in Phase I. While Mr. Hiott was alive Mrs. Hiott said she was fine with his choice to smoke. If she was fine with his choice to smoke, you should be fine with his choice to smoke.
You've already compensated for her loss.
You've already compensated Terrence for his loss. would suggest to you that we do not need to award any more money in this case and it will not accomplish the goals of punishing the people behin the wrongdoing we saw in the past and there is nothing left to deter.
Reynolds is a different company subject to an extraordinarily amount of federal regulation. All of the misconduct that you saw before simply cann happen again. The two goals of punitive damages, punishment and deterrence do not fit in this case and in this phase. And I would encourage vou to
remember all of that as you go forward and deliberate.
Thank you again for your time. I'm going to suggest, and the Judge will tell you this, you do not have to award a monetary amount. Your finding of entitlement is a message that Reynolds has received. They understand the verdict. They respect it, as I do, but you do not have to award an amount.
You can go back and put 0 on that line. You can go back and disagree and come back in and none of that will change what happened in Phase I.
You've already spoken. You've already delivered a very powerful message and that message has been received.
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. I hope you've enjoyed your time as jurors and on behalf of my whole time, Ms. Caseldine, Mr. Gentle, Mr. Hutchins and the men and whom who are the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of today, thank you.
