MR. VINIK: Thank you, Your Honor.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, again, we want to thank you for being here and for being as attentive as each one of you have, you've been a verv attentive iurv.
Each one of you now knows more about cigarette and the tobacco industry than any other six people outside of the tobacco industry. You basically now have a graduate degree in cigarettes. And most people don't have the power to make changes going into higher industry, but you do. You have the opportunity to change the way Reynolds does business. And you have a power and maybe you hav the power to make a difference.
I heard what Mr. Boyce told you on the opening about focusing you on the fact that you've already compensated Carolyn Hiott for her -- for her damage and that's what he's going to want you to focus on in this punitive damages phase but that's not the purpose of a punitive damages phase.
You've already checked yes to the box. You think that punishment is appropriate and whether or not Carolyn Hiott has already been compensated has nothing to do with what you're supposed to be doing here today, and it's just another effort to distract you from what you're supposed to be doing, and that's punishing Reynolds for the conduct that they -- for the wrongdoing that they perpetrated.
So the focus now should be on what is the right level of punishment. And the Judge has already
instructed you on the law and he's going to instruct you again before you deliberate. But he will tell you that you can consider the nature, extent and degree of Reynolds' misconduct, and you have alreac seen a lot of that in this trial already, the financial resources of the company, in other words, you're not allowed to put Reynolds out of business, and any mitigating circumstances, and those are the things that Reynolds talked about with Dr. Figlar on the stand today, and their arguments that they're a changed company.
But as the Judge instructed you and will instruct you again, in deciding the amount of punitive damages you need to consider what it will take to deter Reynolds and other companies that are similarly situated, that means the other big tobacco companies, deter them from wrongdoing in the futur That's one of the things that you need to consider.
And a jury in Jacksonville today can send a message to the entire tobacco industry that what they did was wrong and you guys can make a difference. Your verdict can tell Reynolds that they need to change. And if you send the right message, they will listen.
Now, Defendants say that they've changed, that
they've reformed, that they won't do such things in the future, but they haven't reformed and they haven't changed at all.
You saw in the first phase of this trial that Kenney Hiott was a kid when he started smoking. H was -- there was some controversy, he was 14, 15,
16, probably 15, and you saw documents about how Reynolds marketed to kids in the past and Reynolds has not changed. They market to children as aggressively as ever.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Relevanc
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. VINIK: Marketing to children is a necessity to them and they're good at it. They consider children as the new smokers who replace th smokers who leave the market.
And one of the reasons why it's so important for you to send a message to Reynolds is because of their youth marketing and we need to deter such conduct to break the cycle of youth smoking, youth addiction and then early death.
Think of the statistics. We saw it in the 2012 Surgeon General Report which Dr. Figlar looked at today. In this country 3 million high school kids smoke and 600,000 middle school kids smoke; middl
school kids.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Relevance, Your Hono
THE COURT: Overrule the objection.
MR. VINIK: And they refuse to acknowledge it. But that is where the new smokers are and that is the kind of conduct that you need to deter with this verdict.
Kenney Hiott started smoking as a kid. And you saw those -- the Camel Number Nine and the Camel Crush packs, and you're going to have them back in the jury room and I urge you to take a look at them and read the packaging and see what they say. So this is still happening today.
Who do you think a transforming cigarette appeals to? And they say that everyone else in the world should rely on what the Surgeon General says, but not you. Does that make sense?
And let's talk about addiction for a few minutes. They refuse to come to terms with addiction. Kenney Hiott was certainly addicted and they still have done nothing to address that issue. They won't even acknowledge that addiction is one ( the harms of smoking.
You heard Dr. Figlar up on the stand today.
They don't discuss addiction at the leadership level
of the company. They want to ignore it. Addiction doesn't cause smoking so it's not a problem.
And they'll spend a billion dollars on harm reduction, which they can't do and only can do, they can't take the cancer out of the cigarettes, but they will not spend a single penny to try and get the addiction out of their cigarettes. Imagine if they spent a billion dollars on an addiction cure.
And you know why they don't want to take the addiction out of the cigarettes? Common sense will tell you why. If cigarettes are not addictive nobody will smoke them, that's why.
But they like to take the cancer out of the cigarettes because if they did that they'd make a fortune. No more lawsuits, no more people dying, maybe no more Surgeon General. But what they shou do is address addiction.
You also heard Dr. Figlar up on the stand say he believes that Reynolds has always been honest and upfront with their customers, and Reynolds never lied, they never did anything wrong. And there's an old adage that those who will not learn it from the past will repeat it. And that's maybe trite and it may be old but it's true.
If they say they never did anything wrong, what
is there to change from? What do they change? Wha is a changed company? How could they have change if they don't think they ever did anything wrong? There's nothing to change from.
Now, you've heard a lot about harm reduction from Reynolds. Dr. Figlar testified about it. But one of the things that you'll never hear from him or anyone from the cigarette companies is that they've made a safe cigarette. For all their harm reduction efforts, cancer rates have gone up. We've seen that effort.
One of the other points that Reynolds made and will make again is that they've been punished enough. They have this Master Settlement Agreemen They settled in 1998, 1999, and they paid a lot of money to the states. But you know what? That mone is going to the states to reimburse them for health care costs caused by cigarette disease. And it's not enough. There's no evidence in this case that they pay enough to even cover the costs of those -of that disease.
440,000 people die each year from cigarettes. Reynolds has a little more than a quarter of the market so a hundred thousand people are dying each year from cigarette-related disease.
MR. BOYCE: Objection. Relevance.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. VINIK: The money that Reynolds pays in thi Master Settlement Agreement does not cover that cost. So Reynolds has not been punished enough, not nearly, and certainly it's not been punished enough to change its behavior, and that's the key. Needs to be punished so it changes its behavior.
So you have to think about what will it take to get Reynolds back on the right track or maybe on the right track for the first time ever. You don't have any corrective power other than to penalize Reynolds by making them pay money. You can't make a decisic and say to Reynolds you have to change. The only power you have is a monetary one; that's it.
And you won't find an instruction from the Court telling you exactly how to figure out how much money to award or how much money to penalize Reynolds. But it shouldn't just be a slap on the wrist because that will not send a message where you want the message to go; to the top of Reynolds.
It has to deter. It has to send a message of wrongfulness. It has to send a message of wrongfulness to Reynolds and the other tobacco companies who are similarly doing the same thing.
Now, we have shown you that Reynolds makes almost $2 billion a year in net operating income. That is after they pay any excise taxes, that is after they pay the Master Settlement Agreement. Reynolds has a net worth of $5 billion. And billings of dollars are a number that most people can't wrap their head around. Nobody can. It's just too big.
So in terms of bringing it closer to something that we can all understand and we can all grasp, an Dr. Raffa testified to this, Reynolds on average makes $3 million every day, $3 million every day pure profits, after taxes, after taxes, after the Master Settlement Agreement, after excise taxes, after everything, $3 million a day in pure profits.
And Reynolds, the parent company, pays over a billion dollars in dividends. Remember that 85 percent or 80 percent of that money comes from Reynolds American, the cigarette company. That': from cigarette sales. Over a billion dollars a year in dividends. They certainly don't use that for an addiction cure. And they don't use that money to researc;h how to make non-addictive cigarettes. They just voluntarily give that out to its shareholders. Nobody makes them do that. That's
just excess cash.
So given everything that I've said, what will it take to make them change? You need to decide what that number is, what that number -- the number that will resonate the top leadership of Reynolds. You need to decide what the number is that will mak them take notice. A company that makes $2 billion ; year and $3 million a day of pure net profit.
And I'm going to leave you with that and I'm not going to give you a number but you need to decide what that number should be and it should be ; number that the CEO of Reynolds takes notice of.
Thank you very much for your attention and I really appreciate it.



MR. VINIK: Thank you, Your Honor. Very quid
I'll be very brief. One of the things I think you should do when you go back to the jury room is read the instructions very carefully. Only a page,
page and-a-half, very short. And you'll see when you read them one of the things that you're allowed to look at is the nature, extent and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances as well as deterring R.J. Reynolds and other similarly situated from engaging in such misconduct in the future.
So I would suggest you read those instructions carefully because deterrence definitely is one of the focuses of what it is that the jury is asked to do in this stage, and focus is not in this stage on Carolyn Hiott or on Terrence Hiott.
I heard Mr. Boyce argue for a good bit. Most of his argument seemed to me was an attack on Carolyn Hiott and on Terrence Hiott and on the fact that they have already been compensated, but that's not the purpose of this. The purpose is to send a message to Reynolds.
And the other thing I heard in his argument is that he disagreed with your verdict. And I don't think that's something that you should consider. Your verdict was correct in the first instance. And you checked the box that you think punitive damag is -- should be awarded and is right and you made the right decision.
The other thing that Mr. Boyce said that struck
me is that Reynolds' old statements may have been misguided and wrong, but that is not what we heard from Reynolds. The Reynolds witness said,
Dr. Figlar said Reynolds never did anything wrong.
MR. BOYCE: Objection, Your Honor. Misstat the testimony.
THE COURT: I'll overrule the objection. I told the jury before that what both of you say in closing arguments is not to be considered evidence in the case.
MR. BOYCE: Thank you, Your Honor.
THE COURT: So they can determine that for themselves. Go ahead, Mr. Vinik.
MR. VINIK: That's right. Nothing I say is evidence. You just have to use your memory and remember what Dr. Figlar said. And I think if you use your memory, think about what Dr. Figlar said, it was different from what Mr. Boyce said here in closing.
So you think about that and you think about how -- again, if you don't think you ever did anything wrong, you can't possibly change your behavior because there's nothing to change from.
Thank you.
