MR. PERSONS:  May it please the Court,
Counsel, Miss Hubbird, ladies and gentlemen.
Good afternoon.
THE PANEL:  Good afternoon.   4351
MR. PERSONS:  I want to begin by thanking
you, because you've given up almost three weeks
of your lives, put all your other business
aside to help citizens of equal standing in the
community decide a dispute.  So that's first
and foremost.  I think I speak on behalf of
both tables, the other one in the courtroom.
The system couldn't function without you, and
for that, we are deeply grateful.
This case of Donald (sic) Ellsworth,
you've heard a lot about cigarette design.
You've heard a lot about inhalability of
cigarettes.  You've heard a lot about company
conduct.  And I want to say right upfront, I
make no apologies for or try to defend what was
said in those documents.  It was despicable.  
But the question is what, if anything,
does that have to do with Donald Ellsworth.  In
the next several minutes, I hope to illustrate
to you why that has no bearing whatsoever on
Donald Ellsworth's decision to start smoking.
THE COURT:  Is that David? 
MR. PERSONS:  David.  Thank you for the
correction.
David Ellsworth's decision to start 4352
smoking, his decision to continue smoking and
his decision not to quit.
So let me begin with cigarette design.  It
will be the first slide.  We know that nicotine
occurs naturally in tobacco in the field.  When
it grows out of the soil, it has nicotine in
it.
The best illustration of this is roll your
own cigarettes.  The roll your own cigarettes,
according to Dr. Proctor, plaintiff's expert,
says they're at least as dangerous and as
addictive as a manufactured cigarette, like
R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes.
Additive-free cigarettes are no less
dangerous or addictive than manufactured
cigarettes.
The bottom line is no conventional
cigarette is safer than a Lucky Strike or
Viceroy or a Winston.  They're all inherently
dangerous.  
And they're inherently dangerous because,
whenever you burn organic material, you will
release compounds, and many of those compounds
are carcinogenic, they're cancer causing.  It's
a dangerous product.  It's an addictive 4353
product.  It's inherent in the nature of the
product itself.
Inhalability.  Plaintiff would have you
believe that inhalability came about when
American tobacco companies started making
cigarettes, and we know that hand-rolled
cigarettes, back in Turkey, were addictive and
they were inhalable back in the 1830s before
there was flue curing of tobacco and before
there was the invention of the Bonsack machine.
Writers back in the 1870s observed that
cigarette smokers almost always inhaled.
Scientists and health professionals
thought cigarettes were uniquely dangerous
because they were inhalable.
R.J. Reynolds did not make cigarettes
inhalable.  They were inhalable long before
R.J. Reynolds even came into existence and made
its first cigarette.
So that's a red herring.  Plaintiff's
counsel alluded to red herrings in his opening
statement, and this is a red herring.
Red herring, there really is no fish
that's called a red herring.  It's a herring,
but they sought the herring and they smoke it. 4354
And in that process, the herring becomes red.
They used the herring back in England in
the 13th century to train hounds, hunting dogs.
And they used it to train them to hunt the
fox because the scent was so strong, the scent
of the fox is a milder scent, and they used the
herring to train them how to make the
distinction.  So it's a red herring.  In other
words, it's a distraction.  And that's all this
about inhalability is.
Cigarettes today are no more addictive
than the cigarettes in 1800s.  That's
Dr. Proctor.  That's from his testimony.
R.J. Reynolds and the other American
tobacco companies didn't popularized smoking.
The hand-rolled Turkish cigarettes were popular
in the United States in the 1860s, the 1870s,
the 1880s and the 1990s before flue curing was
widely used, before the Bonsack machine was
invented and before R.J. Reynolds even existed.
Flue curing, the invention of matches and
the Bonsack machine made modern cigarettes
popular before Reynolds manufactured its first
cigarettes.
In terms of advertising, no witness who 4355
came in to testify in this case, either by
deposition or live, testified that
Mr. Ellsworth ever saw any skywriting or any
billboards or any magazines or any movies,
human trademarks, ads on public transportation,
vending machines, radio, or point of purchase
displays for cigarettes.  None.  There's no
evidence of such.
The evidence is that Mr. Ellsworth did not
make smoking decisions based on advertising.
There's no evidence that he made any decision
about smoking Winston based on an ad that
appeared anywhere or the same thing for
Viceroy.
In fact, the decision about Viceroy,
according to Ricky Mayou, was because the
mother smoked, his mother, Ms. Delois
Ellsworth, smoked Viceroy.  Mr. David Ellsworth
switched to Viceroy so they could just buy the
same kind of cigarettes, not because of an ad.
No evidence that Lucky Strike ads prompted
him or influenced him to make the decision to
smoke Lucky Strike.
The same thing is true for the Tareyton
ads, Pall Mall ads, Camel ads, Philip Morris 4356
ads or Marlboro ads, which there's testimony he
saw them, the Tareyton ad, rather fight than
switch, but he never switched to Tareyton or to
Pall Mall, Camel, Philip Morris or Marlboro.
The evidence is that he never bought a
particular brand of cigarettes because of
advertising.  He didn't make his decisions
about smoking based on advertising.
Now, Dr. Proctor.  Dr. Proctor gave
generic evidence.  He talked about what was
generally out there.  He gave nothing specific
to Mr. Ellsworth.  He didn't know when
Mr. Ellsworth started smoking cigarettes.  He
didn't know why Mr. Ellsworth started smoking.
He didn't know what Mr. Ellsworth knew about
the dangers of smoking, and he had no evidence
that Mr. Ellsworth saw a single document or
statement.  There is no evidence Mr. Ellsworth
saw a single document or statement that
Dr. Proctor talked about.
He was paid $2 million so far in tobacco
litigation, but he knew nothing about David
Ellsworth's particular circumstances or the
decisions that he made or why he made them.
So why did the plaintiff spend most of the 4357
case reproving the Engle findings?
Now, the Engle findings don't even come
into play unless and until it's determined that
David Ellsworth is a member of the Engle class,
and the plaintiff has to prove that by the
greater weight of the evidence.
So the case is about David Ellsworth.
Every question on the verdict form relates to
David Ellsworth, and the plaintiff failed to
prove her case about David Ellsworth, and I'll
walk through the evidence.
No witness who came and testified that
heavy plaster dust exposure did not cause David
Ellsworth's cancer.  Zero.  No evidence.
How many witnesses testified that
tuberculosis scarring did not cause David
Ellsworth's cancer?  None.
The number of witnesses who testified that
David Ellsworth lost control of his smoking
behavior?  Nobody said that.
Witnesses who testified that David
Ellsworth did not make his own smoking
decisions?  The evidence is to the contrary.
That he did make his own smoking decisions.
Witnesses who testified that addiction to 4358
nicotine in cigarettes caused David Ellsworth's
cancer?  No.  No one testified that it was the
addiction that caused his disease.  There was
evidence that addiction to nicotine can cause
disease, but not his disease.
Witnesses who testified that information
about the dangers of smoking was unavailable?
Nobody ever said that.
Witnesses who testified that Mr. Ellsworth
was confused about the dangers of smoking?
Nobody came in here and said that, that
Mr. Ellsworth somehow was confused about the
dangers of smoking.
The evidence is that David Ellsworth was a
hard-working man who made his own decisions, he
had his own mind and made his own decisions.
Carole Mayou was his daughter-in-law,
married to Ricky Mayou, before their divorce.
She knew him from the time she was 16 years old
in 1977 until the time he died in 1994.
Richard Ellsworth, his brother, who is
three years older, they were particularly close
because the oldest brother was much older than
them, and the youngest brother was much younger
than them, so they were the closest in age 4359
among the four brothers.
And so he told us the same thing, that he
was a hard-working man who had his own mind,
made his own decisions.  And Ricky Mayou said
that, he was his own man, made his own
decisions, hard working.
Plaintiff failed to prove David
Ellsworth's case because they failed to prove
that David Ellsworth had lung cancer caused by
smoking, and we're going to go through each of
these, the evidence that pertains to each one
of these.
Failed to prove David Ellsworth was
addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
Failed to prove that addiction was a legal
cause of David Ellsworth's lung cancer.
Failed to prove that David Ellsworth
relied on anything Reynolds said or did in
making his decision to smoke, to continue to
smoke and not to quit.
And they failed to prove they're entitled
to damages.
Now, the plaintiff has the burden of proof
in this case, as the Judge has instructed you,
and the burden of proof on these claims is by 4360
the greater weight of the evidence.
If the greater weight of the evidence does
not support the plaintiff's claim, your verdict
will be for Reynolds.  It's only if the greater
weight of the evidence does support some or all
of the plaintiff's claims, then your verdict
should be for the plaintiff on those claims.
So the plaintiff has to prove her claims
by the greater weight of the evidence.
Plaintiff has to prove that R.J. Reynolds, that
but for something R.J. Reynolds did,
Mr. Ellsworth would not have suffered injury
and would not have died.
The first question on the verdict form is
a question that relates to class membership.
Is David Ellsworth a member of the Engle
class, that is, was Mr. Ellsworth addicted to
smoking cigarettes containing nicotine and, if
so, was such addiction a legal cause of his
lung cancer?
That's the first question.  And there are
three parts to that question.  As I mentioned
at the outset of the case, there are three
hurdles that the plaintiff has to get over in
order to establish class membership. 4361
And the Engle findings don't answer those
questions.  There's medical causation.  There's
addiction.  And there's addiction causation.
The plaintiff has to prove, under medical
causation, that David Ellsworth had lung cancer
caused by smoking.  That's not the only thing
that has to be proven.
They have to prove that David Ellsworth
was addicted to nicotine and the plaintiff has
to prove that the addiction was a legal cause
of David Ellsworth's lung cancer, in other
words, but for the addiction, he wouldn't have
suffered lung cancer.
And the plaintiff has the burden of proof
on all three of these.
You have a jury instruction, I think it's
instruction number 11, that talks about the
fact that the Engle findings do not establish
class membership.  
It says, "The findings I have described to
you do not establish that Reynolds is liable to
anyone, including plaintiff in this case.  The
question of whether or not Reynolds is liable
for Mr. Ellsworth's injuries and death remains
an issue for you to decide based on the 4362
evidence presented by the parties in this
case."
So the Engle findings can't be used to
establish class membership.  Plaintiff has to
prove, by a greater weight of the evidence, all
of those elements necessary to establish class
membership.
So let's start with medical causation.
Plaintiff must prove David Ellsworth had lung
cancer caused by smoking.
What do we know about that?  We know he
was diagnosed with two types of lung cancer,
BAC and squamous.
We know that the BAC caused his death, and
BAC is not caused by smoking.
We know that he had multiple independent
risk factors for squamous cell lung cancer.
We know, in terms of the squamous cell,
that he had cigarette smoking, exposure to
plaster dust and tuberculosis scarring, all
risk factors, all independent risk factors for
the development of squamous cell carcinoma.
Dr. Robert Cerfolio, he said that
Mr. Ellsworth's exposure to plaster dust could
have caused Mr. Ellsworth's lung cancer. 4363
That's what it means to be an independent risk
factor, that that alone could have been the
cause.
He said that Mr. Ellsworth's history of
tuberculosis could have caused Mr. Ellsworth's
lung cancer.  That's the scarring associated
with the tuberculosis, that that could have
been an independent cause.
We know that there was -- Mr. Ellsworth
had heavy dust exposure because he told his
doctors that he had such.  In two separate
entries in this medical record, where
Mr. Ellsworth is presenting to the doctor, the
doctor writes, he has heavy dust exposures,
heavy dust exposure, and this is coming
directly from Mr. Ellsworth while he was alive.
We know that his family members confirmed
that he had this plaster dust exposure.  Ricky
Mayou testified that he created the dust as a
laborer, because you start as a laborer before
you become a finisher.
So, at some point in time, Mr. Ellsworth
himself was a laborer, mixing and creating the
dust before he became a finisher.
In either capacity, he was exposed to 4364
plaster dust.  His clothes had plaster on the
legs when he got home, and dust, and he would
hit the legs and the dust would fly everywhere.
That was an observation that eyewitnesses made.
No one ever observed him using a mask or
other protective equipment.  We have no reason
to quarrel with the medical record, that he was
exposed to heavy dust.
Miss Sherri Ellsworth observed white dust
on Mr. Ellsworth after work and Carole Mayou
said never observed Mr. Ellsworth with
protective equipment.
Plaster dust.  Dr. Cerfolio told us,
squamous cell lung cancer is absolutely
associated with dust, that dust is a risk
factor for squamous cell lung cancer.  And that
he could not rule out Mr. Ellsworth's dust
exposure as a cause of his squamous cell lung
cancer.  That's from Dr. Cerfolio.
Tuberculosis scarring.  Dr. Cerfolio also
told us that tuberculosis is an independent
risk factor for developing squamous cell lung
cancer, that tuberculosis infections from 20
years before are associated with squamous cell
lung cancer.  Because it's an inflammatory 4365
process, it creates the scarring, and the
scarring can become cancerous.  He told us
that.  That's plaintiff's expert.
He also said that Mr. Ellsworth had a
documented history of tuberculosis going back
to the 1960s, and he said there's a correlation
between Mr. Ellsworth's squamous cell lung
cancer and his tuberculosis, that he could not
rule out Mr. Ellsworth's history of
tuberculosis as a contributing cause of his
squamous cell lung cancer, could not rule it
out.
Now, plaintiff wants you to ignore these
risk factors and assume that cigarettes and
cigarettes alone caused Mr. Ellsworth's
squamous cell lung cancer.
Dr. Cerfolio said he could not distinguish
which of the three contributed more to the
cause of it.  He couldn't break it out.  But he
said each of them, independently, could cause
squamous cell lung cancer.
Cigarettes.  No medical record states that
smoking caused Mr. Ellsworth's squamous cell
lung cancer.
The death certificate doesn't say that 4366
smoking was a cause of his death, not either
the primary or secondary.  Nowhere in the death
certificate does it say that smoking
contributed to it.
You cannot assume that smoking caused
Mr. Ellsworth's lung cancer.  You have to
depend on proof.  You have to depend on
evidence, and there isn't evidence that it was
caused by that, and that alone.
We talk about the pathologists.  Now,
Dr. Cerfolio is a thoracic surgeon, admits that
he's not a pathologist, and he's admitted that
cancer is diagnosed by the pathologists.
Dr. Cerfolio relies on pathologists to
diagnose cancer in his regular practice.  He
says he agrees with the pathologist 98 percent
of the time, and in the other 2 percent, he's
right 50 percent of the time and the
pathologist is right the other 50 percent.
But he defers to pathologists when
reviewing specimens and slides in his regular
practice.  He admitted that.
He admits that he's not qualified to
dispute the pathology opinions in this case.
No formal pathology training, not 4367
Board-certified in pathology, no pathology
expertise.  Yet, he didn't even talk to a
pathologist about Mr. Ellsworth's case.
He was asked a question by one of you
about the pathology report in this case, and he
agreed with Mr. Ellsworth's pathologist's
description of what the pathologist saw.
He said, yeah, I agreed that that is what
he saw.  He's describing what he saw.  And what
he saw was a predominantly bronchioloalveolar
carcinoma, a BAC, and he admitted that the BAC
diagnosis was within the standard of care.
There was some question about who prepared
the discharge report that described this as
being a BAC, because there is no signature on
the line above Dr. Capulong's -- the line there
for Capulong.
But we know that Dr. Rene Capulong
dictated this, because we've got it right
there.  Those are her initials, and that's
whoever transcribed it.  That's Dr. Capulong.
So Dr. Capulong dictated this record.
And buried in this record, it will be in
evidence, you'll have it back there with you,
in the middle of a long paragraph in the 4368
middle, it says, "The second lesion discrete
from the first, is a non-oat cell carcinoma
which is predominantly bronchioloalveolar."
Now, Dr. Cerfolio defers to oncologists
like Dr. Okun for diagnosis.  He said the
medical oncologist is an absolutely critical
member of the team, defers to a medical
oncologist when he and the pathologist disagree
about what kind of tumor it is.  And we brought
you a Board-certified medical oncologist in the
person of Dr. David Okun.
Dr. David Okun said that the BAC spread to
Mr. Ellsworth's airway, and it was like a
caterpillar that became a butterfly when it
became an invasive adenocarcinoma.
The BAC caused Mr. Ellsworth's death and
there's no dispute by anyone that BAC is not
caused by smoking.
Just to kind of recap what Dr. Okun told
us.  You'll recall Dr. Okun said that this
squamous cell was located up here in the area
of the third and fourth, that it was in the
posterior region, which is towards your back or
your scapula.  That up in this region, there
was the presence of the scarring from the 4369
tuberculosis.  And of course, the scarring is a
risk factor for the squamous cell.  This was
the squamous cell located up here.
The smaller of the tumors was the BAC,
which was located here.  The BAC became
invasive, but BAC is a form of adenocarcinoma,
but all adenocarcinomas are not BACs.
BAC is a slow-growing tumor, but it can
change, and it can become what he called
well-differentiated, which means it becomes
aggressive.
It became aggressive, and then it
metastasized to the mediastinum.  You'll recall
that they took -- they examined 17 of those
lymph nodes in this region.  This region is
just covered with lymph nodes.
And typically, when the cancer
metastasizes from the lungs, it goes to the
lymph nodes.  That's so important when they're
making a -- diagnosing and they're staging the
cancer.
It spread to this lymph node.  Out of the
17 of them, one of them contained this cancer,
and the cells were similar to the cells that
were in this smaller of the two tumors.  The 4370
larger one was the squamous, the smaller one
was the BAC.  In fact, he said it spread --
that this lymph node became four centimeters,
and it became larger than the tumor from which
it had metastasized.
It grew to the point that it encroached on
the bronchus, and that's what cut off his
airway, and that's what brought about the death
of Mr. Ellsworth.
It's plain and simple and straightforward,
without this BAC, you wouldn't have had this
invasive adenocarcinoma, and you wouldn't have
had the blockage of the airway, and he wouldn't
have died when he did.  Plain and simple.
I think what he described it as, he used
the butterfly because the term is lepidic, and
that's a derivative of the word butterfly in
Latin.
And you can't have -- I think he said a
caterpillar, you can't have the butterfly
without the caterpillar.  So when it's over
here, it's in this cocoon-like phase.  And then
it becomes a butterfly, but it's the same
thing.  It's the same kind of cell with the
same DNA, and that is what brought about 4371
Mr. Ellsworth's death.
So the bottom line is, you can't establish
class membership if you don't have medical
causation.
Am I doing something wrong?  Thank you,
ma'am.
So the answer to this one, on class
membership, the answer is no.  And if that's
marked no, then you proceed no further.  You
sign the verdict form, and that's it, the end
of the deliberations.
Now, let's talk about addiction.  The
plaintiff failed to prove that David Ellsworth
had cancer caused by smoking.  He had a BAC
that's not caused by smoking, and that's what
caused his death.
Let's talk about addiction.  Plaintiff
must prove David Ellsworth was addicted to
nicotine.  And what was the evidence that you
heard on that?
Well, you heard from Dr. O'Brien, the
plaintiff's expert.  He said addiction is a
change in the brain that causes loss of
control.  But he also said that Mr. Ellsworth
was able to control his smoking.  His testimony 4372
was that Mr. Ellsworth controlled his smoking
by not smoking in certain places.
He said that Mr. Ellsworth didn't smoke in
Kerri's bedroom.  He didn't smoke during
dinner.  Didn't smoke in church, and didn't
smoke on certain jobs.
He didn't smoke around certain people.  He
didn't smoke around his brother, Donald, when
he was around him, because he knew that Donald
and Donald's wife didn't like smoking.
Mr. Ellsworth never told anybody that he
had lost control.  There was no evidence that
Mr. Ellsworth ever lost his free will over
smoking.
In fact, Dr. O'Brien admitted that
Mr. Ellsworth did not lose his free will over
smoking.
We know that David Ellsworth did not meet
the definition of addiction set out by the
plaintiff's expert in terms of losing control.
Dr. Roger Samuel came and testified that
he employed diagnostic criteria.  I think he
set out 11 of them that he wrote on a board
right in front of you.
He said that smoking did not cause 4373
significant clinical impairment or distress in
Mr. Ellsworth.  Mr. Ellsworth controlled his
smoking, and smoked until he decided he was
going to quit smoking.
The touchstone of the addiction analysis
is the significant clinical impairment.
Someone's addicted to something, it impacts
their ability to carry out their activities,
and there's no evidence of that in this case.
Both Dr. Samuel and Dr. O'Brien say that
all smokers, even heavy smokers, are not
addicted.  They say 50 percent are, 50 percent
are not.
We know David Ellsworth was not addicted.
No medical record described David Ellsworth as
being addicted.  David Ellsworth never received
any medical treatment for nicotine addiction.
His treating doctors never diagnosed him
as being addicted.
Plaintiff failed to prove that he was
addicted to nicotine.  So, again, the answer on
the verdict form in terms of addiction is no.
Not only are you required to prove medical
causation, but you got to prove that there was
addiction. 4374
Let's talk about addiction causation, the
third aspect of this class membership question.
Plaintiff must prove addiction was a legal
cause of David Ellsworth's lung cancer, a legal
cause, that but for the addiction, he wouldn't
have had cancer.
We know that he could have quit smoking
because millions did during this time frame.
We know that, between 1955 and 1965,
17.6 million people quit smoking.
And that, between 1964, when the Surgeon
General's report came out, and 1979, 30 million
quit.
And then, as of today, up to 60 million.
Dr. Proctor has it pegged at 60 million.
Dr. Samuel said between 50 and 60 million
people have quit.  And this includes those who
were heavily addicted.
So we know that addiction doesn't prevent
people from quitting.  And they weren't just
light smokers.  Most of them quit without any
assistance, something like 90 percent.  And
there are now more former smokers than current
smokers.  So addiction doesn't prevent people
from quitting. 4375
In fact, Dr. O'Brien says that he never
tells any of his patients that they can't quit.
And I don't believe he ever said, in this case,
that Mr. Ellsworth could not quit.
In fact, what he said was that internal
motivation is required in order for a smoker to
quit.  Whether the person wants to quit is the
key question in determining whether someone is
addicted.  And we saw no signs that
Mr. Ellsworth wanted to quit.  So internal
motivation is very, very, very vitally
important.
If you took the 60 million people who
quit, you'd fill Sun Life stadium about 750
times.  That's a lot of people who have quit. 
Dr. O'Brien tells all of his patients they
can quit.  He has never told a patient that
they should not try to quit, and he would never
tell a patient that they cannot quit, because
he knows that addicted smokers can quit.
We know that heavy smokers quit in the
1960s, '70s and '80s.  Dr. Proctor told us
that.  Male smokers who quit in the '60s and
'70s smoked an average of 30 cigarettes a day.
Other smokers who quit in the 1960s and '70s 4376
smoked more than 30 cigarettes a day.  That's a
pack and a half.  Most smokers who quit were
not light smokers. 
We know that people have many reasons for
smoking.  Both Dr. O'Brien and Dr. Samuel told
us that, that people smoke for enjoyment, they
like the taste.  It helps them relax and ease
stress.  We know that was the case for
Mr. Ellsworth. 
There's a social aspect to smoking,
improved attention, helps with weight control
and relieves boredom. 
And we know that David Ellsworth was no
different than the 60 million smokers who did
quit.  Were the cigarettes he smoked more
addictive than the cigarettes of people who
quit?  No.
Was his brain affected differently than
the smokers who quit?  No.  They had memory
paths as well.  They had uptake of the nicotine
receptors as well.  But they managed to quit.
Was Mr. Ellsworth exposed to advertising
different from those smokers that quit?  No, he
was not.
Was he exposed to tobacco company 4377
statements different from the smokers who quit?
No, he wasn't.
Did he smoke more or longer than the
smokers who quit?  No.
Did he make his own decisions and choose
not to quit smoking before 1993?  Yes, he did.
Plaintiff admits that Mr. Ellsworth may
have some fault for his injuries or death.
Now, what does that mean, because when Sherri
Ellsworth was on the stand, I asked her
questions.  She said, yeah, he may have some
responsibility for his injuries.
And what does that mean?  That means that
David Ellsworth knew that smoking was
dangerous, yet, he continued to smoke.
It means that he had the ability to quit
smoking early, and thereby avoid suffering from
a smoking-related illness.
It means that he had the ability to quit
smoking at the time -- at a time that would
have prevented his death.  That's what it means
to be partially at fault, that there's
something you could have done more of that
could have enabled you to avoid that fate.
That's what that means. 4378
We know that Mr. Ellsworth had to make the
decision to quit smoking.  His own expert,
Dr. O'Brien, said Mr. Ellsworth had to make the
decision.  Nobody could make it for him.  No
one else could decide that he was going to quit
smoking.  He had to do that for himself.
Dr. O'Brien also said there are two kinds
of smokers.  He said there are people who don't
even want to quit, and then something bad
happens to them, and they stop without any
help.  That's the category that Mr. Ellsworth
fell into.
Then there are those who need help and
they keep coming back and they keep relapsing.
There's no evidence whatsoever that
Mr. Ellsworth had any relapsing or continued to
seek help in quitting smoking.
Those are the two kinds of categories that
Dr. O'Brien described.
We know from Sherri Hubbird and Kerri
Ellsworth, they never observed Mr. Ellsworth
try to quit smoking before 1993.
Kerri said that she saw him sucking
lollipops and chewing gum and she assumed from
that he was trying to quit, but he never told 4379
her he was trying to quit.
He told her he attempted to quit sometime
in the past when they had a discussion about
that 1977 term paper that she wrote on
nicotine, and he said he was addicted and had
tried to quit sometime in the past.  There's no
eyewitness that ever saw any of that.
And when he did quit smoking, he didn't
use any assistance.  He quit cold turkey.
Dr. Charles O'Brien said that addiction
can cause disease.  He did say that.  But he
never said addiction caused Mr. Ellsworth's
disease.  He did not say that.  He did not say
that nicotine addiction caused Mr. Ellsworth's
disease.  And that's a very important
distinction.
We know that Mr. Ellsworth enjoyed
smoking, because Carole Mayou, the former
daughter-in-law, testified she saw him, she was
with him.  She was a smoker.  She smoked with
him and his wife during the time that
Mr. Ellsworth was living, and he enjoyed it.
Well, how did she know he enjoyed it?  How
do you know anytime somebody enjoys something?
Does somebody have to tell you that they enjoy 4380
spending time with their children or their
grandchildren?  No.  You can say it.  Or if
somebody enjoys a meal or a glass of wine?  You
can tell if somebody is enjoying something.
Based on her observations and based on her
interactions with him, she said he enjoyed
smoking, and there's not anything wrong with
that.  That's just a fact of the matter.
David Ellsworth enjoyed it.  He used it
for stress relief.  He enjoyed having a
cigarette when he was drinking beer.  There's
nothing wrong with that.
He enjoyed it while he was playing board
games with his family members.  He enjoyed it
while he was socializing with others, including
the people on his crew.  He enjoyed it after a
meal.  He enjoyed it while watching television
and he enjoyed it while he was drinking his
coffee.  He enjoyed smoking.
Now, no witness saw David Ellsworth quit
for a single day in 43 years.  The evidence is
that he didn't take a single step, according to
the eyewitnesses, to quit before 1993.
We do know that he said to Kerri that he
quit for six months at some point in time prior 4381
to when she showed him the term paper in 1977.
When it was, under what circumstances, we do
not know.
On the other hand, we have the plaintiff
coming in and saying he didn't quit for a
single day for 40 some years.  You'll have to
decide what's more plausible, what's more
likely to you.
What we do know for a fact is that he
never sought any help from family and friends
to quit smoking.  That he never sought any
medical assistance.
Did he throw away his cigarettes?  No.
Did he throw away his ashtrays and
lighter?  No.
Did he attend smoking cessation clinics?
No, he did not.
Did he quit for a single day?  According
to the plaintiff, he didn't quit for a single
day.
Did he take a single step to quit smoking?
No, he did not.
If someone -- and actions speak louder
than words.  You heard Dr. Samuel say that
yesterday.  Actions speak louder than words. 4382
We've all heard that.
But did he ever pick up the telephone and
call smoke enders to make an appointment?
There's no evidence of such.
Did he ever throw out ashtrays?  There's
no evidence of such.  
Or get rid of other smoking queues, like
try to cut back on beer consumption or take
some steps?  No, he did not.
No witness saw David Ellsworth quit for a
single day in 43 years.  Again, actions speak
louder than words.
Now, how do we know that Mr. Ellsworth
could quit at any time?  He did quit.  So the
evidence is overwhelming that David Ellsworth's
choice to begin smoking, to continue smoking
and not to quit were the only -- that was the
only legal cause of his death.  He quit in 1993
the first time he tried.
So plaintiff failed to prove that David
Ellsworth had lung cancer caused by smoking,
failed to prove that David Ellsworth was
addicted to nicotine, failed to prove that
addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of
David Ellsworth's lung cancer and his death. 4383
What the plaintiff spent two weeks doing
is reproving the Engle findings, but failed to
prove that David Ellsworth is an Engle class
member.
So on question number one, is he an Engle
class member?  Was the addiction the legal
cause of his lung cancer?  The answer is no,
not an Engle class member.
At this point, with no to that answer, the
case is over.  But if you don't answer no to
that question, then you proceed to the question
concerning concealment, and that question
involves whether information that was withheld
from David Ellsworth or Reynolds and the other
tobacco-related entities' agreement to conceal
information, was that a legal cause of David
Ellsworth's lung cancer?  In other words, but
for that information, would he have 
contracted - developed lung cancer.
I submit to you, you cannot conceal
information already known or available to
Mr. Ellsworth.  And the evidence is
overwhelming that he knew that cigarette
smoking was dangerous, and he knew that it was
addictive. 4384
Number two, the death legally caused by
lung cancer that was caused by smoking
cigarettes, the answer to that is no.
On wrongful death, concealment.  Did David
R. Ellsworth reasonably rely, to his detriment,
on any statement made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company which concealed or omitted material
facts not otherwise known or available to him
concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, was
such reliance a legal cause of his death?
I submit the answer is no.
Number four, did David Ellsworth
reasonably rely, to his detriment, on any
statement in furtherance of an agreement to
conceal or omit material facts not otherwise
known or available to him concerning the health
effects or addictive nature of smoking
cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a
legal cause of his death?
The answer to that is no as well.
I'll tell you why.  See, there has to be a
connection.  You have to connect up the
concealment and the agreement to conceal with
the lung cancer.  There has to be a connection. 4385
And the question becomes, was information
about the dangers of smoking unknown or
unavailable?  Was it unknown or unavailable?
I submit it was not unknown or
unavailable.
Before I do that, I want to show you a
couple of instructions that may be helpful in
guiding your decision making.
This is instruction number 13.  It says,
"The next issue for your determination is
whether David R. Ellsworth reasonably relied,
to his detriment, on any statement or omission
of material fact by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company that omitted material information
concerning the health effects or addictive
nature of smoking cigarettes not otherwise
known or available to Mr. Ellsworth and, if so,
whether such reliance was a legal cause of his
non-BAC lung cancer or death."
It makes mention of material information.
You also have an instruction on what
constitutes material information.  The Judge is
going to tell you.  It's instruction number 14.
"A material fact is one that is of such
importance that David Ellsworth would not have 4386
acted as he did but for the concealment or
omission of that fact."
So, in other words, it's a game changer.
The concealment or omission of that fact would
have changed his behavior.  And I submit it
would not.
And the reason I say that is the
information about the dangers and addictiveness
of smoking has been known since the 1800s.
It's been known that nicotine is a chemical in
tobacco since the 1830s, when it was isolated
as a chemical in tobacco.
Addicted to smoking is terminology that's
been in use since the 1850s.  Smokers' cancer
was popularized as a description for mouth
cancer in the 1850s.
Schools have taught the dangers and
addictiveness of smoking for over 100 years.
We know that from Dr. Proctor, plaintiff's
expert.
More than a hundred years ago, cigarettes
were banned in states like Florida because they
were deemed to be dangerous.
We know that information about the dangers
of smoking have been available in the popular 4387
culture since the 1800s.
Slang terms have been used to describe
cigarettes since the 1800s.  And there are
hundreds of different slang terms.
In the early 1800s, they used terms like
"coffin nail" that came into use, and still are
using it to show the concern that cigarettes
would be like a nail in your coffin.  And, of
course, slang terms show a broader cultural
knowledge of something.
If somebody says they're taking a selfie,
we know what that means.  It means something
different now than it would mean ten years ago,
or whenever, but that's just what slang does.
It comes into the common usage and people know
what you're talking about.
We know that the Reader's Digest covered
issues of smoking and health in the 1920s and
the 1930s.
One of the issues of Reader's Digest from
1924 said does tobacco injure the human body.
And it says, "Tobacco is injurious to the human
body.  It lessens resistance to tuberculosis
and other diseases.  Its use sometimes induces
cancer." 4388
So it's no secret that tobacco use can
cause cancer.
There are other articles on giving up
smoking.  I quit smoking.  Nicotine knockout or
the slow count, are you a man or a smoke stack?
All of these articles dealt with the
issues of the danger of cigarettes.
We know that Mr. Ellsworth was overseas in
the Pacific between 1952 and 1955, and we know
that the Stars and Stripes had articles that
talked about the dangers of cigarette smoking.
Said nonsmokers said to outlive puffers.
That's June 1953.
1954, cigarette cancer tie found.  They
interviewed 187,768 people.
Smokers' hack can kill, New York doctors
say.
What we do know is the Stars and Stripes
did not publish the Frank Statement.  So all
this business about what was in the Frank
Statement, Mr. Ellsworth didn't see it.  He was
stationed in Korea and the Stars and Stripes
did not carry the Frank Statement.  It only
appeared in the newspapers nationwide, major
newspapers, on one day.  And on that one day, 4389
he was in Korea.
Smoking and health warnings.  He moved to
the Miami area in 1955 after he was discharged
from the service and took the Miami Herald.
And the Miami Herald had lots of stories about
the dangers of smoking.
Smokers, bad risk, doctors say.  The
evidence pointing to smoking as a cause of lung
cancer is overwhelming.  That's 1955.
Lung cancer ruptures tied to cigarette
smoking.  Cigarette smoking widely blamed for
lung cancer, may be even more hazardous than
has been hitherto recognized.  That's 1955.
Heavy smokers, cancer victims.  That's
Miami Herald, December 1955.
Cigarette blamed again for cancer.  Miami
Herald, March 1956.
And this is just a small sampling of the
thousands, literally hundreds of thousands of
articles that appeared in newspapers throughout
the United States, and magazines, about the
dangers of smoking, and linking cigarette
smoking to lung cancer.
More Miami Herald.  British survey, lung
cancer rise laid to smoking.  That's 1957. 4390
Filter is no help, medical doctor tells
smokers.  Miami Herald, 1958.  Says there is
not any question or doubt that cigarettes cause
lung cancer.  No doubt.
Cigarette lung cancer link seen by many
smokers.
We know the public was well informed of
the scientific studies about the dangers of
smoking.  Dr. Proctor testified that scientific
studies about the dangers of smoking were big
news.  And they did, they got coverage in
newspapers and magazines.
They were widely covered in medical
journals, but they were picked up in the
mainstream media, and it would become a
newspaper story for laypeople to read.
1953, Wynder/Graham study was the biggest
cigarette story up until that time.  That was
the mouse skin painting study that was done by
Wynder and Graham in 1953.
Four years later, there was a study that
received even more publicity in the news.
"Cancer stick" was a term that was widely
used in the 1950s following the publication of
these epidemiology studies talking about the 4391
link between smoking and lung cancer.
Here is a copy of the cover of that Wynder
and Graham Life magazine article that's
describing the Wynder/Graham study, and showing
the mice with the tumors growing on their backs
once they were painted with the smoke
condensate.
And Dr. Proctor told you that this kind of
information was covered in radio, television,
magazines.  It was widely covered.
Here's Newsweek and Time magazine.  Time
magazine article on how to stop smoking.  The
psychological urge is reinforced by
pharmacological urge.  The true physical
craving for tobacco.
1958, Newsweek.  Smoking is a most serious
sort of drug addiction and with a real
psychological basis.
And you saw the video deposition of
Mr. Heimann, Dr. Robert Heimann, who had been
president of American Tobacco Company.
The deposition was taken in 1986.  He had
left the company in 1980, and somebody had
asked him, well, what's going on at the company
now.  He said, I don't know.  He could only 4392
speak to what was going on while he was there.
One of the things they asked him was,
despite what the American Medical Association
says, the American Cancer Society, the American
Heart Association, the American Lung
Association, the American Association of
Thoracic Surgery, the American College of Chest
Physicians, the American Public Health
Association, and the World Health Organization,
all saying that smoking causes lung cancer and
other diseases and it's addictive, do you deny
that, sir?  And he denied it.
So there was an overwhelming amount of
information from the public health community
about the dangers of smoking.  In fact, the
Surgeon General, in 1957, said -- the Surgeon
General had informed the public, through the
excellent coverage of the press, radio and TV,
said newspapers, radio and TV and other media
did an excellent and objective job of covering
this problem.
So you'd have to be in a cave not to know
about the dangers of smoking, because it was
everywhere.  The information was all over.
Dr. Proctor says the information about the 4393
1964 Surgeon General's report was widely
available.  It was headline news across the
United States.  Every major newspaper covered
it, every single television station had it,
because there were only three networks and they
all devoted two hours to it.
It was in magazines.  It was the biggest
medical story of that year.  In fact, it's the
biggest medical story up until the AIDS
epidemic.
The 1964 Surgeon General's report was
widely covered in the media.  Here's the Miami
Herald coverage of the 1964 Surgeon General's
report.  I quit smoking at 2 p.m., Saturday.
That's it.  Cigarettes guilty.  And that's from
January 12, 1964.
Miami Herald.  Here's what study by US
revealed.  Lung cancer to strike 400.  Will you
be one of them?  No ifs, ands, or butts, Pal,
try Smokers Anonymous.
There's no evidence that Mr. Ellsworth
ever joined Smokers Anonymous.
Here is the Miami Herald, 1960s.  Smoke
link to cancer emphasized.  Cancer cause found
in cigarette smoke.  Cigarette smokers again 4394
warned of the cancer dangers.  Abstinence from
smoking affords the best protection against
lung cancer at present, the council asserted.
They truly are coffin nails.  That's one of
them.  1967.
Another article in 1967, Miami Herald,
says, "High death rates cited among smokers.
US strengthens smoke cancer tie."
We know that Mr. Ellsworth watched the
news.  We know that he read the newspaper and
we know he listened to the radio.  Eyewitness
testimony to that effect.
We know that he took the Orlando Sentinel
when they moved to Deland, and he read the
Deland Sun Times in Deland.  And when he lived
in Miami, he read the Miami Herald.
We know that mass media played a big role
in publicizing the dangers of smoking.
So the information is available.  Whether
someone took advantage of it or not is beside
the point.  The jury instruction says
information otherwise known or available, and
that's the key thing, available, and it was
available.
We know there were the scientific studies 4395
that were done, the epidemiology studies in the
'50s, the mouse skin painting studies in the
'50s bringing to the attention of the public
the dangers of smoking and how it was linked to
lung cancer.
This culminated in -- and then we have the
1964 Surgeon General's report.  This culminated
in this warning that appeared on every pack of
cigarettes after 1966.
In 1966, this warning was adopted.
"Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your
health."  That began appearing on every pack of
cigarettes sold in the United States of
America.  And it was effective.
How do we know it was effective?  Because
people started quitting.  Millions of Americans
quit smoking as a result of seeing articles
about the mouse skin painting studies and other
epidemiology in the 1950s.
Large scale quitting began in the 1950s
and accelerated through the 1960s and the
1970s.
Dr. Proctor says quitting is an expression
of knowledge.  In other words, the people got
the message.  They knew that it was dangerous. 4396
They knew it was addictive.  They started
quitting.
We know that this was true for two of
Mr. Ellsworth's brothers.  In fact, one of
them, the older of the two, Donald Ellsworth,
he said he knew in 1948 that it was dangerous,
that it was unhealthy.
Richard Ellsworth said, well, I quit
smoking, my wife and I quit smoking in 1980
after smoking Viceroys for 30 something years.
And I knew, since 1960, that it was dangerous.
But after having some health problems in
1980, he quit smoking.  They quit cold turkey,
never picked up another cigarette to this day,
so he was one of those people who quit as an
expression of knowledge.
THE CLERK:  One hour, Counsel.
MR. PERSONS:  Thank you, ma'am.
And the warning label itself got
widespread media coverage.  The warning bill,
signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson,
and this is from the Miami Herald, July 28,
1965.
And then the American Cancer Society put
up these posters that were displayed for the 4397
public to see.  Congress has acted.  The next
step is yours, with a picture of a pack of
cigarettes and the warning label on the side.
Again, widely publicized.
Okay.  In 1970, the warning was
strengthened.  And it now reads, "Warning.  The
Surgeon General has determined that cigarette
smoking is dangerous to your health."
So if you're smoking two or three packs a
day, and you're smoking 20 cigarettes out of
each pack, you're picking this up and the
warning is available.  Whether you read it or
not is your own business.  It is available.
And that's a warning that's there.
Now, if you're not going to heed this
warning, where's the evidence that you would
heed a memo from R.J. Reynolds or an internal
document from R.J. Reynolds and stop smoking so
as to save your life?  There is none.  There is
none.
Newspaper articles about the benefits of
quitting.  So you had newspaper articles about
the benefits of quitting smoking in the '70s
and '80s.
Here's the Miami Herald, 1976.  Study. 4398
Quitting cigarettes greatly cuts lung risk.
Ceasing smoking may save years.  That's
1983.
It's never too late to quit smoking.  Even
people who have been smoking for four or five
decades decrease their risk of
cigarette-related diseases if they give up the
habit.  If you stopped smoking cigarettes ten
years ago, your life expectancy rate equals
that of persons who never smoked.
All of this information is out there and
being publicized, and people are acting on it,
because -- we know that because people are
quitting.
And then there was the Great American
Smokeout.  And 88,648 heavy smokers stopped
quitting as a result of the Great American
Smokeout.  Entire towns would go cold turkey in
quitting smoking habit.  Class to help douse
smoking.  That's Miami Herald.  And the class
was on Mondays and Wednesdays, and it cost
$15 to go and get help to quit smoking.
No evidence that Mr. Ellsworth ever
availed himself of it.
Now, if you're not going to heed what's in 4399
the local paper that you read and you're not
going to drive down to -- it was on 12th
Avenue, 1400 Northwest 12th Avenue, and pay
$15, what makes you think that something that
Reynolds said in an internal document is going
to prompt you to quit smoking?
Smokers kick habit in clinics.  They went
to smoke-ending clinics to get help.
Best way to quit.  Abruptly and totally.
Just quit cold turkey.
Now, how did the public respond to the
message?  Well, we know that millions of
heavily addicted smokers quit.
Let's look at 1953.  The publicity
surrounding the Wynder/Graham study attracted a
great deal of attention and caused American
smoking rates to drop profoundly.  We know
that.
1957, the Surgeon General said the public
had been warned through excellent coverage of
the press, TV and radio.  And we know, between
1955 and 1965, 17.6 million Americans quit
smoking.
Much of that was in response to the scare
from the Wynder/Graham studies and other 4400
scientific studies that were coming out, and
this public information from the press, radio,
TV coverage of the science.
1964, all of the news media and the US
covered the link between smoking and lung
cancer that was part of the '64 Surgeon
General's report.
1966, we know the warning label went on.
1970, the warning label was strengthened.
1971, cigarettes no longer advertised on TV or
radio.
Between '65 and '79, 30 million people
quit smoking.  And then, in 1985, we had the
rotating warnings on packs of cigarettes.
Again, as Dr. Proctor put it so
eloquently, quitting was an expression of their
knowledge of the dangers of smoking.  That's
how you know that people were getting the
message.
Here are the rotating warnings.  "Smoking
causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema
and may complicate pregnancy."  That's one of
them.
Another one, "Smoking by pregnant women
may result in fetal injury, premature birth and 4401
low birth weight."
Another one, "Quitting smoking now greatly
reduces serious risk to your health."  So if
you want to protect your health, you need to
quit now.  Take steps to quit now.  Do
something to try to quit.
"Cigarette smoke contains carbon
monoxide."
One of those warnings would be on -- an
equal number of times on every pack of
cigarettes sold in the United States.  It's a
warning that was right there, a warning that
the smoker can see.
And if you believe that Mr. Ellsworth
smoked two packs a day, 40 cigarettes a day,
that would come to his seeing that warning or
having it available 280 times a week.  More
than 1,000 times a month, the warning was
there.
So the bottom line, David Ellsworth did
not develop lung cancer and die because
information about the dangers of smoking was
unknown or unavailable to him.  There was a lot
of information known and available to
Mr. Ellsworth. 4402
He knew smoking was dangerous and
addictive.  How do we know that?  Well, we know
that because of the federal and state
government and regulatory agencies, the
information from the Surgeon General,
information from public health authorities
about the dangers of smoking.  That information
was widespread.  Information that circulated
word of mouth, from family members.
Antismoking, Donald Ellsworth said he --
antismoking for more than 50 years.  Knew as
early as 1948 that it was unhealthy for you,
that it was dangerous.
Kerri Ellsworth knew that it was addictive
in the 1970s when she did that paper in 1977.
You've got the American Lung Association,
American Cancer Society and doctors telling
patients about the dangers of smoking.
You remember Dr. O'Brien said that he
would have been very surprised if
Mr. Ellsworth's doctors, since he was being
treated for tuberculosis, didn't tell him that
he needed to quit smoking, because as someone
who had suffered TB and had the lung scarring,
that smoking would not be good for him.  That 4403
was Dr. O'Brien who said that.
We know that the mass media, and
Mr. Ellsworth did take the newspaper and
watched television, that that covered the
dangers of smoking.
Ricky Mayou was punished, along with his
brother, Michael, by Mr. Ellsworth, for
smoking, and he made them smoke a cigar until
they got sick and threw up, telling them this
is bad, and you shouldn't be doing it.
We know that the Baptist church had
literature about the dangers of smoking.  And
then one of his brothers, I think it was Donald
Ellsworth, said, well, it was just common
sense.  For those of us growing up in Rhode
Island, it was common sense that smoking was
unhealthy.
Carole Mayou met him when she was 16 years
old in 1977.  She said, we knew the harmful
effects in the '70s of smoking.
And Grace Fisher warned him about smoking
being addictive.
And, of course, the slang terms that we
know about that were in use, like "coffin nail"
and so forth. 4404
We know that the parents of David
Ellsworth, Donald Ellsworth, Douglas Ellsworth
and Richard Ellsworth warned their children
against smoking, taught Mr. Ellsworth and his
brothers that smoking is bad for you.
In schools, schools didn't allow them to
smoke.  Mr. Ellsworth's middle school health
teacher taught that smoking was bad.
In the church, smoking not allowed in
church.  The church warned members about the
dangers of smoking.
So those are personal warnings about the
dangers of smoking from an early age.  And one
of his brothers, I believe it was Donald
Ellsworth, said, I knew, in 1948, it was bad
for you.  He was 20 years old in 1948.  Said
because people were choking and coughing from
smoking.  So I knew from that, that it was bad.
He didn't need the Surgeon Generals report
to tell him to quit.  He knew it was bad.
Richard Ellsworth didn't wait on the '64
Surgeon General's report to know that it was
bad.  He said I knew in 1960, but I wanted to
continue smoking until I had a health scare in
1980, and my wife and I quit cold turkey. 4405
Here we go, Donald Ellsworth.  The dangers
of smoking were common sense growing up in
Rhode Island.  He grew up in the same
household, same neighborhood, went to the same
schools as David Ellsworth.  He knew, it was
common sense, he said.  
So it stands to reason that David
Ellsworth would have known that it was common
sense as well.  It doesn't take a leap in logic
or a speculation to arrive at that conclusion.
Information about the dangers of smoking
was available to David Ellsworth.  I told you
about Donald Ellsworth, his older brother.  He
knew that smoking -- oldest brother -- he knew
that smoking was harmful in 1948, he said.
Now, of course, he left home in 1945 to go
off to World War II.  And he's the one that
said, well, yes, they had cigarettes in the
rations, but that didn't make me take up
smoking because I knew it was bad for you.
But it stands to reason, if he knew it was
harmful in 1948, left home in '45, same
household that David Ellsworth lived in, that
David Ellsworth knew, too.  Of course, he's
been at it, smoking for more than 50 years, 4406
wife opposed to smoking, don't allow it in
their house.
When he went to see David Ellsworth and
came and visited him in Florida, David
Ellsworth refrained from smoking in his
presence.  Even though, on a couple of
occasions, he spent the night, David Ellsworth
did not smoke while he was staying at the
house.
I talked about this, where they were
forced to smoke the cigar until they got sick.
We know about Kerri Ellsworth's preparing
the school report in junior high.  The report
concluded that tobacco is addictive.
She showed the report to her father.  He
said, yes, it's addictive.  And she talked to
him about -- talked to her father about
quitting smoking, and he said, I tried twice
and I'm addicted, I couldn't quit.
Kerri Ellsworth told Mr. -- Sherri Hubbird
told Mr. Ellsworth that smoking made her sick,
asked him not to smoke around her children, and
he respected her wishes.
Sherri Hubbird told David Ellsworth that
he needed to quit smoking.  This was in late 4407
1981 or early 1982, and Carole Mayou shared
this with us.  That Sherri Hubbird did not like
Mr. Ellsworth's smoking, and would sigh in
frustration when she saw him smoking.  Told
him, you need to quit smoking, it's not
healthy.  He smiled and walked out the door.
And Carole Mayou has no dog in this fight,
has no reason to be anything other than just
totally candid about what she saw, what she
observed.
So when we get to the verdict form, and
you get to the questions on concealment, did
David Ellsworth reasonably rely, to his
detriment, on any statement by Reynolds which
concealed or omitted material facts not
otherwise known or available to him concerning
the health effects or addictive nature of
smoking cigarettes and, if so, was such
reliance a legal cause of his death?  The
answer is no.
The answer should be no to number four as
well, which is on the agreement to conceal.
Now, let's talk about fault.  The
assignment of fault relates only to actions
that were a legal cause of David Ellsworth's 4408
lung cancer and death.
Reynolds cannot be assigned fault for
actions that were not a legal cause of David
Ellsworth's lung cancer and death.
Now, I don't have time to go through that
long list of things on that fault board that
Mr. Kaiser held up, just don't have time.  You
wouldn't want me to go through all that anyway.
I'm going to try to finish in a minute.
But you have to link those things to
Mr. Ellsworth.  Were any of those things, did
any of those things cause -- were any of those
things the legal cause of Mr. Ellsworth's lung
cancer and death?
But for any one of those things, would he
have made a different kind of decision about
continuing to smoke?
We don't have any evidence about why he
began smoking.  There's no proof, and the
burden of proof is on the plaintiff, to
demonstrate why he started smoking and how does
that connect with any of those things on that
board.  Or his continuing to smoke, how are
they related to any of those things on that
board?  And I submit to you they are not. 4409
Reynolds can't be assigned fault for
actions that were not a legal cause.  And in
order to be a legal cause, it has to be a
but-for cause.  But for those things, would he
have quit smoking or would he have refrained
from taking up smoking?
As Dr. O'Brien put it so well, smokers are
fully responsible for making the decision to
try to quit smoking.  That's their expert,
their addiction expert.  He said that being
addicted does not mean that a smoker cannot try
to quit or is not responsible for the choice to
quit.
He also said something else, that internal
motivation is required for a smoker to quit.
And so the responsibility lies with the smoker
in order to take steps to quit smoking and to
give up cigarettes.
David Ellsworth was a hard-working man who
had his own mind and made his own decisions.
That's Ricky Mayou, Richard Ellsworth said
that, and Carole Mayou.
Any damages awarded must be fair and just,
and I'm not, by any means, suggesting that
damages should be awarded.  But if they are, 4410
they have to be fair and just in light of the
evidence.
I was reminded of something I didn't do.
Now, if you went to the alternative
survival claim, you'll see these same set of
questions about concealment, and the answer
would be the same.  It would be no on each of
those.
A thing that's important to know on the
concealment and agreement to conceal claims,
there's no reduction for fault on those, and so
that's a very important distinction on those.
That no matter how much fault rests with
Mr. Ellsworth, there would be no reduction on
those -- any amount awarded for those claims,
if any, on the concealment claims.
Now, the jury instruction I was about to
show you -- thank you, Todd, for reminding me
of that -- is number 26.  And it says, "The
purpose of an award of compensatory damages is
not to punish or penalize Reynolds for its
conduct or to make an example of Reynolds for
the publics good.  It's to compensate the
plaintiff."  
The other thing to keep in mind, the Judge 4411
is going to tell you that, in reaching your
verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice,
public opinion or any other sentiment for or
against any party influence your decision.  And
that's instruction number 35.
I won't read that to you, but I just
wanted to tell you that.  It's in your packet
of instructions.
Now, this claim for more than $6 million
in damages, or any amount, defies common sense.
Here's what's not at issue.  Plaintiff is
not seeking damages for Kerri Ellsworth's pain
and suffering, Sherri Hubbird's pain and
suffering, loss of relationship with David
Ellsworth, support and services provided to
Kerri Ellsworth by anyone other than David
Ellsworth.  They're not seeking compensation
for services provided, for instance, to Kerri
Ellsworth by Sherri Hubbird.
No claim for Mr. Ellsworth's medical
expenses.  There's no claim for Kerri
Ellsworth's medical expenses, and there's no
claim for funeral expenses in this case.
The plaintiff can only recover for one or
the other of these, wrongful death, which is 4412
Kerri Ellsworth's loss of Mr. Ellsworth's
support and services from 1994 to 2013, or the
survival claim, which is David Ellsworth's pain
and suffering, mental anguish or loss of
enjoyment of life.  You can't recover for both.
It's an either/or proposition.
Now, on punitive damages, punitive damages
can be awarded only for conduct that was a
legal cause of David Ellsworth's death or
injury.  They are in addition to damages that
fully compensate. 
Punitive damages can only be -- can be
awarded only to Mr. Ellsworth's estate, only to
Mr. Ellsworth's estate, not to any other
entity.
I want to share with you some law on
punitive damages.  I submit to you that -- I
omitted something.
On number five, when we're talking about
fault, 100 percent of the fault rests with
Mr. Ellsworth, zero on Reynolds.
And the same thing is true on the
alternative survival claim.  It would be
100 percent Mr. Ellsworth, zero on Reynolds.
Let me read to you some law, and this is 4413
jury instruction number 29.  This is on
punitive damages and the burden of proof on
punitive damages.
Unlike the other claims in the case where
the burden of proof is by the preponderance of
evidence, which is more likely than not, the
burden of proof, or the greater weight of the
evidence, the burden of proof on punitive
damages is clear and convincing evidence, and
that's evidence that is precise, explicit,
lacking in confusion and of such weight that it
produces a firm belief or conviction, without
hesitation about the matter in issue.
So if there's any hesitation whatsoever,
then the burden hasn't been carried.  That's
what clear and convincing evidence means.
It is a much higher burden than proof by a
preponderance of the evidence or by the greater
weight of the evidence.  The burden of proof on
other issues, plaintiff must prove all elements
of her claims by the greater weight of
evidence.
Burden of proof for punitive damages,
plaintiff must prove punitive entitlement by
clear and convincing evidence.  So if there's 4414
any hesitation whatsoever, then plaintiff has
not met that burden and should not be awarded
entitlement to punitive damages.
So on that, I submit to you that the
answer is no.
I'm going to tell you why.  Reynolds
should not be punished.  The Council for
Tobacco Research awarded more than $350 million
in grants to fund independent scientific
research projects.
Dr. Proctor didn't like all of them, but
the fact of the matter is, they did fund this
research.  It resulted in 7,000 published
scientific or medical articles and reports.
The Surgeon General himself in the Surgeon
General's reports cited more than 600 of the
articles.  So if they were of dubious value on
the issue of smoking and health, why would the
Surgeon General's report cite 600 of the
articles?
They funded ten Nobel Prize winners, and
the Council for Tobacco Research funded
research at virtually every major university in
the country.
One of the articles that they provided 4415
funding for appeared in the American Journal of
Psychiatry in 1963.  And one of the things that
that article said was that heavy cigarette
smokers, thus, appear to be true addicts.
It went on to give credit to the sponsor.
Said this work was sponsored, in part, by
grants from the American Cancer Society and the
Tobacco Industry Research Committee.
And they funded what was called the
pillars of consensus.  In other words, they
funded epidemiology studies.  They funded
animal studies.  They funded research on the
chemistry of tobacco smoke.
Very important lines of evidence,
according to Dr. Proctor, when evaluating
whether smoking causes a disease is to do this
kind of research.
This was in response to a request from the
public health community, called on the tobacco
companies to sponsor this kind of research in
the 1950s, and they did so.
Reynolds tried to reduce the levels of
carcinogens in cigarette smoke starting in the
early 1950s.  This is from Dr. Proctor.  They
started developing a heat-not-burn technology 4416
in the 1960s.  They spent a billion dollars to
develop the Premiere cigarette.  But the public
rejected it.  They didn't like the taste of it.
They rejected it.  It was a commercial failure.
Well, that's what happens in capitalism.
That's what happens in business.  If the
consumer doesn't want it, they're not going to
buy it.
And Dr. Proctor even admitted that a
cigarette that nobody buys isn't going to
provide any health benefits to the public.
They developed another heat-not-burn
technology called Eclipse.  And Dr. Proctor
says the tobacco company spent a fortune trying
to make cigarettes less hazardous, but they're
a dangerous product.
Reynolds shouldn't be punished.
Cigarettes have carried warning labels since
1966, so nobody can say they haven't been
warned.
Reynolds has not disputed the dangers of
tobacco for over a decade.  And punitive
damages aren't needed to prevent Reynolds from
concealing the dangers of smoking, because the
public already knows about the dangers of 4417
smoking.
I thought I had something else.  I've
already done that.  There we go.  Thank you.
So plaintiff has failed to prove David
Ellsworth had lung cancer caused by smoking.
We know that he had a BAC, and that's not
caused by smoking.  Squamous cell had
independent risk factors, independent of
smoking.  Dust, heavy dust exposure, and the
scarring from tuberculosis.
They failed to prove that David Ellsworth
was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes.
Dr. Samuel took you through the 11 criteria.
He satisfied only one of them, and that's if
you accept what he said about having attempted
to quit sometime prior to 1977.
They failed to prove that addiction was
the legal cause of David Ellsworth's lung
cancer.
Failed to prove that David Ellsworth
relied on anything Reynolds said or did.
There's no evidence that he ever saw anything
from Reynolds, any information that was put out
by R.J. Reynolds and relied on it to his
detriment. 4418
Failed to prove money damages or even an
entitlement to it, because if he's not a class
member, then you don't even get to talk about
money damages.
The bottom line is David Ellsworth was a
hard-working man who had his own mind, made his
own decisions, lived his life the way he wanted
to live it, and that's just the bottom line.
That's who he was.  That's how he lived.
He chose to do what he wanted to do.  He
was an independent man.  He enjoyed smoking.
It helped relieve his stress.
If he did quit for six months, nobody
knows why he started up again.  There's no
evidence about why he started up again.
What we do know, and what there is
evidence of, is that he enjoyed cigarette
smoking, even though he knew that it was
dangerous, and even though he knew it was
addictive.  He took no steps to quit smoking
because that was his own business and that was
something he enjoyed doing.
And so for all of those reasons, you
should find in favor of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company. 4419
Again, I thank you for your attention
throughout these days, and I thank you for
giving me your attention right after lunch and
listening to me.
I won't get a chance to get up and say
anything else to you again, because I don't
have the burden of proof, so I don't have the
last word.  But I do want my last word to be
thank you for your time and attention.
