          MR. PERSONS:  May I proceed, Your Honor?
          THE COURT:  I'm thinking you can.
          MR. PERSONS:  Thank you, Your Honor.
          Miss Kelly is making some adjustments to
     the slides, Your Honor, and they're going to
     let me know when I can start.  I will move this
     in the meantime.
          Good afternoon.
          I'll try not to talk too long, but I've
     got a fair amount to say, because you've heard
     a fair amount of evidence.  You've been
     introduced to the new R.J. Reynolds, but I'm going to expedite this, and hopefully, with the
     use of these slides, we can move through it
     fairly quickly.
          This is a different phase, and you've
     heard new evidence, and you've got new law that
     the Judge has given you that you're going to
     have with you to take out.
          Now, first and foremost, I believe the
     Judge told you, you do not have to award
     punitive damages.  You may, in your discretion,
     decline to assess punitive damages.
          And one of the things you can look at is
     the nature and extent, degree of the conduct
     that caused Mr. Ellsworth's non-BAC lung cancer
     and the related circumstances, the conduct and
     actions of others, including Mr. Ellsworth.
          And Mr. Ellsworth had some conduct, too.
     In awarding the $3 million compensatory
     damages, you found that Mr. Ellsworth had some
     fault.  So he had some of his actions
     contributed to it.
          But you look at whether there is a
     continuing need for deterrence in light of
     changes, and that's what we talked about this
     afternoon with Dr. Borgerding, changes in the conduct of Reynolds from the conduct on which
     you based the determination of punitive
     damages, how the company has changed.  And,
     indeed, it has changed.
          Punitive damages can only be awarded to
     the estate of David Ellsworth.  It can't be
     awarded to public health agencies, can't be
     awarded to smoking cessation clinics or
     charities, other smokers, anyone, but David
     Ellsworth's estate.
          The amount of punitive damages would be in
     addition to the compensatory damages you have
     previously awarded.  You've already fully
     compensated David Ellsworth's estate.
          According to the instructions on the
     verdict form, there can be no reduction in the
     amount of that $3 million.  That 3 million has
     been awarded to Mr. Ellsworth's estate.
          Now, punitive damages, any award has to be
     solely for the injury caused to Mr. Ellsworth,
     and not to harms that occurred to other
     smokers, no matter how many there are out
     there.  They've got the right to bring their
     own claims for damages, including punitive
     damages. You should consider the conduct of
     others -- I mean, the conduct and actions of
     others, including Mr. Ellsworth, and so we
     talked about that.  I'll move on.
          You should impose punitive damages only if
     you conclude that monetary liability beyond
     your award of compensatory damages is necessary
     to accomplish punishment and deterrence.  And
     that's the law's way of recognizing that the
     compensatory award, in and of itself, can be
     punishment and deterrence.
          Instruction number 12, you're entitled to
     conclude that misconduct that occurred in the
     distant past, and I would submit to you that
     the 1950s and 1960s are distant, and involve
     actors who are no longer associated with
     Reynolds need not be punished or that it should
     be punished less severely than recent
     misconduct.
          And the misconduct we're talking about is,
     indeed, remote.  The people who are involved in
     it, not only are they no longer involved with
     Reynolds, they are no longer involved in life.
     They have gone on to glory.
          Now, the Tobacco Institute is gone.  The Council for Tobacco Research is gone.  The
     Tobacco Industry Research Committee is gone.
     Former executives like Mr. Heimann are gone.
     Alan Rodgeman and Claude Teague are gone.
     They're no longer with us.  They're part of the
     distant past.
          And so what you should consider is what is
     Reynolds like now under new ownership, their
     new executives, their new scientists.  There's
     a new environment.
          And as you review this, you ask yourself,
     what more could Reynolds do than it's presently
     doing, other than just go out of the tobacco
     business.  And, of course, in this country, the
     manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful
     business.
          It's controversial, yes.  Tobacco is
     unpopular, yes.  But it is a lawful activity in
     the United States, and it's lawful to make
     tobacco products, to sell them and to advertise
     them.
          Punitive damage instruction number 12, you
     should consider the extent to which Reynolds'
     conduct has changed from the conduct on which
     you based your determination that punitive damages may be warranted, and the extent to
     which the circumstances have changed, and the
     circumstances, indeed, have changed greatly.
     Because for one thing, Reynolds wasn't subject
     to FDA regulations back in the '50s and '60s
     and '70s and '80s.  It is now.  And
     Dr. Borgerding talked about that.
          So you ask yourself, are punitive damages
     needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing and
     agreeing to conceal information?  No, it's not,
     because there's full disclosure.
          They've got a website that's up now that
     talks about the dangers of smoking and the
     diseases caused by smoking, the constituents in
     the tobacco, in the cigarettes and so forth,
     additives.  All of that is laid out.
          Now, according to Dr. Proctor, he said
     Reynolds publicly admitted that cigarettes
     caused disease in 2000, that Reynolds publicly
     admitted that their cigarettes contained
     nicotine and are addictive in 2000.  The
     internal company documents were released in
     2000.
          So the company turned a corner in 2000.
     They've got the website now.  They've introduced risks -- reduced risk products.
     They even sell cessation aids.
          Cigarette smoking is a leading cause of
     preventable deaths in the United States.  This
     is on their web page.  Cigarette smoking
     significantly increases the risk of developing
     lung cancer, heart disease, chronic bronchitis,
     emphysema and other serious diseases and
     adverse health conditions.
          Anyone looking at the website has access
     to this information.
          People looking at the website are told
     that quitting cigarette smoking significantly
     reduces the risk for serious diseases.
          As Dr. Borgerding told you, they've got
     the ingredients listed for each of the brands
     of cigarettes.  So do we need punitive damages
     to prevent Reynolds from concealing information
     today?  No, because everything is -- it's an
     open comodo.
          Are punitive damages needed to force
     Reynolds to manufacture and sell safer
     products?  No.
          Reynolds manufactures reduced risk
     products today.  You saw many of them this afternoon, and they inform smokers about their
     options.
          Of course, the only safe cigarette is the
     one you don't smoke.  They continue to make
     cigarettes.  That's a lawful product, but it's
     an unsafe, it's a dangerous product.  We talked
     about that from the day we had voir dire, we
     talked about how cigarettes are dangerous and
     addictive.
          No tobacco product has been shown to be
     safe and totally without risk.  All of them
     have some risk associated with it, whether
     you're talking about the nicotine, the
     e-cigarette, the Vuse, there are risks
     associated with it, and that's made clear.
     There's a warning on it, even though it's not
     required.
          The best course of action for tobacco
     consumers concerned about their health is to
     quit smoking.  Adults who continue to use
     tobacco products should consider the reduction
     of risks for serious disease associated with
     moving from cigarettes to the use of smoke-free
     tobacco or nicotine products.
          And Reynolds has been working on this for a long time, even going back to the time when
     Mr. Ellsworth was alive, going back to the
     1950s, they started trying to reduce the level
     of carcinogens in cigarettes.
          Were they successful?  No.  But they
     continued to try.
          Brown & Williamson started developing
     heat-not-burn technology in the early '60s, and
     according to Dr. Proctor, his own admission,
     the tobacco companies spent a fortune trying to
     make cigarettes less hazardous.
          So here is a graphic illustration from the
     website about the migration that Reynolds is
     trying to achieve as one of its objectives,
     moving people away from cigarettes to smokeless
     tobacco, to nicotine products to try to reduce
     the risk to their health.
          Dr. Borgerding talked about this.  The
     high risk on the far left, traditional
     cigarette, the conventional cigarette like
     Winston, and then you move over to cessation,
     where there's no risk at all.
          But in between, the aim is to get people
     who want to continue smoking to move to the
     heat-not-burn products, like the Eclipse and the Vuse, the smoke-free Snus.  Those who want
     to try to quit, use the nicotine replacement
     products.
          Reynolds spent a billion dollars on the
     Premiere.  It was a flop in the marketplace.
     Nobody liked it.  They didn't like the way it
     tastes and it smelled even worse.  So nobody
     bought it.  So it was a flop.
          But they didn't give up, and then they
     developed this Eclipse cigarette.  You saw one
     of those.  It reduces the risk for
     smoking-related disease.  It reduces or
     eliminates the biological activity.  It's been
     on the market since 1996.
          Money is lost on every pack of it, but
     it's part of the whole aim of getting people to
     migrate to less hazardous products and so it
     remains on the market and available for sale.
          $200 million was invested in Vuse.  It's
     available nationwide.  Just a vapor.  It
     doesn't burn tobacco.  There's no smoke
     associated with it, but it does contain
     nicotine, and so there's a warning.  Even
     though it's not mandated, it's a voluntary
     warning about the dangers associated with it. It says that this product -- Vuse is a
     tobacco product because the nicotine used in
     this product is extracted from the tobacco
     plant.  No tobacco product has been shown to be
     safe and without risks.
          This tobacco product contains nicotine,
     which is addictive.  This product is intended
     for use only by adult tobacco consumers, and is
     not intended for persons who are pregnant or
     breastfeeding, persons who have an unstable
     heart condition, high blood pressure or
     diabetes, or persons who are at risk for heart
     disease or taking medicine for depression or
     asthma.  Keep out of the reach of children.
          That's the warning that's on there so
     people are informed.  Those who want to switch
     to smokeless tobacco can use products like the
     Snus, and they have been shown to reduce the
     risk of lung cancer by 75 percent.  And, of
     course, it carries the warning label that
     smokeless tobacco is addictive.
          The Zonnic, developed in Niconovum, and
     this is to help people quit smoking.  And it's
     packaged in such a way, sold in such a way that
     the price point is such that it's more accessible to people who want to quit.
          It's displayed and sold in the same places
     where the tobacco products are sold, so that
     people can just make a choice.  They can stand
     there at the display case and make a choice, do
     I continue smoking conventional cigarettes or
     using tobacco products, or do I quit, and it's
     right there.  So they're juxtaposed.
          Sold in smaller quantities, less
     expensive, cheaper than cigarettes.  So it's
     designed to be attractive to those who want to
     quit.
          And you heard about the Kentucky
     Bioprocessing, trying to move into other uses,
     non-dangerous uses of tobacco and to, indeed,
     to find ways to use tobacco in a very
     constructive and healthy way in producing
     medicines, and one of which they use to treat
     those two doctors who came from West Africa.
     They treated them at Emory Medical Center in
     Atlanta, and they've since been released.
          Are punitive damages needed to force
     Reynolds to manufacture and sell a safer
     product in 2014?  No, it's not.  No, they are
     not. Instruction number 12, you should consider
     the extent to which Reynolds' conduct has
     changed from the conduct on which you based
     your determination that punitive damages may be
     warranted, and the extent to which the
     circumstances have changed.
          And they have changed greatly.  It is not
     the company that those people, like Rodgeman
     and Heimann, would even recognize today.
          Mitigating evidence.  Mitigating evidence
     is evidence that may demonstrate that there is
     no need for punitive damages, or that a reduced
     amount of punitive damages should be imposed
     against Reynolds.
          Well, here's mitigating evidence, and you
     are to take this into account, mitigating
     evidence.  The FDA regulates all aspects of
     Reynolds' operations, from the manufacture of
     the product to the marketing of the product and
     to the sale of the product.
          The manufacturing, packaging and marketing
     are subject to comprehensive oversight by the
     FDA.  They have to disclose all harmful and
     even the potentially harmful constituents have
     to be disclosed to the Food and Drug Administration.
          Nicotine yields have to be disclosed.
     Additives have to be disclosed.  Any changes
     that they want to make to the product prior to
     being sold has to get FDA clearance.
          The manufacturing plants are subject to
     FDA inspection.  Introduction and advertising
     of less harmful products require FDA approval.
          All of their research has to be disclosed
     to the FDA.  So no more of this business about,
     well, I'm going to do some internal research
     and not share it with the government.  They've
     got to share it with the government now.
          Research related to smoking and addiction
     has to be shared with the FDA.
          Product ingredients by brand, that has to
     be shared with the FDA.
          Content and delivery of nicotine by brand,
     that has to be shared.
          Quantities of the carcinogens and any
     other harmful constituents in tobacco smoke and
     in tobacco products has to be shared with the
     FDA.
          They don't do it, they fall down on the
     job in any respect, the FDA can come in and close the plants, seize the products, stop the
     sales.  Basically just shut them down.
          And they have to pay for the privilege.
     They have to pay the policemen to enforce them.
     The FDA polices them and they have to pay user
     fees.
          And thus far, since this began in 2009,
     for the first five years, Reynolds has paid the
     FDA $440 million to inspect, regulate and
     potentially shut them down.
          The total punishment that Reynolds has
     received or is likely to receive from other
     sources.  These are examples of mitigating
     evidence.
          The total punishment that Reynolds has
     received or is likely to receive from other
     sources, other civil awards against Reynolds
     for the same conduct, those things are to be
     considered by you as mitigation.  Not in a
     vacuum.  It's not like this is the only case
     that Reynolds has had to deal with or will have
     to deal with, but the law says you should take
     into account what the -- as mitigation, what
     Reynolds has had to pay for claims of this
     kind.  And to Florida, thus far, it's $2 billion.
          The total payments for the 50 states, $42
     billion, and this is in perpetuity, this is
     forever.  As long as Reynolds is in the tobacco
     business making tobacco products, it has to
     make these payments.  This is forever.
          Total paid to date in punitive damages in
     Engle cases, $102 million.
          Jury instruction number six.  Any amount
     of punitive damages you award must be
     considered in relation to the amount of
     compensatory damages you have awarded to
     plaintiff.
          So there has to be some relationship
     between any amount of punitive damages and the
     amount that has already been awarded to
     Mr. Ellsworth's estate.  There has to be some
     relationship.
          Your verdict on Wednesday fully
     compensated David Ellsworth's estate.  There
     are over 5,000 cases that are still pending.
          An award of $300,000 in each pending case
     would result in $1.5 billion just in punitive
     damages awards.
          And, of course, you may not award an amount that would financially destroy Reynolds.
          While I'm on that subject, there is
     nothing wrong with paying shareholders
     dividends.  People can take their money and
     invest it wherever they wish.
          But if you stop paying dividends, see how
     fast shareholders will move on to another
     investment.
          So I would submit to you $300,000 would be
     a common sense punitive damages award, because
     it's 10 percent of $3 million.
          At that rate, over 5,000 cases, that's
     one-and-a-half billion dollars.
          Another suggestion would be an award of
     $600,000.  If that were awarded in 5,000 cases
     that are still pending, that would total
     $3 billion, and that's just in punitive damages
     award, not counting the compensatory.
          Now, plaintiff's request for $35 million
     in each pending case would result in a
     $175 billion in just punitive damages awards.
          Full compensation has been awarded with
     the $3 million.  Punitive damages are not
     needed to make Reynolds stop concealing
     information.  Punitive damages are not needed to force Reynolds to manufacture and sell safer
     products.
          An award of over $300,000 would be
     excessive when there are over 5,000 Engle cases
     still pending.
          Plaintiff wants more punishment without
     purpose.
          What kind of message would a verdict of
     punitive damages for the plaintiff send?  Even
     though Reynolds has already changed the way it
     does business, plaintiff wants more punishment
     for the conduct of a longtime past.
          Even though Reynolds has already paid its
     debt to society, plaintiff wants more
     punishment.
          Will that motivate other companies to
     modify their behavior?
          What kind of message will it send, even if
     you change everything that you do about your
     business, that you even pay the government to
     regulate you, that you pay the master
     settlement and pay billions of dollars in
     perpetuity, that you can be sued, that you can
     punished over and over and over again.
          Punitive damages are not needed, I submit to you.  Is a punitive award needed to make
     Reynolds stop concealing information?  No,
     because now everything is either on the
     Internet and it's certainly provided to the
     FDA.
          Would a punitive award make Reynolds more
     transparent?  No.  It can't be any more
     transparent.  Everything is subject to FDA
     inspection without announcing in advance that
     they're coming to look at it.
          Would a punitive award make Reynolds
     introduce different products?  No, I dare say
     not.  They've already introduced the Eclipse,
     the Snus, even products to get people to quit
     smoking - quit using their product.
          Would a punitive award make people more
     aware of the dangers of smoking?  No.
          Would a punitive award stop people from
     beginning to smoke?  No.  Youth?  No.
     Unfortunately, no, it would not.
          Would a punitive award cause more people
     to stop smoking?  No, it wouldn't.
          Would a punitive award serve any valid
     purpose?  I submit to you it would not.
          Punitive damages in this case are not necessary.
          And just because you checked the box yes
     on the verdict form that punitive damages,
     under the circumstances, are warranted doesn't
     mean they have to be awarded, because you've
     heard new evidence now that wasn't available to
     you on Wednesday, and that's what the law
     contemplates when it says you take into account
     where the company is now, you take into account
     the remoteness of the misconduct, you take into
     account whether punitive damages would deter,
     and there is nothing to be deterred, because
     the company is on lockdown.
          I mean, it really is on lockdown.  The FDA
     has R.J. Reynolds and the other tobacco
     companies on lockdown.  If they step out of
     line, they can shut them down.
          Again, I thank you for your time and thank
     you for your attention and your jury service.
     Thank you.
