MR. GUSTAFSON: I want to start by saying we appreciate your patience. You all have been very patient for this, you've been kind to us since you've been here and you've, obviously, paid a lot of close attention and taken a lot of notes.
Mrs. Huish appreciates your service in this case. This was her one case for her one husband for her one chance and this is the last day we're going to be together. I wanted to tell you on behalf of Mrs. Huish, thank you.
You've heard enough facts, you've heard the evidence and I know you-all want to get to deliberations. I'm going to be very brief this morning.
By your verdict you have already decided that punitive damages should be imposed against both these defendants. What does that mean? What is the purpose of punitive damages? The instructions that you have tell us that the purpose of punitive damages, the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed is to be as punishment and as a
deterrent to others.
Punishment and a deterrent to others. So we ask that when you consider the amounts to impose on these defendants for the reprehensibility and wrongness of their conduct, we ask you to award an amount that's going to be meaning -- a meaningful amount. Think about what they did, talk about what they did. You've got a stack of evidence showing you the things that they did are disturbing. It s disturbing that people in this country would do that to other people in this country and do it for money. It's disturbing.
Make reasonable use of the facts that you got. Decide what it is, what amount is going to get their attention, because that's what this is for, the amount you impose on these defendants as punishment and as a deterrent to others is designed -- is supposed to be designed to get their attention because everything that they did was for money. If you don't impose -- if you don't impose a meaningful amount, an amount that's going to get their attention, they will celebrate your verdict the way they celebrated the addictiveness of their product. Everything they did they did for money. Everything. They bragged about how much money they made. They
wrote memos about needing a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. The amount that you impose here has to be meaningful.
And when you're determining the amount, what you're supposed to consider is, number one, the nature, extent, and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances. And you're also supposed to consider each defendant's financial resources.
There is only one side of this story. We proved
this case with their own documents. We proved this case with the things they wrote at the time they did them. We brought you two of the four most public health experts on smoking and health, Dr. Michael Cummings and Dr. David Burns. You heard Dr. David Burns quoted his research, quoted in the 2010 U.S. Surgeon General Report yesterday during cross examination, Dr. Burns, who came here and testified to you about the things they did and why they did them and the -- and the effect and consequences it had on millions of people, 400,000 plus people die in this country every year. That's just the United States.
MR. BRENNER: Objection, State Farm, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: That's just the United States.
Philip Morris's lawyer got up here in closing argument and he called Dr. Cummings dangerous.
Folks, nothing about that has changed. Nothing about them has changed. The evidence that we put in yesterday morning, it took about two minutes, showed you how much money it is that they make because this is one of the things you are to consider, the law you've got in your lap, Philip Morris revenues in 2009 from selling cigarettes, from selling an addictive, deadly product, they made $20,919,000,000. Do the math. It's $57,312,329 a day. A day.
R.J. Reynolds' 2009 revenue was $7,350,000,000. $20,136,986 a day. That's from selling cigarettes. That's from selling stuff that you can walk down in the Hippodrome, to the tobacco shop down there, you can buy 14 different kinds of Camel cigarettes, they got pink boxes, they got wides, they got menthols, and they got filters you can squeeze and click and get yourself a little extra flavor. Folks, they are in the business of selling a product that's addictive and they are in the business of trying to get children to smoke their product. That's what these defendants do -MR. BRENNER: Objection, State Farm.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: -- that's the way they've always been -- it's the way they have always been, it's where they are today, it's where they're always going to be. Their goal is to get replacement smokers. Because Lord knows they don't want to take nicotine out of the product. You heard Philip Morris's guy yesterday say, If you take nicotine out of the product, our competitors are going to sell more cigarettes than us. Money.
R.J. Reynolds' guy got on the stand says, Nothing keeps them from meeting at the Plaza Hotel again or anywhere else of their choosing to come to an agreement one more time, this time make an agreement that you're going to put addictive drugs in your product, take them out, they can do it. They've been able to do it since the '20's, they decided not to do it and the reason they decided not to do it is because if they can get you started,
they can keep you going. That s the whole purpose. Whole people.
Get people -- get young kids to be replacement smokers, to get lifetime profits -MR. BRENNER: Objection, State Farm, Your
Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: The issues you are to decide in this case are based on the evidence you already heard. I'm only going to be a couple more minutes, two, three minutes.
You know these companies knew their products were addictive, you know that. You know that these companies designed their products to be addictive. Designed products. You heard the R.J. Reynolds' guy yesterday say they changed, they adjust the amounts of nicotine depending on whether it's an entry-level product or whether it's a product that's an unfiltered Camel or whatever it is that they're selling that has high levels of nicotine to satisfy the habituated user. They added it. They could change that. They have different brands. They want to be consistent, they want your Camel number nine in the pink package to be light and luscious and they want their Turkish blend in their unfiltered Camels to be heavy and everything that someone expects them to be. They can change the amount.
They can take the nicotine out. They've done it, but you can't find it. They don't want to sell that stuff, that's what people use to quit.
That's what people use to quit smoking because they know that most of their customers would rather not be doing what they're doing. They knew people were going to die. They knew people were going to die and they bragged about how much money they could carry to the bank.
And as you look back on these things, ask yourself, Has there been a time, has there been a time when the defendants looked back and reflected on what they did and say to them-self, We've got a different take on this now? We have a different take on this now, we're not just out to make money, we're not just out to get a larger bag to carry the money to the bank, we're not just out to hook kids on our product and watch 400,000 people die a year.
MR. BRENNER: Objection, State Farm.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GUSTAFSON: What you've seen -- what you've seen is their effort to continue to get replacement smokers.
You've seen them silence their scientists through their lawyers, when scientists with a conscience who works for them comes forward and says, Y'all need to stop doing this, I can't take these company positions, you saw the memo up there,
it's the one that had the underlines in it.
It's true that the nature and extent of the misconduct and the related circumstance, the very language in this jury instruction, what they did is offensive, what they did is disgusting. It's
disturbing and yet R.J. Reynolds sat there yesterday and told you, We didn't intend to lie and mislead you. Nothing about them has changed.
These two companies, this industry, has made a mantra of never having to say you're sorry. So, folks, you're going to have to do it for them.
You're going to have to impose punitive damages on them that are going to get their attention.
How do you go about doing that? You may consider harms by other persons -- suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit. When considering whether to award punitive damages, you may only consider harm R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and Philip Morris's conduct caused Mr. Or Mrs.
Huish. You may also consider harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongness of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and Philip Morris's conduct.
The amount of damages that you awarded in the
first phase of this trial was $750,000 for which Mrs. Huish is grateful and thankful. That's your starting point here, $750,000 because it has to have a reasonable relationship to the harm caused to Mr. Or Mrs. Huish, and your award was $750,000.
The punitive damages award should not be so great as to bankrupt either one of these companies. It would have to be a very large number, indeed, to bankrupt one of these companies. What we will ask you to do in this case is to award some multiple of $750,000, a multiple. What we call a single-digit multiplier. It can be one times $750,000, which would be 750; 2 times $750,000, a million 5. What I will tell you is nine times $750,000 is 600 -750,000 -- I'm sorry, 6,750,000 per defendant.
That's not going to bankrupt anybody. We hope it would get their attention. That's the intent of this, to get their attention and to deter others from this kind of conduct.
That amount of money is three one-hundredths of 1 of what Philip Morris makes in a single day, three one-hundredths of 1. That number is nine one-hundredths of 1 of what R.J. Reynolds makes in a single day. That number bears a reasonable relationship of harm to Mrs. Huish based on the
verdict you've already given. You need to get their attention with your verdict because it's the only thing they care about is money.
I'm going to leave you with this thought. Many of us have been in places in our lives where we had the chance and the opportunity and the ability to do something that was the right thing to do, may not be the easy thing to do but it was the right thing to do and many of us have fallen short. Many of us have chosen to take the beaten path and not do the right thing. Might have been something little, might have been something big, we've all had different experiences. You are in a very unique position today. You are in a very unique and powerful position, where you get to stand up and you get to tell somebody what you think about what they
did. You re not going to get this chance again. You'll never get this chance again with regard to Mrs. Huish. The chances of you ever sitting on another jury involving a cigarette manufacturer are slim to none. This is your time. Do something meaningful today.
These are my suggestions to you. Please, whatever you do don't award more than 6.75 million per defendant. Don't award more than that, please.
Something -- that number or less, make it meaningful. Make your voice heard today. Thank you.



THE COURT: Thank you very much. Does the plaintiff have a rebuttal?
MR. SALES: I do, Your Honor. I believe it will take about 20 minutes.
THE COURT: That's fine. Go ahead.
MR. SALES: Should I do it now?
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. SALES: I've got many things to say and a short period of time in which to say them. So I'm going to try to pick up the pace a little bit. I would like to begin by saying it's only in a
courtroom with a room full of lawyers where people can disagree so much about what's said on two pages, the instructions, not what the judge -- not what lawyers says is the law but what tne judge says is the law because what you've been told in this case, effectively, is your verdict tells you what you said, that punitive damages were warranted, not to award them, and I ask you to consider whether, in fact, that's what these instructions say? We know a couple things. We know a couple of things, that you did not hear this morning in the argument of either one of these lawyers, nothing about John Huish, and the judge is going to tell you and has told you and you have copies of these instructions, that the award that you give, if you give one in this case, is to be based on the harms suffered to John Huish, to John Huish. And you are allowed to consider the reprehensibility, the wrongfulness of the conduct you've heard about for a couple of weeks, in deciding your award, but the amount of the award has to be based on the things that not one of these lawyers talked about, neither one of them, neither one of them, nothing about the man whose life was cut short at least 50 percent by them or 50 percent by them. Nothing.
You know that you're allowed to consider the reprehensibility of their conduct and they urge you by your verdict in rejecting the claim of concealment and the claim of conspiracy to conceal, to suggest that you throw out all of that other evidence because it is irrelevant to your consideration. And I want to ask you a little bit about that. And ask you if it makes any sense to suggest to you that just because Addison Yeaman's comments were kept secret, that that has nothing to do with defective and unreasonably dangerous products that you have concluded are responsible at least in part for Mr. Huish's death. And that's what they're asking you to do. They're asking you to consider whether or not you should throw out all of that evidence that came in largely through Dr. Cummings because it doesn't have anything to do with the unreasonable and dangerous qualities of their products. I would submit to you that you may and you must, most respectfully, consider that
evidence, as well. It would be unfair and unjust not to do so.
Going -- going back long -- yes, it is a long time ago, it's a very long time ago. There are people who have spent their lives trying to make
things right for things that have gone wrong in the past. And this is the opportunity for whatever reason as a result of the twists and turns of our judicial system where we find ourselves today, in 2011, in the only one shot given to this lady and to you to do right.
So the argument is, from Mr. Furr on behalf of R.J. Reynolds, Don't punish us or, if so, $87,000, I submit to you that that's two minutes, if you do the math, it's a little bit more, a hair more, than two minutes of the revenue stream. And if you think the relevant measure is profit, you have that information, as well. How much they make, how much they get to keep, and how much should be awarded to this lady for punitive damages for the loss of her husband and the loss that she has suffered.
So they suggest to you, you know, that has nothing to do with defective and unreasonably dangerous products. What does it say? Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? And it goes on. It is true that for 50 years they didn't tell anybody how they really thought about their products, that is true. That they want to suggest to you, however, that has nothing to do with the
unreasonably dangerous qualities of these products and that you should throw out that evidence largely through Dr. Cummings because you didn't find that Mr. Huish was harmed by -- through the concealment, itself, but I would submit to you that you did find that he was harmed by those unreasonably dangerous products. You said so.
So let's go back to the instructions just a moment if we could. You know that you're allowed to consider the harm to others in deciding the magnitude of the wrong and even though these instructions are quite brief, you will recall your instructions from yesterday that set out the types of conduct, the four routes to a determination of punitive damages, and I agree with Mr. Furr on one thing, we don't know which one you took, we don't know whether you decided it was in the nature of intentional conduct, whether it was reckless, wanton, and all those other factors that were provided to you as a route to the disposition of punitive damages. We do not know. But we know that one of them must have been a guidepost for you.
So when you go back and consider the reprehensibility of the conduct, that is important in your considerations because you are allowed to
and instructed by the court that you are allowed to, take those matters into consideration, how bad were they? How wrong was it? And that is the time when you are allowed to consider, not all the things that these witnesses and lawyers talked about in phase
two, because there s nothing in these instructions about stewardship; there's nothing in there about that. In fact -- in fact, if you take a look at the instruction, what it says is two things:
Punishment. They're talking about punishing them in the future. We're not here to punish. We're not asking you for punishment for things that they're going to do, that they have not yet done. We're asking you to punish them for the things that happened to John Huish just like His Honor's instructing you that you should do, if you award punitive damages.
And all of this stuff about deterrence, look very carefully at the words of those instructions, because they refer to deterrence to others. Others. The message that the law allows you to deliver in this case is not a message to them. They know what they did. They know what they said. That's not the law. The law is a deterrence to others. And they haven't said anything about what it is that would be
necessary for a message to deter others. We are telling you in this courtroom that when -- in fact, when you consider the life of John Huish, these are the Camel products of today. All Camels.
When Mr. Huish started smoking them, that's what was available to him. Before that it was the Lucky Strikes, which we had here previously in the courtroom, for which they're now responsible. And you can get them in any color, any variety and manner of packaging, you can get them pink and black, and ask yourself what you know from the evidence in this case, Mr. Furr mentioned children, who are some of these things really for? And one of the thing that's very interesting about this case and in this phase two is that, yes, we spent a lot of time talking to you about how children, children -- they say they want abstinence. We spent a lot of time talking to you about how children become addicted to nicotine because that is where the public health war really is.
MR. BRENNER: Objection, State Farm, Your Honor.
MR. SALES: In all of their stewardship, in all of their good guys, in all of the things that they will have you believe that they are doing today, do
you really believe that they want to sell less cigarettes? Do you really believe that as they downsize and their profits grow, that their goal is to sell fewer cigarettes? Well, you can buy, if you can get them, if you can find them, and these you can find just about anywhere, Camel Crush on the package, squeeze the filter, hear it click, change the flavor.
MR. BRENNER: Excuse me.
MR. FURR: Objection, Your Honor. There's no evidence in this case of any of this.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. SALES: Ask yourselves, members of the jury, with respect to the phase two evidence that you heard in this case, if it was really a changed company, if they were really interested in getting
the cigarette -- getting cigarettes out of the hands of children, where is -- where was -- where was the "keep them out of children's hands" specialist. Dr. Figlar if he knows something about that, why wasn't he asked about those things? Why wasn't he asked about those things? Because the answer is, in this country where there is still a war, where there is still a war on tobacco with all of the lives lost, 434,000 last year, that has not changed.
I want to spend a little bit of time talking about this issue since it was raised by Mr. Brenner about the ammoniation of cigarettes. No one ever said that cigarette tobacco doesn't contain ammonia. The point of the examination of Dr. Cummings in that regard was that it is partly an additive to tobacco. And Mr. Brenner says that we should be obliged in this phase two to cross-examine Ph.D. chemical engineers about their products.
The judge isn't going to tell you that. We proved this issue in phase one and lawyers worry sometimes, and I hope I don't insult anyone, that people sometimes in a longer trial forget some of the thing that happen. But Dr. Cummings talked about that. He talked about the addition of ammonia-based products for purposes of flavoring and, also, for the purposes of the regulation of pH and how the regulation of the pH changes the way that nicotine reaches the brain.
Now, let's just talk about all of the evidence in this case very quickly and see if we can put the puzzle together as to who's right. This is from a Reynolds document in 1976. It s in evidence. What were they talking about? They knew that the change in the pH of the tobacco smoke changes the
availability of it to the brain. We showed you that, just like Dr. Cummings said. They knew that one of the reasons you could do that, quoting them in 1973, easily is so that when you want to give an additional kick, you regulate the pH and you do it by the addition of ammonium hydroxide or diammonium phosphate, that was the undisputed evidence from the plaintiff's case in phase one. Nobody else said anything about that.
And so what did we do? Well, you have a referee and there's no dispute about what the referee said about this, that would be the Surgeon General.
E, please.
The Surgeon General in 2010, just last year, they have done things the Surgeon General said that have made cigarette products, at least potentially, more addictive and one of those approaches has been the control of pH. That's what they've done. So the idea that we should have called another witness in phase two to prove what we proved without rebuttal at all in phase one, was, most respectfully, just silly.
Now, the other thing Mr. Brenner did -- if you'd put that up -- was to suggest to you that we
id something wrong in phase two by showing you what
their financial resources were. Well, do you know what, members of the jury, it turns out that the court has instructed you that there's two things that you're supposed to look at: Nature, extent, and degree of misconduct and so forth, we did that already. That's number one, when you talk about amount and, number two, financial resources. They didn't challenge those. They said look at the profit figures and the revenue figures, if you think that's important. We would ask you to do that and ask you whether or not you can do so within the limitations that the court also instructs you on. They're very important because there are two. Don't bankrupt them. And we ask that you not do that. We ask you to accept the notion that what's been requested in this case is not going to bankrupt these companies. That's not really a problem. And the other is that there ought to be a reasonable relationship between the compensatory damages and the punitive award. And Mr. Furr said, That ought to be two minutes' worth of revenue to my client.
If you find that -- if you find that that will send a message to a company that makes several billion dollars a year, that is certainly your
purview. We submit that it would not do that and it would not accomplish the twin goals of punishment for things that happened in the past and deterrence to others in the future.
Mr. Brenner did get me, he got me good. He proved that Dr. Lapowicz agreed with one out of two contradictory statements in the Surgeon General's report. I accept responsibility for that, that's true, but this whole thing about consistent message that they'll show you on their Web site and I'll talk a little more about that in just a second if I have time, but he disagrees with this, that's where all the action is right now. People are very concerned, not only about having smoking causing harm to themselves, and those who smoke, but smoking cause to others, bystanders, children, relatives, friends, and he says, and it's certainly in the interest of Philip Morris to deny, that that's not true.
And if you do find that the question is whether or not these defendants need to be deterred and not somebody else, I do ask you -- I know this looked a little bit different in closing argument today -- I ask you to go back to this, because when you want to find out a little bit about the attitudes of this
company, these companies, what you know is that everything that they are claiming credit for in this courtroom, with the exception of the two identified, everything that they are claiming credit for, came kicking and screaming down the road, everything. Everything, except for those two. And you know what, with the thousands and many, many people that they have in their companies now today, is there evidence in this case? Well, we haven't been able to discuss every piece of paper that the defendants, R.J. Reynolds in this case, put into evidence but just use your common sense. If this was a company
that was really motivated to promote abstinence among children, would you not have heard about it, and use your common sense about things that you know to have happened in the past.
I'm going to briefly summarize. This is another one of those "Orlando Sentinel" articles that for reasons you have to decide for yourself, R.J. Reynolds put into evidence, and what it tells you is that Marlboro, Philip Morris, is being advertised through the backdoor in movies that are later played on television. That's what this article is about.
And if you choose, and it's February 19th in
1983, you can even see they said that they're -- you know, they have these public relations people that will talk to you about these issues and you need to hear about them, and that person was actually interviewed in the story, the one I'm talking about, and what he said was, Well, we didn't know that those "Superman II" would end up on television and the fact that Marlboro cigarettes appeared 22 times in "Superman II," a movie that was made after the advertising ban on TV. We just -- we just look at scripts and, yeah, if people want to lend a little bit of authenticity to their movie sets, that's fine.
And I would ask you, you know, when a company says that it's just a good guy now and they do all these things, whether or not you can trust them. Because, actually, even though the punishment is supposed to be for the past and not for the future, all those arguments are not consistent with the judge's instructions, they're not. But if you decide you need to know about what their attitude really is, just look at the witnesses, most respectfully, who came into this courtroom, the instructions that you have before still apply, which of the witnesses crawfished left and right and
wouldn't give a straight answer, which executives were there, two of them who came in and don't want to even accept, accept, one of the Engle findings that the court instructed you on with respect to their past conduct, not even here now. You have to decide if you can trust them.
I want to say just one more word about the damages in this case. It is for you to decide and only you can know, only you can know if a reasonable multiple, and I agree with Mr. Gustafson, it should be a single-digit multiple, the amounts that you found in this case, not two minutes' worth of revenue or six minutes' worth of profit, that won't even go noticed by anyone. This is a very unique system where you have, through the verdict that you will give in this case, to tell people, other people outside this courtroom, what you think about what the harm was that was done and the fact that the harm done in this case was the use of a reasonably dangerous cigarette product by a young man. It has to be reflective of the harm done and it has to be proportionate to the verdict that you've given already. And we ask you on behalf of Mrs. Huish to
tell people what it really means.
Thank you.
