MR. FURR: Thank you, Your Honor. If it please the Court? Counsel?
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen. I want to begin by thanking you for your service. And I want to thank you on behalf of the thousands of women and men that make up the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. And I want to thank you personally for the attention that you've given us during this trial and for your patience during this trial because you sure had to be patient.
Mr. Gustafson said one thing this morning that I 100 percent agree with, is that this case should have been about three days long, not two weeks long. The reason it took two weeks instead of three days is we spent a lot of time talking to you about things that in the end are not going to be of much assistance to you when you're asked to look at the questions that you will be asked to answer on the verdict form.
Much like the closing argument that you heard this morning, we spent a lot of time in this case
reproving the Engle findings. Even though all were asked during jury selection to commit that you would not require the plaintiffs to reprove the Engle findings, we spent days reproving the Engle findings.
We also spent a lot of time in this trial talking about smokers other than Mr. Huish. This is a case about Mr. Huish's smoking, not about others, but the plaintiff spent days talking about other smokers.
We also spent a lot of time during the trial talking about things that simply never impacted Mr. Huish. This is a case about Mr. Huish, not about other things that may have impacted other smokers.
So what I'm going to try to do this morning is try to assist you in identifying the facts that will actually help you answer the questions on your verdict form.
Just like I suggested to you all during the opening statement, I think that you will find that the facts that actually help you answer the questions on your verdict form are the facts that have to do with Mr. Huish. So that's where I'm going to begin with the same facts I showed you in opening statement. And these are the facts that I
think you will find to be the most important things for you to consider in this case. And I will tell you that these facts are undisputed.
You will recall that these facts were based upon the admissions of Mrs. Huish and the admissions of her paid witnesses that came here. These facts are undisputed, and you know them well.
The first fact is that Mr. Huish knew that smoking was harmful to his health and addictive before he smoked his first cigarette.
There was a suggestion to you today that he never knew, that he never understood these things. I'm going to review this evidence with you. But it's amazing, he was taught that smoking was harmful to his health and addictive before he ever smoked that first cigarette, before any addiction was affecting him in any way whatsoever that's what he was taught.
Second Mr. Huish was warned continually that smoking was harmful to his health and addictive throughout his life. I'm going to review that evidence with you also.
Third, Mr. Huish never attempted to quit smoking not one single time before he got sick in 1993. I will review that evidence with you.
Fourth, Mr. Huish had the ability to quit smoking at any time that he chose to. And you'll recall that every expert in this case, Dr. Burns, Drs. Cummings, Dr. Tucker, all told you that any smoker can quit smoking if they're motivated to quit, if they make persistent efforts to quit.
Finally, Mr. Huish could have substantially decreased his risk of dying from a smoking-related disease by choosing to quit. Quitting matters. And the reason it matters is that when you quit, your risk of developing disease goes down and you become
very similar to that of a nonsmoker depending on how long you quit. And I'm going show you what Dr.. Burns told you about those issues.
Before I get to all that, I feel that I need to respond to a couple of the things that Mr. Gustafson talked to you about during his opening statement.
And I need to put these things in their proper context.
Let me begin by reminding you, this is a case about Mr. Huish. It's not a generic case. So let's put some of this evidence in the proper context.
First, as the Court's instructions instructed you this morning, they were read to you, the Engle findings do not answer the issues that you are here
to decide.
You all know by now that the Engle jury heard no evidence about Mr. Huish. The Engle findings don't mention Mr. Huish. The Engle findings can't even be considered until after you determine whether or not Mr. Huish was a class member. The Engle findings do not establish that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his death. And they don't establish that the actions of RJR or Philip Morris were a legal cause of his death.
And the Engle findings do not establish that tobacco companies are responsible for Mr. Huish's death. That's what you were instructed.
Now, I'm not trying to contradict these findings in any way. I'm not trying to diminish these findings in any way. These are serious matters that we take seriously, but we need to put these matters in their proper context.
This is the work that was done by another jury. This was all done before you got here. I don't know why we spent three days trying to prove the Engle findings again, but that's what we did. But those findings don't answer the questions that you're here to decide.
I want to talk about some other evidence that
we need to put in context. You heard a great deal of discussion this morning, again, about actions by the tobacco companies that may have influenced what people thought about the dangers of smoking. And in particular, you heard a deal of discussion about advertising.
Now, not one time during this trial did anybody for the defense suggest to you that Mr. Huish was never exposed to tobacco advertising. That would be a ridiculous thing to suggest. In all likelihood, he saw tobacco advertising throughout the course of his life. And no one's suggesting that to you in any way that he didn't see advertising.
But the question is not whether he saw advertising, the question is whether that advertising caused him to misunderstand the dangers of smoking.
Now, I don't think I heard the term used this morning, but what the plaintiff's witnesses said throughout this trial was that the advertising provided a psychological crutch that kept smokers smoking notwithstanding their awareness of the
rs of smoking. Again, talking about other rs because it has nothing to do with Mr. Huish. I'm sure you remember that Mrs. Huish admitted
that her husband never saw or relied upon anything that the tobacco companies said.
When I cross examined both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings who -- at least Dr. Burns had reviewed the record, they both admitted that there was no evidence that Mr. Huish ever saw or relied upon anything that the tobacco companies did or said.
Why did we spend so much time talking about evidence that doesn't help you decide the case of Mrs. Huish?
I told you we spent too much time on general issues. And here's -- y'all, here we give exhibits the numbers and letters when we talk, here's Exhibit A of how we spent too much time in this case on evidence that's not going to help y'all very much I don't think.
Dr. Cummings was here for three days. He was asked: You told the jury during Mr. Sales' examination that you were here as a generic witness?
Answer: That's right.
In other words, you're not here to offer case-specific testimony, are you?
No.
And here's the important part, Ladies and Gentlemen.
You're not here to try to connect the dots between the defendants' conduct and Mr. Huish, are you?
Answer: No. I'm just here to testify on the topics I do.
You're not here to make any case-specific linkage between the defendants' conduct and Mr. Huish?
No.
That was a curious thing, we spent three days with this witness and he told us that he actually didn't have enough time to study the facts of this case because he testifies in so many tobacco cases that he just can't actually learn the facts of each case. He told you he had already testified in about 30 Engle cases.
Y'all are going to have to decide if that type of generic testimony helps you decide the issues in this case. I don't think that it does and I'll tell you why.
Generic testimony might help you decide a generic case like the Engle class action case, but this is not a generic case. This was a case about Mr. Huish. Mr. Huish was not a generic person. He didn't come from a generic family. You heard that
Mr. Huish did not grow up in a generic community.
He was not a generic smoker. Mr. Huish was not taught generic values as a child. Generic testimony will not help you decide this case.
Now, I'm going to review this with you as I go forward today, but I just want to give you one example of why you have to address Mr. Huish's case
individually and not as a generic case.
Here's what Dr. Cummings told you all. I asked him: I want to ask you this question. Was it the cultural norm in the United States in the 1930s and '40s for children to be taught by their parents that smoking was dangerous and addictive?
The answer was: No.
All of this discussion about people who didn't know that smoking was dangerous and addictive in the 1930s and '40s had nothing to do with Mr. Huish. He was taught by his family in that very time frame those exact facts.
So much for reproving the Engle findings for generic testimony for generic witnesses.
I want to turn with you, again, to the facts that I think will help you decide the issues in this case. And the truth of the matter is I don't think you have to -MR. SALES: Excuse me, Your Honor, statement of personal opinion with respect to what the truth is; objection.
MR. FURR: I will rephrase, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you very much.
MR. FURR: You will see that you don't have to look very far beyond the admissions that Mrs. Huish made during her cross examination to have the facts that you need to decide the actual issues that you are here to decide. These are all things that Mrs. Huish told us during her cross examination.
Mrs. Huish admitted that Mr. Huish was taught at a young age that smoking was addictive and bad for his health. And I'm going to review this testimony for you so there's no doubt as to what you heard.
Question: As your lawyer -- as you told your lawyer in response to your lawyer's question, you told the jury that your husband was taught at a young age in his family that smoking was addictive and bad for his health, right?
Answer: Yes.
Mrs. Huish's family -- Mr. Huish's family repeatedly asked him to quit smoking throughout his life. Mrs. Huish admitted exactly that.
Almost done, ma'am. You told us earlier that throughout your lives you asked your husband to quit smoking many times, right?
Answer: Yes.
Your children also asked your husband to quit smoking many times, correct?
Answer: Yes.
Mrs. Huish admitted that Mr. Huish never tried to quit smoking prior to 1993.
But prior to 1993 when your husband became sick, he never tried to quit smoking, did he?
Answer: No.
The next admission. Mr. Huish never took any steps to quit smoking prior to 1993.
Question: But prior to 1993 when your husband became sick, he never tried to quit smoking, did he?
Answer: No.
That's what we just saw.
Question: And, in fact, he never took any steps to help himself quit smoking prior to that time, did he?
Answer: No.
Ladies and Gentlemen, these admissions by Mrs. Huish during her cross examination, you will see when you look at the verdict form and the
instructions that you get, completely defeat all the claims the plaintiffs are making in this case.
You do not have to look any further than Mrs. Huish's own admissions to decide the issues in this case.
I want to turn now to discussing with you the specific legal claims -Alicia, we're going to need the Elmo.
-- to discussing the specific legal claims in this case and the questions that you're going to have to answer and the evidence that relates to those claims. And I'll start with the first question.
The first question you've been told deals with the issue of class membership.
Was John Delbet Huish addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and Philip Morris-USA, Inc., and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death?
Let's break that into two parts. Was Mr. Huish addicted? The plaintiffs this morning seemed to be arguing that we had done something wrong by not contesting whether he was addicted or not. You heard the evidence in this case, whether someone was addicted or not depends upon the definition you use
for addiction. It's that simple.
Dr. Tucker explained to you yesterday that if you strictly interpret the criteria of the DSM that Mr. Huish was not addicted. But he also told you that based upon his clinical judgment he believed that Mr. Huish was addicted. And he told you that that's exactly what he told the plaintiffs during his deposition. So I'm not sure what the argument is with respect to Dr. Tucker's testimony. The defendants are not contesting whether or not Mr. Huish was addicted.
But that's not the end of your analysis on question 1. That's only the beginning of the analysis because what you have to decide is whether such addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Huish's death.
Put the -- you will see instructions with respect to what a legal cause is. There is a lot of terminology there, it's written by lawyers for lawyers. You're going to have to interpret that language. I'm going to suggest to you a way to think about this question, the legal cause.
I suggest to you that the question that you ask yourself is: Did addiction to nicotine control John Huish and leave him no choice but to continue
ing until he died?
Let's start more generally. Let's start with r smokers since that's what we spent so much
time on and then we'll work towards the evidence with respect to this issue regarding Mr. Huish specifically.
So let's begin with this question. Do addicted smokers have no choice but to continue smoking until they develop smoking related disease?
You don't have to look any further than the testimony of the plaintiff's paid witnesses to know the answer to this question.
Let's start with Dr. Cummings. He told you that addicted smokers quit by the millions before 1965. You know, there was a suggestion this morning that, sure, people can quit today because they know information that wasn't known in the 1950s and '60s. Look at what Dr. Cummings told us.
Question: Let me see if you agree with this.
By 1965 the Surgeon General has estimated that 17.6 million U.S. smokers had quit, correct?
That's right.
1965. You recall that you were told that the quitting in this country began in the early 1950s. When the first reports of the epidemiologic studies
and the mouse skin painting studies hit the lay press, people began quitting by millions including addicted smokers, and it didn't end.
Dr. Cummings told us that approximately 30 million smokers quit smoking before 1960- -- between 1964 and 1979. He told us that that was the highest rate of quitting smoking ever experienced in this country.
But it didn't end there. Dr. Burns told us that by 1993 when Mr. Huish stopped smoking, that about 45 million ex-smokers were living in the United States. 45 million ex-smokers, most of whom were addicted, according to the plaintiff's own witnesses, quit smoking during the years that Mr. Huish never made a single attempt to try.
I asked Dr. Burns just to be clear: I want to talk a little bit about what that means because I believe you told us that most of these 45 million former smokers would have been addicted smokers at some point, correct?
Answer: That's likely true.
This testimony was solicited so that you will see that Mr. Huish was no different than had the 45 million that chose to quit.
Dr. Cummings -- there was a lot of discussion
during the case about Mr. Huish being a heavy smoker and heavy addicted. I'll talk about that in a little bit more detail because Dr. Tucker explained that to us yesterday.
But Dr. Cummings was asked: Millions and millions of heavily-addicted cigarette smokers have quit smoking, haven't they, sir? The answer was yes.
Let's take a look at these numbers. These numbers are huge. When you start talking in millions, it's really hard to really imagine exactly what they mean, so let's look at them a little more closely.
You heard this morning a suggestion that
addiction leaves smokers helpless to quit. Helpless to quit is what you were told this morning. Is that what the evidence is? Is that what the evidence is?
The plaintiff's paid witnesses admitted that 17.6 million had quit by the year after the first Surgeon General's Report. Like we just discussed,
30 million quit in a 15 year period between 1964 and 1979. Those numbers are mind boggling. Think about what that means. 30 million peopler quit in 15 years, that's 2 million people a year. On average that means that about 5,000 people a day quit
smoking, 5,000 addicted smokers a day quit smoking year in, year out for 15 years between 1964 and 1979. Are addicted smokers helpless to quit is, that what these numbers tell us?
And, of course, by 1993, 45 million people had quit as Dr. Burns suggested to you.
We didn't see this this morning, but during Dr. Cummings' examination -- you might remember this exhibit -- Dr. Cummings put up the black-and-white part of this exhibit which he titled, The Addictive Process and Cycle. He told you that there was diminishing choice, last completely free choice, and he showed you sort of this closed loop and said that there was relapse and increasing dependence.
You might recall I asked Dr. Cummings, I said, what's missing, Dr. Cummings, what is missing from this diagram in order to accurately depict the nature of tobacco addiction? Here's what's missing Ladies and Gentlemen, the off ramps. What's missing is that millions and millions and millions of heavily-addicted smokers quit smoking, broke their addiction, as Dr. Burns told you, and quit smoking permanently, became former smokers all during the years that Mr. Huish never made a single attempt to quit smoking. Still a big number. Still a big
number.
So, of course, I can't resist talking about football at least one time during this closing. So I tried to find an analogy that would help explain what a million people really is and -- what 45 million people really is. The Swamp. 45 million people would be equivalent to filling up the Swamp approximately 500 times. You could fill up the Swamp 500 times with the former smokers in this country, most of whom who been addicted, many of whom had been heavily addicted during the years that Mr. Huish never made a single quit attempt.
In fact, based upon the quitting statistics in 1993 when Mr. Huish quit smoking, which was about 3,000 per day you heard every month, every 30 day month we have you would approximately fill up the Swamp again with people who had broke their addiction and quit smoking.
Are smokers helpless to quit smoking? Are addicted smokers helpless to quit smoking? Is that what these numbers show us?
Not everybody quit, but anybody can quit. Anybody can quit. That's why we conducted this cross examination of Dr. Burns.
I want to talk a little bit about what that
means because I believe you told us that most of those 45 million former smokers would have been addicted smokers at some point, correct?
Answer: That's likely true.
But it's pretty obvious they broke their addiction, correct?
Answer: Yes.
There's no addiction that can't be broken. There's no addiction that can't be broken. Anyone can quit.
We asked Dr. Cummings the same type of question. He resisted the question initially, rephrased the question, and I said that wasn't my question, sir. You have stated in the past that anyone who smokes can quit?
Answer: I have stated that in the past, yes.
The evidence is pretty clear that any smoker can quit, that heavily-addicted smokers can quit.
How do they do it, though, how do they quit?
You know the answer to that. Through motivation and persistence. Think about the 45 million Americans who quit smoking by 1993. What was their secret? What was their secret? What did the plaintiff's paid witnesses tell you about the secret to quitting smoking? They told you, first of all, a smoker has
to want to quit smoking. They have to be motivated to quit smoking. They told you that a smoker has to try to quit smoking. Pretty common sense. If you don't want to quit and you don't try to quit, you're not going to quit. But if you're motivated and persistent in your efforts to quit, you're going to succeed.
All three of these witnesses, you'll recall, testified to you if a smoker is motivated to quit smoking and if a smoker makes a persistent effort to quit, because it doesn't always happen on a first time for everybody, it doesn't always happen on the first time. Sometimes smokers have to quit once, fail, learn better how to deal with their addiction and then succeed on a subsequent quit attempt.
We're not disputing that issue. Some smokers take more than one attempt. I think the testimony was the average is three or four. But all these experts told you if a smoker is motivated and persistent, that 100 percent of addicted smokers can quit.
That's what the evidence is.
Let's turn to Mr. Huish because the real question for you when you think about this addiction causation issue, the real question for you is whether Mr. Huish wanted to quit smoking and whether
he made persistent efforts to quit. We don't have to look any further than the testimony of his family members to know the answer to that question.
First, Mr. Huish never took any steps, any steps to quit smoking. Mrs. Huish's cross examination:
But prior to 1993 when your husband became sick, he never tried to quit smoking, did he?
Answer: No.
And, in fact, he never took any steps to
himself quit smoking prior to that time, did he?
Answer: No.
His daughter, Mrs. Janet Huish Tucker, did he ever make any preparations to quit smoking?
Answer: No.
Same testimony from his son Jesse Huish.
But then rather than restricting ourselves to just those depositions, as you know Dr. Burns reviewed additional depositions so we asked Dr.
Burns what his review of the records showed.
You're not aware of any evidence in this record that Mr. Huish ever made a plan to quit smoking or took any steps towards executing that plan, are you?
Answer: I'm not aware of any evidence that suggests that that happened.
He never took step one towards quitting smoking. It just didn't happen.
We asked the family members whether Mr. Huish ever tried to quit smoking. You've seen this testimony from Mrs. Huish, but it's worth looking at again.
But prior to 1993 when your husband became sick, he never tried to quit smoking, did he?
Answer: No.
To Mrs. Janet Huish Tucker, question: How many times -- let me restate that.
Did your father ever try to quit smoking?
Answer: No.
James Huish. Do you remember a time when your father tried to stop smoking?
Answer: No.
Jesse Huish. Do you remember your father ever attempting to quit smoking?
Jesse: I don't think that he ever attempted to quit smoking.
Let's talk about whether he ever wanted to quit smoking, whether he ever wanted to quit smoking.
The suggestion was made to you this morning that you assume that he wanted to quit smoking but that he was afraid to try to quit smoking based upon his
experiences when he had controlled his smoking for a period of hours. That's the argument that was made here. Is there any evidence of that? Is there any evidence of that? Let's look at what Mrs. Huish admitted during her cross examination.
And you don't think he wanted to quit, do you?
Answer: No. As far as I know, he never tried to quit or ever even wanted to quit.
That's the evidence in this case. That's the evidence in this case.
Throughout this trial we've told you that we're not running from evidence. When an issue comes up we talk about it, we deal with it, and we provide to you evidence about what it means. There was testimony in this case that Mr. Huish said that he couldn't quit. The question for you is whether that evidence makes any sense, so let's look at that a little more closely.
Does the claim of Mr. Huish could not quit make sense? Well, Anna Huish and Janet Huish both testified that he said that he could not quit. But
is there any evidence that he couldn't quit? You heard from Dr. Tucker yesterday, and I'm sure most people agree with this, actions speak louder than words, actions speak louder than words when you're
talking about issues of addiction. There simply is no evidence that Mr. Huish ever made a single quit attempt.
And Dr. Tucker told you that it is impossible for a smoker to know whether they can quit or not if they never make a single quit attempt.
Now, this -- this statement that Mrs. Huish and Janet Huish report Mr. Huish making, that is, that he could not make -- that he could not quit, what was really going on there? What was really going on there? Dr. Tucker explained to you yesterday that when people are asked by family members to stop doing something that they don't want to stop, that sometimes they say I can't stop.
The evidence is that what Mr. Huish was doing when he said I can't quit was attempting to end the conversation because he wanted to keep smoking, because he wanted to keep smoking.
There was a suggestion this morning there is no evidence that Mr. Huish enjoyed smoking. Well, we're going to look at Mr. Dotson's testimony next. But keep in mind what Mr. Dotson said about that issue, please.
Finally, when he did quit -- now, he was sick. There is no dispute he was sick. He was taking a
lot of medications. There is no argument his illness and his medications may have masked any withdrawal symptoms that he was experiencing, that's common sense. But you're being asked to assume that he had withdrawal symptoms when he quit. You're being asked to assume that he had them and that his illness and the medications masked it, but that's completely speculation. There simply is no evidence that he had any withdrawal symptoms. That's just what the evidence is.
Finally, Mrs. Huish admitted during cross examination that when Mr. Huish said that he could not quit, that she really didn't know what he meant. She said she didn't know whether that meant that he actually couldn't quit or that he didn't want to quit. And that's not surprising. How could she have known what he meant if he never tried to quit? It must have been as confusing and perplexing to her then as that statement is here in this courtroom because a smoker can't know whether they can quit if they don't try.
And, of course, when you evaluate whether or not this statement makes sense, please recall that Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns both admitted that anyone and everyone can quit. So does this statement make
sense? Did Mr. Huish continue smoking because he couldn't quit, or did he continue smoking because he enjoyed smoking and didn't want to quit?
Let's look at Mr. Dotson's testimony, Mr. Huish's friend from Saudi Arabia.
(Video played.)
Q Did Mr. Huish ever discuss with you whether he enjoyed smoking?
A Yeah, we talked about when we would get a cup of coffee and you get something just right and you take a big puff of that cigarette, boy, that's good, you know, yeah, it was, but --
Q And that was the conversation that you had with Mr. Huish?
A Yeah.
Q So based on your interactions with Mr. Huish, you would say that he enjoyed smoking?
A Yeah. Yes.
(Video ended.)
You were told this morning there's no evidence in the case that Mr. Huish enjoyed smoking. What was Mr. Dotson's testimony? What was Mr. Dotson's testimony?
Okay. Let's pull back a minute and talk about choice. You may recall during opening statement
that the plaintiff's counsel actually he told you that you should count how many times the word choice comes out of my mouth during opening statement.
This morning you were told by plaintiff's counsel that this word choice is somehow misleading with respect to the nature of tobacco addiction. The suggestion really was that the word choice is some kind of tobacco speak, that it's something that's been created by the tobacco industry to defend itself from lawsuits. Let's look at where this word comes from.
The Surgeon General of the United States has described smoking as both addicting and a personal choice behavior. That's where this comes from.
Let's just look at the 1986 report. Cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. Choice. Choice.
While Dr. Tucker was on the stand there was cross examination where he was asked a series of questions as to, Oh, this word, this use of choice, that doesn't actually come from the Surgeon General's Report that says that smoking is addictive. That happened yesterday afternoon.
First, the 1986 report couldn't be clearer.
The Surgeon General is acknowledging that cigarette smoking is both an addictive behavior and a choice that smokers have to make.
But let's look at what plaintiff's own paid witnesses said to you in this trial. Dr. Cummings told you addictive smokers have the choice to quit.
Question: Isn't it true in 1986 the Surgeon General said that cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior?
Answer: Yes, he did say that.
That's what we just looked at.
Question: And you agree with that statement?
Answer: Sure.
Dr. Cummings is a man who has devoted his life to studying issues related to tobacco use. He's told you about the QuitLine that he runs, that he's
helped thousands and thousands of smokers to quit smoking. We didn't challenge any of that.
But look at what he says about smoking and addiction and choice. He agrees that smoking is both addictive and a personal choice behavior.
Look at what Dr. Burns told you.
Question: We're going to talk about both of those. Even though nicotine is addictive, you agree
that ultimately it is up to the individual smoker, like Mr. Huish, to either continue smoking or decide to quit smoking, don't you?
Answer: It is the responsibility of the individual smoker to do that, that's right.
Is this word choice some term that the tobacco companies made up or was dreamed up by lawyers to defend tobacco cases? Of course not. The evidence is clear that the Surgeon General has always recognized that addicted smokers have choices, they have to decide whether to continue smoking or to break their addiction. That's where the word choice comes from.
Let's take a look at what Dr. Tucker said because Dr. Tucker is not a public health figure.
Dr. Tucker is a guy that's in the trenches treating addicted people as part of his medical practice.
He's board certified in addiction medicine. He is board certified in addiction psychiatry. He's down in the trenches actually working with addicts, cocaine, heroin, alcohol and tobacco, as he told you. And here's what Dr. Tucker told us.
He told us that Mr. Huish could have quit sooner if he had tried, if he had tried to quit smoking.
He told us that nicotine addiction did not cause Mr. Huish's death.
He told us that Mr. Huish liked smoking and never wanted to quit.
He told us that Mr. Huish could have chosen to quit smoking like 45 million Americans did.
Well, how did he reach those conclusions? Yes, he worked a lot of hours on this case and he charged us for those hours. But what did he do? Was he a generic witness like Dr. Cummings who came in here and gave you generic testimony that he gives in every case? No. Dr. Tucker went and reviewed every deposition in this case and all the medical records and poured over those records. And you saw how knowledgeable he was compared to the other witnesses in this case.
Dr. Cummings was a generic witness, so we'll just set him aside.
You saw when Dr. Burns was questioned about this case, frequently he would just tell you, well, those are just facts I haven't committed to memory. That's what this case is about, it's about Mr.
Huish.
So we paid Dr. Tucker to take all the time that he needed to review every deposition in this case
all the medical records to reach his opinion. What else did Dr. Tucker tell you? Well, we
asked Dr. Tucker to focus on people like Mr. Huish, heavily-addicted smokers, according to the plaintiff, that's their description of him; at a minimum to focus on people who smoked the same amount as Mr. Huish did. Here's Dr. Tucker's testimony yesterday, none of which he was even cross examined on, completely undisputed.
Over 50 percent of males smoking two packs per day in 1959 like Mr. Huish quit smoking by 1972, undisputed.
Are people who smoke two packs a day helpless to quit? Of course not.
What about people who smoke more, people who smoke more than Mr. Huish did. Dr. Tucker told you smokers who chain smoke five to six packs per day can and do quit. No cross examination whatsoever on that subject.
We asked him to explain just a little bit more about why people can break their addiction and how nicotine works and how it doesn't work. And he told you that being addicted to nicotine simply does not prevent someone from understanding information about the dangers of smoking. You still understand what
your family tells you about the dangers of smoking. You understand the warning labels with regard to the dangers of smoking.
And we asked him does being addicted to nicotine somehow cause you to forget the information that you were asked before you became addicted? He told us no, of course not.
And he told you that nicotine does not interfere with the smoker's ability to decide to quit and develop a plan for quitting. And by now we know that to be the case. 45 million people were at one time addicted to nicotine, made a decision to quit, adopted whatever strategy was best for them, and we know from the evidence in this case that somewhere in the range of 90 percent of them quit cold turkey, simply put their cigarettes down and never went back to them. But they were able to do that and nothing about nicotine prevented them from succeeding.
Well, let's talk about Mr. Huish, talk about Mr. Huish's personality and characteristics. But let's talk about what that personality and what those characteristics really mean for the issues in this case. The evidence demonstrates that Mr. Huish had all of the tools that he needed to quit smoking.
Mr. Gustafson elicited testimony from Mr. Beal that Mr. Huish was a squared-away guy. I couldn't agree more. What is a squared-away guy? A squared-away guy is somebody who knows what the right thing to do is and does that thing and takes responsibility for his actions. That's who Mr.
Huish was.
He was intelligent. He was hard working, ambitious, and very important testimony, he was a leader of other men at work. And he was always promoted everywhere he went. He always succeeded at things that he tried to do. If he tried to do them, he succeeded. Mrs. Huish told us that he succeeded
at everything he attempted.
Now, there was some talk this morning about him being a quiet man. I have no reason to dispute that.
You also remember that Mr. Huish's colleagues testified to you that he was a very dependent guy and opinionated guy, strong-willed guy, decisive, and once he made up his mind, he stuck to what he wanted to leave.
Perhaps most importantly he had a family that wanted him to quit. He had a family that wanted him to quit. His son told you Mr. Huish did what he
wanted to do. That's the type of guy he was.
In this lawsuit Mr. Huish is being depicted as a victim, as a victim of the tobacco companies.
Well, respectfully, Ladies and Gentlemen, is this the portrait of a victim? There is nothing about what we know about this man that causes -- that demonstrates that in any way was he a weak individual, that he was unable to control himself, that he was victimized by others, that he couldn't understand the information, that he couldn't achieve things that he wanted. Mr. Huish was no victim in life. With all due, respect he shouldn't be turned into a victim in this lawsuit. That's not who he was. That's simply not the type of man that Mr. Huish was.
So why did he quit smoking? Why did he quit smoking? The evidence is he liked smoking and didn't want to quit. Dr. Tucker and the witnesses in this case talked to you about what people do when they want to quit smoking, when they want to quit smoking.
Did Mr. Huish want to quit smoking? The answer's no. Mrs. Huish told you he never wanted to quit smoking, that was the admission she made on cross examination. Did he ever seek help from any
family or friends to quit smoking? No. Medical assistance? No. Did he ever try nicotine replacement therapy? Now, it wasn't available throughout his life, it only started being available in the mid '80s, but it was available.
All of this talk about he was smoking for nicotine, smoking for nicotine, if nicotine is what he wanted, nicotine replacement therapy was available during his life and he never tried it. He never tried it. It's because he wasn't smoking for nicotine, he was smoking because he enjoyed smoking.
Did he ever take the simple steps of throwing away his ashtrays, the cigarettes? No. Going to a smoking cessation clinic? No. Persistently trying to quit? No. Making a single attempt to quit? No. These are the things that Dr. Tucker told you are the signs that he looks for as an addictionologist, as a guy who works in the trenches, these are the types of behaviors he looks for to evaluate whether or not someone wants to quit. They're just not here.
Was Mr. Huish different than the 45 smokers who quit? Was he different than the 45 million smokers who quit? Were the cigarettes he was smoking more
ctive than other cigarettes? No. You were to
that he smoked major brands. Did the cigarettes that he smoke defect his brain chemistry different from other cigarettes? No. There's no evidence of anything like that in this case.
Did he try to quit over and over without success? Is that how he was different than the 45 million? No, he never tried.
Was he a weak person who could not control himself? We just talked about that.
Were two-pack-per-day smokers like Mr. Huish unable to quit? The answer is no. You've seen that evidence.
Did he choose to continue smoking without ever attempting to quit? The answer is yes. That's how Mr. Huish was dealing with it. He chose to continue smoking without ever attempting to quit.
Let's take all this information and apply it to the question you have before you which is class membership that we looked at a moment ago.
Plaintiffs have the burden of proof. Now, the question is not whether addiction constrained Mr. Huish's choices or he felt some -- that he was compelled to smoke or anything like that. You're not going to see those words on the verdict form. What you're going to see is the plaintiffs must
prove that addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to Mr. Huish's death. Those are the instructions you will see on the verdict form.
In other words, plaintiff's are attempting to prove to you that there's a straight, direct, natural, continuous line between addiction and Mr. Huish's death. But you know that's not the case because as Dr. Tucker explained to you that between addiction and death stood Mr. Huish, and Mr. Huish's choices to continue smoking superceded the role of addiction in this case.
His choice to begin smoking despite the warnings, to become a regular smoker, to ignore clear warnings for 45 years of his family and friends and everyone else and to never try to quit smoking, Ladies and Gentlemen -Alicia, could I have the Elmo, please.
Ladies and Gentlemen, that's why -- that's what caused Mr. Huish's death, not addiction. Those were his choices, pure and simple. His choices superceded addiction. As Dr. Tucker explained to you, Dr. Burns admitted and Dr. Cummings admitted to you, a smoker always has the choice. Like the Surgeon General said, a smoker always has the
choice.
So I suggest to you, Ladies and Gentlemen, that when you get to the first question of the verdict form, the right answer is no. The right answer is no. And when you do that, the case is over. You don't have to go any further. That's end of this trial. But I recognize that you might not answer that question no, so I'm obligated to go further with you.
There are a series of questions regarding information, whether or not the concealment of information caused Mr. Huish's death. I believe those are questions 6, 7, 8 and 9. Two questions for Philip Morris, two questions for R.J. Reynolds, those questions ask you to decide whether or not the concealment of information caused Mr. Huish's death.
You will see when you look at the instructions -- could I have the screen back, please.
The question you're actually going to have to answer is this: Did Mr. Huish die from a smoking-related disease caused by RJR and Philip Morris concealing material facts that were unknown to Mr. Huish?
Remember, it's not a generic case, it's about Mr. Huish. And the instructions will tell you that
the plaintiff's must prove to you that the defendants in this case concealed facts that were unknown, unknown to Mr. Huish.
Let's look at the evidence. As you do this, respectfully, I'm going to suggest that you need to keep your eye on tne ball. Tne plaintiff spent a lot of time, as I said, on this case trying to prove that the public was confused about the risks of smoking. We're going to talk about that, we're going to talk about whether the public was confused or whether the public knew that smoking was dangerous.
The plaintiffs -- excuse me. But more importantly perhaps is the case about Mr. Huish.
And you know that Mrs. Huish admitted that Mr. Huish was taught that smoking was addictive and bad for his health before he ever started. The plaintiff tried, with all due respect, and failed to prove that anything that the defendants ever did confused Mr. Huish.
And you know one of the interesting twists in this case, because it's not a generic case, it's not a generic case, it's a case about an individual, Mr. Huish lived outside of the United States for about 20 years, between 1960 and 1983. He lived outside
of the United States for about 20 years.
Mrs. Huish told you that during those years they made no attempt to keep up with the news, that the news got to them late and sporadically. And, yet, we spent day after day talking about statements made by the tobacco companies during the period of time when Mr. Huish had no access to those statements.
Let's back up and talk about the general public. Did the general public know that smoking was dangerous and addictive? Dr. Cummings. In fact, tne media in the United States has publicized that smoking can be dangerous and addictive for a hundred years now, right? A hundred years. That's what the media has been telling people. Now, pretty interesting admission by Dr. Cummings.
He told you that the defendants began what he described as a cover up in 1953, and the defendants disputed whether or not smoking had been proven to be a cause of lung cancer and other diseases. He
labels that cover up, so be it. But he told me that that began in 1953. But he had no evidence of that whatsoever. No evidence that he offered to you of any cover up before 1953. Of course, Mr. Huish had been smoking somewhere in the range of four to five
years by 1953 without any evidence that he was being influenced by a cover up. But Dr. Cummings testified that that cover up resulted in confusion among the American public.
But look at what else he admitted? He said -I was asking him because as we discussed, the fact that smoking can cause disease was no secret in 1954, was it?
Answer: No. Everybody knew.
1954, everybody knew. That's Dr. Cummings' testimony.
He told us that in that decade the public awareness of the dangers of smoking actually became saturated. He told us that by 1964 the level of awareness was so high that there was nowhere else for it to go, that it couldn't go much higher. Were the dangers of smoking a secret in the 1950s and 1960s? Is that what the evidence is?
Dr. Burns in a presentation to the Lung Association admitted on the stand that he told the Lung Association that more Americans knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name of the president of the United States in 1975. He tried to explain the away this rhetorical excess. I don't know if he was trying to say he
didn't mean what he said, but this is what he told the Lung Association.
Were the dangers of smoking a secret? Was it something that you had to have access to tobacco company documents to know?
When this issue came up about, well, maybe people heard, maybe they knew, but they hadn't personalized it yet, they hadn't made that connection that their own smoking was bad for their own health, so we asked Dr. Burns this question.
95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking and 90 percent of them realized that their own health could be affected, could be affected? The answer was yes.
Now, Dr. Burns knows a lot about smoking and health. And he's had a distinguished career in the public health service. But with all due respect to Dr. Burns, these last two statements, this statement and this statement, were made before he began serving as an expert witness for plaintiffs in these cases, a pursuit which has yielded him over a million-and-a-half dollars to date already.
Let's pull some of this together. The evidence is that the public awareness campaign resulted in millions of addicted smokers quitting. What I've
done is sort of taken some of the public awareness and overlaid it on the quitting patterns in the United States.
Dr. Cummings told you that everybody knew that smoking caused disease in 1954. You saw the
evidence of Surgeon General Leroy Burney and Dr.
John Heller of the National Cancer Institute. They told you the public health had done an excellent job publicizing the dangers of smoking by 1957 when they were looking backward at their efforts.
Dr. Cummings told you that the public was saturated with awareness about the risks of smoking in 1964. And look what happened? People who were concerned about the dangers of smoking quit. Health-conscience smokers who decided they didn't want to take a risk any more quit. 17 million by '64. Of course, the quitting marched on and on.
Dr. Horn's famous statement, You could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they didn't already know. It was just like Dr. Cummings said, awareness was saturated by 1964.
Dr. Burns' statements about smoking and health. The point of all this obviously is the public health campaign succeeded as the dangers of smoking were
publicized in this country. Smokers, including heavily-addicted smokers, who decided that they did not want to take the risk of smoking, made decisions to quit, made a plan to quit and they quit and they quit by the tens of millions of people.
Now, this question has come up as to whether the tobacco company's statements somehow confused Mr. Huish. That's the issue. Not whether they confused other people, not whether people kept smoking perhaps more than they should, but was it did Mr. Huish hear any of these statements and rely on them to his detriment, was he harmed by statements by the tobacco companies. We asked Mrs. Huish her recollection of these events, we cross examined Dr. Burns on al of these things, and the answer to every one of these questions is no.
We spent -- witness after witness talking about the Frank Statement. There is no evidence that Mr. Huish ever heard about the Frank Statement published one day in 1954.
The statements by CTR, TIRC, the Tobacco Institute, tobacco industry press releases, tobacco industry white papers, interviews just like you saw this morning of tobacco company spokespersons on TV, statements by these defendants about smoking and
health and about addiction. There's no evidence that Mr. Huish ever heard any of these or had his beliefs shaped by any of these. You're being asked, most respectfully, by the plaintiffs to assume that that's what happened.
But, of course, you know what the evidence actually is. Before he ever smoked his first cigarette Mr. Huish was taught a clear and consistent message that smoking was addictive and dangerous from childhood until he left Douglas.
Let's go back to the house he group up in.
There was no mixed message in that household. You heard his father was a strict man, ran a conservative, home that the house rules were no tobacco and no alcohol.
Well, you heard all this discussion this
morning about 80 percent of the people in his -that were born around the years that he was born began smoking. Not in the Huish household. Not in the Huish household. Of the nine brothers and sisters that survived to adulthood only Mr. Huish smoked. His parents didn't smoke. His brothers and sisters didn't smoke. That was not the norm in the Huish household.
You heard he was warned by his coaches, by his
school, by his community. And, of course, Mrs.
Huish again -- I bring this up again because this admission answers a lot of the questions in this case. Mrs. Huish admitted that Mr. Huish was taught at young age in his family that smoking was addictive and bad for his health. That's an admission by Mrs. Huish. And there's absolutely no evidence to the contrary. So every time you hear that he didn't know that smoking was dangerous, I suggest to you that you remember Mrs. Huish's admission on this very subject.
Mr. Huish was not raised in a generic community. He was raised in a community in which the message about the dangers of smoking kept coming to him over and over and over. In the community in which he was raised he received this type of message. Warnings about nicotine from his community, Nicotine is a deadly poison. Warnings about addiction, The yellow finger stain is an emblem of a deeper degradation and enslavement to the ball and chain. The community which he grew up in addiction to nicotine was being compared to being a prisoner with a ball and chain around your leg. This community told him -- warned him about lung cancer from smoking cigarettes.
And then, amazingly enough, he was actually warned by his community about cigarette advertising. Before he ever smoked his first cigarette he was warned in his community about cigarette advertising.
Was Douglas a generic community? Was a generic community? Does all this generic evidence have anything to do with what was going on in Douglas?
We went and found one of Mr. Huish's high school classmates, Frank Vigil. Look at what he told y'all.
(Video played.)
Q And that's just something you knew as a player on coach Sancet's team?
A Right. In fact, come to think of it, it's kind of like a -- like a the whole town itself, as a kid you didn't smoke or do any of those things.
Q In Douglas, Arizona?
A Yeah, just -- well, if you talked to anybody, you know, the younger people, they just didn't do, you know, things like that. They didn't drink they didn't smoke, they didn't -- you know, you were home by a certain hour and this and that.
Q Do you know why that was?
A Just the type of community we lived in, I would imagine.
ideo ended.
Was Douglas a generic community? That's the only evidence in the case about what Douglas was like when Mr. Huish was growing up. But, of course, that was only the beginning of the information that he got about the dangers of smoking.
Throughout his life -- you know, one of the things -- human nature being what it is, one of the things that sometimes we do when we're doing something that we're not supposed to do is that we hide it from others. We don't want them to know what we're doing. We don't want to hear them ask us to quit, especially if that's what we want to continue doing. And that's what the evidence was in this case. Mr. Huish hid his smoking throughout his life. In high school he hid it from his parents, his nine brothers and sisters, his coaches.
Whenever he would go back to Douglas to see his family members, he hid his smoking.
Is there any doubt that he knew he wasn't supposed to be smoking because of the dangers of the addictive properties of smoking? Of course not. He had been taught that as a kid.
But it didn't just come from his family or from Douglas. As he went through life, you heard that he
-- you heard explicit, expressed testimony that he was exposed to the public health message including the 1964 Surgeon General's Report.
Mrs. Huish told you that a friend of hers came back from vacation in the United States and told her, Do you know that people are dying from cigarettes? Do you know that people are dying from cigarettes? She doesn't remember whether she shared that with Mr. Huish or not. I know she loved her husband, I suggest to you that there really is no doubt that she discussed this with her husband.
His daughter Janet discussed the Surgeon General's Report with him. You heard the son Jesse in 1981 when he was brought over from vacation in Hawaii to visit his family in Florida he asked his dad, Aren't you listening to these advertisements about the dangers of smoking? Aren't you paying attention to the risks you're taking? Aren't you thinking about what you're doing to the rest of us with your secondhand smoke? Was this a secret to Mr. Huish?
He was warned throughout his life by family members, friends.
I'm going to go through these. I just reviewed all these, the warnings he got from his family, but
let's look at a warning he received from a friend of his in Saudi Arabia, Mr. Dotson.
(Video played.)
You know, we might have been playing golf and he'd go into a coughing fit, and he would be smoking, John, you better quit them things, they're going to kill you.
(Video ended.)
You better quit them things, they're going to kill you. His coughing started in the mid 1970s when he played golf in Saudi Arabia. Was this a secret to Mr. Huish? Was he -- did his death result
from him not knowing these things?
Cigarette warning labels. I'm not going to belabor this, but let's never forget in this case that Mr. Huish smoked from 1966 to 1993, a period of about 27 years, with a warning on the side of a package that he was smoking telling him that cigarette smoking was dangerous and bad for his health. Was this a secret? Is there any way in 27 years he didn't know about these labels? Especially when Mrs. Huish told you that in about 1967 she was back in the United States and saw the Surgeon General discussing these labels on TV. Is there any way she didn't share that knowledge with Mr. Huish?
You will see when you read the instruction on concealment in this case, an agreement to conceal, that to be a legal cause of Mr. Huish's injury, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown to Mr. Huish. Must have been unknown to Mr. Huish.
The evidence is absolutely overwhelming that he knew from before he smoked that first cigarette that smoking was dangerous and addictive.
I suggest to you that you should mark no to all the questions regarding concealment and agreement to conceal information because Mr. Huish already knew that information. You can't conceal information from somebody who already knows it.
The other claims in this case include negligence and product liability. I want to suggest to you for the exact same reasons -- I don't have time to review all that evidence again, for the exact same reasons the negligence of these defendants and the selling of a defective product by these defendants was not the legal cause of Mr. Huish's death. It was always the choices that he made fully aware of the risks that he was taking.
Could I have the Elmo.
So, Ladies and Gentlemen, I'm going to suggest to you that the right answer would be no for
negligence for both the defendants. Mr. Huish's choices superceded any actions of the defense.
The right answer on product defect for both of these defendants is no for the same reason.
All of these questions about concealment and agreement to conceal, the answer should be no for the same reasons. These facts were known to him.
And you'll see from the instructions if they were known to him, they can't have been a legal cause of his injury.
Let's talk about this allocation of fault question that Mr. Gustafson talked to you about. Fault.
I should mention one more thing -- could I have the -Okay. The allocation of fault question. Who is responsible for in Huish's death? You will see in your instructions that the assignment -- the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of Mr. Huish's death. RJR and Philip Morris cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of Mr. Huish's death.
It's not a generic case. The Engle findings
generic. It applied to the company s conduct rally. In this case what you're here to do is
what Dr. Cummings didn't do, you're here to evaluate whether the dots can be connected between the conduct of the companies and Mr. Huish's case.
Well, this is a question really about responsibility, about responsibility of your actions. Ladies and Gentlemen, I don't think you have to look any further than the admissions of Mr. Huish's paid experts to know where responsibility lies in this case.
Dr. Cummings. Isn't it true, Dr. Cummings, that your view is that a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit?
Answer: Yes. A person has to make the choice to quit.
And the bottom line, you believe that smokers have a responsibility to try to quit smoking, don't you?
Answer: Yes.
Fully responsible. Fully responsible.
Dr. Burns: Isn't your statement that Mr. Huish was addicted to nicotine and it was his responsibility to deal with his addiction?
Absolutely. He was addicted and he had the responsibility to deal with his addition.
Full responsibility, responsibility to deal
with his addiction. Those are the admissions of plaintiff's paid experts.
And you heard this morning that Mrs. Huish in this case through her lawyers has admitted that Mr. Huish was negligent in his efforts to quit smoking and that his negligence was a partial cause of his death. His negligence was a partial cause of his death.
You were told that we're here because the defendant's won't accept partial responsibility. That's not why we're here. We're here because the plaintiff's have no evidence that the defendants were responsible for Mr. Huish's death.
Let's step back a minute and think about what Mrs. Huish's statement means. How could Mr. Huish have been a legal cause of his own death? What would have had to have happened for Mr. Huish to be a legal cause of his own death? First of all, he would have had to have known that smoking was addictive and dangerous. Plaintiff would not be here admitting that he was a legal cause of his own death if he was unaware of those facts.
Second, the plaintiff has admitted that he should have tried to quit. The plaintiff wouldn't admit that was fault if he didn't know that he
should have tried to quit.
Third, the plaintiff in essence has admitted to you that he had the ability to quit smoking that would have prevented his death. Would the plaintiff admit to you that he was at fault if he was unable to quit smoking or he couldn't quit smoking at the time to prevent his death? No. In essence what the plaintiff has admitted to you is Mr. Huish's choices
were the cause of his death.
And Mr. Huish could have prevented his death. I'm not going to review all these statistics with you, but you'll recall the admissions by Dr. Burns that Mr. Huish could have quit as late as 1981, and he said that to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, more likely than not, that Mr. Huish would not have developed his lung cancer in 1993.
Mr. Huish had every opportunity in the world to quit all the way up to 1981 when he was a 52, 53-year-old man and he could have avoided lung cancer. That's what Dr. Burns admitted.
He said that had Mr. Huish quit at age 60 in 1984 he would have avoided more than 90 percent of the risk attributable to smoking. Yet, plaintiffs come in here and ask you to assign 20 percent of fault to Mr. Huish. 20 percent. Well, let's think
about the actions of Mr. Huish and whether 20 percent is a reasonable percentage of fault to assign to his actions.
First, Mr. Huish chose to begin smoking even though his parents and community warned him that smoking was addictive and bad for his health.
Second, every day for 45 years Mr. Huish chose to continue smoking. Remember, smoking is not a one-time thing. It's not that you start and then that's the end of choice. You saw all the evidence about how smokers always have a choice. They have a choice every day of their life, every day of their life, whether to stop smoking or continue smoking.
Mr. Huish chose to smoke for 45 years even though he lived in a world full of warnings including cigarette package labels.
He chose to ignore warnings from the media, parents, his wife, the Surgeon General, children, his friends, his brother and his own body when he began coughing and people would tell him your cough is from your cigarette, John. He chose to ignore that warning. He chose to ignore that warning at a time when he could have made a difference in the outcome.
He chose to smoke 45 years without ever trying
to quit one time. Not a single day in 45 years did he wake up and try to quit smoking. There's no evidence of that whatsoever. He chose never to ask anyone for help. He chose never to seek any medical assistance. He chose -- I've already covered that one. I must have hit the back button.
He chose never to use nicotine replacement therapy as we discussed. He chose -- in short, he chose the pleasures that he got out of smoking over the risks that he had always known that he was taking.
This is your decision. I couldn't agree more with Mr. Gustafson, you have to decide what the right allocation of fault is. You have to ask yourself is this 20 percent? Is that what this adds up to, 20 percent at fault when there's no evidence on the other side of the scales that anything that the tobacco companies did was a legal cause of Mr. Huish's death? It's your choice, you decide.
I submit to you that the right answer is that only Mr. Huish could have prevented his own death, so the right answer is that Mr. Huish is 100 percent at fault for his own death.
Jumping ahead here in the interest of time. Well, you're going to get to the damages question in
this case. You're going to have to ask yourself whether the request that you heard this morning for $5 million makes any sense. Does that make any sense to you.
Let's -- with all due respect to Mrs. Huish in her fine lawyers, and I mean that sincerely, let's remind ourselves about the nature of the claim being brought in this lawsuit. Look at the decisions that Mr. Huish made during his life. He was warned by family and schools and community it was addicting and bad for his health before he ever started. He could have chosen health, he chose to smoke.
Throughout 45 years he got warning from his parents, the media, Mrs. Huish, the Surgeon General, the package, his children, his friends, his brother, from his own body, and every single time he chose to ignore those warnings and he continued smoking.
For 45 years he was bombarded with information that he should stop smoking, and he could have quit smoking and chosen health all the way up until the early 1980s according to Dr. Burns. Instead, instead, he continued smoking for 45 years until he got lung cancer in 1993, and then they sued, of course, Philip Morris and RJR Reynolds.
And despite all the choices that Mr. Huish made
what you should do is award them $5 million, $5 million. Mrs. Huish is, in essence, asking you to make her a millionaire even though her husband smoked for 45 years without ever trying to quit.
And she admits that he was a partial cause of his own death, a legal cause of his own death, and for that she's asking you to make her a millionaire.
If you get to this question, I'm not going to suggest a number to you. This is purely something for y'all to decide. You're going to see in the jury instructions that you're going to be told to award only an amount that the evidence demonstrates is fair and just. You will have to decide whether or not this claim justifies an award of $5 million.
Your Honor, I have about ten minutes, may I proceed?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
MR. FURR: Thank you very much.
This brings me to question 12 and 13 on your verdict form regarding punitive damages. Punitive damages.
Could I have the -- thank you.
Punitive damages are different than compensatory damages, so I want to begin by identifying for you some key parts of the
instructions that you will see when you look at this question about punitive damages.
First, it's not a generic case, not a case about whether you like the tobacco companies or
dislike them or approve of their actions or disapprove. And nobody's asking you to bless the actions of the tobacco company. That's not what this is. This is not a generic debate about you like or dislike what you saw here. It's a question about whether or not the legal claims in this case have been proven because you can only award punitive damages for conduct by the defendants that was a legal cause, a legal cause of Mr. Huish's death.
You'll see on the instructions that you can only award those damages to Mrs. Huish.
It's important to understand the nature of punitive damages. If you get to this point, you will, as a jury, have already decided to fully compensate Mrs. Huish for the losses that you found her to have incurred as a result of the actions of the defendants, so she would have been made whole in the eyes of the law. You would have fully compensated for her if you do this. And this is a request for additional money unrelated to compensating her.
When you -- you will see in your instructions that there's a different standard here. The standard is whether she has proven by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages should be awarded in this case. Clear and convincing evidence.
You will see, as defined your instructions, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitations about the matter at issue. A different standard than you apply to the rest of the case.
I submit to you the reason that there's a different standard is you're really being asked -Mrs. Huish is making that extraordinary request of you. She's asking you to award her money unrelated to the actual losses that she suffered in this case. This is a standard you have to evaluate that claim by.
Let's look at the evidence. The evidence demonstrates clearly that punitive damages are not warranted in this case.
Cigarettes are dangerous and addictive but they are a legal product. Tney are a legal product. Dr.
Burns, at least, told you he thought cigarettes should remain a legal product.
Dr. Burns admitted to you that there has never been a cigarette sold anywhere in the world that has been proven to be safer than the brands that Mr. Huish -- the brands that Mr. Huish smoked. You're being asked to punish the companies that sold brands that were safe as any cigarettes sold anywhere in the world.
Some talk this morning about additives and the suggestion that the cigarettes would have been okay but for additives. Specifically you were talked to about ammonia. You'll remember when I cross examined Dr. Cummings -- excuse me, Dr. Burns he admitted that he knows of no evidence that ammonia
was ever used in a Lucky Strike cigarettes or Camel cigarettes during the years that Mr. Huish was smoking.
He also told you that additive-free cigarettes cause lung cancer and are addictive. Additive-free cigarettes cause lung cancer. And this is not a case about additives. This is a case about the properties of tobacco. When you burn tobacco, it produces carcinogens.
Dr. Burns told you that even today the tobacco
companies are unable to take the carcinogens out of cigarettes, out of the tobacco that is burned.
You're being asked to award extraordinary damages in a case where cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. 1966.
You know that R.J. Reynolds hasn't disputed the dangers of smoking since the 1990s. You know that there is no concealment about the dangers of smoking. You've heard that the company's website expressly tells people about the dangers of smoking.
You've heard that there's no concealment of documents today. That's where all these documents came from that the plaintiff's used in their case. They've all been produced, you've heard, from their websites where all the company -THE COURT: Sorry.
MR. FURR: Punitive damages aren't needed because of the risk of smoking or being concealed or that documents are being concealed. There's nothing to deter about the conduct of these companies.
. And just take a step back from this request to award Mrs. Huish damages unrelated to her loss. With respect to R.J. Reynolds, who I represent, Mr. Huish last smoked a product made by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in 1972. There was no evidence that
he ever smoked one of our products after that. You are being -- here in 2011 being asked to award punitive damages to Mrs. Huish because her husband last smoked a product made by R.J. Reynolds in 1972 that he knew was dangerous to his health and addictive.
Let's talk about this. Mr. Gustafson suggested to you that a finding for the defendants would be equivalent to blessing the conduct of the defendants, blessing the conduct of the defendants. Of course, that's not what this case is about. It's not about generic conduct. It's about the legal claims in this case.
Let's talk about what a verdict for the plaintiffs would do. What kind of message does a verdict for the plaintiffs in this case send.
What would it accomplish first? Would a verdict for Mrs. Huish make smokers aware of anything that they are not already aware of? Do we need a verdict for Mrs. Huish to accomplish that?
Would a verdict for Mrs. Huish make cigarettes safer? Would a verdict for Mrs. Huish have any impact on whether people choose to smoke? Just this morning you heard things are different now, things are different now. There's full transparency.
Everybody knows.
You were also told 20 percent of people of adults in the United States continue to smoke with full knowledge of the dangers of smoking.
Fortunately for all of us in the United States we get to choose, we get to make choices about things like that.
Would your verdict for Mrs. Huish decrease the number of people who smoke or ban the sale or manufacture of cigarettes to improve public health? All those things nave already been addressed. None of those things will be accomplished by a verdict for Mrs. Huish.
I tell you what would be accomplished, with all due respect to Mrs. Huish and her lawyers, the message that you would be sending if you rendered a verdict for Mrs. Huish is that it is okay to engage in a behavior that you know is dangerous and addictive and then if you develop a disease, you blame other people, you blame others.
A verdict for Mrs. Huish would send a message that it is okay to ignore safety warnings, including ignore warnings on the side of a package of the product that you're smoking for 27 years. And if you develop a disease, blame others and ask for $5
million.
A verdict for Mrs. Huish would send the message that you can make choices in life about dangers that you take without taking personal responsibility for those choices. With all due respect, that's the message that a verdict for the plaintiffs would send in this case.
Well, I'm done. I have to sit down. I don't get to get back up. The plaintiffs are going to get another chance to get up and respond to what I talked about.
I predict that what they will do is get up, once again spend a great deal of time talking about the conduct of the tobacco companies. They will try to make you angry with the tobacco companies. They will try to distract you from the issues in this case.
But here's what won't happen. What will not happen when the plaintiffs get back up is that they will not be able in any way to disprove any of these facts. They will not be able to disprove the facts about Mr. Huish that controls the way this lawsuit would come out.
I don't get to get back up, like I said. All we can ask of you during the plaintiff's response,
think carefully about what they're saying to you.
Are they again trying to make you angry? Distract you with conduct that had no impact on Mr. Huish?
To talk about other smokers? Are they going to talk to you about Mr. Huish? Are they going to talk to you about why Mrs. Huish should be awarded $5 million even though each and every one of these facts is undisputed?
Thank you very much for your patience.



MR. BRENNER: Counsel, Mrs. Huish.
Good afternoon. So we have been together for two weeks and 2 days, I think, and over the course of that time I think we can all agree that you have been presented with a tremendous amount of
information. We have worked long hard days, and you not only have gotten a lot of information, you've gotten it in a way that is not how we receive information in our everyday lives. It's not normal that we receive information through watching lawyers and witnesses talk to each other, or playing videos, depositions, and things like that.
I think about a trial like a puzzle. Everyone has done puzzles, I'm sure. The pieces of the puzzle are the evidence you receive. And His Honor will instruct you that that is the only thing you can base your decision on, the law that His Honor gives you and the evidence that you receive.
Now, when you have a puzzle and you open it and you -- the first thing you do is spill the pieces, and it's just a big pile of cardboard cut up in different shapes, and usually -- well, I should say always you have the box that the puzzle comes out of, and you put it -- at least in my family you put it in front of where the pieces are, and you're trying to build the puzzle to meet that picture.
And tnat's the solution. The pieces of the puzzle meet that picture.
But in a trial you get to decide what picture is there. It's up to you to decide what picture the
pieces of the puzzle form.
But we're all dealing with the same puzzle pieces. Okay. You have the same puzzle pieces that the plaintiffs have and the defendants have, and it's only from those pieces that you can piece together the story.
I was struck during the plaintiff's opening -or closing argument, I'm sorry, that they showed you almost no pieces of the puzzle as it directly related to Mr. Huish. If you think back, did they show you any testimony, show you the testimony, not lawyers telling you what the testimony is or what
you should remember about it, did they show you the testimony from the family members, from the friends, from the co-workers? I submit to you they didn't do that.
The plaintiff brought, I believe it was, seven witnesses to testify in the case. The first witness they brought was Dr. Cummings. Dr. Cummings, as Mr. Furr showed you, freely admitted he made no effort to link up anything he was saying to Mr. Huish. So if you're trying to form a picture of who Mr. Huish was, Dr. Cummings is not real helpful.
Second witness they brought you was Dr. Burns. Now, Dr. Burns, similar to Dr. Cummings, said I
didn't have time to learn all the facts. Dr. Cummings said I didn't learn anything. But Dr.
Burns said to the plaintiff's lawyers, you pick out which facts you think I should look at and I'll look at those, only because it's not the best use of my time.
We'll talk a little bit about Dr. Burns only because he provided just a couple pieces of the puzzle, but for the most part he didn't know Mr. Huish either and didn't know the record in this case.
As a matter of fact, the experts in general I'm not going to focus a lot on. Mr. Gustafson did that, and Mr. Furr did. As you'll see, I'm going to focus on what the people that knew Mr. Huish best, knew him for his entire life, loved him and cared for him, wanted the best for him, what they said.
The plaintiffs then brought you Drs. Samera and Auerbach. All I want to say about them is neither one of them has any memory of ever meeting Mr.
Huish, ever seeing Mr. Huish, ever speaking to Mr. Huish, and they were brought basically to say that cigarette smoking caused Mr. Huish's lung cancer. They don't help us fill in the picture of who is Mr. Huish.
Then the plaintiff brought three what we call fact witnesses. They brought Sheila Cloid, who was the twice daughter-in-law, married to one of the Huish sons. You didn't hear anything about Ms.
Cloid from the plaintiff. I'm going to talk about what she said because she provides pieces of the puzzle.
They also brought you Janet Tucker, who was the oldest daughter of the Huishes, and she absolutely provides pieces of the puzzle. She knew her dad obviously, and she knew her mom, and she knew what was going. And we're going to talk about her. She provides pieces of the puzzle.
And of course Ms. Anna Huish took the stand.
And as we all know, in puzzles you need all the pieces to fill in the picture. If you get to the end of the puzzle and one of the pieces is missing it's pretty darn frustrating.
So I'm not suggesting that all the pieces aren't important, but when you're doing a puzzle there's always that 1 or 2 pieces that help you start forming the picture. So for example, if you had a puzzle of a woman standing in a field, grass
er feet, blue sky behind her, you don t know -fill in more sky, you fill in more grass, but
when you get to those couple pieces that are, for example, the eyes or the nose suddenly the picture starts to come into focus. And Mrs. Huish's testimony is critically important because she is the provider of the most important pieces of the puzzle.
That was the end of the plaintiff's case. That was it.
We brought you the other -- testimony of the other two Huish children, Jesse and James. We brought you the testimony of Mr. Huish's only living sibling, Ivan. We brought you the testimony of the only person outside the family that lived in his community. We're going to talk about his community in a bit in Douglas. That was Mr. Frank Vigil. And we brought you the testimony of his co-workers, his friends. We brought you -- Mr. Beal came here live. Brought you the testimony of Mr. Tomkins and Mr. Dotson, was the colorful fellow who used to play golf, very good friends with Mr. Huish.
So at the end of the day those are the pieces of the puzzle. I can't make them up, plaintiff can't make them up, defendant can't make them up.
But we have vastly different views of what the pieces of the puzzle, when they're put together, form. When you cut away all the jury instructions
and legal argument and things like that, no doubt about it the parties have two different views that when you put this puzzle together what picture is going to emerge of John Huish.
On the left here is the plaintiff's position that when you put all the pieces together the picture that emerges is one of a man who was unaware or confused about the dangers of smoking, wanted to quit, but simply couldn't. And that is what plaintiff is suggesting the pieces of this puzzle, when you put them all together, form.
The defense, on the other hand, believes the puzzle when you put it together will show an entirely different picture. It will show a picture of a man who chose to smoke knowing the dangers and never tried, or perhaps most importantly, ever wanted to quit.
Now, you've heard testimony -- excuse me -you've heard testimony and argument about wanting to quit. Let me be perfectly clear. There is no doubt that others wanted John Huish to quit smoking. Ms. Huish, no question about it, she wanted her husband to quit smoking. And you're going to see testimony from other people. But the question in this case is not what others wanted for John Huish, but what John
Huish wanted for himself.
And I suggest to you, as you look at the pieces of the puzzle -- excuse me -- at the two different pictures that can form three questions jump out.
The first question is what did Mr. Huish know about the dangers of smoking both before he started smoking and throughout his life. Got to answer that question in order to build the puzzle. The second
question that jumps out at you is whether Mr. Huish ever tried to quit. And the third question that jumps out is did he ever want to quit, or even want to quit.
And now what I would like to do is step back and instead of me doing the talking I want to present to you the evidence in the case as you heard it. Not what I think it says, not my shortening of it, not my selective quoting from it, we're just going to walk through the evidence on those three questions.
So let's start off with the first question, which is what did Mr. Huish know about the dangers of smoking? And this question, as I said, you have to start from the beginning and work your way through time.
If you could bring up Slide 2, please.
Mr. Furr went through some of these articles with you. Remember Dr. Stueck came and testified. Dr. Stueck, unlike Dr. Cummings, they both testified about this idea of awareness.
Dr. Cummings testified generically, as you've heard, and he actually picked up his testimony, as you recall, basically in the 50's, and he talked about mixed messages in the 50's.
But Dr. Stueck went back and looked at the actual environment in which Mr. Huish was born and raised in. And these were the articles, as you recall, from the 20's, 30's, and 40's that were directed to Douglas Arizona.
Now, remember at the very end of Dr. Stueck's testimony he told us something, which I think we have come across, but it's quite a remarkable fact in the case. The stuff that was appearing in the media -- excuse me -- in the articles that were going to Douglas, Arizona were truly ahead of their time. No doubt about it. This stuff was not being picked up until the 50's in places where John Huisn didn't live. But in the place where he lived starting all the way back in the 20's people of Douglas were being taught that smoking was addictive, that smoking caused not just disease,
caused lung cancer, as Mr. Furr pointed out, that you should be weary of any tobacco company trying to tell you what it was. Remarkable. Remarkable.
Now, some of you may ask, well, sure, Mr. Brenner, Dr. Stueck found these articles and told us they were in the community of Douglas. How do we know they had an impact there? How do we know they weren't just sort of floating around and he picked them out of some archive and they weren't really impacting the people of Douglas?
Well, we have testimony on that, and that's the next piece of the puzzle I would like to it share with you. You've actually heard this before, and as I said, we all have the same puzzle, and I'm trying not to repeat, but we do have the same puzzle to work with. I would like to play for you the testimony of Mr. Vigil, which is 3(a), please. This is -- Mr. Vigil was the high school classmate.
(Video clip played as follows.)
And that's just something you knew as a player on Coach Sanchez's team?
Right. And that, come to think of it, it's kind of like -- like in the whole town itself. As kids, or something like that, you didn't smoke or do any of those things.
In Douglas, Arizona?
Yes. It was just -- well, if you talked to anybody, you know, the younger people, they just didn't do, you know, things like that. You did not drink, you didn't smoke, you didn't -- you know, you were home by a certain hour, this and that.
Do you know why that was?
Just the type of community we lived in, I would imagine.
MR. BRENNER: So on this issue of what did John Huish know, so far we know that the people of Douglas were being given a message and it was having an impact in Douglas. But how do we know that it was having an impact in Mr. Huish's household, because that's who we're here to talk about? We have the testimony, as I said, of the only remaining child from the Huish family, Mr. Ivan Huish.
If you could bring up 4(a), please.
(Video clip played as follows.)
You knew your parents were against smoking; correct?
That's correct.
So to your knowledge John was the only one of the ten children that smoked cigarettes?
That's correct.
MR. BRENNER: So the funnel gets a little bit more narrow. We know it's in Douglas, we know the people of Douglas are reacting, we know the Huish family is receiving the message.
And that's why testimony from people like Dr. Cummings is so dangerous, because when Dr. Cummings left the stand, when he left that stand there would have been no reason for you to think that 80 percent of the people, including 80 percent of the people in Douglas, were smoking. But of course we now know that's completely untrue.
Well, how do we know that they just weren't against smoking for reasons like it smelled bad or things like that? Well, we have the testimony from Ms. Huish that tells us what that message from Dr. Stueck's articles, was that message making it directly that smoking was unhealthy, that it was addictive; was that message, that very message making it to the Huish household?
If you could bring up Slide 5, please.
This is Anna Huish's testimony where she's being asked about John's parents:
They definitely didn't want their children smoking, did they?
Answer. No.
And that's because his parents believed that smoking was addictive and harmful to your health; right?
I assume so.
And she told us how she knew that. She told us she knew that from her husband.
That's what he told you, isn't it?
Yes.
Now, there was a suggestion -- well, it was probably more than a suggestion during Mr. Huish's closing that you should just assume tnat Mr. Huish said certain things because he was a very quiet man and didn't talk about smoking. Well, first of all, you can only judge the case by the evidence you have, but does it make sense that he wouldn't talk to anyone about this thing that the plaintiff's are telling you was controlling him, tormenting him? Of course not. Mr. Huish spoke to his family freely about these issues and others.
So how do we know -- we now know that the parents believed it was addictive and unhealthy.
Now, how do we know that they actually told John Huish? We also have the testimony from Anna Huish on that very topic.
Would you believe out Slide 6, please.
Did he, John -- this is to Anna -- tell you that when he was raised that he was specifically taught that smoking was addictive and unhealthy?
Answer is yes.
Now, how do we know that when John Huish left Douglas -- and he left '48, '49-ish, married his wife Anna. How do we know that he somehow just didn't forget it, or didn't suddenly get confused? He's had this message ingrained in him since he was a child, but how do we know that it stayed with him?
Well, we know that because the witnesses have told us that. You recall the testimony of the Huish's daughter, Janet. She told us that when they were living in Peru in 1961 she was 13 years old, or maybe 1962, she was 13 years old, and some of her friends approached her about smoking, and to her credit, and to the credit of the Huish family she came to her parents for advice. We know that Mr. Huish was a good father, and we know what Janet told us her father told her about smoking in 1962.
If you could play 7(a), please.
(Video clip played as follows.)
You mentioned you asked him about smoking.
When did you talk to him about smoking?
Whenever my friends were trying to get me to
start smoking at 13 years old.
And was this -- where were you living at the
time?
In Peru, in Toquepala.
And what do you remember about conversations you had with your parents at that time?
About that?
Yes, ma'am.
They both told me that they didn't want me to do it, or they didn't want the three of us to do it because it was bad for you, not a good habit.
Was this a discussion that your parents -- that you had with both your parents together?
Yes.
MR. BRENNER: How do we know what John
believed? He passed on the exact same message that was taught to him by his parents to his own children.
To move through time a bit, we know that in 1964 the Huishes are still living in Peru, and you heard that they didn't keep up with current events so much, but they would come back to the states for either a month or two at a time depending on which company they were working for.
But we do know from the evidence that in 1964
the Surgeon General's report came out and it was big news. It had sort of collected all the science that everyone knew and put it in there and said it's definitive now, smoking causes lung cancer. And we know from the testimony of Ms. Huish that that very information made its way to Peru.
Slide 9, please.
This is to Mrs. Huish:
Okay. Your friend had been on vacation in the United States; right?
Answer. Yes.
This was around 1964; right?
Answer. Yes.
And she came back and spoke and told you, do you know that people are dying from smoking cigarettes?
Answer. Yes.
Now, you've heard a lot of suggestion that because there was so much out there that the tobacco companies -- Dr. Cummings showed you a bunch of statements and press releases and white papers, and they've asked you to assume that Mr. or Mrs. Huish saw any of those things. Remember, they just asked you to assume it, but Mrs. Huish told you flat out,
I don't remember any of them.
But she does remember being back in the United States in 1967. And 1967 was shortly after the warnings came on cigarette packages. And the only specific thing Mrs. Huish can remember ever seeing about these issues about smoking and health was about that, and she remembers seeing the Surgeon General on television.
Bring up 10, please.
She says on one of their trips back to the United States in 1967 -- and she's talking about what she saw -- she says:
The Surgeon General of the United States was talking about warnings on the sides of cigarette packages on a television show; right?
Answer. Yes.
Was your husband with you?
Probably.
Remember they're on vacation and they're back here, and she told us that when they're on vacation they're usually together all the time.
If for some reason he wasn't with you at that point do you think you would have told him about what you saw on TV?
Answer. More than likely.
The picture of John Huish and what he knew
about the dangers of smoking is crystal clear.
We know that Janet Huish saw the same types of things about the warnings on cigarette packages and shared them with her father as well.
If you could bring up Slide 11(a), please.
(Video clip played as follows.)
So you were aware at the time warnings came out on cigarettes that the warnings were there and that they discussed the health effects of smoking?
I guess people in general would talk about it.
And you heard these discussions taking place in the late 60's?
Yes, seen it on TV, the news, and everything that they were going to make them put a warning on cigarette packages.
And were these -Because the Surgeon General said it was not good for you.
And was your father -I can remember them saying that.
And was your father also aware of these discussions at the time they were going up?
He was out of the country so much of the time,
I don't know.
So did you have discussions with your parents
once you saw these news reports and heard these discussions over the fact that smoking can cause disease and illness, including cancer?
I don't really recall. Probably.
You think you would have told your parents that, hey -Probably.
-- the Surgeon General is putting warnings -Probably.
-- on cigarettes because they're causing cancer?
Probably.
You think you would have had that discussion with your father at that time in asking him to quit smoking?
Yeah, I probably would.
MR. BRENNER: There's no evidence of any confusion. At this point he's had this message for about 25 years, as a child -- as a teenager in Douglas.
Now, fast forward to the 1970's. Mr. and Mrs. Huish moved to Saudi Arabia and they meet Mr.
Dotson. You saw a video of Mr. Dotson a little bit before.
Now, Mr. Dotson is a guy that hung out with Mr.
Huish in settings where guys were real honest with each other. They played golf together, they were buddies. And we asked Mr. Dotson about what people like him, Mr. Dotson, who was a smoker, and Mr.
Huish and all the other smokers in Saudi Arabia knew about the dangers of smoking in the 70's.
Can we play Clip 14(a).
(Video clip played as follows.)
When you were smoking in Saudi Arabia would you say it was common knowledge that smoking cigarettes was harmful to one's health?
I would think that, yeah, that it was apparent to everybody. I had a couple buddies that didn't smoke, and they would say, you know, Lou, you need to quit them things, they're going to kill you.
That kind of stuff went on all the time. Maybe you're playing golf and have you a coughing fit or something, and you got a buddy that don't smoke: I told you they was going to kill you. And that was just normal conversation.
This is throughout the 1970's when you lived in Saudi Arabia?
Yeah.
MR. BRENNER: Common knowledge among Mr. Huish and his friends in Saudi Arabia that smoking was
dangerous. No doubt about it. No confusion.
Now, the last piece of testimony I want to share with you comes from the Huish's own son,
Jesse. Jesse is the middle son who we brought you as one of the witnesses that was read to you.
By the way, I just want to step back a second. We sometimes as lawyers assume that everyone understands the procedures we do. When I'm showing you written text, that is from the trial transcript that our court reporters take down. It's the actual words that were said, it's what you heard. These are not from their depositions, although the videos are, that's what was played to you. And then occasionally you'll see on videotapes it seems like something has been edited out, and all that is, as you've seen many times during this trial, lawyers make objections, the judge rules on the objections. In depositions the lawyers make objections and Your Honor rules on them at the time of trial, and those get cut out because you don't need to hear lawyer talk.
So that's the actual testimony you heard. There's no splicing where we take one question and another answer. That's just the record in the case. I just want to make sure you know that.
Line 16. This is a conversation with Jesse Huish and his dad. I believe it's in 1981:
Tell me to the best of your ability what you remember about saying to your father at that time?
I just told him, you know, surely you were listening to all the advertising that smoking is bad for you. It's not good for you. It's not good for -- to be around secondhand smoke for the family and the kids. So why don't you quit. As far as I know he never tried to quit or even wanted to quit.
And we asked him: Well, when you told this to your dad did this seem surprising to him?
Answer. I don't think so.
Go to the next slide, please.
Did he react in any way to suggest to you that this was something new to him?
No, I think he'd heard it a lot.
In fact, the Huishes in 19 -- I think it's '81, not only knew that smoking could be bad for you, or was bad for you, they believed that secondhand smoke was bad. That's the smoke off the end of the cigarette that goes around you.
Did that come as a surprise to him?
Nope. I think he heard all that too.
Did he react in any way to think it was the
first time?
No.
That's the testimony in this trial. Those are the pieces of the puzzle on the issue of whether Mr. Huish was unaware or somehow confused, as the plaintiff suggests, or was he a man that chose to smoke knowing the dangers.
The picture of June Huish starts to emerge, and it is clear from the pieces of the puzzle from which you get to decide this case.
The second issue that we said we wanted to talk about is whether Mr. Huish ever tried to quit. Now, it seems simplistic to say, but we all know that quitting smoking is possible. There's no one disputing that. And for things that are possible everyone knows you never know if you can do it until you try.
The plaintiffs seem to suggest to you that somehow the fact that he never talked about trying to quit was because he was a quiet man. Well, let's see what the pieces of the puzzle are from the people that lived with him every single day of his life; not what he said, but what he did and what he didn't do. Let's start with the testimony of Mrs. Huish.
Slide 19, please.
You've seen some of this before. I'm just going to flesh it out a little bit so you can see it's actually what Mr. Furr told you. I'm just going to show it to you in the actual transcript.
He showed you most of this.
But prior to 1993 when your husband became sick he never tried to quit smoking, did he?
No.
He never took any steps to help himself quit smoking, did he?
No.
He never went to see a doctor to quit smoking?
No.
He never asked anyone for help in quitting smoking, did he?
No.
Did he ever throw away his cigarettes?
No.
Did he ever hide his ashtrays?
No.
Did he ever seek any type of cessation help, go to any clinics?
No.
In fact, we asked her, did your husband ever
even once say to you that he didn't like smoking?
No.
Now, there are other pieces of this puzzle on this same issue, and I suggest to you that every single family member of Mr. Huish say the exact same thing, the people that observed him. Mrs. Anna Huish observed him ever day of his life probably
from the time he was 18 years old, and his kids observed him from the time they lived with him.
Let's just go through what each of the Huish children told us about whether Mr. Huish ever tried to quit smoking.
Bring up 21(a), the testimony of Janet Tucker.
(Video clip played as follows.)
Did your father ever try to quit smoking?
No.
Did he ever say, I'm going to quit smoking?
No.
MR. BRENNER: Bring up the testimony of Jesse Huish, the next child. Slide 22.
Do you remember him ever trying to attempt to quit smoking?
I don't think he ever did.
Do you remember a time when he stopped smoking for a period of time?
No.
Do you remember a time that he took steps toward stopping smoking?
No.
This last question is something that we haven't talked about a lot. Do you remember a time when your father attempted to cut down on the amount he smoked?
His answer was no.
I want you to think about that for a moment.
He smoked for about 45 to 46 years, is probably the best estimate. That's what the medical records say, 46 years for the most part. Not only in those 46 years did he not try to quit, he never once even tried to cut down on the amount he smoked, not one time.
Did he ever take any steps to cut down?
No.
Did he ever even say that he wanted to quit smoking?
No.
Ever say he wanted to cut down?
No.
The picture starts to emerge of a man that did what he wanted to do and lived his life the way he
wanted to live.
Look at the testimony of James Huish. Again all the family members, the nuclear family, the people that lived with him and knew him best, same thing, never saw him stop smoking, never saw him try to stop smoking.
Again did he ever indicate to you that he couldn't quit smoking?
No.
Did he ever actually try?
No.
We brought you the testimony of Mr. Tompkins.
He was a co-worker in Saudi Arabia through the 70's. This is what Mr. Tompkins said:
Did he ever tell you he tried to stop smoking?
He never told me.
Mr. Beal, another co-worker. Mr. Beal you'll remember is the one who described Mrs. Huish as like
a mother to his children. This is what he said:
Did you ever know him to try to quit smoking?
No.
Did he ever tell you in the past that he had ever tried?
No.
Again the same testimony: Did he ever tell you
he was unable to?
No.
Mr. Dotson says the same thing.
27(a), please.
(Video clip played as follows.)
Do you recall whether -- and do you recall whether or not Mr. Huish ever tried to quit smoking while he was in Saudi Arabia?
No.
Now, again, this is not just a situation or circumstance as Mr. Gustafson suggests that he just wasn't talked about. These are people that observed him every day over the course of his entire life, at least starting with his smoking life, and no one ever once saw him try to cut down or try to quit smoking.
Let's go back to our picture of Mr. Huish to see which one is emerging. Is the picture that plaintiff suggests of someone who couldn't stop correct, or is the picture of someone who never tried correct? The pieces of this puzzle only form one picture, and I believe it's clear what it is.
Now, the last piece, or the last section of the puzzle, and I said to you perhaps the most important, is what did Mr. Huish want? Not what
others wanted for him, what did he want, how did he want to live his life?
Now, I told you we would talk a little bit about Dr. Burns. And if you recall, Dr. Burns talked about Mr. Huish's cigarette brands over the course of his life a little bit. And what we learned from Dr. Burns is that in the 50's and 60's and into the 70's that almost everyone, almost everyone went from smoking unfiltered cigarettes to filtered cigarettes, and he told us the reason was is because that was one time in this whole story that the same message was being delivered regarding filtered or unfiltered cigarettes. Both the public health community and folks like Dr. Burns and the cigarette companies were all saying, were all pushing -- you know, they were saying smoke filtered cigarettes. The public health industry said quit, but if you don't want to quit, smoke filtered cigarettes.
And we asked Dr. Burns if an addiction controls what brand of cigarette or whether you smoke filtered or unfiltered cigarettes, and he says, no, that has nothing to do with it. And in fact, by the time Mr. Huish switches to a filtered cigarette the market has gone from one where 1.4 percent of the
ple are smoking filtered cigarettes to percent. In fact, Dr. Burns told us it was about and-a-half million people made that switch before
Mr. Huish decided to do it himself.
So we asked Dr. Burns what did that mean, and he told us.
If you could bring up 29, please.
He's talking with the congruent message that's being given about filtered cigarettes. I asked him, so what does it mean that when everyone is saying filtered cigarettes Mr. Huish is choosing to smoke what everyone believes is the most dangerous cigarettes. He says, well, he chose to ignore both messages put out by the public health community, one which was to quit, and the other was that if he couldn't quit to switch to filtered cigarettes. So he ignored both of those.
Then I said, well, what about the message from the tobacco companies, what was he doing about that? We heard all this about advertisements. Dr. Burns told us that too. We asked him: Well, did he also choose to ignore the tobacco company advertising that was urging people to switch to filtered cigarettes as well? He did not respond to that.
That's correct.
He made his own choice, did he not, Doctor?
He made an independent choice.
Nothing about any addiction controlled what brand or type of cigarettes Mr. Huish smoked. He was a man that wasn't going to let others tell him what to do. Plain and simple. And this story, this piece of the puzzle tells you exactly that.
We had the testimony again of his entire family, in fact, I believe every witness in the case about whether -- every fact witness about whether Mr. Huish wanted to quit. Let's just walk through these. I asked his daughter about that.
Slide 31(a), please.
(Video clip played as follows.)
Do you remember him ever telling you that he wanted to quit smoking?
No.
MR. BRENNER: Can you bring up Jesse Huish, please.
You've seen this before. I want to focus on the last line of this answer. This is again a conversation between Jesse and his dad about smoking being dangerous. In the last line Jesse says:
As far as I know he never tried to quit or even wanted to quit.
Slide 33, please.
Now, this testimony is very important in the case. This is James Huish, this is the youngest child, and he's relaying a story about Mrs. Huish and her husband, and I believe it's during a poker game, I believe is the testimony when this conversation takes place, and Mr. Huish is smoking, in the home, and we asked him:
Do you remember your mother complaining to your father about smoking?
He said no.
Said, well, how about ruining the carpet or ruining the sofa with matches.
And he remembers that, he says, yeah, burning
them. I recall that.
Do you recall seeing the burn holes?
Yeah, and her complaining about it.
What would she say to your dad?
She just asked him not to smoke in the house. That's what she asked him to do.
Next slide, please.
This wasn't her asking him to quit, this was her asking Mr. Huish to just simply not smoke in the house because he was burning things. His response: Just light up another one.
We asked James: I get the impression he wasn't going to follow her request.
Answer. Correct.
We asked him why. Is it because he was going to do whatever he wanted to do?
Answer. Right.
That is who John Huish was. And we shouldn't pretend in this trial that he was anything other than what the people who loved him, cared for him, worked with him, tell us he was.
I told you the plaintiff brought Sheila Cloid, former daughter-in-law, and she testifies about this subject.
Slide 35.
Again Mrs. Cloid, she lived with the Huishes for a while, had lots of opportunity to observe him.
Did he ever tell you he wanted to quit smoking?
Nope, don't recall him ever saying that.
Mr. Tompkins tells us the same thing.
Slide 36.
Did he ever tell you he wanted to stop smoking?
Answer. Never told me.
Now, Mr. Dotson testified about this, and I'm going to play you a clip because sometimes a picture is more important than the words, sometimes you get
a flavor for what's going on. You've seen part of this before, but I want you to listen closely about how the guys out on the golf course talked to each other about their smoking, what they were going to do with it.
Play Mr. Dotson, please.
(Video clip played as follows.)
And when you were smoking in Saudi Arabia would you say that it was common knowledge among Aramco employees that smoking cigarettes was harmful to one's health?
I would think that, you know, it was apparent to everybody. I had a couple buddies that didn't smoke and they would say, you know, Lou, you need to quit them things, they're going to kill you. That kind of stuff went on all the time. Maybe you're playing golf and you have a coughing fit or something and you had a buddy that don't smoke: I told you they going to kill you. You know, that was just normal conversation.
And this was throughout the 1970's when you lived in Saudi Arabia?
Yeah.
And you mentioned that this would come up in conversations during golf outings?
Yeah, or anywhere, just with your -- with your friends and acquaintances. If you happen to go into a coughing spasm they would say, you know, I told you them things are going to kill you.
Was Mr. Huish ever around when these conversations occurred?
Oh, I'm sure he was. I -- I don't recall a specific incident. I may have said the same thing to him and with a cigarette in my hand. You know, we might have been playing golf and he would go into a coughing fit and me smoking, John, you better quit them things, they going to kill you. That was just, you know, smoking and talking to each other.
And from what you observed about Mr. Huish and his smoking would you say that he is someone who would let others dictate to him about his smoking?
No.
And do you think that Mr. Huish was a man that made his own decisions about his smoking?
Yeah.
And from your observations about Mr. Huish did you think that's his right to smoke if he chose to was one of his strongly held beliefs?
Yeah, I would say so.
So he made the choice to smoke.
Yes.
And did Mr. Huish ever tell you that he wanted to quit smoking?
No.
MR. BRENNER: Ms. Anna Huish also testified about whether her husband wanted to quit smoking. Now, you recall Ms. Huish is the one who told us that at some point -- we're not sure when -- when she would be asking her husband to quit smoking she would say he said ne couldn't stop. We know he never tried, but she still said he couldn't stop.
But this next piece of testimony we're going to put up she tells us what she thought that meant and what it didn't mean.
If you can bring up Ms. Huish's testimony.
I believe this was the question by Mr. Furr:
Ma'am, your husband never told you he didn't like smoking, did he?
No.
And your husband, although you've told us that he told you he couldn't quit, never told you he wanted to quit, did he?
No.
We asked her flat out: In your opinion, you're the one that knows him best, you don't think that he
wanted to quit, do you?
Answer. No.
Those are the pieces of the puzzle. Which picture emerges with John Huish? Was he, as the plaintiffs say, a man who was unaware or somehow confused about the dangers of smoking; wanted to quit, but just couldn't stop, or do the pieces of the puzzle form a completely different picture of John Huish, a picture of a man who chose to smoke knowing the dangers and never tried or even wanted
to quit?
Now, the other lawyers have gone over the verdict form with you, and I'm just going to pick up a couple pieces. I'm not going to walk through the whole thing from the beginning.
If you could bring up the verdict form, question 1, please.
You've heard a lot about this question. And again the focus here was whether it was the addiction, Mr. Gustafson's words I believe in opening statement, compelled John Huish to smoke, or whether it is, as every witness has told you, he never tried to quit, he never wanted to quit.
Now, if you could bring up questions 2 and 3, please.
As Mr. Furr told you, all of these questions go to each of the defendants separately, and I agree with what Mr. Furr told you, but remember this is the part where it's only if you answer yes to question 1, which we don't believe the pieces of this puzzle form a picture that allows you to do so, but if you do you will get what's been referred to as the Engle findings.
Actually if you could switch me to the Elmo just real quickly.
So when you're doing that first question, the addiction question, you have to base it solely on the evidence you heard, not what a jury -- another jury heard in the generic case. And the court is going to instruct you that the findings do not establish in any way that either R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris are liable to Mr. Huish. His Honor is also going to instruct you that they do not establish whether Mr. Huish was injured by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company or Philip Morris USA's conduct, or whether that conduct was the cause of Mr. Huish's death.
The findings say what they say. They don't say anything more, they don't say anything less. They took place in a case that, frankly, was a lot about
what Dr. Cummings talked about. They had nothing to do with Mr. Huish.
So if you could bring up questions 2 and 3 again, please.
On that question you have to ask yourself is there anything that Philip Morris or Reynolds did or didn't do -- not whether you approve of what they did or didn't do over the last 50 years -- did any of those things have a direct and substantial impact on Mr. Huish such that you'll be able to say, well, if it wasn't for that he wouldn't have smoked, he wouldn't have got sick, that's the reason he smoked. I suggest to you that the evidence does not support that.
The second claim on the verdict form is what's called defective product. Now, if you could look at the second paragraph right towards the end, second to last line, what the plaintiff must prove here is that but for the defect Mr. Huish would not have gotten sick.
Now, the plaintiff has identified what that
defect -MR. SALES: Excuse me, Your Honor. That misstates the Engle findings. I object.
MR. BRENNER: Your Honor, I'll move on.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. BRENNER: What the plaintiff said during closing argument was -- well, two things they mentioned about cigarettes, specifically not about all cigarettes, but about some cigarettes. The first thing they mentioned was ammonia. Remember that?
Well, Mr. Furr told you that Dr. Burns acknowledged that adding ammonia does not do the things that Mr. Gustafson suggested. But importantly, the only evidence regarding things put in cigarettes, additives or ingredients put in cigarettes, came from Dr. Cummings, and Dr. Cummings put up a picture of each of the companies' websites in 2009, I think it was, for each of the products that Mr. Huish smoked. He put up one for Lucky Strikes, one for Camel, and one for Marlboro, one for Marlboro Lights. I don't believe he put up Chesterfield, which was made by a different company.
Those are the ingredients that are added to cigarettes now. I asked Dr. Cummings a simple question: Any evidence whatsoever that you know of that whatever ingredients you showed the jury were in the cigarettes Mr. Huish smoked? No.
We also learned from Dr. Cummings that in
addition to being irrelevant to Mr. Huish, that every ingredient added to cigarettes is sent to the government, they know it's added, they know it's burned, they evaluate it, and not once, neither for R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris, have they said anything about take out a particular ingredient.
Ingredients is a hot button issue. They want you to think there's something mysterious about the ingredients in cigarettes. There's nothing mysterious.
In fact, Mr. Furr told you if you make a cigarette with not a single ingredient other than tobacco, it's no more dangerous, no less dangerous, no more addictive, no less addictive than any of the cigarettes Mr. Furr's client makes or that Philip Morris makes. It's a nonissue.
The second thing they talked about in closing is why not make a cigarette without nicotine? Well, we asked Dr. Cummings about that too. He told you Philip Morris didn't make one of those, it made three of those, marketed a denicotinized cigarette under three different brands. Spent hundreds of millions of dollars, bought a company to get the technology, at the time the same technology to take caffeine out of coffee. Bought a company, spent
hundreds of millions of dollars on a plant, made the cigarette, marketed the cigarette, sold the cigarette in Florida when Mr. Huish was living here.
So that can't be a defect, because we did exactly what plaintiff said we should have done.
Mr. Furr walked through with you the issues of
concealment and agreement to conceal. I m not going to repeat it. The evidence is clear. Mr. Huish through Mrs. Huish's own testimony never saw or heard anything from any tobacco company, Tobacco Institute, Tobacco Research Committee, any of those things. It's all stuff to make you mad, as Mr. Furr told you, take your eye off the ball.
I'm not going to go through the comparative fault. I agree with what Mr. Furr told you. I'm not going to go through the damages. Those are for you and you alone to evaluate if you reach that part on the verdict form.
The last question on the verdict form has to do with punitive damages.
If you can bring that up, please.
It's questions 12 and 13. Again this is not a trial about whether you think that everything the tobacco companies did over the last 50 years is what you would expect them to do, it's not about that at
all. You'll see in the instructions what it is about is whether anything that they did or didn't do had any impact on Mr. Huish.
Now that we have put the pieces of the puzzle together that tells you who Mr. Huish was, you know the answer to that question is no.
As Mr. Furr said, both Reynolds and Philip Morris have admitted that cigarettes are addictive and cause cancer and other diseases for over a decade. There's no need or no reason to use this trial to deter them from talking about those things in the future. There is no going back. There's no secret documents.
In fact, I showed you even today, I don't know, 20, 30 documents of things that all took place a long time ago. No secret ingredients. You saw yourself they're all listed on the websites of the companies, shared with the public and shared with the government.
My time is done. Like Mr. Furr said, I don't get a chance to stand back up again. The plaintiff gets an opportunity in our system to give what's called a brief rebuttal. And ask yourself when they get up what they're telling you if it really does relate to Mr. Huish, and ask yourself does it change
the puzzle that we just spent the last hour putting together.
On behalf of my client and myself I thank you so very much for your time. We look forward to receiving your verdict. Thank you.
