MR. FURR: Counsel, Mrs. Huish.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURY: Good morning.
MR. FURR: The only possible place I can begin is to thank you for your service. The service you've provided in this case is absolutely extraordinary. You stayed here till 11 o'clock two nights ago, you were back at 9 a.m. the next morning. Jury service in this country is extremely important. Other than perhaps serving in our military, jury service may be the next most valuable service that we as citizens get to provide to our country. We appreciate very much your service.
R.J. Reynolds appreciates it. Dr. Figlar, who's here with us today appreciates your service very much. You carefully considered the issues. On
some issues you found in the plaintiff's favor. On some issues you found in the defendant's favor.
It's obvious you took your service very seriously. You worked late and we can't thank you enough. And I want to be very careful -- I want to be very clear about one thing. We respect the verdict that you gave us in this case.
Now, of course, in some ways we wish it had been different. You know what our position was but we respect your verdict and nothing I say today is in any way intended to challenge your verdict whatsoever. But you have a very different task before you today. Today you have a very different task than you had in the first phase. To help you address that task, I wish I knew what evidence in the first phase you found most persuasive and what the basis for your verdict was but, of course, we can't talk to you. So I can't know that for sure but we have some clues.
The clues we have, of course, come from the verdict you gave us in the first phase. So let's remind ourselves what you told the parties in the first phase. You told us that the sale of an unreasonably dangerous and defective cigarette harmed Mr. Huish. You told us the negligence which
instructions basically define for you as a
failure to use reasonable care harmed Mr. Huish.
You told us that concealment of material information did not harm Mr. Huish, and you told us that the agreement to conceal material information did not harm Mr. Huish. These are important findings that you made because in this phase of the trial you can only punish these companies under the law for conduct that harmed the plaintiff.
And so we know that your concern was the selling of a defective product and the negligent conduct of the companies. That was the basis for your verdict and I'm going to try to address those issues.
But you also told us something else in the first phase. You told us that you found that Mr. Huish was respon- -- 50 percent responsible for his death. Your finding was that he was 50 percent responsible and that R.J. Reynolds, whom I represent, as y'all know, was 25 percent responsible. So we find ourselves here today where you're being asked to award millions of dollars in a case where you found, with all due respect, that Mr. Huish was twice as responsible for his death as R.J. Reynolds was. That's your findings, not my
argument, but your findings. That's where we start this case.
Well, the question is -- the first question is, actually, Are you going to award punitive damages? You just heard an argument suggesting to you that you had already made that decision. Well, you see the law recognizes that you are going to receive more evidence just like you did yesterday and that that evidence should be considered as you decide whether you're going to award punitive damages. You will see in your instruction this phrase, You may in your discretion decline to assess punitive damages. Of course, what that really means is that you are not required to award any punitive damages. It's up to you whether or not to award any punitive damages in this case.
And one of the things that you should consider is the evidence you heard yesterday as you make that decision. Well, I think that -- I hope this will be helpful. Punitive damages are kind of an unusual subject to deal with. Not many people have any experience with thinking about punitive damages and why they should be awarded and who they go to and things like that so I'm going to try to give you a little roadmap to this case and to the instructions
that you're going to have, a fact which that may -you may find to be important to consider as you make your decision.
First, you need to consider, I think, who, who, who should punitive damages be awarded to? Second, what is the purpose of punitive damages? Third, what are the legal standards for awarding punitive damages? That's the framework and then once you have that framework in mind, you'll be asked to consider whether plaintiff has proven that punitive damages should be awarded in this case and, if so, how much. So I'm going to try to -- this is sort of
an outline of what I want to talk to you about with the time I have today.
First, this is still Mrs. Huish's case. It's Mrs. Huish -- Mrs. Huish's request that you award her punitive damages. She is the only party that damages -- that punitive damages can be awarded to. Said a little bit differently, you cannot award punitive damages to public health agencies or to antismoking organizations or to smoking cessation clinics or to any other smokers. You cannot award punitive damages to any other smokers or for harm suffered by any other smokers. They can only be awarded to Mrs. Huish. Now, I'm not saying one
thing bad about Mrs. Huish. I haven't done that during the trial, I am not going to do it, I will never do it. This is not in any way an attack on Mrs. Huish, but it's important to understand who you can award punitive damages to and who you can't award punitive damages to.
I think something else that's important to understand, and you will see this in your instructions, you heard it read this morning, This amount would be in addition compensatory damages you have previously awarded. You already made a decision to award Mrs. Huish $750,000 in compensatory damages. Your decision -- you found that to be a fair and just amount to fully compensate her. Now the situation, you have to consider whether to award her additional damages unrelated her compensation, even though you found Mr. Huish to have been 50 percent at fault in this case.
A very important instruction you will see was read to you this morning, If you determine that punitive damages should be awarded, the amount of damages must be based only on harm suffered by Mr. Huish or Mrs. Huish. You may not award damages against R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and/or Philip
Morris USA, Inc. For harms suffered by anyone else. Pretty self-evident but here's what it means. RJR can only be punished for its fault in causing Mr. Huish's death. That's the legal framework we're in here today. RJR cannot be punished for any fault causing the death of anyone else. Of course, that makes sense because you haven't heard the case of anyone else. You haven't heard the case of anyone else.
Other smokers can bring their lawsuits if they think they have a valid case. You heard the plaintiff's expert witnesses talk to you about all the lawsuits they work on. You've been told that these lawsuits have been going on since 1954. Other cases are the place where other plaintiffs' rights are to be. This is only a case about Mrs. Huish. When you see your verdict form you're still going to see her name at the top of the verdict form. This case is not about anybody else.
What are the purpose of punitive damages? Punishment and deterrence. You've heard that already. Let me suggest to you that when you consider punishment a deterrence from the
perspective of R.J. Reynolds, the question really is, Should R.J. Reynolds pay punitive damage in 2011
to punish the company when Mr. Huish stopped smoking R.J. Reynolds' Camel cigarettes in 1972? That's just where we are.
Now, I'm not suggesting to you that R.J. Reynolds did everything perfect. You've heard the evidence. There were mistakes made. I'm not here to defend all the historical conduct. You've already considered that evidence. But the question now is, Are you going to award punitive damages in 2011 for conduct that could not have harmed Mr.
Huish after 1972? That's 39 years ago. 39 years ago. Because the basis for your decision in the first phase was the selling of defective product and negligent conduct. Any impact those acts had on Mr. Huish would have ended when he stopped smoking cigarettes, Camel cigarettes in 1972. So the real question is you're being asked now to go back and award millions of dollars for conduct that did not harm Mr. Huish after 1972.
Well, who would you be punishing today? Who would be punished by punitive damage awards against R.J. Reynolds? You've heard that R.J. Reynolds is a very different company in 2011 than it was in 1972. Different ownership, there are new scientists, there are new executives. The scientists today are
scientists like Dr. Figlar. That's who you're being asked to punish today.
The question for -- I want to go back at this point. You know, again, we're still talking -- even today in closing argument we're talking about things that happened a long time ago. We're still talking about James Johnson and Ed Horrigan and Claude Teague an Al Rodgeman, people who used to work at Reynolds but have been retired for a long time. Can you punish them by punishing Reynolds? They're gone. They're gone.
R.J. Reynolds is located 401 North Main Street, Winston-Salem. If you go to 401 North Main Street and knock on the door to look for these individuals, you're not going to find them. They're retired. So you're not going to punish these people by punishing R.J. Reynolds today.
Well, like I said, your decision in the first phase is based on negligence, the failure to use reasonable care, and product design. So I want to talk to you about those things and I want to suggest to you to consider the evidence that you heard yesterday when you think about whether or not R.J. Reynolds has conducted itself negligently in 2011.
We spent some time going through the Web site. Dr.
Figlar showed you that the R.J. Reynolds Web site states -- makes a number of statements to smokers about smoking because that's who Reynolds need to be careful how they address. And here's what they tell smokers: Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States. Cigarette smoking significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer, heart disease, chronic
bronchitis, emphysema, and other serious diseases and adverse health effects. R.J. Reynolds gives smokers today the same message that they get from the public health community.
A lot of testimony in this case about how the message about the dangers of smoking needs to be uniform and unimpeded by any different messages. Well, that's exactly what happens today. And you heard nobody forces R.J. Reynolds to make these statements on its Web site. This is something that R.J. Reynolds has determined to do to do the right thing.
What else did they show -- tell smokers? No tobacco product has been shown to be safe without risk. Quitting cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk for serious disease. The best course of action for tobacco users concerned about
their health is to quit. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company believes that individuals should rely on the conclusions of the U.S. Surgeon General, the Centers for Disease Control, and other public health and medical officials when making decisions regarding smoking.
Is R.J. Reynolds behaving unreasonably in 2011? They've given smokers the exact same messages that the public health community gives them. In fact, they tell smokers, Don't rely on what we're saying. Trust -- follow what the public health community tells you. We even provide links. We make it as easy as possible for smokers to get all the information they need about the dangers of smoking. That's how R.J. Reynolds does business today.
That's how R.J. Reynolds treat smokers today. Full transparency, no disputing the health risks of smoking. We tell the world. We tell our customers that smoking is dangerous and we tell them as you're thinking about smoking, look at what the Surgeon General says. That's what you need to look at. So let us make this as easy for you as we can. Ingredients. We all know in our society today that people are very concerned about ingredients, in our food, our water, products we eat, and the cigarettes
we smoke. Nobody forces R.J. Reynolds to tell anybody about the ingredients in its product, but because RJR is a fully transparent company because it's doing business the right way today, because it's doing things it should do for smokers, it puts all its ingredients on its Web site and it does it two ways. Here's a comprehensive list of every ingredient on the Web -- that appeared in any cigarette, the maximum amount it's used in and referenced to what that ingredient does to health.
So anybody, plaintiff lawyers, smokers, public health officials, anybody who wants to know what's in the cigarettes can look right there. But, of course, a smoker might not be interested in what's in every cigarette, they might want to know what's in their cigarette. So R.J. Reynolds puts the ingredient list up according to specific brands.
You heard Dr. Figlar tell you yesterday that if you want to smoke a Camel, if you're smoking a Camel
unfiltered cigarette, considering smoking Camel unfiltered cigarette, you can go to the Web site and look at every ingredient that's included and every additive that's included in that product. Full transparency. Full transparency. Does R.J.
Reynolds need to be punished for that conduct?
Documents. A lot of discussion about documents. Some of these documents, you know, had bad ideas in them. I'm not trying to defend what some of the old documents would say. They were written a long time ago, in the '50's and '60's but one thing you now know is that these documents are available to everybody. Full transparency. At its own cost, R.J. Reynolds maintains a Web site where anybody can log in and look at any document they want. You may have heard lawyers like the plaintiff's lawyers here and their witnesses can log in to those Web site, look at any document they want, and bring them into court and put them up in evidence for you. Full transparency. That's the way R.J. Reynolds does business now.
So are punitive damages needed to prevent R.J. Reynolds from negligent conduct? I suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the answer is no. R.J. Reynolds gets it. R.J. Reynolds got the message. R.J. Reynolds turned over a new leaf a decade ago and is now a company who's conducting business exactly the way a tobacco company should be conducting business. Should it be punished for that? That's a the question you have in front of you. I suggest to you that the answer is no but, of
course, that's for you to decide.
The second question is whether -- is this topic of -- go back to your verdict form, you found that Mr. Huish had been injured by the selling of a dangerous and defective product. So the question I put before you is, Does R.J. Reynolds need to be punished to force it to try to make its cigarettes safer. Let's look at what the evidence is that you heard yesterday. Go back a little bit. Cigarettes are risky and inherently dangerous. All the plaintiff's experts agree that there's no such thing as a safe cigarette. And during the first phase of this trial Dr. Burns said a couple of very interesting things. He told you, first of all, that there is no cigarette that has been proven to be less dangerous or less addictive than the products that Mr. Huish smoked. Nowhere in the world, he said, is there a less-dangerous, less-addictive conventional cigarette.
Second, he told you -- then he was speaking in present terms. He said, Here we are in 2011. The companies are unable, because technology doesn't exist, to take the carcinogens out of cigarettes. That's the nature of the tobacco business just like we talked about during jury selection. It's a
dangerous product, it's an addictive product, but it's a legal product. Our society decided it's a legal product, it's a product that can't be made safe. It can't be made safe. But has R.J. Reynolds
tried to make their product safer? Well, what should -- what should R.J. Reynolds do in this situation? You're selling a dangerous and addictive product that you can't make safe. What should you do for your customers? I think there's about three things you should do. First, you should make sure you don't make that product any more dangerous than it has to be. You should make sure that nothing you do during the design and manufacture of that product makes it more dangerous than it is and that's what they do.
You heard Dr. Figlar sit there yesterday and explain to you what their product stewardship program is. How Reynolds tests every ingredient, every manufactured process, anything they do to their product, to make sure -- to make sure that they don't do anything to make the cigarette more dangerous. That's what we should do for the customers and that's what we -- and that's what we do.
What's the second thing you should do? It's
fine not to make it more dangerous but shouldn't you try and make it safer if you can? Of course, you should, and that's what they do. You heard that Reynolds has spent over a billion dollars over the past 30 years doing everything they can to try to make cigarettes safer. You heard the story about low nitrosamine tobacco, about the very low nicotine cigarette now, about the extremely high-tech Premiere and Eclipse cigarettes. You heard about the development of tobacco products that are alternatives to smoking cigarettes called Snus and you heard about Reynolds' purchase of a company called Niconovum to try to develop products that will help smokers quit if that's what they want to do.
Let's walk through this quickly. The low nitrosamine story, you heard that in the 1990's R.J. Reynolds learned that something that the farmers were doing in their barns were causing nitrosamines to increase. They didn't keep it to themselves, they didn't try to get a competitive advantage out of it, they didn't hide the information from public health community, they published it, they told their competitors about it, and they went and spent their money to help farmers change their barns to decrease
the levels of nitrosamines in their tobacco. The tobacco that they now use in all their brands.
Could they get all the nitrosamines out? No, they can't do it. They can't get them all out. Dr. Figlar told you the technology doesn't exist yet.
But we significantly decreased the level of those nitrosamines.
Second, there was a lot of discussion in this case about nicotine and about addiction. You heard during the first phase the plaintiff's lawyers describe this case as a case about addiction. Well, let's look at what R.J. Reynolds has done to try to decrease nicotine. First -- and none of this is in way has been disputed by plaintiff's counsel. They had the opportunity to cross-examine company
witnesses yesterday. This testimony was given, none of these facts were disputed. R.J. Reynolds does not add nicotine to its cigarettes. Does not add it. It would be wrong to add additional nicotine to your cigarettes. Doesn't happen. In fact, during the manufacturing process nicotine is lost as a result of the manufacturing process. You heard yesterday that if you go pluck a leaf of tobacco from any field, including fields you can find here in Florida, the level of nicotine in that leaf is
going to be lower than the level of nicotine in the tobacco after the cigarette's manufactured.
Nicotine is lost during the manufacturing process.
But Reynolds didn t stop there. You heard that through various technology they have been able to substantially lower the nicotine content across their brands since the 1950's. You know, there's a lot of discussion in the first phase of this case about the Quest cigarette, should R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris offer a low nicotine cigarette? Well, they do, and they've been doing it since the 1970's. You heard about the Now cigarette, which is available nationwide. The undisputed testimony in this case, it contains 1 to 2 percent of the amount of nicotine that's contained in the average cigarette.
During cross-examination of Dr. Figlar, Mr. Gustafson made the point that people have actually used this product to stop smoking. They can use it as a stop smoking aid the level's so low. R.J. Reynolds makes that product and markets it nationwide so that smokers have that choice if that's what they want to do.
Finally, and it was raised again this morning, should R.J. Reynolds just take all the nicotine out
of its brands? Should it just take all the nicotine out of its brands? You know, the bottom line is R.J. Reynolds is a legal business, it has the right to stay in business. It has the right to try to profit by making cigarettes, they're a legal product. What good would it do for R.J. Reynolds to begin manufacturing cigarettes that nobody will smoke and nobody will buy? What do you think would happen to R.J. Reynolds' customers? You heard Dr. Figlar explain to you yesterday, the only result would be that they would begin buying the products of competitors. That's what would happen.
Perhaps the sort of crown jewel of Reynolds' efforts to try to make cigarettes safer, try to make cigarettes safer, is the Premiere/Eclipse cigarettes. They spent 30 years, they spent a billion dollars, they obtained 40 patents, they had to invent the technology to do it. They developed this high-tech product and put it on the market.
But before they did that, they tested it. You remember the big book Dr. Figlar showed you yesterday about all the testing that went into this and what did they find? They were able to significantly reduce the chemistry of that cigarette smoke, more than 90 percent of most carcinogens had
been reduced in that smoke. Is that a reasonable thing to do?
Second, when you've tested it in animal systems, they try to minimize how much animal testing they have to do but sometimes people require animal testing in order to justify claims they make about a product. When they tested in animal systems they found -- you heard that the animal exposed to Eclipse developed fewer tumors.
Third, they marketed it nationwide. Now, there was some suggestion a little white ago that you can't find these things. The unrebutted testimony yesterday for which there was no cross-examination is Eclipse cigarettes are sold in about 1,000 stores in Florida alone, 1,000 stores. Why does Reynolds do that, because they make so much money off the product? You heard yesterday they lose money off every single pack of these cigarettes they sell, but the company believes it's an option that smokers should have and so they keep it on the market even though it loses money. So the smokers can have a chance to buy a product like this if that's what they want to do.
Finally, make sure you don't make the product more dangerous, try to make it safer if you can.
Eclipse, Now, they offer smokers a tobacco product alternative, Snus. What else could the company do? What else could the company do? Selling a dangerous and addictive product, you could help smokers quit. You could help smokers quit. And you heard in 2009 that R.J. Reynolds went to Sweden and purchased a company that was begun by Dr. Fagerstrom. You heard a lot about him in the first phase. He's one of the scientists in the world who developed ways to look at addiction. He also started a company that tried to develop products to help people quit.
Reynolds went and bought that company and is now in the process of trying to get the studies done to get FDA approval so that they can market a nicotine replacement product to smokers who want to quit. That's what they're doing for smokers.
So, again, I would suggest to you that you think about whether to award punitive damages, you should consider the evidence you've heard about whether or not punitive damages are necessary to force R.J. Reynolds to produce safer products. The answer is clearly no.
Transparency. You know, there's been a lot of discussion in this case about don't trust the tobacco companies, don't trust the tobacco
companies. Well, first of all, it should be obvious that RJR got the message and turned the corner more than a decade ago. They're doing things the right way today. But, still, you may have some lingering doubt. Could they backslide? Could this company backslide, go back to doing things the way they used to do? The answer is clearly no because the company operates its business under the microscope of the United States Food and Drug Administration. You heard yesterday that the Food and Drug Administration requires disclosure of additives and
ingredients, disclosure of research documents and reports, requires the companies to open up their manufacturing plants to FDA inspection. They're requiring new warning labels and additional advertising restrictions. Additional advertising restrictions.
Ladies and gentlemen, I submit when you get to the bottom-line question whether punitive damages are warranted now, that you're being asked to punish a company that is a socially responsible tobacco company in 2011. It's still a tobacco company, that's why we talked about this during jury selection. The nature of the business is to sell cigarettes. It's a legal product to sell, they
can't be punished for selling cigarettes. But it's a socially responsible seller of cigarettes. Look where we are. R.J. Reynolds agrees with the health dangers of smoking, it advises smokers to obtain information from the public health community, the documents are publicly available. We make sure we don't do anything to make the product more dangerous. We try to make it safer and if people want to quit, we're trying to develop a product to help them quit. What more could they do? What more could they be doing in 2011 to try to do the right thing for the 20 percent of Americans that continue to smoke?
You know, with all the information out there, in 2011, you heard in this case that 20 percent of adults continue to smoke in this country. It's a legal product and they get to make that choice. But what's the right thing to do today? Make sure you don't make it any more dangerous, try to make it safer, help them quit if that's what they want to do. And that's was R.J. Reynolds does do.
You know, let's talk about punishment. Anybody who's lived a little longer and raised children, you know, this topic of punishment comes up once in a while in life. I suggest to you that for punishment
to be valid, it needs to have a purpose. It needs to have a purpose. Let me ask you to consider what the purpose of punishment would be in this case? Would a punitive damage award make people more aware of the dangers of smoking? I think the answer's no. Would it improve public health? Would giving Mrs. Huish damages in addition to full, fair, and just compensation you've already awarded her, would that improve public health? Would it make cigarettes safer? Would it stop people from beginning to smoke? Would it cause more people to stop smoking? Would it make cigarettes illegal? Could it make the companies any more transparent? Would it serve any valid purpose? I suggest to you that the evidence that you heard yesterday when you finally got the additional facts from the company witnesses about what's going on today demonstrates that the answer to all those questions is no, and that punitive damages are not warranted in this case.
However, I recognize that you may disagree.
This is your decision. And because you may
sagree, I have an additional obligation and that s discuss with you the amount of punitive damages at might be proper if, in fact, you decide to
award punitive damages in this case.
And the good news for you is that's kind of a difficult, thing not very much people in their lives have ever thought about the question, how much punitive damages should I award? It's not something we all walk around thinking about. So you need some guidance on a question like that.
Fortunately, you get it from the court's instruction. You will see that the instruction says, There must be some reasonable relationship between any amount of punitive damages you award and the amount of compensatory damages you have awarded to the plaintiff. That's the test that the court has given you to measure the size of any punitive damage award.
I want to suggest to you a common-sense way to apply that approach. Let's remind ourselves, you awarded Mrs. Huish $750,000 in phase one as fair and just damages. Now, this morning plaintiff's counsel asked you to apply some multiple to that number, to the 750,000 number, which includes the damages caused by Mr. Huish, the 50 percent of damages caused by Mr. Huish. Remember that you actually found that R.J. Reynolds was 25 percent at fault for Mr. Huish's death. So I suggest to you that a
common-sense way to think about how a punitive damage award could have a reasonable relationship to the compensatory damages that you have awarded against R.J. Reynolds and, for that matter, Philip Morris, since the numbers are the same with respect to 25 percent, is to consider that what you've done is you've awarded the companies to compensate Mrs. Huish $185,500 each. That's the fault that you found. That's the damage that you found the companies caused. So that's where you start this analysis. Not with the number that includes all the damages caused by Mr. Huish. R.J. Reynolds can't be punished for what Mr. Huish did to himself. For that matter, R.J. Reynolds can't be punished for what Philip Morris -- you found Philip Morris to have done to Mr. Huish. Philip Morris cannot be punished for what you found that R.J. Reynolds -the role that you found R.J. Reynolds played in Mr. Huish's death. So you have to think about this on a defendant-by-defendant basis and on a fault basis.
So I suggest to you that here's where you start.
How do you think about what is a reasonable relationship to this number? I'm going to suggest that you consider this. You bracket this number.
You bracket this number. Start with $187,500 and
you say to yourself, What's the bracket I would put around that? Simple way to think about it is punitive damage award should be as low as half of that, half of the award has a reasonable relationship to it, which, in fact, would be $93,750. You could decide to double that number.
You could decide that in this case I want to double
that number and you can come up with another $187,500.
You could say, Well, I actually want to go as high as reasonable in this case. I would suggest to you that twice the actual damages caused by Reynolds would be the highest number that would have a reasonable relationship to the damages that Reynolds caused. Reynolds can only be punished for the harm that it caused. Twice the damages that Reynolds caused would be $375,000. I want to suggest to you that that would be our range of damages that would have a reasonable relationship to be to the compensatory damages.
Just about done. I wanted to remind ourselves we are in 2011. How R.J. Reynolds does business, as you consider whether or not you should punish them. They tell smokers that their product is dangerous. They tell smokers to follow the public health
communities' message. They make sure they don't do anything to make their products more dangerous.
They try to make them safer and now they're trying to help smokers quit if that's what they want to do.
And I'm going to leave you with this question, what more can they do now? What more can they do? Would a punitive damage award in this case cause them to do anything any differently? Is there anything left to do?
Thank you all very much for your attention.



MR. BRENNER: May it please the court, counsel, Mrs. Huish.
Well, we're at the home stretch. I'm going to do my best to not repeat what Mr. Furr has told you. As you saw from the two company witnesses that testified yesterday, these companies are doing a lot of the same things when it comes to cigarette design today, when it comes to the environment that they operate in their transparency. But I do want to repeat where Mr. Furr started and, that is, that I want to thank you for both the work you've done so far, the seriousness with which you've taken your job. You worked till -- you deliberated for about seven hours, I think, till 11 o'clock at night. As
Jeff said, you're back on the next morning, you've been attentive. We -- as we should, we took your verdict and we respect your verdict and we looked at your verdict. We looked at your verdict very closely because, as Jeff said, it told us, at least as best we could analyze, what you were thinking, what you were looking at when you reviewed all the evidence.
And as Jeff said, you told us very clearly that you had found that the negligence of both Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds had been a partial cause of Mr. Huish's death and that the defective product, the unreasonably dangerous products, the cigarettes he smoked, were a legal cause or a partial legal cause of his death. But you also told us that the concealment of information and the agreement to conceal information as it relates to Mr. Huish was not the cause of his death.
So after receiving that verdict, I thought to myself, Well, we spent a whole lot of time in the first part of this trial on that very issue. The plaintiff put in a whole lot of evidence on that very issue. I would suggest to you that a significant percentage, certainly more than half, as high as 75, 80 percent of their efforts, was on that
issue and we, too, responded. We are the defendant and defendants respond as you would expect to the evidence that plaintiff put on and there was a big back and forth about whether that concealment of information had any impact on Mr. Huish. And each side put on the evidence that you gave your decision and just as we respect your verdict on where you found that companies have been partially responsible on Mr. Huish's death, we also respect your verdict on what was not a partial cause of his death.
So as we entered the second phase of the trial I asked myself two things, Well, is the plaintiff going to review the verdict and talk about things in phase two that you have told all of us was important? And how can we respond to that verdict and give you evidence on those topics? So when we
got here yesterday morning, the praintiff s entire evidence in the second phase of the case was, These are big companies, R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris, that make a profit. And that was it. It was as if the whole first part of the trial had answered the questions already. But, of course, they didn't.
And Mr. Gustafson, I think he made a mistake. He said, You've already determined that you have to award punitive damages. And as Mr. Furr points out,
the court will instruct you, who already has instructed you, you will have those instructions. That's not the case.
Because what you did -- what you were asked to do in phase one was to look at all the conduct, mostly on the concealment issue, and make a determination whether that conduct was conduct that you felt deserved to go to a second phase. Now, when we get to this phase of the trial you learn for the fist time that it's only the conduct that you found caused harm to Mr. Or Mrs. Huish that is relevant to punitive damages. So let me just walk through the instruction now.
When Mr. Gustafson went through these instructions, he only focused on those first two paragraphs, which I wrote next to whether. And I wrote that because those first two paragraphs go to whether to award punitive damage. The court has instructed you what you will have is, one, you can only consider the conduct that harmed Mr. And Mrs. Huish in determining whether to award punitive damages but you can rook at harm to others just for a small purpose and that purpose is you could look at the same conduct that caused damage to Mr. Huish and see if that particular conduct caused harm to
others. What do I mean by that? Can you look at whether the cigarettes that were made caused harm to others? Sure. For the purpose of whether to award punitive damage you can look at that. But the whole issue we spent two weeks talking about concealment, whether or not that caused harm to others is irrelevant because we know from your verdict that you determined, at least as it relates to Mr. Huish, did not cause damage.
So although the instructions that you'll see, they say you cannot consider others, you can consider others, you cannot consider others, those first two paragraphs go to the question of whether.
The next paragraph is one Mr. Gustafson didn't read at all the entire time he was up, in fact, he highlighted those two as to whether and avoided the one that went to amount. And what that says, When you get to -- or if you get to the amount of damages, the instructions are crystal clear, you can only look to the harm suffered by Mr. Huish and Mrs. Huish and not the harm suffered by anyone else.
As Jeff pointed out the lawsuit's going on, other people can have different lawsuits, this lawsuit is only about the harm to Mr. Huish and that's if you get to the amount. So the
-to-others part has nothing to do with the
amount of punitive damages.
So plaintiff in phase two rests their evidence on putting in the fact that these are big companies that make money. And even today they put on the revenue figure of the companies, the revenue figures, the sales figures and said they make $57 million a day. You all know that revenue figures are not what you make. Revenue figures are what they are, it's what you get from the sale of cigarettes. Doesn't take into account cost of doing business, all that stuff. Now, do the companies make a profit? Absolutely. Do these companies both make a profit? Absolutely. Is it really fair to put up revenue figures and suggest that's how much money the companies make a day? Well, why would you do that when this is a case only about Mr. And Mrs. Huish.
Well, you do that because, respectfully, trying to take the attention off issues that you all found, because the evidence that was presented, as I said, was largely not in line with where you all rested your verdict. So as Jeff said, what we try to do in phase two, we each brought a representative from the company and as you can see from the testimony that
we brought the representative, we tried to gear it to what you guys told us was important. You told us negligence, failure to use reasonable care was an issue that you were concerned with, an issue that you felt warranted liability against these companies and you told us that the products, themselves, was an issue that you felt important, felt warranted liability so we tried to give you information on both of those.
Let me start with the second one first. The design of cigarettes, what cigarettes are. In the first part of the trial, the plaintiff did a lot of sort of throwing out things, not really talking about the design of cigarettes, but throwing out scary words like, you know, added nicotine and additives and ingredients and ammonia. So we put on witnesses to address the topic directly factually and this is what they told us. So let's start with nicotine. What did we learn about nicotine? First, we learned, which is pretty interesting, that for hundreds of years the tobacco plant's scientific name has been named after nicotine. No secret. Nicotine is in the tobacco plant, you go out to the field and pull out a leaf and burn it, you get nicotine. Well, what did we also learn? We asked
Dr. Lapowicz and Dr. Figlar the same sorts of questions. A few questions. One, is there more or less nicotine in a cigarette or is it in the tobacco? Meaning you start with the nicotine in tobacco and end with the nicotine in cigarette, which has more? Both of them told you there's more in the tobacco plant. When you make cigarettes, you take out nicotine, you lose nicotine.
And we asked the second question, none that the plaintiff has suggested to you. Do you ever -- do you add nicotine to your cigarettes? No. Have you ever added nicotine to your cigarettes? No.
Third thing we asKed, and a rot of suggestion in the plaintiff's case, we just asked straight up, asked the witnesses straight up, Do you control or adjust the level of nicotine to sustain addiction? Answer, absolutely not.
Now, one thing you saw in this triar -- excuse me for a moment -- is there was no hesitation by any of the lawyers in the case. This is Mr. Gustafson, Mr. Sales, myself, Mr. Furr, and Mr. Bassett, if we had a question, if we had an issue something another witness said, none of us were shy about asking. That's what we should do because we're here to get the truth and you get that truth from watching the
witnesses, hearing what they say when a lawyer questions them from one side or when a lawyer questions from the other side.
They didn't ask these witnesses, they didn't cross-examine these witnesses on these basic facts I just told us because they're all true. When they had the opportunity with the witnesses on the stand to ask them, Do you add nicotine? They didn't ask them. They didn't ask them, Do you control nicotine to sustain addiction? Instead, when you have a witness here sitting currently live in front of you, you had the chance not to rely on 50-year-old documents, you have a rive human being in front of you, they don't ask him those questions. Again, they go back to old documents even today. Old documents that have, frankly, language that is inflammatory. Why do they keep talking to you about old documents? Why don't they ask the witness right in front of you if they disagree with anything he said.
You heard a lot of suggestion in the first part of the trial, in fact, you heard the suggestion today, Why don't you just take the nicotine out of cigarettes and sell those cigarettes? Well, the answer is, you now heard, that Philip Morris, they
did do that, and they do do that.
If you could bring up slide number one, please.
These were the cigarettes, three different brands, marketed in the '80's and '90's right here in Florida but also other places, exactly what the plaintiff is saying we should do and we did. And we do it today. You heard Dr. Lapowicz talk about the Merit, Ultra Merit, Merit Bronze cigarette. I guess the suggestion is that the only cigarettes that should be sold are the ones with very low nicotine. That's the only thing I can think of because the suggestion that you should make cigarettes with very low nicotine, we're already doing that so I guess the suggestion is that's all we should do. Well, remember what Dr. Lapowicz and Dr. Figlar told you. Even when these types of cigarettes were made with very low nicotine, there were folks in the public health community that said, No, that's a really bad idea. That's a really bad idea because if you make them with low nicotine, people may smoke more. And as you know, it's not the nicotine that causing disease -- a disease in smokers, it's the tar. So what have the companies done? They made cigarettes
ith very low nicotine and they made other i garettes.
What's the third thing you heard about the design issue? You heard tnis very scary word ammonia. I don't know, when you think of ammonia, you think of, I guess, Clorox is ammonia, of someone sitting back -- I think it's Clorox, of someone sitting back in the halls of Philip Morris or Reynolds and pouring ammonia on cigarettes. Not what we were talking about.
First of all, Mr. Gustafson told you in phase one, unequivocally, stood up in front of you in closing and said, If you go out to a field and pull off a leaf of a tobacco plant, pull it off and burn it, you will find no ammonia. Remember when he told you that? So we put Dr. Lapowicz on the stand, a man who's worked with tobacco for 20-plus years, asked him a simple question: If you go to a field, pull a tobacco leaf off a plant and burn it, will you generate ammonia? Answer, Absolutely, yes. Did they ask him a single question about that on cross-examination? No, because it's the truth.
They didn't need to ask him more questions about it because they already know the truth.
We also asked Dr. Lapowicz, Well, in some cigarettes is ammonia used in the process? He said, Yeah. He explained to you the process to make
what's called reconstituted tobacco, a way to have less tobacco. And we asked him flat out two questions: Is there anything about adding ammonia that makes cigarettes more harmful? Answer, No. No cross-examination. Second question: Is there anything about adding cigarettes -- adding ammonia makes cigarettes more addictive? No. Again, you know the truth. Scary words and you learned about ammonia, ammonia is also used in lots of products that we all use every day, and in lots of food products, it's not some scary thing. It's just not. It's not what they want you to believe when they throw out scary words like ammonia. Doesn't make cigarette more addictive, doesn't make cigarettes more harmful and it is used in all sorts of goods.
And then that gets me to the next topic that you've heard, again, just really quick mentions of them to get your attention without any giving you any evidence. They tell you about the ingredients and additives. So what did we learn from the witnesses on ingredients and additives? As Mr. Furr just told you, both of these companies, first of all, voluntarily publicly disclose -- you may take that down, I'm sorry -- publicly disclose their ingredients and additives to the public, Web sites,
you saw it -- you saw it during the plaintiff's case.
They also told you -- again, Mr. Furr went into this in more detail than I'm going to, but before any ingredient or additive is added to a cigarette at either of these companies, it goes through a rigorous testing process, one, to see if the additive, itself, has any danger to it and, two,
importantly, because its a mixture to see if any combination of anything that's going to cause any more harm to the smoker. And then only after that full testing process is done is it then disclosed to the government. We decide we're going to seek to use an additive, we disclose it to the government, been doing so since the mid-'80's. There's nothing secret about additives. Nothing secret about ingredients except they sound scary.
And, importantly, you learned in this trial that if you make a cigarette which you sell in the market today, if you go to the store, it's called American Spirits, I believe, it has no additives, it has no ingredient other than the tobacco. It carries the exact same warning that every other cigarette does. It is no more or no less addictive ana it is no more or no less harmful.
So why talk about additives and ingredients? Again, they -- they are giving no real evidence and when the witnesses are on the stand they don't ask any questions about this. They just like to go back to documents that have real inflammatory quotes like, you know, bags of money.
But when you have a human being here you can ask them. I don't think that Dr. Lapowicz or Dr. Figlar ducked the -- they didn't the question, they just weren't asked. Now you know the truth about cigarette design.
But let me tell you one other thing about the defective product issue. You learned something very important from Dr. Lapowicz and Dr. Figlar. Dr. Lapowicz for 23 years, if you add his time working for the government on these issues, he spent his entire professional life trying to develop a less-harmful cigarette. He did it the day before he got here to testify and he's doing it today. But he also told you that worldwide, universities, other academic institutions, all public health organizations have been engaged in the same research and no one has been able to do it. No one.
Has Philip Morris tried? You bet. Has R.J. Reynolds tried? You bet. So we asked Dr. Lapowicz,
Does that mean you just give up? He said, Of course not. He'll go back tomorrow along with 349 other employees at Philip Morris and keep working at it. There is no safe cigarette. Cigarettes are made from tobacco. When you burn tobacco, you get carcinogens. Should these companies be punished for failing to do something that no one has been able to do despite all their best efforts? Be punished for failing to make a safe cigarette? I suggest to you that that's not appropriate.
Now, Mr. Furr touched upon this and I just want to go into a little more detail. We talked about who is really punished and he said, If you were go up to R.J. Reynolds, you find the people of today who you're punishing. And if you were to go to Philip Morris, I can understand after sitting through the plaintiff's case, especially after hearing Dr. Cummings saying over and over and over again saying, I'd like to give some folks a piece of
my mind. So if you go up "there and you say, I want to see the scientists, I want to see the scientists that work on cigarettes, are you going to find Dr. Wakeham? No. You're going to find Lee Lapowicz and the people that work with him in Florida. People that have spent their entire professional lives
trying to develop a safe cigarette. That's who you're going to find if you go to see the scientists.
Well, what if you say, you know, the plaintiff talked a lot of public relations people, spokespeople, remember the Tobacco Institute and the Council for Tobacco Research, I want to see the folks at Philip Morris who are in charge of communicating with the public, that's who I want to see. I want to see that worked with the TI, CTR. Well, you learned those organizations don't exist but Philip Morris does still have employees that -whose job it is to communicate to the public. And what do those people do?
Can you bring up slide two, please?
Those people design the Web site. I'm not going to go through all the Web site because a lot of the language is very similar to what's on the Reynolds Web site because it's the right thing to do. It tells people that cigarette cause disease, there is no safe cigarette, cigarettes are addictive, it give links to public health organizations. I just want to bring up one point about this relying on the public health community.
You have seen in the course of the trial, for
example, with the Surgeon General that his office, I can say it's a person because it changes over time, but his office has evolved in their opinions on many issues, including issues of smoking, cigarette smoking over the years. And that's because science continues to evolve. And as you may imagine, on a rot of these issues there is science that goes both ways. So we put Dr. Lapowicz on the stand and we didn't ask him to talk about, Well, the Surgeon General says this but we really think this. Okay? There are disagreements on scientific issues among scientists, inside tobacco companies, outside tobacco companies, it's how science works, it's how we as a society get better in technological advancement. That's how science works. They look and continue to look, they reevaluate and ultimately think about the advancements in science just over the last 10 or 15 years.
But then we put Dr. Lapowicz on the stand and they say to him, Well, you don't agree with this. Remember they showed him one page where there was two different statements on the same page. They said different things, in the Surgeon General's own report. So he has to disagree with one of them. He can't agree with both. So he says to you, Look, my
opinion is I agree with one of these statements.
And they say, Aha,	you disagree with the public
health community.	Nothing's changed.
So when I got back up had a chance to explain
with Dr. Lapowicz, let him explain to you what he s saying is, Look, there are disagreements, no doubt about it, but Philip Morris will not air those disagreements in public because they tell smokers, You need to rely on one message and that message needs to come from the public health community.
Isn't that what you would want them to do?
Dr. Lapowicz is not going to get on the stand and lie and say he agrees with something he doesn't. That would make him a bad person. But they're doing exactly what you would want them to do, keep your disagreements private, keep them to yourself. Don't let them out -- don't try to confuse smokers or people who buy cigarettes or others, don't do it. Keep one message out there. You're free to disagree, you're free to let science continue to develop, and maybe the Surgeon General will come up with something else. But isn't it the right thing to do to rely on a single message? Of course it is.
So that is who the people are at Philip Morris today. But we also know from Dr. Lapowicz that the
environment in which they run their business, which all the tobacco companies run their business, is entirely different than the environment which was run in the '50's, '60's, '70's. And we know that because of two reasons.
If you could bring up slide number three, please.
In 1998 Philip Morris and Reynolds entered into an agreement with the attorney generals in the states throughout the United States, and that agreement, which has been in place since 1998 and will be in place forever, there is no end to it, restricts cigarette marketing and advertising to reduce youth smoking and promote public health. It requires public disclosure of internal company documents, it requires payment to the states' revenue.
If you could go to the next slide, please.
What does it mean to reduce marketing? You've heard a lot about advertising in this case. Well, let's just talk about the facts. Since 1971 there's been no television advertising. Since 1971 there's been no radio advertising. As a result of the master settlement agreement there's no stadium advertising, no billboards, no transit ads, no
sponsored concerts, no merchandise. And the last one, actually, on advertisement is something that was not required by master settlement agreement, it was something that Philip Morris decided to do on its own, it decided we're not going to advertise in magazines anymore either.
Isn't that what you want from companies? Why are we talking about ads in the '50's and '60's. You're not being asked to punish the company in the '60's and '70's by these plaintiffs, you're being asked to punish the company today.
Now, we know there was one other significant development that changed the environment that tobacco companies operated in.
Can you bring up the next slide, please?
This is the FDA legislation you heard about. That legislation, as Mr. Furr talked about, regulates all advertising, marketing, and labeling cigarettes, all of it. Every bit of that is now under the watchful eye of the United States Government. It also requires access to all internal business information. But what does that mean?
If you could bring up slide seven, please.
All ingredients and additives, materials used in cigarettes, every bit of it, is given to the
United States Government to oversee. All research documents, reports related to any issue having to do at all with smoking and health, that includes addiction, given to the United States Government. They can come at any time they want and look at the manufacturing plants, they can see exactly what's happening. And that they have the limitless ability to ask for whatever else they want. That's the company today. That's the company you are being asked to punish.
You can't punish the company of 60, 50,
40,30 years ago. The only company you can punish is the company of today.
Now, Mr. Gustafson made a plea to you to deliver a meaningful message. I respectfully submit to you that you now know that whatever message needed to be delivered was delivered and received over a decade ago. You've seen who the people of the company are now. You've seen what they do, and you've seen the environment that they operate their business. So let me ask a slightly different question of you.
You can take that down, please.
What message would it send to the people of Philip Morris who have done, for over a decade,
everything that you would want them to do?
Everything that you would want them to do, they have done. What message would it send to them and to other companies that are thinking about doing the same -- doing the same good deed, same transparency, same openness? What message would it send to punish them?
I'll close as I did at the end of phase one. Thank you so much for your time. You have really been a credit to the jury system of which we all believe in very deeply. You are the representatives of the community and we look forward to receiving your verdict.
Thank you very much.
