         MR. BIERSTEKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
    please the court, counsel, Mr. Jewett, and ladies
    and gentlemen of the jury.
         Together with Jonathan Engram I'm happy to be
    here.  I think other folks have mentioned this, but it bears repeating.  I know jury service is a burden
    and takes you away from your families, from your
    jobs, and from your daily activities.  But as others
    have already said, you know, jury service is also
    important.  It's part of your civic duty, and we
    appreciate your commitment and your patience.
         I'd have to say, I think you've performed your
    duty well.  I can see y'all a little not well all
    the time, but you've been paying attention, and
    you've taken notes, and some of you have taken a lot
    of notes, and it's been obvious that you have been
    listening, and listening hard, and that you've been
    thinking about what you've been hearing.  So we
    appreciate that, and on behalf of everybody here I
    want to thank you.
         Okay.  Let's get down to business and let's
    talk about the verdict form.  There are basically
    three questions you guys are going to be asked to
    answer at this point.  I know you can't read them
    now.  We're going to go through them individually.
         Did Mrs. Jewett know, or by the exercise of
    reasonable care should she have known before the
    magic date of May 5, 1990, that she had COPD and
    that there was a reasonable possibility that her
    COPD was caused by smoking?      That's the first question.  Second question:
         Was Barbara Jewett, Mrs. Jewett, addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was
    cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal
    cause of her COPD?
         And the last question:  Did Mrs. Jewett's COPD
    cause her death?
         And I'll tell you up front -- we'll go through
    them one at a time, but I'll tell you up front that
    the defendant's position is that the answer to the
    first question should be yes, and as to the last
    two, no.
         All right.  Let's start with the first
    question, the magic date of May 5, 1990.  And the
    first part of that is -- it kind of has two parts,
    and I've split them up here just because that's the
    way I think about it -- did Mrs. Jewett know, or by
    the exercise of reasonable care should she have
    known before May 5, 1990 that she had COPD?
         And let me be clear about one thing at the
    start.  The defendants do not, do not need to prove
    that Mrs. Jewett was actually diagnosed before May
    5, 1990.  Look at the question:  Did Mrs. Jewett
    know, or by the exercise of reasonable care should
    she have known that she had COPD before May 5, 1990?      So, for example, if Mrs. Jewett had been
    diagnosed before May 5, 1990, then plainly she knew.
    And we think that's what the evidence shows, and
    we're going to talk about it.
         But let's say you disagree.  Let's say you find
    she wasn't diagnosed before May 5, 1990.  You're not
    done with this first part of this question.  You've
    got to look at the should-have-known part.
         And, for example, if Mrs. Jewett was
    symptomatic, and with the exercise of reasonable
    care, going to the doctor, for example, should she
    have known that she had COPD before that date of
    May 5, 1990?  And I submit that the evidence that
    you have heard in this trial is that Mrs. Jewett
    both knew that she had COPD before May 5, 1990, or
    in the exercise of reasonable care should have known
    that she had COPD before May 5, 1990.
         Okay.  Let's get down to the evidence.  What's
    the evidence?  And I'm going to try to do what Mr.
    Matthews did.  I'm going to try to present the
    evidence on both sides.  First I'm going to try to
    present the evidence that the defense believes
    established that the answer to this question should
    be yes, and then I'm going to try show the evidence
    that I think the plaintiffs have already talked about some of it, and then there's some additional
    things I want to mention, because again they get
    another shot at the apple, they get another bite,
    they get to go last.  I don't know what they're
    going to say when they go last, but I'm going to try
    to anticipate, try to talk about it all.  I might
    leave some stuff out, and if I do, I apologize.
    That's not what I'm trying to do.
         Okay.  Let's look at the medical records.
    Let's start with them.  See if we can do this pretty
    quickly.
         We've got this one from February of 2001.  This
    is in Bloomington, Indiana, and it's 15-year history
    of COPD.  That puts it before 1990.
         Next one, please, Steve.
         Dr. Ottaviana in Clearwater, Florida.
    Bronchitis, emphysema.  Yes.  How long?  15 years
    written on the side there in Mrs. Jewett's hand.
         Next.  This is February 2002, the notes of the
    nurse:  47-year-old female, history of COPD times
    15 years.  Again before 1990.  Again in Clearwater.
         September 2002.  By this point the Jewetts had
    come back here to Jacksonville.  COPD 14 years.
    Mrs. Jewett's handwriting.  Dr. Alvarez.
         Next one please, Steve.  Okay.  Here we are. This is October 2002 with Elaine Gustetic.  I'm
    going to mispronounce that.  She was accompanied by
    Mr. Jewett, and she said, COPD diagnosed 13 years
    ago.  Again before May 5, 1990.
         Next one.  This is Dr. Vasquez.  October 2002.
    This is what the patient is describing, and here the
    patient says, Mrs. Jewett, first diagnosed with COPD
    15 years ago.  Again before May 5, 1990.
         Next one, please, Steve.
         Dr. Pajaro.  October 2002.  He talks about
    meeting with her face-to-face for 40 minutes.
         Let me just say, I probably ought to interrupt
    right now just to say that each side has prepared a
    little binder, and if you look in the defense
    binder, the exhibits that have been introduced in
    the trial, you'll be able to take them back with you
    to the jury room, and what we did is instead of
    giving you all the big stack of medical records we
    took those medical records that have been discussed
    here in the courtroom and we put them in the binder
    for you.
         And plaintiffs did the same thing.  They've got
    a binder and they've got a set of medical records
    that they want to bring to your attention that they
    talked about that were important too.      So you'll have this in the jury room when you
    go back to deliberate.  I'm sorry I interrupted.
         Okay.  Face-to-face he spent 40 minutes with
    her and said, diagnosed with COPD approximately
    14 years ago.  Again before May 5, 1990, our magic
    date.
         Next one, please.  This Dr. Crossfield.  This
    is part of the lung transplant, you know, when she
    was getting interviewed for it, and so the patient
    reports -- this is again from Mrs. Jewett -- first
    diagnosed with the disease -- again, first diagnosed
    with lung disease age 34.  Well before May 5, 1990.
         Next record, please.
         This is in 2004.  The patient states -- again
    this is Mrs. Jewett -- that she was on Prednisone
    for about 25 years.
         Next record.  Last one.  Again this is 2005.
    Not another year.  Mrs. Jewett is a 50-year-old
    white female with a history of emphysema diagnosed
    at 25 years old.
         Okay.  And of course we also have the PBS
    video, and I'm not going to play it, but you saw
    Mrs. Jewett where she said in her own words that she
    had COPD for 26 years, which would have put it back
    to 1979.  She did that with Mr. Jewett sitting right next to her.  And you'll remember I asked him when
    he was up on the stand, you know, why didn't you
    correct her, and he said, ah, it was trivial.  But
    you'll remember when you watch the video that he
    leans over and corrects her on the important fact
    that the lung donor was from Orlando.
         And also remember this.  You saw in a number of
    these medical records that Mrs. Jewett was often
    accompanied by her husband, Mr. Jewett, and he never
    once corrected anything that she told her healthcare
    providers about when she was diagnosed.
         All right.  What the medical records and
    Mrs. Jewett's own words, either on the videotape or
    the words that she said to her healthcare providers
    and are captured in these medical records, tell us
    fits.  What does it fit with?  Well, first of all,
    it fits with the medical science that tells us about
    the progression of COPD.
         We know that in January of 1995 Mrs. Jewett had
    severe or very severe emphysema.  You saw from Dr.
    Frazier the calculation that she had 24 percent of
    the normal lung capacity, and under the standards
    that are used that actually be just barely into the
    very severe category.  But it was severe or very
    severe emphysema in 1995.      And that didn't happen overnight, it happened
    over years.  And nobody here disputes that.  Nobody
    here disputes that.
         Dr. Frazier did the math, and Mr. Matthews
    alluded to that in his closing.  And what did Dr.
    Frazier do?  Well, he looked at the pulmonary
    function tests, those PFTs where you breathe in and
    then try to breathe out as fast as you can, and he
    looked at the loss in function of Mrs. Jewett, not
    the general population, but Mrs. Jewett specifically
    experienced from 1995 forward, and he found that she
    was losing 72 cubic centimeters of lung capacity
    each year.  That was the rate at which she was
    losing it.
         And that was faster than most smokers.  But
    smokers, as you heard from Dr. Frazier, lose it at
    about 50 or 56 -- I can't remember -- it was 50.  So
    she was losing it almost 50 percent faster than
    most.  And what he did is he said, well, I'm going
    to take that 72 percent loss and I'm going to go
    backwards and I'm going to try to figure out what
    was her lung capacity compared to normal back in
    1989.  Back in 1989.  And he said in 1989 she would
    have had severe COPD.  And he said, I've never seen
    a patient with disease at that level of severity who did not have significant symptoms.
         Then there was this question and answer with
    Dr. Frazier:  What is your opinion, Dr. Frazier,
    about when Mrs. Jewett's COPD manifested itself and
    was diagnosable?  And he basically said early, mid,
    late 1980's.
         Okay.  And there's not really much dispute
    about that.  I mean, the other doctors agreed.
    Dr. Wyzan and even Dr. Feingold both said that
    Mrs. Jewett must have had COPD before May 5, 1990.
         Dr. Wyzan.  It would not be surprising if
    Mrs. Jewett had COPD in 1987.  And Dr. Feingold.  I
    think it's reasonable to take that position -- that
    was five years before -- like Dr. Wyzan said because
    it's intellectually defensible.  And not only did
    she have COPD before May 5, 1990, but even as Dr.
    Feingold allowed, it was medically plausible that it
    could have been diagnosed by a pulmonologist like
    himself, like Dr. Fraizer, like Dr. Alvarez, like
    Dr. Wyzan, you know, before May 5, 1990.  Indeed he
    said at least by 1988, was the concession that Dr.
    Feingold gave.
         Okay.  Mrs. Jewett's statements both in her
    medical histories and on the PBS videotape also fit
    with her treatment and symptoms.      Okay.  We've got done talking about the
    biological processes.  Now let's talk about the
    treatment and symptoms.  And you heard Mrs. Jewett
    herself describe, again in the PBS videotape, that
    she had been on Prednisone for about 25 years, and
    again without a peep from Mr. Jewett who was sitting
    next to her Mrs. Jewett told her doctors the same
    thing, that she had been on Prednisone for about
    25 years, well before the magic date of May 5, 1990.
         Mrs. Jewett told her doctors that she had
    symptoms of COPD for years prior to 1990.  There's
    this record.  You know, have you ever noticed any
    wheezing, whistling, or tightness in your chest?
    Uh-huh.  And at what age did your wheezing,
    whistling, or chest tightness occur?  Age 34.
         Age 34.  That puts us in 1988, again before May
    5, 1990.
         And you also heard from some witnesses who
    observed her.  You heard from Jeanette Wilson.
    Actually you didn't actually hear from her, and we
    didn't read Jeanette's Wilson's deposition, but Dr.
    Feingold talked about it, how Mrs. Jewett had
    coughed and used an inhaler before Ms. Wilson
    graduated from high school, which was in 1989.
         Now, Ms. Wilson was a little confused about whether or not the cough was before she graduated
    from high school or not, and you heard both portions
    of that deposition.  But she wasn't confused when
    she was talking about the inhaler.
         Mrs. Wilson also testified about Mrs. Jewett
    being kind of hunched over or bowed over before she
    graduated from high school in 1989.  And you heard
    from Dr. Frazier, it's like the athlete.  You know,
    you bend down because it helps your diaphragm work,
    to do the work to breathe.  Okay.  And some
    emphysema patients sometimes are bowed over and
    hunched over like that because the same physical
    mechanical factors are at work, it helps them to
    breathe when they're having a hard time.  And you
    heard Ms. Wilson in Dr. Feingold's comments about
    her testimony say that she was hunched or bowed over
    in 1989 -- by 1989 when Ms. Wilson graduated from
    high school.
         Now, as to coughing, you heard from the
    children of Leo Powers.  They knew Mrs. Jewett.  And
    there was some confusion about the dates, but they
    knew Mrs. Jewett before the Jewetts moved to Florida
    in 1984, when they were living in Virginia.  There
    was a stint in New Jersey, but from the late 70's I
    believe until 1984 they lived in Virginia, and that's when -- that's when Mrs. Jewett met the
    children of Leo Powers, who you heard from Ms. Thorn
    and Kevin Powers.  And what did they say?  She had a
    hacking cough, a hacking cough and a bronchitis
    cough.
         And finally you heard from Mr. Jewett.  And
    what did Mr. Jewett have to say about his wife's
    symptoms?  Well, he said that in the 1980's she had
    repeated bouts of bronchitis and pneumonia for which
    she was going to see Navy doctors.  Navy doctors.
         Okay.  So what it is in effect showing you, I
    submit, is a mountain of evidence.  This was not an
    isolated slip of the tongue.  There are ten
    different medical records from ten different medical
    professionals recording Mrs. Jewett's patient
    history over a four-year period when she lived in
    Indiana, and in Clearwater, and in Jacksonville, in
    Mrs. Jewett's own words, two are in her own
    handwriting, and others say:  The patient describes,
    the patient reports, the patient states.
         And I want to make two important points.  All
    of the records that I've shown you so far, all of
    them, put the date of the first diagnosis before May
    5, 1990.  And not once, not once in all of her
    medical records is there a statement by Mrs. Jewett that she was first diagnosed in January of 1995.  In
    fact, there's not at statement that she was first
    diagnosed in 1995.  Not once.
         Now, what are plaintiff's responses?  My belief
    is that they do not hold water.  I want to walk
    through them with you.  I want to talk about the
    things that Mr. Matthews mentioned, but I'm also
    going to talk about some additional things that I
    suspect might be mentioned after I sit down and I
    don't have a chance to talk to you again.
         Okay.  Here goes.  In December of 2002 -- you
    heard this through Dr. Feingold -- there's a letter
    stating Mrs. Jewett was diagnosed since January 1,
    1993.  Now, this letter was addressed to whom it may
    concern.  You heard the context in which this letter
    was written.  It was a letter to try to justify some
    transportation expenses.  One of the signatories is
    Carey Smith, who is a clinical respiratory
    therapist, the other is Dr. Alvarez.  We don't know
    if Dr. Alvarez actually wrote the letter, or if Ms.
    Smith did, or somebody else did.  But whoever
    drafted the letter actually wrote that Mrs. Jewett
    was diagnosed since January 1, 1993.  That's New
    Year's Day.  Nobody, not even Dr. Feingold, believes
    that that really happened.  And there's no history that Mrs. Jewett gave to Dr. Alvarez or to Carey
    Smith in December of 2002, the date when this letter
    was written, or even in November, that supports the
    statement that is made there.
         But -- but Mrs. Jewett did give a history to
    Dr. Alvarez three months earlier, two months
    earlier, September 2002, and as we showed you then,
    in her handwriting, that's when she said COPD
    14 years.  Before 1990.
         There's another document.  This was one that
    Mr. Matthews touched upon.  It was David Solomon,
    Dr. David Solomon wrote a letter to Dr. Ottaviana in
    July of 2002, and it had that statement, about
    15 years ago because her husband's job caused him to
    move to Jacksonville, Florida she was seen by Dr.
    Wyzan.
         Well, the Jewetts did move to Jacksonville,
    Florida about 15 years earlier.  This is a 2001
    record.  We know that the Jewett family moved to
    Jacksonville in 1984, about 15 years earlier.
    Actually 16, I guess -- actually 17.  Do the math.
    But it was about 15 years earlier.
         And so the first part of that sentence is
    right.  And it's kind of hard to see if the second
    half of the sentence has anything to do with the first half.  And let's look at the rest of the
    letter.
         You see the statement there:  The patient was
    initially worked up by a former fellow from this
    program who has his practice in Bloomington,
    Indiana.  Well, we know the Jewetts didn't go to
    Bloomington, Indiana until 1999.  The doctor in
    Bloomington, Indiana couldn't have initially worked
    up the patient.  That's wrong.  We at least know
    that Dr. Wyzan saw Mrs. Jewett in 1995.
         And finally, the letter is not signed by
    anybody.  Not signed by anybody.
         Okay.  Mr. Matthews also displayed to you in
    his closing a September 10, 2010 entry by Gracie --
    Dr. Gracie Hercl that Mrs. Jewett had a history of
    COPD times ten years, which of course would put it
    in 1991.  But you will remember, look at that date,
    it was September 2010, actually it was September
    10th, one day before 9/11, and this was the hospital
    admission when Mrs. Jewett was in distress and
    lapsed into a coma.  That was the three-week coma
    visit.  And so not surprisingly -- there are two
    versions of this, there's a handwritten one and a
    typewritten one, but both of them say the same
    thing:  All history obtained from the husband. Mrs. Jewett was in distress.  All the history came
    from Mr. Jewett.  This isn't Mrs. Jewett at all.
         Okay.  So much for the medical records.  What
    other response do plaintiffs have to this?  Well,
    they say look at the testimony of Dr. Wyzan, who did
    -- who did see Mrs. Jewett in 1995, and who also
    said when he came in here and testified that
    Mrs. Jewett was shocked.
         Okay.  Let me make a couple observations.
    There is nothing in Dr. Wyzan's medical records that
    said this was the first diagnosis.  It's not there.
    Dr. Wyzan's medical records also don't say that
    Mrs. Jewett was shocked.  And when Dr. Wyzan
    testified that Mrs. Jewett was shocked he didn't say
    that she was shocked to find out that she had COPD
    or whether she was shocked to find out how severe it
    was.  He didn't say.
         And Dr. Wyzan also agreed that the -- given the
    severity of her disease in 1995, and the medical
    progression of COPD, she would've had to have had it
    before May 5, 1990.  He further agreed that
    Mrs. Jewett, in addition to having emphysema, also
    had a chronic bronchitis condition that went along
    with it.  And finally he said it wouldn't surprise
    him -- it wouldn't be surprising if she had COPD in 1987.  That's what Dr. Wyzan said.
         Okay.  One thing that plaintiffs haven't
    brought up yet, but they may, is what about Mr.
    Jewett's testimony?  Okay.  I want to talk about
    that a little bit.
         Mr. Jewett, as you heard, was in the Navy and
    was gone for months and months at a time in the
    1980's, often without the ability to even call home.
    They didn't have as much cell phone technology as we
    do today.  Indeed, when he was up on the stand and I
    asked him whether Mrs. Jewett could have been
    diagnosed earlier his answer was that she had not
    been, to my knowledge.  To my knowledge.
         He also said that Mrs. Jewett would be the best
    person to know when she was first diagnosed with
    COPD or emphysema.  And he agreed that Mrs. Jewett
    would have no reason to do anything other than to
    tell her healthcare providers the truth, and that
    she would have been candid with them.
         And we have already talked about this, but Mr.
    Jewett also failed to correct his wife ever about
    the statements she made that she was diagnosed
    before May 5, 1990.
         Now, Mr. Matthews did talk about this, which
    was the life insurance application filed in 1986, and I want to make a couple observations about that.
         First, this was in a string of about a dozen
    no, no, no, no, no's where she checked the box next
    to the question about lung disease.  And I would
    also observe that this is April 1986, over four
    years before our magic date of May 5, 1990.  And
    this means little, because most of the time when
    Mrs. Jewett was asked and she told her healthcare
    providers when she was first diagnosed with COPD she
    said it was in the mid to late 1980's, after the
    date of this insurance application.
         Okay.  I want to talk a little bit about
    another anticipated response, something you heard
    here in the courtroom, that plaintiffs might have.
    And it came from Dr. Feingold who said there's only
    one standard, that's to seek the truth in every
    situation no matter who retains me, and no matter
    what the issue.  And I would submit that judged
    against his own standard Dr. Feingold's opinions
    came up short.  Let's talk about how they relate to
    this issue, our May 5, 1990 issue.
         Dr. Feingold is, beyond dispute, a handsomely
    paid professional witness.  He's been paid
    $20 million for what he calls medical/legal business
    since 1993.  He's testified as an expert 750 times, maybe a little more.  He's been joined at the hip to
    Mr. Wilner professionally since 1982, and he's been
    pursuing the tobacco industry, not just as a
    witness, but in seminars, the object of which is to
    help plaintiffs' lawyers win these cases.
         Now, Dr. Feingold is a pulmonologist, but that
    didn't stop him from talking about just about
    everything under the sun.  And he says, well, you
    know, you can ignore all the medical records in
    which Mrs. Jewett said she was diagnosed before May
    5, 1990.  And why?  He said, well, they're not
    primary records.  That was his answer.  I don't know
    if you remember that or not.  They were not primary
    records.  And what did he mean by that?  Records
    that were made contemporaneously with the treatment.
         And then Dr. Feingold's view, that there is no
    record from before May 1990 showing that Mrs. Jewett
    was diagnosed with COPD, it never happened.  That
    was basically what he was saying.
         And I don't really know where to begin.  As Dr.
    Feingold knows full well, there are virtually no
    medical records from before 1995.  Period.  This
    case was filed in 2007.  All medical providers, you
    heard, usually keep records for about 7 to 10 years,
    and by the time the parties got together and went out and tried to find the records most of them were
    gone, through no fault of anybody.  We just couldn't
    get them.
         But there are multiple instances where we know
    that Mrs. Jewett went and saw a healthcare provider.
    For example, she was born, she gave birth three
    times, she had routine physicals.  She mentioned one
    in her April 1986 insurance application.  She was
    treated for the black widow spider bite which had
    complications.  And indeed, she was referred to Dr.
    Wyzan by a doctor named Beethoven Ruedas.
         We don't have any of those records, but we know
    it happened.  We know it happened.
         All right.  Dr. Feingold also dismissed the ten
    different records where Mrs. Jewett told ten
    different healthcare providers in different areas of
    the country over a period of years that she was
    diagnosed before May of 1990.  And why did he do
    that?
         Well, first, he said she didn't give specifics.
    She didn't give specifics.  Well, what did he mean
    by that?  Well, like she didn't mention a pulmonary
    function test.  Baloney.  Who does that?  Who does
    that?  What people say is exactly what Mrs. Jewett
    is recorded as having said in these medical records: Yeah, I've got COPD.  I've had it for 15 years.
    I've had it since age 34.  I was diagnosed, first
    diagnosed in the late 1980's.  That's what people
    say.  They don't say, oh, I had a pulmonary function
    test.
         And Dr. Feingold echoed of course Mr. Wilner's
    comments from opening that Mrs. Jewett misremembered
    or was confused, or as Mr. Matthews put it in his
    closing, that she made a mistake.
         Dr. Feingold's speculation though is laid to
    rest by Mr. Jewett himself.  Mr. Jewett was in a
    much better position to know, and Mr. Jewett flatly
    contradicts Dr. Feingold and the suggestion that
    because of her weakening condition, or something
    else, Mrs. Jewett was getting it wrong.
         And what did Mr. Jewett say on the stand?  His
    wife was intelligent.  She understood and saw -- she
    understood what she saw and read.  She could grasp
    any topic.  And this is the one that's critical.
    Except for the three weeks when she was in the coma
    right before 9/11, in 2001, she was always mentally
    able to answer questions about her health completely
    and accurately.
         And in this case we are in an unusual position.
    We have a videotape of Mrs. Jewett from 2005, and it will be in evidence, you guys will have it back
    there, you can watch it again if you want to.  But I
    submit that Mrs. Jewett didn't sound like she was
    very confused in that videotape.
         All right.  There was also a suggestion, again
    not one that plaintiff has so far mentioned, but it
    came from Dr. Feingold, that you shouldn't believe
    Mrs. Jewett because she gave different dates for her
    diagnosis of COPD before May 5, 1990, over the years
    to her many healthcare providers.
         Golly.  A couple points.  The defense has the
    burden of proving that Mrs. Jewett had COPD before
    May 5, 1990.  That's it.  Doesn't matter if it was
    1989, 1988, 1987, 1986, or some other year, as long
    as it was before May 5, 1990.  And as I've already
    mentioned, the defense doesn't even have to prove
    that Mrs. Jewett was actually diagnosed before May
    5, 1990 by a medical professional.
         Again the issue was -- is in addition, you
    know, should she by the exercise of reasonable care
    have known.  That's what the court's instruction
    says.  It's also what the question says.
         And the court's instructions -- you'll have
    them back there.  The court's instructions are the
    law that you guys have got to follow.  It's sort of like a roadmap to filling out the verdict form.  You
    can't just go back there and check off boxes.
    You've got to read to roadmap to go along with it to
    guide you through the process.  And the court's
    instructions don't say a word about the defense
    needing to show there was a diagnosis.
         Okay.  Let's come back to these records and the
    fact that Mrs. Jewett did give dates.  You can
    calculate it back from her age, or from 15 years ago
    from the date of the record.  There's a range.  You
    know, most of them in the late 1980's, but there's a
    range.  And ask yourself a couple things.
         What are the odds that decades later
    Mrs. Jewett was going to identify the same exact
    year on each and every occasion that she was asked
    by her multiple healthcare providers how long ago
    she was diagnosed with COPD?  What are the chances
    she's going to get the same year every time?  What
    are the odds, for example, that she would never
    round:  About 15 years instead of 13.  I think
    they're probably pretty high.
         If anything, the variation in the years
    underscore that this was information coming from
    Mrs. Jewett.  This was not just one doctor copying
    over what another doctor might have said or that was in an earlier record.  Each time it was Mrs. Jewett.
         In contrast ask yourself this:  If the
    plaintiff were right, if Mrs. Jewett was first
    diagnosed with COPD in 1995, what are the odds that
    Mrs. Jewett would never say 1995?
         In sum, the evidence I submit, ladies and
    gentlemen, has been that Mrs. Jewett knew, or by the
    exercise of reasonable care should have known that
    she had COPD before May 5, 1990.
         Okay.  Let's turn to the second part of the
    first question.  And that is, did Mrs. Jewett know,
    or by the exercise of reasonable care should she
    have known before May 5, 1990, that there was a
    reasonable possibility that her COPD was caused by
    her smoking?
         I submit the evidence here has been
    overwhelming.  Mrs. Jewett knew, or at the very
    least, should have known before May 5, 1990 that
    there was a reasonable possibility that her COPD was
    related to her smoking.
         Okay.  The evidence takes two forms.  First,
    there's specific information that she received that
    smoking causes COPD, and she received it before May
    5, 1990.  And, second, there's general information
    out there that smoking isn't very good for you and causes breathing problems.
         What evidence have you heard that must have
    been received by Mrs. Jewett before May 5, 1990,
    about smoking and emphysema or COPD?
         Well, first, there's the warning.  You heard
    His Honor read it, and it specifically says smoking
    causes emphysema, among other diseases.  It's been
    on the packs of cigarettes since 1985, more than
    five years before May 5, 1990.  It's been on every
    single print ad since 1985, more than five years
    before May 5, 1990, a warning that Mr. Jewett
    testified when he was on the stand Mrs. Jewett must
    have seen.
         Okay.  All the medical doctors agree it was
    standard or common practice of doctors, at least by
    the 1980's, if not earlier, to ask their patients
    about smoking, to warn their patients about smoking,
    to encourage patients who smoke to quit, and to
    especially tell patients with COPD who smoked that
    their COPD was related to their smoking.
         Mr. Jewett said it was common knowledge by 1984
    when the Jewetts moved to Florida that smoking was
    bad for you.  And remember, Mr. Jewett's knowledge,
    he testified when he was on the stand, he said,
    golly, coffin nails, cancer sticks, I didn't really think that had anything to do with the health risks
    of smoking, as if the coffin part and the cancer
    part were somehow accidental.  But even says by 1984
    it was common knowledge.
         And he further testified that he never talked
    to Mrs. Jewett about the health risks of smoking.
    Why was that?  It was because she already knew.  And
    she did.  Apart from the warnings, apart from all
    the Surgeon General's reports and the news, there
    were warnings from family and friends.  You heard
    testimony that the Coles warned, said don't smoke,
    starting when the Jewetts were down here in Florida
    and Mrs. Jewett was working with Mrs. Cole at the
    Hallmark store.  You heard about the children who
    came home from school and told Mr. and Mrs. Jewett
    about the health risks of smoking, and you heard
    about the warnings that Mrs. Jewett, herself, was
    giving back to the kids:  Don't smoke.  You heard
    that from Sarah among others.
         But Mr. Jewett went even further.  He said that
    when Mrs. Jewett displayed symptoms of COPD that
    anybody on the planet would have attributed them to
    her smoking.  And he went on to say that Mrs. Jewett
    in fact attributed those symptoms to her smoking.
         Now, to be fair, Mr. Jewett protested that his wife never had any symptoms of COPD before May 5,
    1990.  That was his testimony.  But you'll remember
    that Mr. Jewett is the same person who had a hunch
    that that PBS video wasn't going to be very helpful
    to his case, didn't produce it for three years, only
    produces it after it was disclosed by Sarah in her
    deposition, and then said, well, the reason I didn't
    produce it earlier was because the engineer,
    bachelor's degree from Florida A&M, an electrical
    engineer, and a master's degree from SMU in systems
    engineering in Dallas, thought subsequent meant
    before not after.
         Further, as we have already discussed,
    Mrs. Jewett did have COPD symptoms in the late
    1980's.  There's the medical records, there's the
    deposition testimony you heard from a number of
    folks about different symptoms, there was Mr.
    Jewett's testimony, for example, about the repeated
    bouts of bronchitis and emphysema for which she saw
    Navy doctors in the 1980's.  There was Dr. Frazier.
    All of them put her symptoms back before May 5,
    1990.  And, indeed, some of them put her symptoms
    back a long ways before May 5, 1990.
         So the evidence as a whole was powerful on the
    second part of the first question.  Mrs. Jewett knew, or at least by the exercise of reasonable
    care -- I mean, after all, all she would have had to
    do is look at the warning on the pack -- at least by
    the exercise of reasonable care she should have
    known that there was a reasonable possibility that
    her COPD and her breathing problems were caused by
    her smoking.
         So if you look at this, the defense submits the
    first question, which is:  Did Mrs. Jewett know, or
    by the exercise of reasonable care should she have
    known before May 5, 1990 that she had COPD, and
    there was a reasonable possibility that her COPD was
    caused by smoking?  The defense submits the evidence
    supports a yes answer to that question.
         All right.  Let's turn to the second question
    on the verdict form.  And that question is:  Was
    Mrs. Jewett addicted to cigarettes containing
    nicotine, and if so, was cigarette smoking because
    of such addiction a legal cause of her COPD?
         Now, I wasn't even going to do this.  I don't
    have a slide.  I'm going to have to use the Elmo.
    There was some discussion about what legal cause
    meant.  And you're going to get the judge's
    instructions.  You can take them with you.  Again
    they're your roadmap.  You ought to look at them when you're filling out the verdict form.
         All right.  Mr. Wilner focussed on the natural
    and continuous sequence produces or contributes
    substantially.  That's fine.  That's in the
    definition.  But one part I wanted to draw to your
    attention to, is that a legal cause is something
    that it could be reasonably said that but for.  But
    for.  It's a but for clause.  It doesn't have to be
    -- if it's just a factor floating out there, that's
    probably not good enough.  It's got to be a but for
    clause.  In other words, but for.  That I think is
    the simplest way to understand that instruction.
         And let's talk about a number of issues related
    to addiction.  You heard this I think from Mr.
    Wilner when he put up -- he displayed something.
    But what does it mean to be addicted to cigarettes?
    And he was candid.  He said, there's no consensus.
    There's no consensus as to what that means.
         Another issue is, was Mrs. Jewett addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine?
         And last:  Did her smoking because of addiction
    cause, was it a -- did it cause her COPD, a legal
    cause?
         Okay.  You've heard the court's instruction.
    There's no definition of addiction there.  That's what I told you in opening.  That's true.
         So what definition are you guys going to use?
    There's no consensus among the scientists, legal
    definition provided to you.  You've got to come up
    with one.  What is it?  Well, common sense, I would
    suggest.
         Dr. Wyzan and Dr. Kaplan all suggest the
    answer.  Addiction is something that controls the
    smoker.  It prevents somebody who genuinely wants to
    change their behavior from doing so.  That's the
    issue of control.
         Well, maybe not literally, because people can
    and do quit.  Loss of control really means it's hard
    to quit.  Hard to quit.
         Regardless of the definition, can some people
    be addicted to cigarettes?  Yeah, sure.  Is
    everybody who smokes addicted so that they can't
    quit if they want to?  Absolutely not.  As Dr.
    Feingold confirmed, smokers aren't robots -- that
    was his words -- and anybody can quit.
         Now, Dr. Feingold talked and Mr. Wilner talked
    in his closing about nicotine impacting the brain,
    and receptors, and Dopamine, and I'm not going to
    try to address all that.  And here's why.
    Notwithstanding all of that, 1.5 million smokers quit each year.  50 million smokers have had enough
    control to quit.  90 percent of them did it without
    any assistance at all, no nicotine gum, no nicotine
    replacement, no hypnosis, no acupuncture, nothing,
    they just did it.  And there are as many former
    smokers in this country today as current smokers.
    And Mr. Wilner in his closing talked about eating.
    It's not the same thing.  All of those former
    smokers I'm sure are eating.  They're eating.
         Dr. Feingold talked about addiction for a long
    time.  He talked about compulsion, he talked about
    the DSM-IV, he talked about Fagerstrom, he talked
    about five cigarettes a day.  He talked a lot.  And
    I got to say, a lot of it didn't make sense to me.
         For example, I asked him:  What distinguishes
    people who smoke five cigarettes a day who are
    addicted in your view, Doctor, from those who are
    not?  His answer.  It may not be possible to
    distinguish.
         So I asked him, I said:  Well, okay, let's say
    somebody is smoking five cigarettes a day and they
    can quit.  And I snapped my fingers like that.  And
    I said, they quit, no problem, are they addicted?
    His answer:  I don't know.  I don't know.
         And he insisted that nobody, including Mrs.(sic) Wilner's hypothetical Petunia, who I think
    smoked two packs a day for a long period time and
    quit like that, no problem.  Was she addicted?  He
    said:  Absolutely, absolutely.  And I said, why?
    Why?  If they can quit like that, no problem, why
    are they addicted?  And he says he refused to
    believe that anybody who smoked a significant number
    of cigarettes for a long time could quit without
    having withdrawal.  That was basically his answer.
    He just doesn't think there is such a person.
         And so the real question here, I submit, is
    whether or not because of the effects of nicotine a
    particular individual smoker, in this case
    Mrs. Jewett, experienced withdrawal symptoms that
    made it hard to quit.  That's the bottom line.
         And if Mrs. Jewett was addicted, was her
    smoking cigarettes because of such addiction a legal
    cause of her COPD?  And it's important to look at
    her addiction therefore in time.  And you've got to
    look at the time period before she had COPD, whether
    or not it was diagnosed or even diagnosable.  Only
    her smoking before she had COPD could have caused
    her COPD.  That's just common sense.
         Okay.  So that's what the -- the doctors, Drs.
    Wyzan, Fraizer, Feingold, pretty much all agree that she had to have had COPD before May 5, 1990 in the
    80's.
         What evidence did you hear about whether or not
    Mrs. Jewett was addicted in the 1970's and the early
    to mid 1980's?  Not much.  You heard that
    Mrs. Jewett enjoyed smoking.  You heard that she had
    no trouble not smoking where it wasn't permitted or
    she chose not to do it.  You heard about New Year's
    resolutions from Mr. Jewett, but at the end of the
    day he said that they weren't very serious, that
    they weren't very serious.
         And I've got to add that Sarah, when she was on
    the stand, also seemed to recall Mrs. Jewett using
    nicotine gum or patches in the 1980's.  It was a
    little bit ambiguous, but I think she was pegging it
    to that time period, which would have been about the
    time that Mrs. Jewett repeatedly told doctors that
    she had been first diagnosed with COPD.
         Then we come to the 1990's, and we'll talk a
    little bit about that evidence.  There was the
    evidence that Mrs. Jewett cut down her smoking
    dramatically from one and-a-half to two cigarettes
    per day in 1995, and that then she quit, and then
    later on again she started, not heavily, but on and
    off, then she cut back down to three cigarettes per week, and then she quit.
         Mrs. Jewett never once said to any of her
    doctors that she was experiencing withdrawal
    symptoms.  And she really wasn't observed as having
    withdrawal symptoms.  Not during this period.
         For example, Mr. Jewett testified that he
    didn't notice anything that was different about her
    when she quit for good.  You would think that if
    anybody was in a position to observe whether
    Mrs. Jewett was having a hard time quitting smoking
    it would have been her husband, but he didn't see
    that there was anything different about her.
         Now, Dr. Wyzan.  Let's talk a little bit about
    him.  She(sic) was, as you know, Mrs. Jewett's
    treating physician, and he said at the time he was
    treating her he couldn't tell whether she was
    addicted or just a social smoker.  That was his
    testimony.
         And plaintiff tried mightily to get Dr. Wyzan
    to say that Mrs. Jewett was addicted because she
    started smoking again later.  Okay.  And they asked
    him that question when he was on the stand, and I've
    heard different characterizations of that testimony,
    but these were his words.  What he said, was that
    her restarting smoking later was consistent with addiction.  He never said she was addicted.
         Then you heard from Dr. Kaplan, and he said,
    you know, this is a really highly personal and
    individualized issue.  And I don't think anybody
    really disputed that.  He said about half the
    smokers are addicted, half of them aren't, and there
    are various statistics, but the touchstone is
    control.  And the evidence is that Mrs. Jewett was
    strong-willed and that she had not lost control of
    her smoking.
         Mr. Jewett put his finger on the button.  I
    confronted him when he was on the stand, and I said,
    you never asked your wife to quit, you never helped
    her to quit.  Why not?  Why didn't you do that?  And
    his answer was:  She was a mature woman who could
    make up her own mind.  Yep.  And it was her personal
    choice.  It was her personal choice.
         Okay.  Last point on addiction.  The internal
    company documents supposedly showed secret knowledge
    about nicotine and addiction, and there was Dr.
    Feingold's opinions that the defendants designed
    cigarettes to make them more addictive.
         This is a complete red herring.  Look at that
    evidence and ask yourself, what on earth do they
    have to do with Mrs. Jewett?  They don't have anything to do with the questions that are on the
    verdict form that you guys are going to be asked to
    answer.
         And last, there is no there there.  Don't
    forget the cross examination of Dr. Feingold.  Let's
    walk through it.
         First, Mr. Wilner showed you a bunch of
    documents primarily from the 1960's where the
    documents show that there were tobacco company
    employees who used the word addictive to describe
    smoking, and who said, yeah, nicotine is important,
    maybe even the most important reason why people
    smoke.  That's the first thing he tried to use these
    documents for.
         My response is, big deal.  Big deal.  Because
    you heard from Dr. Feingold when I cross examined
    him that the fact that nicotine is an important
    reason why people smoke was not a carefully guarded
    tobacco industry secret.  It's not a surprise to
    anybody.
         Dr. Feingold agreed that the central role that
    nicotine plays in smoking behavior has been known
    for decades.  He agreed that in the 1964 Surgeon
    General's report, way back then, it was observed
    that people didn't smoke cigarettes that weren't made out of tobacco and that were made from other
    things that didn't have nicotine in them.  Nobody
    bought them.
         And, in fact, these defendants and the
    cigarette industry in general manufactured
    cigarettes that didn't have any nicotine in them.
    Not truly analytical, but sort of like decaffeinated
    coffee, you try to take the nicotine out, made
    cigarettes that way, and nobody bought them either.
         Okay.  Nicotine is important to smoking.  Yeah,
    sure it is.  Sure it is.  But was that a secret?
    No, absolutely not.
         Nor was it a secret that it could be hard to
    quit.  Nor was it a secret that it could be hard to
    quit.  The Surgeon General's report in 1964 talks
    about it.  Talks about it.
         And why did you hear all that testimony about
    those -- the research that the company who isn't in
    this courtroom, British American Tobacco Company,
    had conducted by Battelle, a research organization
    Geneva, Switzerland, they had that research done,
    and, you know, there's this big show about how,
    gosh, that research wasn't given to the Surgeon
    General in 1964.  You had to wait for our cross
    examination to find out why that occurred.      Why did it occur?  It's because they had the
    research reviewed.  The people who reviewed that
    research at the time said it wasn't publishable.  So
    they went back and did more research on rats and
    nicotine, got it right, fixed the problem, and they
    published it.  There's no there there.
         Second, Mr. Wilner and Dr. Feingold, and again
    in closing, all talked about cigarettes being
    designed to be more addictive instead of less.  And
    they had two examples of what was done.  First was
    the tar to nicotine ratio; keep the tar the same,
    increase the nicotine, lower that ratio.  The second
    was pH.  And I want to talk to you about that.  I
    want to talk to you about both of them.  Let's do
    them one at a time.
         Let's talk about the cigarettes that were
    relatively high in nicotine and low in tar.  All
    right.  As Dr. Feingold conceded when he was on the
    stand, the public health officials said that because
    tar is dangerous, it's what makes you sick, and
    because people smoke for nicotine, gosh, maybe a
    safer cigarette would have less tar compared to the
    amount of nicotine that's in them.  And they said,
    go and research it.  It sounds like a good way to
    make a safer cigarette.  And that's what they recommended.
         And the tobacco companies tried.  They tried to
    do it.  But it turns out that when the nicotine and
    tar get into -- get out of whack, when they get --
    depart from the ratios that are there in tobacco
    naturally, when that happens the cigarette tastes
    different, in fact, it tastes awful.  And so they
    couldn't make a commercial cigarette.  They tried in
    the labs.
         Was it technically feasible to do it?
    Absolutely.  Was it something they could sell?  No.
    And they never did.
         So far from being an attempt to make cigarettes
    more addictive, it was an attempt to make a safer
    cigarette, and it was one that failed, it was never
    marketed, and it has nothing to do with whether
    Mrs. Jewett was addicted.  Nothing.  That's one
    point.
         Mr. Wilner showed you documents primarily
    documents from the 1970's when the tobacco companies
    were discussing pH.  PH, which is a measure of how
    acidic or basic a particular substance is.  And
    there was this notion that, gosh, if it got more
    basic you would have more free nicotine in it.  Free
    nicotine.  And that might make cigarettes more addictive.
         And indeed again he talked about the Surgeon
    General commenting on this.  But what he didn't tell
    you, and what Dr. Feingold didn't tell you, and you
    had to wait for my cross examination here is
    potentially, possibly.
         Okay.  I said to Dr. Feingold, let's have the
    rubber meet the road here.  Let's talk about this.
    And he agreed.  He agreed on cross examination that
    all commercial cigarettes have pH in a narrow range,
    and that in that narrow range there's no free
    nicotine, or very little of it, and there's no
    evidence that any -- that the pH of any of the
    brands that Mrs. Jewett smoked were somehow
    manipulated or altered in order to try to make them
    more addictive.  Absolutely none.
         Again, this is a sideshow.  It's a sideshow
    that makes me a little steamed, because I think it's
    an attempt to distract from the issues that you do
    have to decide in this phase of the case, and to get
    you mad.  But when you think about the story and you
    understand the context in which these documents are
    written, there's nothing even to get mad about.
         All right.  We're in the home stretch.  Last
    issue.  Did COPD cause Mrs. Jewett's death?  The evidence was no.
         Let's start with the death certificate.  The
    death certificate couldn't be any clearer.  And you
    will see that identifies a single cause of death.
    TTP.
         And I think I heard Mr. Matthews say -- maybe
    it was Mr. Wilner -- that TTP was the immediate
    cause of death.  But, you know, you've got to go
    look at this, and it's going to be really hard to
    read.  The death certificate is back there, but
    believe me I've strained my eyes more often than I
    care to count trying to read the death certificate.
    It's hard.  You'll probably need a magnifying glass.
    But the instructions to the section where TTP occurs
    commands doctors who fill them out to list the chain
    of events that directly caused death.
         And how many links are there in this chain?
    One.  One.  TTP.  TTP.  Nothing else is listed.
         And there's a comment in the death certificate
    about bronchiolitis obliterans, or BOS, but it was
    not the underlying cause of death.
         Now, how do we know that?  Well, this is
    consistent with Dr. Wyzan's testimony.  He was asked
    this not by defense counsel, but by Mr. Matthews, I
    think, whether BOS was a contributing cause to Mrs. Jewett's death, and he says it's hard to say
    whether BOS directly contributed to her death.  That
    was his testimony on redirect by Mr. Matthews.
         And let's go back to the death certificate.  It
    excludes tobacco.  Did tobacco use contribute to
    death?  No.  No.
         The plaintiff forgot to raise that with you in
    their closing.
         Now, the death certificate.  This -- was this
    some clerical person who filled this out?  Was this
    somebody who didn't know anything?  No.  You heard
    the testimony.  It was Dr. Alvarez.  He's the
    pulmonologist.  He treated Mrs. Jewett for four
    years.  He has over 70 medical records for her.  He
    was on her transplant team, and he was responsible
    for her care in her last days.
         Is there anybody out of all the doctors who
    treated Mrs. Jewett, of all the doctors who appeared
    in this courtroom, is there anybody who would know
    better than Dr. Alvarez what caused her death?
         Dr. Ambinder was perfectly clear.  He said,
    don't listen to me, listen to Dr. Alvarez.  But not
    Dr. Feingold.  He wanted to rewrite the death
    certificate.
         Despite what he called Dr. Alvarez's incredible quality of care, and how expertly handled her
    treatment was, Dr. Feingold testified that Dr.
    Alvarez, like Mrs. Jewett, somehow got confused,
    misremembered, or made mistakes.  And when it came
    to filling out the death certificate he called him
    silly and foolish.
         What was Dr. Feingold's theory?  It's the same
    one plaintiffs are playing for you in their closing,
    immunosuppression and rejection of the transplanted
    lung.  Let's take them one at a time.
         First let me start generally, not about
    Mrs. Jewett, generally.  It's true,
    immunosuppression can cause TTP.  They can.
    Generally true.  It's true that lung transplant
    patients are at higher risk of TTP than the general
    population, in part because they're taking
    immunosuppressants.  That's true.  It's true that
    lung transplant patients don't have a good long term
    prognosis.  The body can reject the transplanted
    lung.
         But this case isn't about lung transplant
    patients in general, it's about Mrs. Jewett.  So how
    do these general theories, these general truisms
    play out in this case?  And I submit that Dr.
    Feingold's theory and data based on the world at large again don't fit Mrs. Jewett.
         Let's talk about it.  First, fact number one,
    what's the fact?  Mrs. Jewett was not
    immunosuppressed.  How do we know?  You saw the
    hematology records.  From them you know Mrs. Jewett
    did not have TTP when she first was admitted to the
    hospital in September of 2006.  You know that the
    levels of immunosuppressants in her blood during the
    entire time she was in the hospital were below the
    therapeutic dose.  You know that her white blood
    cell count, part of your immune system, the white
    blood cells, fight infections.  They were measured
    each day, sometimes more than once.  And you know
    that her white blood cell count during that hospital
    stay was normal 13 out of the 14 times it was
    measured.
         And crucially, you know that her treating
    hematologist ruled out immunosuppressant drugs as a
    cause of her TTP.  Wasn't the drugs, they said.  And
    you know that Dr. Alvarez didn't list tobacco use as
    contributing to her death at all.  End of story.
    End of story.
         Well, another fact about that sequence of
    treatments.  You know that when she was in the
    hospital and they ruled out the immunosuppressant drugs, I think it was Tacrolimus at the time, they
    kept her on it.  If she had TTP that was caused by
    immunosuppressant drugs would they have done that;
    would that make any sense?  No.  They kept her on
    it.
         Okay.  Only Dr. Feingold said otherwise, even
    though he's not a hematologist.  So who are you
    going to believe, Dr. Feingold, a professional
    witness who was testifying outside of his field, or
    Mrs. Jewett's treating physicians and her medical
    records?
         As His Honor has made clear in the instructions
    that he's given you and that you'll take back with
    you, it's entirely up to you who to believe.  Who to
    believe.
         Fact number two.  Mrs. Jewett did not die of
    lung rejection.  Again, you saw the medical records.
    When Mrs. Jewett was in the hospital and was being
    treated she had 16 bronchoscopies to check for lung
    rejection.  Only two of them indicated some mild or
    minimal issues, and that occurred two and-a-half
    years before she died.  There was no evidence of
    lung rejection from the bronchoscopies from May 2004
    through September of 2006 when she passed away.
    And, importantly, none of the treatment that she received when she was in the hospital in her final
    stay was for lung rejection.
         Ask yourself, if lung rejection caused
    Mrs. Jewett's death, don't you think Dr. Alvarez,
    who was on the transplant team and who was caring
    for her in that final hospital stay, would have
    known about it and would have put it on the death
    certificate?  It's not there.
         If there were a shred of doubt, and I submit
    there is not, it was dispelled by Drs. Ambinder and
    Frazier.  And I want to draw a contrast between them
    and Dr. Feingold.
         They limited their testimony to the subjects in
    which they're expert.  Now, in cross examination Mr.
    Matthews got Dr. Ambinder to try to talk about
    everything, including stuff he wasn't an expert in.
    And he kept saying, you know, I'm not really an
    expert, but if you're asking what I think, here it
    is.
         Okay.  And, you know, as part of that testimony
    he probably got some things wrong, but when it came
    to hematology he was rock solid.
         And both Dr. Ambinder and Dr. Frazier, they
    don't make their living testifying all the time.
    They're busy treating patients.  They didn't have big egos.  They were straightforward with you.  They
    gave short and understandable answers.  They didn't
    prattle on and fight all the time.  And,
    importantly, their answers confirmed what you
    already knew from Mrs. Jewett's treating physicians
    and from the medical records.
         The evidence on this last issue strongly favors
    the defense.  Mrs. Jewett's COPD did not cause her
    death.
         Again I'm getting ready to sit down.  I hope
    there's not a round of applause this time.  But I
    don't get to talk to you again.  Plaintiff's counsel
    do.  And so as you listen to their final closing
    think about the evidence, and as you do think about
    how I might have responded.
         Let me close again by thanking each of you for
    being here.  We really appreciate it.  Thanks a
    bunch.


         MR. GEARY:  Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
    On behalf of Dan Weiner and Lorillard, I want to
    thank you for your participation in this process and
    for your service.  We know it's not easy, and we
    know you've worked hard, and we appreciate very much your service.  You can't be thanked too many times.
         Now, when you were -- when you began the
    process you were 1 of 150 or so people who might
    have been jurors, and you're the ones who were
    selected because you said, I can be fair, I can be
    impartial and treat both parties the same, I can
    apply the facts to the law and make a decision.  And
    one of the things that you said was, if it's not
    proven that Mrs. Jewett is addicted, not proven,
    then can I can return a verdict for the defendants.
    And if it's shown that her claim should be time
    barred I can return a verdict for the defendants on
    that issue as well.
         So this is about applying the facts to the law.
    And you heard from His Honor what the law is in this
    case.  And the form of verdict which you'll get
    really guides your decision making.  It's sort of a
    roadmap, and I want to talk about a few of the
    questions on that verdict form.
         Now, the first question is about COPD and the
    second question is about addiction.  Now, I'm going
    to talk about the addiction question first.  And the
    addiction question has really two parts to it
    plaintiff has to prove:  Was Mrs. Jewett addicted?
    And if so, did smoking during the addiction cause her COPD?
         Now, I want to talk about whether she was
    addicted, because that's really what you look at
    first.  And if you find she wasn't addicted you
    don't have to worry about causation on that
    question.
         So I want to go back to the beginning of the
    case though and say this.  What -- what -- what is
    this case about?  Okay.  It's about Mrs. Jewett, and
    it's about what she knew and her experiences.  It's
    not about what Mr. Jewett knew or thought, and not
    about what the children knew or thought about her
    COPD.  It's about what she knew and thought, her
    experiences.  And indeed it's about control.  And
    that's the point about addiction.
         And what is the standard?  What determines if
    someone is addicted?  You heard it over and over.
    The 2010 Surgeon General's report, the primary
    criteria is highly controlled by the cigarette.  And
    we'll talk about that more in just a minute.  But
    control is the issue.  She was not controlled by
    cigarettes, and she was not addicted.
         Now, one thing that I think is important to
    note here is this.  You've heard about warnings on
    the packages of cigarettes, and there are some questions in voir dire about when that started.  In
    Mrs. Jewett's situation every pack of cigarettes
    that she smoked from had a warning on it.  She never
    smoked a cigarette from a pack that didn't have a
    warning on it.
         Now, let's go to A2.  Was -- was Mrs. Jewett
    addicted to cigarettes?  And again we heard some
    talk about, well, causation and so forth, and what
    contributed and what was a factor.  The first
    question is, was Mrs. Jewett addicted?
         What is the standard?  The 2010 Surgeon
    General's report, the 1988 Surgeon General's report
    said the same thing, the common element of all the
    definitions is control, and did the substance
    control the user?  Did the cigarettes control
    Mrs. Jewett?
         And even Dr. Feingold on Power Point 41, which
    he didn't see, but he talked about, said the same
    thing, the primary criterion is control.  So who
    is -- who is in control of Mrs. Jewett's life
    decisions?
         I'm going to back up a little bit.  Independent
    of smoking she made some very serious decisions
    throughout her life; where to live, when to get
    married, raising her children.  And she did so much of this while Mr. Jewett was gone working.  She took
    care of business.  She worked hard.  She took care
    of her family, and she made a lot of decisions, and
    smoking was no exception.
         You heard from Dr. Kaplan about how she
    controlled her smoking regarding places, around
    certain people, and how she reduced her smoking,
    five cigarettes a day, quit at intervals with no
    problems.  She was in control.  Cigarettes didn't
    control her.  And the burden of proof on this issue
    is on the plaintiff to prove that she was
    controlled, and she wasn't.
         Now, you saw some statistics earlier about 5
    percent of people quitting on the first attempt.
    Sometimes it takes more than one attempt, and that
    was the case with Mrs. Kaplan -- excuse me --
    Mrs. Jewett.
         What were the statistics here?  50 million
    people have quit.  And you've heard some talk about
    cigarettes.  What did they quit?  The cigarettes
    that have been talked about.  50 million people have
    quit, and Mrs. Jewett indeed was one of them.  She
    quit the same cigarettes.
         Now, what is the burden of proof?  It's not
    just to bring you evidence or someone talking about things.  It's to bring you evidence that's more
    persuasive and convincing.
         Now, what have you heard here?  In the opening
    so far on the other side you didn't hear anything
    about Mrs. Jewett's choices or the choices that she
    made about her cigarettes.  What you heard about
    was, well, she smoked for quite a while, for many
    years.  That's not the standard.  There's much more
    to it than that, and Dr. Kaplan told you about that.
         Now let's go to A3.  And we saw this from the
    2010 report, we put it up on the screen, and the
    criteria -- the primary criteria is highly
    controlled.  Highly controlled.  Did cigarettes
    highly control Mrs. Jewett?  They didn't.
         Dr. Kaplan at A4 said this, said she wasn't
    controlled by cigarettes.  And then at A5 he talked
    about why not.  Well, her pattern of use.  Able to
    reduce to five cigarettes a day with no problem.
    Dr. Wyzan explained that.  Three to four cigarettes
    per week with no problem, no withdrawal symptoms, no
    difficulties because of that.  How did she smoke her
    cigarettes?  Not all the way down.  She left a
    quarter to a third unsmoked.
         And if the question here is was she controlled
    by the nicotine in cigarettes, I say that's important.  She wasn't controlled.  She made her
    decisions as to how she smoked, when she smoked, and
    how she stopped.  And when she stopped she stopped
    because she wanted to and because she was motivated.
    And you heard that motivation is important.
         Now, I want to talk a little bit about witness
    credibility, and Dr. Feingold on the one hand and
    Dr. Kaplan on the other.  And indeed, Dr. Feingold
    has testified for many, many years, and he's made a
    lot of money doing it.  $20 million.  Dr. Feingold
    said basically she was addicted because she smoked a
    lot.  He really ignored the 2010 Surgeon General's
    definition and what the 1988 Surgeon General's
    report said was the common element of the
    definitions over time, control.  He didn't really
    talk about that.  He didn't talk about really the
    facts of the case.
         Dr. Kaplan did in great detail, and with no
    outline in front of him, because he had studied the
    mass amount of medical records and the depositions.
         Now, when you think about the witnesses, think
    about this.  Today Dr. Kaplan is probably seeing
    patients, that's probably what Dr. Frazier is doing.
    Dr. Ambinder is working in his field.  Dr. Feingold
    probably is testifying. You're entitled to put whatever weight you want
    on the experts.  I would submit to you that what Dr.
    Feingold brought to was not convincing, and it
    wasn't -- it wasn't persuasive when you take all
    that into account.
         Now, Dr. Kaplan explained that under the
    current scientific literature about half of regular
    smokers are addicted and half are not, and that he
    sees the same thing in his clinical practice, half
    are, half aren't.  In his opinions for court cases
    it's half are and half aren't.  And his opinion
    about Mrs. Jewett was that she wasn't addicted
    because she wasn't controlled, not by cigarettes.
         Now, you saw -- you saw references in the
    medical records to opinions by other physicians --
    and we asked Dr. Kaplan about that -- other
    physicians who said, I think she's dependent, she
    may have tobacco abuse.
         What about that?  Well, you saw a lot of
    depositions, you heard about them, Mr. Jewett's, the
    children, friends, thousands of pages of medical
    records studied by Dr. Kaplan.  We're not expecting
    all the treaters to have done it, and don't know
    what standard they're using.
         In jury selection we asked you, would you be willing to consider a serious definition of
    addiction in a case like this, and everyone said
    yes.  And that serious definition is highly
    controlled.
         We don't know what standard the treaters were
    using when they made those references, but we know
    what standard Dr. Kaplan used, because he explained.
         Now, what about Fagerstrom?  You've heard a lot
    of talk about that.  Okay.  Dr. Feingold said this:
    It's not designed as a diagnostic tool to diagnose
    whether a person is nicotine addicted.
         Well, that's why we're here.  That's what that
    question is.  That test is not designed for that,
    and Dr. Feingold said, I didn't use it.  I, Dr.
    Feingold, didn't use it.
         The DSM-IV, the big book about how to diagnose,
    Dr. Kaplan explained it.  And the requirement under
    the DSM-IV to be addicted is this:  Does the pattern
    of use cause a clinically significant impairment of
    the way the person lives their life regarding their
    work, families, important activities.  It's a
    measure of impact on behavior.
         It's a way of looking at control.  Are you
    losing control because we're seeing some problems in
    the rest of your life?  Not so with Mrs. Kaplan -- not so with Mrs. Jewett.  Excuse me.  She was able
    to work and take care of her family day in and day
    out, and take care of business.  She wasn't impaired
    in the way she lived her life when she smoked.
         Medical impairment is an entirely different
    issue.  It's not about whether a person gets a
    disease, it's about whether they're controlled.
         Now let's go to A6.  Let's talk about
    Mrs. Jewett's symptoms.  Dr. Wyzan said this, and
    again it's 1995, and she's cut down to three
    cigarettes, five cigarettes a day, and Dr. Wyzan
    says about Mrs. Jewett, no problems, no lack of
    concentration, irritability, frustration, anger, no
    insomnia, no restlessness, no problems.
         That's Dr. Wyzan.  What did Mr. Jewett say
    about Mrs. Jewett?
         Let's go to A7.  No serious attempts to stop
    before 2001.  And when she quit, no withdrawal
    symptoms, and nothing different about Mrs. Jewett
    after she quit because she quit.  No withdrawal
    problems noticed by Mr. Jewett about Mrs. Jewett.
         Again the issue on addiction is control.
    Mrs. Jewett was able to control.  She wasn't proven
    to be addicted, and in fact, she wasn't.
         Now, I want to shift gears a little bit and talk about question one, and that's -- and that's
    the question about COPD, the statute of limitations
    question.  And again the question there is whether
    before the date, May of 1990, Mrs. Jewett knew or
    should have known that she had COPD, and whether she
    knew or should have known that her COPD could
    possibly, could possibly have been caused by
    smoking.  So it's two parts.  It's about the disease
    and what Mrs. Jewett knew or should have known about
    it.
         Okay.  On the first part -- and let's go --
    let's go to B2.  And you've heard this before.  The
    defendants don't need to prove that Mrs. Jewett was
    diagnosed at all.  There's no dispute about that.
    If -- and this is if -- it wasn't this way, but if
    Mrs. Jewett had only symptoms of emphysema back in
    the 80's, was aware of them, ignored them, didn't
    want to go to the doctor, didn't want to find out
    about it, and had reason to know the symptoms could
    have been caused by smoking, the result is the same.
    That's a claim that's barred as well.  We don't need
    a diagnosis to win on this issue, because it's about
    what she should have done and should have known.
         Well, here there's much more than that.  We
    have her medical records where she says repeatedly, I was diagnosed before 1990.
         Confused?  One time on an ER visit, but not the
    rest of the time.  She was not a confused person.
    You saw it on the video, you see it in the medical
    records, you hear it when people talk about her.
    And these statements were made over many, many
    different years.  She wasn't confused when she told
    her doctors when it was that she was diagnosed.
         Now, when daughter, Sarah, watched the PBS
    video she said, she looks good, she looks good in
    the video, and she wasn't confused.  Mrs. Jewett
    made impressive and impactful decisions throughout
    her life, including -- including the last decade.
    She wasn't confused.
         Now, in the PBS video she said she was
    diagnosed 26 years before, and Mr. Jewett is sitting
    right next to her and didn't make the correction.
    And it wasn't a mistake.
         Let's go to -- it wasn't a mistake because just
    a couple weeks later she said the same thing in a
    different way to Dr. Wyzan when she said -- it
    wasn't Dr. Wyzan, it was Dr. Weiss, excuse me, when
    she said, I was diagnosed at age 25.  That's 1979.
    She's saying the same thing in a different way.  So
    it wasn't a mistake. Okay.  Now, the PBS video.  I don't want to
    make too big an issue about this, but Mr. Jewett
    said he had a -- he had a hunch that the video might
    be harmful to his case.  What I would say is this.
    The case doesn't turn on the video.  The limitations
    issue can be proven with Dr. Frazier's testimony all
    by itself when he did the math and said based on how
    bad it was in 1995 she must have had it back in the
    80's, and it would have been symptomatic, and she
    would have known about it, and it could have been
    diagnosed.
         And, in fact, Dr. Feingold said the same thing.
    Dr. Wyzan said the same thing.  You can subtract all
    the statements and all the medical records, and just
    based on what Dr. Frazier says about the
    mathematics, how bad it must have been back in the
    80's, the result is the same.
         The statements in the medical records add to
    it, the PBS video adds to it, but the point is this.
    She did have COPD back in the 80's, it's clear,
    because she had a lot of symptom of it, and that was
    explained by -- by a lot of folks.
         Now, let's go to -- let's go to B8.  All right.
    Again Dr. Wyzan.  He said it wouldn't be surprising
    if she had COPD in 1987.  He agreed with that. That's fine.
         And let's go to the next one.  Dr. Feingold
    said this.  He said a physician could have diagnosed
    Mrs. Jewett with emphysema in 1988.
         Let's go to the next one.  Dr. Frazier.  He
    said this:  By the mid 80's she would have had
    moderate to severe COPD -- and this is really
    undisputed, it's just the mathematics of going
    backwards -- based on the very severe PFT data that
    was obtained by Dr. Wyzan in '95.
         What about the '89?  Severe COPD, and he had
    never seen a patient who would have had that
    severity who didn't have significant complications.
         Now let's go to B11.  Okay.  What about
    doctors?  During the 80's Mrs. Jewett went to
    doctors, and we know that because the witnesses have
    said that.  We just don't have the medical records.
    We also know this oldest daughter, Jeanette, said
    that she played medical information close to her
    vest.  She didn't want to worry the family.  She
    didn't talk about it.  She didn't talk about it with
    her family.  And daughter, Sarah, said she would
    keep a lot of things from us about her health.
         Okay.  So what did Mr. -- what did Mr. Jewett
    say?  Let's go to B12.  He said -- he said, well -- he said, it's possible she was diagnosed by a doctor
    before Dr. Wyzan and she didn't tell me.  And that's
    understandable because Mrs. Jewett didn't say much
    about those things.  And that's in response to a
    question by Mr. Jewett's lawyers, and he agreed with
    that; yes, it is possible, and that makes sense.
         Dr. Wyzan said he recalls her being shocked
    during the visit.  And it was put to you earlier,
    shocked for what reason.  Shocked because of the
    very severe PFT data, and learning that now you've
    got very severe emphysema?  We don't know.
         But here's something that doesn't make sense.
    If Mrs. Jewett is shocked by that information in
    1995, in early 1995, would Mr. Jewett have taken a
    job in 1995 that put him in the Middle East for two
    and-a-half years?  No, he wouldn't.
         Now, the second part of question 1 is did
    Mrs. Jewett know, or should she have known that
    smoking might have caused her COPD a reasonable
    possibility?  It doesn't require us to prove it that
    she knew it for sure.  It only requires that we
    prove that she knew or should have known that there
    was a reasonable possibility of it being caused by
    smoking.  Should have known.  A reasonable
    possibility.  That's not a diagnosis. Now, so what's the evidence in this question?
    We know that Mrs. Jewett was smart and capable and
    very intelligent.
         Let's go to C3.  And Mr. Jewett said this.  He
    said, well, when she had symptoms of COPD he
    attributed it to her smoking, which makes sense, and
    he believes she attributed it to her smoking as
    well.  That also makes sense, because she's a smart
    person.
         So what -- what were those symptoms?  Let's go
    to C4.  So these are people who saw Mrs. Jewett.
    Mr. Jewett said she had coughing and wheezing and
    shortness of breath.
         And C6 -- actually C5.  And Mrs. --
    Mrs. Jewett, what did she say to Dr. Ottaviana in
    2001.  She said that she had wheezing and whistling
    and coughing and chest tightness back in the 80's.
         This comes from Mrs. Jewett.  These are her
    symptoms.  And when she had these symptoms she
    attributed them to smoking.  And that makes all the
    sense in the world.  It really does.
         What else?  Let's go to C8.  Daughter --
    daughter, Sarah, said in the late 80's -- in the
    late 80's -- and this is before 1990 -- Mrs. Jewett
    had a deep nasty recurrent and persistent cough, and she was concerned about it.  She asked her mom about
    it, and her mom said, I'm going to go see the
    doctor.  Didn't say what the outcome was, but went
    to see the doctor.  There were doctors' visits.
         So what else?  Let's go to again friends of the
    family.  Kevin Powers and Debra Thorn at C7.  Before
    '84 -- and again they're in Virginia, the Jewetts
    are in Virginia.  Debra Thorn says a bronchitis-like
    cough back in the first part of the 80's, and Kevin
    Powers, a hacking cough with phlegm throughout the
    day.  And that's the same thing that Mrs. Jewett
    said to Dr. Ottaviana in that handwritten note, in
    her own handwriting from Mrs. Jewett.
         So what are doctors saying back then?  Let's go
    to C8.  Okay.  If someone goes to the doctor in the
    80's and they've got problems with emphysema, what
    are they told by the doctor?  You need to quit
    smoking because smoking is what causes it.  Should
    she have heard that?  Would she have heard that?  Of
    course.  Of course.  Because -- let's go to C9 -- in
    1985 that was on the packs, smoking causes
    emphysema.  Doctors knew that, patients were being
    told that smoking causes emphysema.  And Mrs. Jewett
    was no exception to that.
         Now, I'm just about finished.  On the verdict form, the second question is about addiction, and
    Mr. Biersteker has already told you about, well, if
    she was addicted then did that really cause
    something?  The answer to that is no.  But was she
    addicted?  That's really the first question.  The
    answer to that question is no.
         Okay.  The first question is did she know about
    her COPD?  That's that question.  The answer to that
    question is yes.  And if the answer to question 1 is
    yes, you're done.
         Now, plaintiff -- the plaintiff has rebuttal
    and the chance to talk to you one last time, and we
    don't, and that's fine, those are the rules.  The
    plaintiff has the burden of proof on a lot of
    issues.
         When you're hearing rebuttal I want you to
    think about what Dr. Kaplan might say and what Dr.
    Frazier might say, what Mr. Biersteker, what Ms.
    Luther, and even what I might say.  And I also want
    you to think about this.  What did Mrs. Jewett say
    in the medical records?  And would she say something
    different -- I just want to just play the very first
    part -- would she say something different from this?
         (The following video clip was played as
    transcribed by the Reporter as follows.)  Let's talk a little bit about your medical
    history, Barbara.  You were sick for a while before
    your transplant.
         Yes, I was sick 26 years.  I was diagnosed
    26 years ago with COPD.
         (Following the video clip the following further
    proceedings were had.)
         MR. GEARY:  And indeed that was before 1990.
         I thank you for your patience.  I thank you for
    your hard work.  I ask that your verdict be for the
    defendants on these questions.  Thank you.
