         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         So the question that you have to decide, what
    is the right amount to punish and to deter?  When we
    conclude our closing arguments, the Court will read
    your instructions to the jury, and the Court will
    read that in deciding the amount of punitive damages
    to be awarded, if any, the award should be no
    greater than the amount you find necessary to punish
    defendant with the harm caused to plaintiff, Elaine
    Jordan, and to deter defendant and others similarly
    situated from engaging in such misconduct in the
    future.
         So what is the right amount?  What is the right amount to punish and deter?  And what goes into that
    decision?  Basically, the Court will instruct you
    there are three things that you should consider in
    determining what is the right amount.
         One, what is the nature, extent and degree of
    the conduct and the misconduct that caused the harm?
         Two, the financial resources of the defendant.
         And, three, any mitigation.
         These three things really make sense.  Anytime
    you're thinking about punishing, the first thing you
    want to think about is the conduct, what they did.
    What is the nature, the extent and the amount of the
    harm?
         So what I first want to talk about is a little
    bit about those things, and I think that they have
    three elements.  The nature, extent of the harm in
    this case basically has three elements.
         The first is the impact of the harm.  I think
    it's appropriate to look at what is the impact of
    the misconduct of the defendant in this case?
         The second thing is the pattern and length of
    time that the misconduct took.
         And, third, what was the intent of the parties
    when engaging in that conduct?
         All of these things point to this conduct being extreme and egregious.
         First, the impact.  The decisions that the
    defendant made, the misconduct had life and death
    impact, enormous suffering.  It wasn't one act or
    two acts.  This was a pattern of conduct that lasted
    for decades.  And why did the defendants do this?
    The evidence clearly established for one reason, and
    that was to make them more money.
         You have already found in the first phase that
    the defendant engaged in misconduct, and I wanted to
    go back and read what the instruction was with
    respect to the reasons for punitive damages being
    awarded.  And that was in the first phase.  Punitive
    damages are awarded if by -- if you find by clear
    and convincing evidence that the conduct causing
    loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as
    to show a reckless disregard of human life or the
    safety of persons exposed to the effects of such
    conduct or the conduct showed such an entire lack of
    care that Philip Morris must have been consciously
    indifferent to the consequences or the conduct
    showed such an entire lack of care that Philip
    Morris must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded
    the safety and welfare of the public or the conduct
    showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be the equivalent to an intentional
    violation of those rights.
         The evidence that you heard for over three
    weeks, ladies and gentlemen, showed that the nature,
    extent and degree of this conduct is unparalleled
    historically, both in the impact on human life and
    suffering and the length of time that it went on.
    Smoking cigarettes is the leading cause of
    preventable death in the United States.
         And so the first area to be considered through
    all of the testimony that's presented was what is
    the nature, the extent of the misconduct?  And I
    think in evaluating that, you can look at how long
    did it go on?  Is this just one act or two acts, or
    was this decades long, over and over again?  Two,
    you can look at the harm that it caused, the amount
    of suffering that it caused.  And, three, and
    perhaps most importantly, the intent with which it
    was done, the intent.  And you saw document after
    document that showed that the intent was for them to
    make more money, to keep selling cigarettes.
         And those three things, the Court will instruct
    you, go to the issue of the nature and extent of the
    misconduct.  And that's the first thing that you can
    consider.      The second thing that you can consider is the
    financial resources of Philip Morris.  And we've put
    on the testimony of Ian Ratner that showed that this
    is an enormously profitable company, that the
    profits per year are over $4 billion, that the
    revenue that they generate is over $21 billion.
    It's a very, very profitable company, and that's the
    second thing that you're entitled to take into
    consideration.
         The third thing that you're entitled to take
    into consideration is mitigation, and that's the
    testimony that you just heard.  The defendants put
    on the testimony of Dr. Lipowicz and you just heard
    his testimony.  And I think that you-all can
    evaluate whether, in fact, that is mitigation or not
    because I believe that testimony showed that their
    agreement to engage in a regulation that they talked
    about was merely an effort to solidify their market
    position, that regulation didn't affect this company
    back in the 1960s, '70s, '80s and it doesn't affect
    the way that they are behaving today.  They are
    still marketing their product.  They are still
    continuing to sell their cigarettes.  They are still
    continuing to have color changes between the light
    cigarettes and the other cigarettes.      I think Dr. Lipowicz's testimony solidifies the
    issue that there is no reason that they should not
    be punished for their conduct in the past.
         And I think Mr. Cofer said this.  It was very
    important.  He said, why did you make these changes?
    What happened?  Was there any new developments?  And
    do you remember what he said?  Lawsuits.  We changed
    because there were lawsuits.  And, ladies and
    gentlemen, that's the only thing that will get them
    to change, from Dr. Lipowicz's own testimony.
         So I say all that to ask the question, what is
    the right number?  And I've been thinking about that
    a lot over the weekend, what I wanted to ask you
    for.  And one of the things I thought about was the
    chart that we showed in evidence in the first part
    of the case, in Phase I.
         MR. COFER:  Objection, Your Honor.  May we
    approach?
         THE COURT:  Yes.
         (A sidebar conference was held outside the
hearing of the jury as follows:)
         MR. COFER:  You cannot punish for harm to
    others and she's gotten very close to that two or
    three times.  And you cannot punish for harm to
    others.  And I don't know where she's going with this chart but I just want to head that off.  And I
    want to object to anything about harm to others or
    the number of people who have died or the number of
    people who have gotten sick.
         MS. SHAMP:  I think -- I think, Your Honor,
    that I'm entitled to argue the nature of their
    misconduct and the nature of their misconduct over
    various times.  Part of the -- one of things that
    they can consider, Your Honor.  And the nature of
    their conduct for the harm to the plaintiff and
    similar harms to others.
         MR. COFER:  That's --
         MS. SHAMP:  That's charging --
         MR. COFER:  That's only in Phase I.  In Phase
    I, you consider harm to others but particularly
    reprehensible.  In Phase II, you only punish to harm
    to plaintiff.  So you can't talk about harm to
    others in this portion.  Talk about the conduct that
    has affected her, but you can't punish for harm to
    others.
         And so we're getting into all these decades and
    all the people, all the suffering, all the loss of
    life and that's an improper argument in Phase II,
    which is the amount phase.  Do it in Phase I, not in
    Phase II.      THE COURT:  I think if you establish the
    facts --
         MS. SHAMP:  And, Your Honor, I think I can
    establish -- I was going to look at -- I think it's
    specifically with respect to the -- do you have the
    charge up here?
         I'll move on.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  All right.
         (The sidebar conference was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court in the
presence of the jury:)
         MS. SHAMP:  So I've been thinking about what is
    the right number to ask.  And I think the number
    that you have to award has to be significant.  It
    has to be significant in order for your verdict to
    be heard.  And you'll remember what Mr. Cofer said
    earlier throughout the course of the trial.  Actions
    speak louder than words.  And you remember when he
    got up here in the beginning and said to you, we
    heard your verdict.
         Well, ladies and gentlemen, in order for Philip
    Morris to actually hear you, they have to have
    actions.  To stand up and say, we heard you, doesn't
    mean anything.  Actions speak louder than words, and
    the action that will -- it will take in order for Philip Morris to hear you is to write a check and to
    write a check that is significant.
         Now, I expect that Mr. Cofer will say that you
    can only punish Philip Morris for the harms to
    Elaine Jordan, and for once, Mr. Cofer and I agree.
    I completely and totally agree.  Elaine Jordan is
    one person and I represent that one person.  She is
    the person that the evidence will show, Philip
    Morris doesn't give one eye open about and never
    has, just like all the smokers that it's hurt over
    time.
         And maybe what you do today will just be a blip
    on the scale for them.  But doggone, today, now, in
    this courtroom, I ask you to make Philip Morris do
    an action that shows that one smoker, Elaine Jordan,
    her life and her suffering matters.  It's
    significant and it's important.
         And so your verdict, the number that you give
    for punitive damages has to be significant because
    it has to show that one smoker is important.  It has
    to show that one smoker's suffering has to make a
    difference to Philip Morris, if that is the only
    thing they hear.  The only thing that will make them
    change is money.  They said that themselves.
         Mr. Ratner said that they make $4.2 billion a year in profit.  If you divide that by 365 days,
    that's $11 million a day.  I'm going to ask that you
    award Elaine Jordan, a good person from
    Jacksonville, Florida, two days of the profit of
    Philip Morris, just two days, $22 million.  And I'm
    going to ask that you award not a penny more than
    that and not a penny less than that.  Because that
    number here in the courtroom says that today Philip
    Morris loses; they don't win.  Today in this
    courtroom, we say that truth prevails, that justice
    is done today by awarding that number, no more, no
    less, $22 million, to say that Elaine Jordan's
    suffering means something, to punish them and to
    deter, two days of their profit for one smoker.
         Martin Luther King said, it is always the right
    time to do the right thing.  We ask that you do the
    right thing and render a verdict that speaks the
    truth and award Elaine Jordan $22 million in
    punitive damages.
         Thank you.


         MS. SHAMP:  The purpose?  The purpose is to
    punish them.  The purpose is to punish them for the
    conduct that you heard about.  And the purpose is to
    deter other companies from doing that kind of thing, period.  What he said is what kind of message will
    we send if we've now reformed and you punish them?
    The message you send is don't do this.  The message
    you send is we, the citizens of Florida, won't
    tolerate it.  That's the message that you send.
    Deter other companies from doing this kind of thing
    because if you say, it's okay, you're not sending
    any kind of message.
         Sort of amazing.  It's sort of amazing to me
    that Mr. Cofer is going to try and take credit for
    what they were forced to do through the litigation
    brought by individuals.  The Attorney General had to
    bring litigation, and a Master Settlement Agreement
    came into effect through litigation that forced them
    to do that.  And now he wants to come in here and
    take credit for it.  We're doing all these things.
    They were forced to do those things.  They were
    forced to do that thing by litigation and by juries
    who stood up to them.
         It's amazing that they can testify that they
    behaved so badly, so badly that they had to put
    regulations and implementations and -- and all kinds
    of statutes that cost the American people money to
    implement.
         MR. COFER:  Objection, Your Honor, misstates the evidence.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule.  You can proceed
    with your argument, Ms. Shamp.
         MS. SHAMP:  That he wants to take credit
    because now all those things are in place to try and
    prevent them to do what they did that hurt Elaine
    Jordan.  Punish them for what they did.  That's what
    we ask you to do.
         Amazing that they want to have -- take credit
    for having to compensate the states for the enormous
    amount of money that the states expended to try and
    take care of the sick people caused by smoking their
    cigarettes.
         It's amazing.  What is the right amount?  Even
    if you believe that they were a different company,
    even if you believed it, the point is to punish them
    for what they did.  That's what the point is.  You
    heard the testimony about the conduct.  You heard
    the testimony about doubt is our product.  Let's get
    a psychological crutch.  Let's make a front and a
    shield to prevent the United States from knowing
    about the effects.  If you don't punish them, then
    they get away with decades long.  You are the only
    jury that will ever punish them for what they did to
    Elaine Jordan.  You're the only jury that will punish them for that conduct.
         Your actions speak louder than words, and in
    order for them to hear you, they have to write a
    check and a significant check.  Is it necessary to
    punish them?  Yeah.  It's necessary.  We cannot let
    that conduct go unpunished.  We cannot let other
    companies see that, well, if you change and become a
    new company or you come in and testify a new
    company, then we'll forgive the fact that you put
    your hand up in front of Congress and testified
    falsely.  Yes, it is necessary, in this courtroom
    today, to punish them.  Regardless, even if they are
    a changed company, your job is to punish them for
    what they did, for all that evidence you heard, for
    all of it.
         Don't give them a pass.  Don't give them a
    pass.  Don't be silent when you have a duty to
    speak.  Now is the time.  Now is the time that they
    are punished and held accountable, and you're the
    only ones that can do that.  And it has to be a
    significant punitive damage award to punish them or
    they just won't hear you.  $22 million, that's what
    it will take, two days, just two days of their
    profits.
         I want to thank you again for your service, your attention.  I want to ask for a verdict that
    speaks the truth.
         Thank you.
