         MR. COFER:  Counsel, Ms. Jordan, Members of the
    Jury, good afternoon.
         I told you in opening statement that we believe
    this case comes down to three pretty straightforward
    questions:  Why did Ms. Jordan smoke; why did she
    wait so long to quit; and did Philip Morris do something wrong that caused her to smoke and get
    sick.
         And I told you that the evidence would be that
    Ms. Jordan smoked because her friends and family
    smoked and because she liked to smoke.  She said she
    always had the ability to quit smoking whenever she
    made up her mind that she really wanted to quit and
    was willing to make an effort, her efforts to quit.
    And finally, that nothing that Philip Morris did or
    did not do, said or did not say, caused her to begin
    and continue smoking.
         So let's look at the evidence.  Question 1:
    Why did Ms. Jordan smoke?
         You may remember plaintiff's very first witness
    was Dr. David Burns.  And he told you that two of
    the most important factors in determining whether
    someone smokes is whether their friends and family
    smoke.
         And we know, Members of the Jury, that many of
    the important people in Ms. Jordan's life are
    smokers.  In fact, Ms. Jordan told Dr. Blank, while
    a couple of her co-workers were non-smokers, that
    most everyone she knew and worked with smoked.
         We know that her dad was a smoker.  He smoked
    until 1970, when he died of a stroke and emphysema. Ms. Jordan's sister, Judy, is a long-time
    smoker.  And Ms. Jordan told you that she can't
    remember a time when her brother Tommy wasn't a
    smoker.
         Ms. Jordan's first husband, Mitchell Johnston,
    he was a smoker, and he smoked throughout their
    marriage.  Her second husband, her current husband,
    Mr. Clarence Jordan, was a smoker who continued to
    smoke for years after Ms. Jordan herself quit.
         Her son Tim, her daughter, Sheryll, are current
    smokers, and her daughter, Tonya, told you that she
    quit just last January.
         But Tonya Spencer said something that I wrote
    down and I thought was very important in this case.
    What she told you was that smoking was just a way of
    life for her mother, and until her mother got sick,
    she enjoyed smoking.
         Ms. Jordan herself admitted that smoking
    relaxed her, it calmed her down, it helped her
    concentrate.  She said she liked to have a cigarette
    with a cup of coffee, she liked to smoke when she
    watched TV, and she enjoyed playing cards and
    smoking.
         Now, you heard that Ms. Jordan smoked her very
    first cigarette when she was at a carnival with some friends.  Her friends were smoking, and so she
    wanted to join in with them to fit in with the
    crowd.
         Advertising did not cause Ms. Jordan to smoke.
    Nothing Philip Morris said or did caused Ms. Jordan
    to begin smoking.  She picked up that first
    cigarette because of peer pressure.  She told you
    that.  She said the cool kids were smoking, so she
    went over and wanted to be one of them.
         Now, over the next couple years, she would
    occasionally get cigarettes from her friends, but
    she would also sneak cigarettes every now and then
    from her dad's pack.  But she didn't sneak her dad's
    cigarettes very often.  Do you remember why?
    Because he smoked menthol, and she didn't like the
    taste of menthol.
         Now, Ms. Shamp has argued that for Ms. Jordan
    it was all about the nicotine.  We know it wasn't
    just the nicotine; it was also about the taste.
         When Ms. Jordan became a regular smoker, she
    chose Marlboro because it was a popular cigarette,
    and she told you she liked the way it tasted.
         Dr. Proctor told you there were three reasons
    Marlboro is successful.  He said:  The advertising,
    he said ammonia -- and we talked about that -- and he said the taste or flavor.
         Members of the Jury, the evidence was that
    until Ms. Jordan got sick, she enjoyed smoking, and
    the cigarette that she enjoyed smoking the most was
    Marlboro.
         So, why did Ms. Jordan smoke?  Because her
    friends and family smoked, and she liked to smoke.
         Let's be honest.  You know, most of us do
    things that we know aren't necessarily good for us,
    whether we eat bad food, whether we drink too much
    beer, whether we spend too much time out in the sun
    on the days that it's sunny, whether it's, you know,
    staying up too late reading a good book or watching
    a movie when we know we've got an early morning.
    There are things that we all choose to do because we
    enjoy them.  They give us pleasure.
         And as adults, we are entitled to make those
    choices.  What it really comes down to is we have a
    lot of freedom to choose how we want to live our
    lives, and the decision whether to smoke is one of
    them.  And we make our choices, and we're
    responsible for our choices.
         And you know what, don't take that from me.
    What did David Burns say, their very first witness?
    You know he's no fan of Philip Morris or cigarette companies.
         "QUESTION:  You said many times that smokers
    are responsible for their own smoking behavior,
    correct?
         "ANSWER:  That's correct.
         "QUESTION:  And even if they're addicted, the
    smokers are still responsible for their own smoking
    behavior, correct?"
         And then what did Dr. Burns say?  He said:
    "That's correct.  The fact that someone is addicted,
    it's a barrier to behavioral change; but, it doesn't
    free them from responsibility for their own
    behavior."
         And that takes us to question 2:  Why did she
    wait so long to quit?
         You know, one of the first things I told you in
    opening statement, Philip Morris admits nicotine is
    addictive.  Some people who smoke will become
    addicted.  But it is undisputed, you heard from
    every single witness in this case, that even
    addicted smokers can and do quit smoking.
         Plaintiff's own experts told you that.
    Dr. Proctor told you that each and every day in this
    country 5,000 Americans quit smoking.  By the time
    of the 1990 Surgeon General's report, almost half of all living adults in this country who ever smoked
    had quit.  The vast majority of those quit cold
    turkey.  They just put their cigarettes down and
    quit.
         Currently, there are 60 million former smokers
    in this country, and many of them were addicted; but
    when they made the decision to quit smoking, they
    put their cigarettes down, and they did quit.
         Now, you heard the evidence.  The single most
    important factor in whether someone is successful in
    quitting smoking is motivation and persistence.
    Simply put, unless and until the smoker makes up her
    mind that she truly wants to quit, and she's willing
    to make an effort or efforts to quit, chances are
    she's not going to quit, right?
         I mean, is that a surprise?  I mean, isn't that
    true of everything in our lives?  Until we make up
    our minds we really want to do it, we usually don't
    do it.
         So let me ask you this:  Before Ms. Jordan got
    sick, did she really want to quit?  Did she make a
    sincere and sustained effort to quit?
         So let's talk about that.  Ms. Jordan testified
    that over the years she made several attempts to
    quit smoking.  And she said that she would eat candy and peppermints and chew gum.  She would
    occasionally hide her cigarettes by putting them in
    her purse or putting them in another room or leaving
    them in her car.
         And she told you that the first time that she
    tried to quit smoking was when she was pregnant with
    her son, Tim, in 1966.
         Now, just to remind you, to set the stage,
    Ms. Jordan had just become a regular smoker, and she
    decided she wanted to quit smoking because she
    thought it was nasty looking for a woman who was
    pregnant to smoke.  And she said that smoking made
    her morning sickness worse, so she just didn't want
    to smoke.  That's what she told you.
         And you heard the question I asked her.  I
    said:  "Well, Ms. Jordan, if you had just become a
    regular smoker, and you really didn't want to smoke,
    why didn't you just quit?"
         And she said:  "I wish it were that easy."
         And then her testimony was, in 1966, when she
    was 17 years old and had just become a regular
    smoker, she was already so addicted that she simply
    couldn't quit.
         Does that make sense to you?  Based on what you
    heard in this case, in your own life experiences, does that ring true?  Do you believe that Ms. Jordan
    was unable to quit, or do you think she just really
    didn't want to quit?  Maybe she wasn't motivated to
    quit.
         Because we know for a fact that she could quit,
    because she did.  On February 27, 2002, Ms. Jordan
    quit smoking and never smoked another cigarette the
    rest of her life.  But until then, until that day,
    she never went a single day without a cigarette.
    Even on those days when she said she wanted to quit,
    she admitted she always had a cigarette in the
    morning.
         She never asked any of her friends or family
    how to quit.
         You saw in the records, when I asked
    Dr. Rothstein, he offered to refer her to a
    psychiatrist or psychologist, and she didn't take
    him up on it.  She never joined a support group or
    tried hypnosis or acupuncture.
         One time, she did ask one of her doctors for
    help in quitting, and he gave her a list of things
    to do; but, she admits she didn't follow his advice.
         And when she was asked why, she said:  "I guess
    I just didn't want to quit," but then quickly added,
    "I couldn't." Let's talk about that.  You know, oftentimes,
    we say we can't do something when we really don't
    want to.
         Let me give you an example.  Maybe you heard
    about the guy who's home in bed, and he's sleeping
    away, and the phone rings.  It's the middle of the
    night.  And a co-worker says, hey, my car broke
    down, I need a ride, can you get out of bed and get
    me?  He said, man, I'm sorry, I can't.  The guy
    said, I'll give you 100 bucks.  He said, I'll be
    there in 15 minutes.
         You know, sometimes can't actually means can't;
    but, a lot of times, can't means I don't really want
    to.
         Members of the jury, we find a way to do the
    things that are important to us.  And when it became
    important to Ms. Jordan to quit smoking, she quit.
         When she went into that hospital in February of
    2002, she put her cigarettes down, and she never
    smoked again.  She hasn't smoked a single cigarette
    in over 13 years.  She's been able to quit and stay
    quit, even though her husband, her son, her
    daughter, her brother, and her sister continue to
    smoke.
         Dr. Blank told you it's virtually impossible to quit and to stay quit when the people around you
    smoke, yet since 2002 Ms. Jordan has done it.
         So why is that important in this case?  Because
    we all know every time we go to the doctor, the
    doctor says, do you smoke?  And if you say yes, what
    does the doctor say?  The doctor says, quit.
         And that's been true for a very long time.  And
    the reason why doctors tell people to quit smoking
    is because when you quit, your risk of getting a
    smoking-related disease goes down.  And if the
    smoker quits early enough and stays quit long
    enough, her risk of getting a smoking-related
    disease becomes about the same as a never smoker.
         What did Dr. Burns tell you?  He said that ten
    years after a person quits smoking, the risk of
    dying drops by 50 percent.  He said 15 years after
    quitting, the smoker's risk of dying is down by 80
    percent.  After 20 years, almost all of the risk is
    gone.  That's Dr. Burns.
         What did Dr. Proctor tell you?  He told you
    about Dr. Doll and Dr. Peto's 50-year doctor
    study -- do you remember that -- and what those
    doctors found.
         Looking at what Peto and Doll found looking at
    doctors over a 50-year period, that on average smokers die ten years earlier than non-smokers; but,
    if they quit by age 34, they get all ten years back.
    Ms. Jordan turned 34 in 1983.
         If they quit by age 44, they get nine years
    back.  Ms. Jordan turned 44 in 1993.
         If Ms. Jordan had stopped smoking in 1970, when
    the warning was changed to say smoking is dangerous
    to your health, and when her dad died of emphysema
    from smoking, or if she quit in 1985, when the pack
    warning was changed to say smoking causes lung
    cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and quitting
    smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health,
    she would have avoided, basically, all of her
    smoking-related risk.  But, of course, she didn't
    quit.  She made a different decision.
         And only Ms. Jordan was in control of her
    decision to smoke or quit smoking.
         Members of the jury, the evidence is that
    Ms. Jordan always had the ability to quit.
    Unfortunately, she waited until her lungs were so
    damaged that she needed a transplant before she did
    quit.
         And that takes us to question 3:  Did Philip
    Morris do something wrong that caused Ms. Jordan to
    smoke and get sick? You know, I told you in opening statement that
    if you look back over the last 60 years at the
    millions of pages of documents written by the
    thousands of employees at Philip Morris, you would
    see that when those things were taken out of
    context, they look pretty bad.
         They made statements where they said smoking
    was not a proven cause of lung cancer, smoking was
    not addicting.  And I told you that the evidence
    would be that Philip Morris hung its hat on too many
    technical distinctions.  They held on to those views
    for way too long.
         And, you know, if you think about it, given the
    number of people who worked at Philip Morris over
    the last 60 years, is it surprising that some of
    them had some bad ideas?  And others, even with the
    best of intentions, made some mistakes?
         So what I told you I was going to do in opening
    statement, I said, you know, I'm going to do my best
    to give you the appropriate context to understand
    the documents and to understand what Philip Morris
    was saying and why they were saying it.
         So I want to show you and I want to talk about
    some of the documents.  I want you to think about
    the documents that plaintiff showed you and the way they showed them to you.
         First, a number of the documents that you saw
    are not even Philip Morris documents.  Ms. Shamp
    showed you documents from R. J. Reynolds Tobacco
    Company and British American Tobacco Company and
    Brown & Williamson Tobacco Company.  Those aren't
    Philip Morris documents.
         Those weren't written by Philip Morris
    employees.  They don't in any way represent what
    Philip Morris was thinking.  Those were R. J.
    Reynolds' and Brown & Williamson and B&W's private
    business records.  There was no evidence those
    companies shared those documents with Philip Morris.
    And there was no evidence that Ms. Jordan saw them
    or relied on them or that they influenced her
    decision in any way.
         Ms. Jordan has sued Philip Morris.  Why did
    Ms. Shamp spend so much time showing you documents
    written by other companies, companies who are not
    defendants in this case?
         And when Ms. Shamp did show you a Philip Morris
    document, she often either took it out of context or
    didn't tell you the whole story.  Let me give you
    just a few examples.
         In opening statement, Ms. Shamp told you that Philip Morris paid to have cigarettes or Marlboro
    signage placed in The Muppet Movie.  And she said
    that was a reason to punish Philip Morris and award
    Ms. Jordan punitive damages in this case.
         And I got up, and I told you that is absolutely
    not true.
         Then when Dr. Proctor took the stand, he told
    you, well, okay, Philip Morris did give cigarettes
    to the people who made the movie, but he conceded
    there is no and there was no Philip Morris products
    or Marlboro signage in The Muppet Movie.
         In fact, if you watch The Muppet Movie, you
    would never see any cigarettes.  There was no
    cigarette smoking in The Muppet Movie.
         Why did Ms. Shamp try to suggest otherwise?
    Why?  Because it would have been a very prevalent
    thing to do, but Philip Morris didn't do it.
         Ms. Shamp showed you a clip of Superman 2.  She
    showed you a picture of it in her closing argument
    that showed Marlboro product placement.
         Well, what you didn't learn in
    cross-examination is that Philip Morris USA, the
    defendant in this case, was not the company who
    contracted with the movie.  It was Philip Morris
    Europe, a completely different company. Why did plaintiff try to lead you to believe
    that the defendant in this case was responsible for
    something that it didn't do?
         Another example, and we saw this in closing
    argument when Ms. Shamp was telling you why Philip
    Morris should be punished, she showed you a couple
    of letters where Gus Wayne, an actor who portrayed
    Little Johnny, he suggested, hey, you know, how
    about I give candy cigarettes to little kids?  And
    some Philip Morris employee said, gee, that sounds
    like a good idea.
         What you learned in cross-examination is it
    didn't happen.  There is not one shred of evidence
    that Philip Morris ever gave candy cigarettes to
    anyone.
         And to make the point, I said to Dr. Proctor,
    Dr. Proctor, you first raised this in 2013.  You
    said there are millions of pages of documents.  And
    you agree there's not a shred of evidence that
    Philip Morris ever gave candy cigarettes to anyone?
    And don't you think if there was, that Proctor would
    have found it?
         So why was it suggested that Philip Morris did
    it?  Because we're protective of our children.
    Because Ms. Shamp is trying to appeal to your emotion.  Because she wants to make you mad.
         So when I was in law school, my trial practice
    professor said, here's the deal.  If you've got the
    facts, argue the facts.  Juries love the facts.  If
    you've got the law, argue the law.  Judges love the
    law.  If you don't have either, just make everybody
    as mad as you can.
         If Philip Morris had placed cigarette products
    in The Muppet Movie, if Philip Morris had given
    candy cigarettes to little kids, that would have
    been a very bad thing to do; but, what you learned
    when you had an opportunity to hear the other side
    of the story, Philip Morris didn't do it.
         Okay.  Here's the final example.  In her
    opening statement, Ms. Shamp showed you a quote from
    a Philip Morris document called "Motives," and a
    sentence that says:  "No one has ever become a
    smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine."
         And Ms. Shamp suggested in her opening
    statement that Philip Morris knew people smoked for
    nicotine and tried to hide that from the public.
         Well, frankly, that's just silly.  Dr. Proctor
    admitted that it's been known since the 1900s that
    smokers smoke for the pharmacological effects of
    nicotine. And I showed you, remember, with him, a number
    of scientific articles and just articles in regular
    magazines that talked about nicotine being an
    important reason why people smoke.
         So when Dr. Proctor took the stand, they used
    this same document, and they showed you this same
    quote, and they tried to make the same point.  "No
    one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking
    cigarettes without nicotine."
         They tried to suggest, see, we knew it.  We
    knew something.  Philip Morris knew something.  They
    didn't admit it.  They kept it secret.
         And you remember the rule of completeness?  The
    first time I tried to use it, I had the wrong
    document.  That was kind of embarrassing.
         The second time, they were using this document.
    And I said, for the rule of completeness, would you
    please show the last paragraph?  Because I knew that
    this document was from a public speech.  This wasn't
    a secret, hidden Philip Morris document.  It was a
    speech that Bill Dunn -- and you see some of his
    documents -- made in 1972 at a conference on why
    people smoke.
         And you heard Dr. Proctor tell you that people
    from The National Cancer Institute and the Surgeon General were in the audience and heard the speech.
         We then showed you this newspaper article, that
    after the speech Bill Dunn was interviewed by the
    local paper.  It was the Sunday edition, above the
    fold.
         And what did he say?  "Nicotine is an important
    reason why people smoke."
         And then I showed you the book, the book that
    Dr. Dunn -- that Bill Dunn put together.  And
    Dr. Proctor told you that this book has been cited
    in four different Surgeon General reports 12
    different times.
         You know, if Philip Morris was trying to hide
    the fact that they think it's -- the nicotine is an
    important reason why people smoke, they sure chose
    an odd way of doing it.
         Interestingly, you saw this document in opening
    statement, and you saw it in Dr. Proctor's
    testimony, but you did not see it today in closing
    argument.
         Now, one thing that both Dr. Burns and
    Dr. Proctor said that I agree with, and that is,
    context is important.  And let me be clear.  I'm not
    here to say Philip Morris did not do some dumb
    things, but plaintiff has to prove more than that Philip Morris said or did some dumb things to
    recover in this case.
         Plaintiff claims that Philip Morris fooled
    Ms. Jordan, and that she did not have the
    information she needed to make an informed decision
    whether to smoke or not smoke.
         And in order to recover in this case, plaintiff
    has to prove that Philip Morris actually did
    something legally wrong that affected Ms. Jordan.
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's not
    a proper standard for class membership.
         MR. COFER:  I'm not talking about class
    membership.
         MS. SHAMP:  In order for us to recover, we have
    to prove that.  It is, Your Honor.
         MR. COFER:  In order to --
         MS. SHAMP:  For us to recover, we have to prove
    class membership.
         THE COURT:  I'll overrule.  You can proceed,
    Mr. Cofer.
         MR. COFER:  When you get to the jury room, look
    at instruction number 3.  Instruction number 3 is
    where it lays out all of the claims that plaintiff
    is making in this case.
         At the end of that, it says they have to prove that they caused Ms. Jordan's COPD.  In this case,
    they can make claims all day, but they have to link
    the wrongful conduct, the conduct they think is
    wrongful, to Ms. Jordan.
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  We do not
    have to do that in order to prove class membership.
         MR. COFER:  This is basic causation, Your
    Honor.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, we don't have to prove
    causation in order to prove class membership.
         THE COURT:  I'm going to overrule.  Do you
    think we need to come over to sidebar?
         MR. COFER:  I don't think we do.
         THE COURT:  I'm going to overrule.
         MR. COFER:  Okay.  We're going to talk more
    about this, but let me tell you this.  You have the
    jury instructions.  And throughout this closing
    argument, I'm going to walk through some of the jury
    instructions with you.  I'm going to talk with you
    about what it is plaintiff has to prove.  I'm going
    to talk with you specifically about what the
    plaintiff has to prove with respect to class
    membership, okay?  And so we'll go through that and
    refer to some of the jury instructions.
         All right.  So Ms. Shamp argued that Philip Morris, among other things, hid the risks of smoking
    from Ms. Jordan, and that she didn't have the
    information that she needed to make an informed
    decision whether to smoke or not smoke.
         So let's look at the evidence.  You know, I
    showed you on the timeline, and Ms. Shamp mentioned
    this in her opening as well, her closing as well,
    starting in the early 1950s, before Ms. Jordan was
    even born, studies were being published that linked
    cigarette smoking with lung cancer.
         And you know from Dr. Proctor, these studies
    were widely reported in the press, in newspapers, in
    magazines, and on television.
         And you heard about the famous mouse skin
    painting study in 1953, December of 1953, how Ernst
    Wynder and Evarts Graham painted tobacco condensate
    on the back of mice, and it produced skin tumors.
    And you heard that was a big deal and got a ton of
    attention.
         Here's an example of how it was in LIFE
    magazine.  I think I also showed you when it was on
    TV in 1955, on the See It Now program.  And we know
    for a fact that these studies were getting a lot of
    attention and people were talking about them because
    in June of 1954, there was a national poll that asked have you heard or read anything recently to
    the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of
    cancer of the lungs, and 90 percent said yes.
         Think about that.  What question could you
    possibly ask the public today where 90 percent would
    say yes?  I wouldn't think very many things.
         Ms. Jordan was five years old at the time, and
    that was years before she tried her first cigarette.
         Ten years later, in 1964, the Surgeon General
    of the United States published its landmark report
    announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was a
    prudent cause of lung cancer.  And plaintiff's own
    experts, both Burns and Proctor, told you it was a
    big deal and got a ton of publicity.  It was
    literally front page news.
         It was the lead story on the night of the
    newscast.  It was on the front page of the
    newspapers across the country.  It was in the weekly
    magazines, like TIME and Newsweek.  And here's a
    report of how it was covered on CBS News with Harry
    Reasoner.
         (A video clip was played and transcribed by the
    court reporter to the best of her ability as
    follows:)
         "MR. REASONER:  This is a CBS News Extra, On Smoking and Health, the findings of the Surgeon
    General committee.
         "Almost from the moment that cigarettes were
    introduced, they were attacked, but the attack took
    a new turn 10 years ago, and culminated in the entry
    of a report by the Surgeon General's Committee.
    This, in summary, is what the Committee says:
         "Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung
    cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the
    same way.  Cigarette smoking is a significant cause
    of cancer of the larynx and probably the most
    important cause of chronic bronchitis.
         "Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung
    diseases.  Male smokers have a much higher death
    rate from heart disease, although it's not proven
    that smoking is the cause.
         "On the question of filters, the Committee said
    there is no evidence that they do any good, but it
    didn't exclude the possibility that an effective
    filter might be developed.  In short, the Committee
    says, if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your
    chances of dying early.  The sooner you start, the
    more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your
    chances are.
         "The Surgeon General's Committee presented its report at a news conference in Washington."
         "UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER:  After long and
    exhaustive deliberations, the Committee has reached
    the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a
    health hazard of sufficient importance to the United
    States to warrant remedial action.
         "This overall judgment was supported by many
    converging lines of evidence, as well as by data
    indicating that cigarette smoking is relating to
    higher death rates in a number of disease
    categories.
         "More specifically, the committee states on
    page 61 of the report, and I quote, 'In view of the
    continuing and mounting evidence from many sources,
    it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette
    smoking contributes substantially to mortality from
    certain specific diseases and to the overall death
    rate."
         "MR. REASONER:  Cigarettes have been an
    intimate and reassuring companion.  The familiar
    slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of
    our lives.  It's like being told that an old friend
    has all along been betraying you.  In a case like
    that, you give the old friend every possible chance
    before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then you give him a chance
    to reform.
         "In this time of our country, it comes down to
    you, whether you like it or not.  No one is going to
    forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear
    that no one is going to tell him it's good for him
    either.  The decision is his.  The decision and the
    health that may depend on it.
         "This is Harry Reasoner.  Good night."
         (Video clip ends.)
         MR. COFER:  That's how it was covered on CBS.
    There was comparable coverage on both ABC and NBC as
    well.
         Elaine Jordan was 14 years old at the time, and
    this was right around the time she tried her first
    cigarette at the carnival with some friends.
         Now, of course, this would not have prevented
    her from trying the cigarette.  She was 14 years
    old.  She was with some friends.  There was peer
    pressure.  And so she made the decision to smoke a
    cigarette.
         The fact is, from the time Ms. Jordan first put
    a cigarette in her mouth, it was open, and there was
    tons of information, and it was tons of news that
    cigarette smoking was linked with lung cancer and other diseases.
         Now, Ms. Shamp argued that Philip Morris denied
    that smoking was addictive.  Well, let's see what
    the Surgeon General had to say.
         You heard in 1964 the Surgeon General
    considered the evidence at the time and concluded
    that smoke was not addicting.  And the main reason
    why is because the definition at the time required
    that cigarette smoking be intoxicating, and
    cigarette smoking is not intoxicating.
         So based on the definition at the time, the
    Surgeon General said smoking is not addictive; but,
    the Surgeon General was quick to say the fact that
    it's not addicting doesn't mean it can't be hard to
    quit.
         Dr. Proctor told you people have known for
    hundreds of years it can be hard to quit, whether
    you call it a habit, an addiction, a dependence or
    whatever.
         It wasn't until 1988, 24 years later, that the
    Surgeon General adopted a different definition and
    determined that cigarette smoking is, in fact,
    addictive.
         So as a result of the hearing, what happened?
    Congress got involved.  They passed a federal cigarette labeling act that required warning labels
    to go on every pack of cigarettes sold in this
    country effective January 1, 1966.
         Congress told the companies exactly what the
    warning will say, how big it would be, the font they
    would use, and where it would be located.
         Now, what was Ms. Jordan doing at about that
    time?  This was -- she was pregnant with her son,
    Tim.  She gave birth to Tim on September 25, 1966.
    And this was around the time that she became a
    regular smoker.
         So there are people who start smoking before
    the warning label goes on the pack; but, Members of
    the Jury, Ms. Jordan wasn't one of them.
         She became a regular smoker when she was
    pregnant with her son Tim.  She gave birth to Tim on
    September 25, 1966.  And this warning label went on
    the pack on January 1, 1966.
         Make no dispute, Ms. Jordan said, I saw this
    warning, I just didn't pay any attention to it.
         In the 1960s and 1970s, the public health
    community, the American Cancer Society, the American
    Lung Association, the American Heart Association,
    ran a number of public service announcements telling
    the public that smoking was deadly and caused disease.
         Let me show you a couple examples.  Here's one
    with Bill Talman, a prosecutor on Perry Mason.
         (A video clip was played and transcribed by the
    court reporter to the best of her ability as
    follows:)
         "MR. TALMAN:  This is the house we live in.
    There's Billy.  He's running (inaudible) around.
    Stevie, home from college.  Barbie, looking after
    her brother Timmy.  Debbie, who will soon graduate
    from high school.  Susan, our youngest.  And my
    wife, Peggy, who looks after all of us.
         "And that's me, Billy Talman, with a friend of
    mine you might recognize.  You know, I didn't really
    mind losing those courtroom battles, but I'm in a
    battle right now I don't want to lose at all.
    Because if I lose it, it means losing my wife and
    those kids you just met.
         "I've got lung cancer.  So take some advice
    about smoking and losing from someone who's been
    doing both for years.  If you don't smoke, don't
    start.  If you do smoke, quit.  Don't be a loser."
         (Video clip ends.)
         MR. COFER:  Let me show you another one that's
    even more poignant.  And this is one that was recorded before Yul Brynner passed and was played
    after he died.
         You may remember Yul Brynner was a very, very
    popular actor back in the day.  He did The King and
    I.  He was in a number of movies, and he was much
    loved.
         (A video clip was played and transcribed by the
    court reporter to the best of her ability as
    follows:)
         "SPEAKER:  Ladies and gentlemen, the late Yul
    Brynner."
         "MR. BRYNNER:  I really wanted to make a
    commercial when I discovered that I was that sick
    and my time was so limited.  I wanted to make a
    commercial that says, simply, now that I'm gone, I
    tell you, don't smoke.  Whatever you do, just don't
    smoke.  If I could take back that smoking, we
    wouldn't be talking about any cancer.  I'm convinced
    of that."
         (Video clip ends.)
         MR. COFER:  Dr. Proctor told you that these
    public service announcements started in the sixties
    s and seventies.  That was one that was done in
    1985.
         Dr. Proctor told you he thought these PSAs were particularly effective in causing millions and
    millions of people to quit smoking.  He thought, in
    fact, they were even more effective than the
    warning.
         Four years later, in 1970, Congress amended the
    federal cigarette labeling act in regard to a new
    warning.  For the next 15 years, this warning
    appeared on every pack of cigarettes sold in this
    country:  "Warning:  The Surgeon General has
    determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to
    your health."
         At the same time this warning went on, that's
    the year that Ms. Jordan's dad died of a stroke and
    emphysema from smoking.  Ms. Jordan said, again, she
    remembers this warning, but she just didn't pay any
    attention to it, and she made no effort to quit.
         She was a 21-year-old woman and mother of two.
    She wasn't that 14-year-old kid anymore.  She was an
    adult.  She was a mom.  She was a mother of two.
    And her dad had just died from emphysema from
    smoking, and she made no effort to quit.
         11 years later, in 1981, Dr. Burns gave a
    speech at the lung association.  And you know what
    he said?  This is 1981.  "95 percent of smokers are
    thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking, and 90 percent thought it might affect their own
    health."
         So you've heard different evidence about what
    people heard, what they believed.  Ms. Shamp talked
    a little bit about that in her closing.  But what
    did Burns say?  What did Dr. Burns say in 1981, not
    in the context of a lawsuit, but speaking to the
    lung association.
         Burns said in 1981:  95 percent of the people
    have heard, and 90 percent think it may be affecting
    their own health.
         Ms. Jordan was 32 years old.
         In 1985, the warning changed again.  This time,
    Members of the Jury, the warning specifically said:
    "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease,
    emphysema, may complicate pregnancy, and that
    quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to
    health."
         So we know for a fact that the public was being
    warned that smoking causes emphysema and other
    diseases, and that quitting smoking greatly reduces
    risk to health.  And we know that Ms. Jordan saw
    those warnings, too.  Unfortunately, she chose not
    to act on it.
         Now, Ms. Shamp talked a lot about filtered and light cigarettes.  She argued that Ms. Jordan smoked
    filters and lights because Philip Morris fooled her
    into thinking they were safer.
         And in closing argument, Ms. Shamp said it was
    the ads.  She relied on the ads.  The ads caused her
    to smoke filters, and the ads caused her to smoke
    Marlboro Lights.
         Well, let's talk about what Ms. Jordan said.
    She testified that she's always smoked a filter, so
    she never switched from an unfiltered to a filtered.
         And she testified that when she started smoking
    filters, health concerns had nothing to do with her
    decision to smoke filtered cigarettes.
         Do you remember why she wanted filters?  To
    keep the tobacco out of her mouth.  She never said
    that ads caused her to smoke the filters because she
    thought they were safer.  She said health concerns
    had nothing to do with it.  She wanted to keep the
    tobacco out of her mouth.
         She did testify that she switched to Marlboro
    Lights because they had less tar and nicotine, so
    she thought they would be better for her.  But she
    admitted by that time her doctors were telling her
    to quit smoking, and that no doctor ever told her to
    switch to lights. And she also testified that when she switched
    to lights, she started smoking more cigarettes.  She
    said she smoked an additional half to a pack a day.
    But even though she said she switched to lights to
    get less tar and nicotine, it never occurred to her
    that by smoking more cigarettes she was defeating
    the purpose of switching.
         Now, think about that.  Ms. Shamp said
    something about one of the great assets of juries is
    your collected common sense.  Think about that.
    It's like the guy who says, you know, instead of
    drinking a 12-ounce can of beer, I'm just going to
    drink two six-ounces instead.  You're getting the
    same beer.
         And it's worth noting that when Marlboro Lights
    came out, cigarette ads were no longer allowed on TV
    or radio.  You've heard some TV ads.  Remember,
    Dr. Proctor told you that January 2, 1971, all the
    ads were taken off the airways.  And Marlboro Lights
    didn't come out until then.
         And, in fact, in 1972, all of the print ads
    were required to have the Surgeon General's warning.
         So by the time Ms. Jordan switched to Marlboro
    Lights, there weren't any TV ads, and there were
    warning labels on every ad that she could have seen. So let's talk a minute, though, about what the
    public was being told about filters and light
    cigarettes.  I told you this in opening statement.
         Members of the Jury, the evidence was that
    Philip Morris didn't tell the public that lights and
    filters were safer.  The Surgeon General and the
    public health community told the public that filters
    and lights were safer.  The thinking was, since tar
    is bad, less tar is less bad.
         And it's undisputed that all the cigarettes had
    the same warnings.  But what the Surgeon General
    said is, if you want to avoid the risk of
    cigarettes, quit.  But if you're not going to quit,
    you should switch to lower tar cigarettes.
         And the reason why he said that is because
    there were dozens of epidemiological studies that
    were published by public health scientists that
    reported that people who smoked filtered cigarettes
    got less lung cancer than those who didn't.
         And it was in the Surgeon General's reports.  I
    showed Dr. Proctor, like, three Surgeon General's
    reports, but here's a 1989 report where they're
    reporting on the data for the studies.
         And so what did Dr. Proctor say?  Well, that's
    what they believed.  That's what they thought the study showed, but they were all wrong.  They were
    all wrong.
         So I said, well, look, here's from the World
    Health Organization in 2003 and 2012.  Three years
    ago, the World Health Organization is still saying
    that lower tar cigarettes and filtered cigarettes
    produce lower levels of disease than non-filtered
    cigarettes.  It was the public health community, not
    Philip Morris.
         Now, let's talk for a moment ago about ammonia
    and additives.  Ms. Shamp mentioned that in her
    closing argument.
         And Dr. Proctor told you that ammonia compounds
    were the secret that sold Marlboro; but, then on
    cross-examination he admitted, well, ammonia does
    occur naturally in the tobacco plant.
         And it's been public knowledge that Philip
    Morris has used ammonia compounds in some of its
    products since at least the 1960s.  Philip Morris
    has had patents since the 1960s, public patents
    saying they used ammonia compounds and reconstituted
    tobacco.
         You also learned from Dr. Proctor that Philip
    Morris and the other companies worked with The
    National Cancer Institute.  They used ammonia compounds to try to make safer cigarettes.  You
    remember that discussion?  The idea was, if you
    could find a way to get smokers the nicotine they
    want, and not the tar -- because it's the tar that
    causes disease, the nicotine is the important reason
    people smoke -- and so if you could find a way to
    get the nicotine from the bound to the unbound
    state, maybe you could make a safer cigarette.
         And so everyone knew about free nicotine and
    about ammonia.  And they actually worked with the
    National Cancer Institute to see if they could make
    a safer cigarette.
         But here's the bottom line, Dr. Proctor
    admitted that cigarettes with ammonia compounds and
    cigarettes with additives are no more or less
    addictive than cigarettes without ammonia and
    without additives.
         Dr. Proctor told you, additive-free cigarettes
    cause cancer and are addictive, and cigarettes with
    additives cause cancer and are addictive.  What
    Proctor told you was it's not the additives, it's
    the tobacco.
         And do you want to know something else?  If you
    want to know today what additives Philip Morris uses
    in its products, go to its website, and you can punch on by brand, and it will tell you the
    ingredients that go in the cigarettes that Philip
    Morris makes.
         So the reporter asked me to give her a head
    sign about an hour in if I'm going to switch to
    another topic.  We're going to take a break, and
    when we come back, I'm going to talk with you about
    one of the most important issues in this case, when
    did Ms. Jordan's COPD first manifest.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
         MR. COFER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         All right.  So let's talk about one of the most
    important issues in the case.  When did
    Mrs. Jordan's COPD first manifest?  And the jury
    instructions that you need to focus on when you're
    back there in deliberations are Instruction 10,
    which tells you that one of the things plaintiff has to prove in order to be a member of the class is
    that her -- she manifested chronic obstructive lung
    disease by November 21st, 1996.  Jury
    Instruction Number 11, I'll show you, and that's the
    test for manifestation.  And then Instruction 13 is
    one for statute of limitations.  So when you get
    back there, it's 10, it's 11 and it's 13 that'll
    give you the information on this issue.
         All right.  So let's talk about it.  In order
    to recover in this case, you must find that
    Mrs. Jordan's COPD manifested between May 5th, 1990,
    and November 21st, 1996.  If her COPD manifested
    before May 5th, 1990, it's barred by the statute of
    limitations.  If it manifested after November 21st,
    1996, she isn't a class member.  And I'm going to go
    through this in great detail.  But, for example, if
    what she told Dr. Ticknor in her CME that her
    disease manifested in the late 1980s, if you believe
    that, she's barred by the statute of limitations.
         If you believe -- and we'll talk about why
    diagnosis is important -- that it first manifested
    when she was diagnosed in '98 or '99, then she's not
    a class member.  Okay?  So that's kind of the
    framework.  I'm going to walk through it.  I know it
    sounds kind of confusing.  But we'll just go through it.
         But the bottom line is in order to recover in
    this case, you have to find that her COPD manifested
    between May 5th, 1990, and November 21st, 1996.  And
    that is why plaintiff is trying so hard to persuade
    you that her COPD manifested in 1993 because that
    would put it in the window.
         But the problem is there is no credible
    evidence that that happened.  So let's talk about
    the evidence.  There is no question that Mrs. Jordan
    has COPD, and there is no question she had COPD
    before November 21st, 1996.  But that's not the
    test.  The Court has now instructed you on the test,
    the definition of manifestation.
         So what does plaintiff have to prove?  And this
    is Instruction Number 11.  She has to prove that her
    COPD first manifested on or before November 21st
    and -- or COPD first manifested itself on or before
    November 21st, 1996, if she knew or in the exercise
    of reasonable care should have known before that
    date that she had COPD and that there was a
    reasonable probability that it was caused by
    cigarette smoking.  Okay.
         So if everyone agrees that she had COPD by
    1996; Mrs. Jordan already had it, does that mean it manifested?  The answer is no.  The issue isn't just
    when she had it; it's when she knew she had it or
    should have known she had it and it was caused by
    smoking.  And Mrs. Jordan has consistently testified
    that she had no idea that her smoking was harming
    her until she was diagnosed with COPD.  That is why
    the date of diagnosis is such a key fact.
         Let me say that again.  The test is not just
    whether she had it but whether she had it and she
    knew or should have known she had it and it was
    caused by cigarette smoking.  And she has said, I
    had no idea smoking was harming me until I was
    diagnosed.  That's why the date of diagnosis is so
    critical.  Okay?  So let's talk about that.
         In her opening statement, Ms. Shamp told you,
    in September 1993, when she was 44 years old,
    Mrs. Jordan collapsed, unable to breathe, unable to
    catch her breath.  She was taken to Baptist Hospital
    and diagnosed with COPD.  Ms. Shamp then said in
    1999, she collapsed again and was referred to
    Dr. Rothstein, who's a pulmonologist.
         Members of the jury, there is simply no
    credible evidence that either of those things ever
    happened.  In fact, Mrs. Jordan, herself, testified
    she has no recollection of collapsing and being rushed to that hospital in 1999, so I don't know
    where anyone ever came up with that suggestion.
         But here's the deal.  Until Ms. Shamp's opening
    statement in this trial, no one anytime, anywhere,
    ever testified or suggested that Mrs. Jordan
    collapsed in 1993 and was diagnosed with COPD at
    Baptist Hospital.
         There's no mention of Mrs. Jordan ever
    collapsing and being diagnosed with COPD at Baptist
    Hospital in any of the medical records or the
    depositions or the interrogatories or the interviews
    in this case with Ticknor or Blank, not one, not a
    hint, not a suggestion.  Mrs. Jordan never told
    Dr. Tecson, Dr. Rothstein or any of her doctors at
    the Mayo that that happened.  Mrs. Jordan did not
    tell Dr. Blank, the expert they hired to testify on
    her behalf, that that happened.  Mrs. Jordan did not
    tell Dr. Ticknor that that happened.
         At trial, I read Mrs. Jordan's deposition and
    asked her about it, where she was specifically
    asked, "How did you learn you had COPD?
         "How did I learn?  When the doctor -- I was
    getting to where I couldn't breathe and had to go to
    the doctor.  And it just kept getting worse."
         There was no mention of a collapse and rushed to Baptist Hospital.
         "My breathing was getting worse and worse, and
    I had to go to the doctor and I was diagnosed."
         Nowhere in Mrs. Jordan's sworn deposition does
    she ever say she collapsed, was diagnosed with COPD
    at Baptist Hospital in 1993 or at any other time.
    Nowhere in her answers to interrogatories does she
    say she collapsed and was diagnosed with COPD at
    Baptist Hospital in 1993 or at any other time.
         Now, at trial, for the very first time, she
    testified she was diagnosed at Baptist Hospital in
    1993 by Dr. Clower, and in fairness, in one place in
    her deposition, she was asked:  "Who was the doctor
    who first informed you that you had COPD?
         "I thought it could have been Rothstein but I'm
    not sure about that.
         "Okay.
         "It could have been Clower.  I'm just not sure
    about it."
         But then we had the written interrogatories,
    where she said that she was diagnosed with COPD in
    '95 by Dr. Rothstein, not Clower, not Baptist
    Hospital, not 1993.  '95 by Dr. Rothstein.
         She told Dr. Ticknor in the CME -- and, again,
    we talked about this a little while ago this morning.  "So what point did a doctor say to you,
    Mrs. Jordan, I think you have COPD?
         "'93.  Somewhere around '93.
         "'93.
         "Okay.
         "And that would have been Rothstein."
         Mrs. Jordan told Dr. Tecson on October 24th,
    '88, she had an asthma attack in 1993.  So we're
    going to talk about the Tecson record.
         And in June of 1999, she told Rothstein she had
    been experiencing shortness of breath for about a
    month and a half and had been coughing up blood.
    She told him that she had asthma for about ten
    years.  "Mrs. Jordan has been having trouble with
    progressive shortness of breath for about the last
    month to month and a half.  She was told she has
    asthma in the past and has been using a
    ventilate" -- it should be Ventolin inhaler -- "for
    the last ten years."
         But she never said anything to Dr. Rothstein
    about having been diagnosed with COPD in 1993 or at
    any time, anywhere by anybody.  And Dr. Rothstein
    said he would have asked her.
         Remember, I asked him.  I said:
    "Dr. Rothstein, you have nothing in your records about her telling you that she had ever been
    diagnosed before?"
         He said:  "That's right."
         I said:  "You would have asked her, right?"
         And he said:  "Well, probably."
         I said:  "Well, of course you would have.  You
    diagnosed her with severe COPD.  Wouldn't you ask
    her, my God, had you ever been diagnosed with COPD
    before?  You would have wanted to get those records,
    right?  COPD's a progressive disease.  You want to
    know how bad the disease is progressing, right?"
         He said:  "Yes.
         "And you didn't get any records because she
    never told you she had been diagnosed before,
    right?"
         And he said:  "That's right."
         Members of the jury, there's simply no credible
    evidence that Mrs. Jordan was diagnosed with COPD in
    1993, and all of the credible evidence is to the
    contrary.
         Now, it's true that Tonya Spencer testified her
    mother was diagnosed with COPD in 1993.  But she
    never said anything about her mother collapsing and
    being diagnosed at the hospital.  And importantly --
    check your notes on this -- Ms. Spencer testified that her mother was using inhalers in 1991 when
    Ms. Spencer's daughter was born.  That's not what
    Mrs. Jordan said.
         Mrs. Jordan testified the first time she was
    ever prescribed an inhaler was December 1993, two
    months after she was taken to Baptist Hospital.  So
    Tonya's testimony about when her mother was first on
    inhalers -- you remember, her mom said, "I didn't
    get inhalers until I was diagnosed."  Tonya Spencer
    said her mother was on inhalers in '91 when her
    daughter was born.  So Tonya Spencer and
    Mrs. Jordan's testimony contradict one another on a
    very key issue in this case.
         In addition, on cross examination, Mrs. Jordan
    testified no one in her family knew that she was
    diagnosed with COPD in 1993 because she didn't tell
    them, because she didn't want them to know.  Well,
    first question is why not?  I mean, how would your
    spouse not know?  I mean, how would you not know if
    your spouse has collapsed and taken to the hospital
    and diagnosed with COPD?  How would you not know?
    But if that's true and she didn't tell her family,
    then how did Tonya Spencer know?  I mean, how could
    Tonya -- she didn't go to the hospital, and
    Mrs. Jordan said she didn't tell her family.  Yet Tonya Spencer came in and said, "Oh, yeah, Mom was
    diagnosed in '93."
         Members of the jury, Mrs. Jordan's own
    testimony is the only evidence in this case that she
    was diagnosed between May 5, 1990, and November
    21st, 1996.
         Now, what we do know is that she told
    Dr. Tecson she had an asthma attack in 1993.  But
    there's no evidence that she had a PFT.  And both
    Rothstein and Dr. Frazier told you, you can only
    diagnose COPD with a PFT.  So you remember
    Dr. Rothstein, and he did say:  "I think she was
    diagnosed in 1993."
         And I said:  "Well, Doctor, it's true, isn't
    it, that you cannot diagnose COPD without a PFT?"
         He said:  "That's right."
         I said, "Doctor, there's no evidence of her
    ever having a PFT before June of 1999?"
         He said:  "That's right."
         Think about that.  Dr. Rothstein is trying to
    help Mrs. Jordan out, and he understands it's
    critical to put the diagnosis in this period.  So he
    just gives an opinion.  "Okay.  Yeah, she's
    diagnosed in '93."
         I said:  "Well, let's talk about that.  You can't diagnose without a PFT, right?
         "That's right.
         "Did she have a PFT in '93?
         "I've never seen it.
         "Have you ever seen a PFT before 1999?
         "No, I haven't."
         I don't have the instruction in front of me,
    but there's an instruction about the credibility of
    experts.  And it says it's not just what they say;
    it's why they say it.
         And I'll tell you, you know, Rothstein's
    obviously a well-credentialed physician here in
    Jacksonville, and he obviously cares about his
    patient in his care.  But he told you, you can't
    diagnose without a PFT, and he admitted he had no
    evidence there was ever one within the manifestation
    period.  So you should ignore his testimony on that
    point.
         So Mrs. Jordan said it happened.  But you know
    what?  We know that Mrs. Jordan suffers from both
    short-term and long-term memory loss.  I asked
    Mrs. Jordan about it, and Dr. Blank diagnosed her
    with the short-term and long-term memory loss.  And,
    members of the jury, you've seen, you know,
    throughout her case that her testimony has been inconsistent and it's been contradictory.  With all
    respect, Mrs. Jordan's testimony about the date of
    diagnosis is simply not credible, and it's
    contradicted by multiple independent and more
    reliable sources of proof.
         And let's just walk through that evidence.  The
    first medical record we had for Ms. Jordan is
    October 21st -- I'm sorry -- October 24th, 1998.
    Remember, she went to see Dr. Tecson, her family doc
    in Macclenny.  She had a headache and some vomiting,
    and she told him in 1998, had history of asthma
    attack five years ago.  She also -- well, we'll get
    to it.  I've got it up here.
         While the notes are a little confusing,
    Dr. Tecson testified that on that visit in October
    1998, he diagnosed her with COPD because of her
    smoking history.  Do you remember that?  We talked
    about that.  Tecson said he didn't do any kind of
    testing or X-rays.  He diagnosed Mrs. Jordan with
    COPD in October '98 simply because she was a
    smoker.
         And then he wrote -- and it should be on this
    record -- "had also" -- well, right after, it says
    "had also emphysema."
         Now, Ms. Shamp argued in her closing statement, Dr. Tecson said that she told him she had emphysema.
    That's what Ms. Shamp said.  She said it twice.  She
    said, we know she told Dr. Tecson that in addition
    to an asthma attack, she had emphysema.  That is not
    what Tecson said.
         Tecson said -- and you saw his deposition.  We
    brought Tecson to testify.  We are the ones who
    called her treating physician to testify.  You
    didn't hear Tecson in their case.  You remember, he
    had Rothstein relying on the record that said "had
    also emphysema."  And I said:  "Dr. Rothstein, did
    you read his deposition?"
         He said:  "No.  I just have the record."
         But when we called Tecson to testify, he said:
    "She told me she had an asthma attack.  I made an
    independent diagnosis of COPD just based on her
    clinical presentation.  She never told me she had
    emphysema five years ago."
         And we know that that's true because if she was
    telling her doctors she had COPD, why wouldn't she
    have told Rothstein that?
         Mrs. Jordan has consistently told her doctors
    that she's had asthma since at least the 1980s.  In
    fact, she used a Ventolin inhaler at least since the
    late 1980s. So in May 1999, Mrs. Jordan came back to
    Dr. Tecson.  She coughed up blood.  She was referred
    to Dr. Rothstein.  Remember, Mrs. Jordan stated in
    her interrogatories that it was Rothstein that first
    diagnosed her.  She said 1995.  We know they didn't
    meet until 1999, so we know that Mrs. Jordan's
    confused about that date.
         Mrs. Jordan filled out a new patient report,
    and here's what she wrote while she was there.
    "Coughing blood, asthma," coming from Dr. Tecson.
    She never says a word about COPD, right?
         So then Dr. Rothstein meets with her and he
    puts:  "Reason" -- "Referred by Tecson.  Reason for
    consultation, shortness of breath" -- bless you --
    "coughing up blood.  Mrs. Jordan's been having
    trouble with progressive shortness of breath for
    about last month to month and a half.  She was told
    she has asthma in the past and has been using an
    inhaler for about the last ten years."
         So this is a 1999 record where she tells him
    she's been using inhalers since about the late '80s.
    And she says, I have asthma, but she doesn't say a
    word about COPD or emphysema.  And this is her lung
    doctor, right?
         So Rothstein performs PFTs and based on those tests, he diagnoses her with severe COPD.  You heard
    both Frazier and Rothstein.  PFTs are the gold
    standard for diagnosing COPD.  It is undisputed in
    this case; you cannot diagnose COPD without a PFT.
    And there's no evidence, none, that she ever had a
    PFT before June of 1999.
         So she goes to Dr. Rothstein.  She's diagnosed
    with severe COPD and that is when she quits working
    at the sawmill.  In order to get temporary
    disability, they had to fill out some forms.  And
    this was completed and signed by both Mrs. Jordan
    and Dr. Rothstein.  And it says:  "Any person who
    knowingly files a statement of claim containing any
    misrepresentation or any false, incomplete or
    misleading information may be guilty of a criminal
    act punishable under law and may be subject to civil
    penalties.
         "When did symptoms" -- this is the part filled
    out by Dr. Rothstein's office and signed by
    Dr. Rothstein.  "When did symptoms first appear or
    accident happen?
         "May '99.
         "Has patient ever had same or similar
    condition?"
         And the answer is:  "No." "What was the standard patient's current
    diagnosis?
         "COPD."
         Now, there's some issue about prior primary and
    secondary diagnosis.  Primary diagnosis, COPD.
    That's why she needs disability because of COPD.
    Secondary diagnosis, coughing up blood.  You don't
    get disability for coughing up blood.  She got
    disability because she had COPD.  And both she and
    Dr. Rothstein signed and represented that symptoms
    began in May of '99 -- it's consistent with the
    records -- and she had never had a similar
    condition.
         This form was prepared nine years before this
    lawsuit was filed.  And both Dr. Rothstein and
    Mrs. Jordan clearly said symptoms began in May,
    never had same or similar conditions -- condition.
         You saw ten months later, they filled out
    another form to get more temporary disability.  They
    had the same information except this time there --
    Rothstein's office wrote down symptoms began in June
    instead of May, reflected the date that they first
    saw her.
         Now, you also saw medical records at the Mayo
    Clinic and prepared by Mrs. Jordan after she was diagnosed.  This is in her own handwriting.  "Please
    describe in the space to the right your main
    symptoms or problems and how long have you had them.
         "COPD, emphysema, four years."
         This is May of 2002.  This is when she's being
    considered for her lung transplant by the Mayo
    Clinic.  Don't you think that the health-care
    providers at the Mayo Clinic, if they're going to
    put someone on the lung transplant list, would do a
    thorough job investigating the person's history and
    how long they've been having lung issues and all of
    those things?
         And here in her own handwriting, it says:
    "COPD, four years."  Also circled asthma.
         You know, I'll show you other records.  Here's
    a representative example of four other records
    prepared by different health-care providers at the
    Mayo Clinic, all of which report that their
    information was she was diagnosed in '99.  None of
    these records, members of the jury, not Tecson's,
    not Rothstein's, not the Mayo Clinic, ever suggest
    that she was diagnosed in 1993 or she ever collapsed
    and was diagnosed at Baptist Hospital.
         Now, you heard Dr. -- or not Dr. -- you heard
    Gil Spruance, her life-care planner, take the stand. He told you that he interviewed Mrs. Jordan.  She
    told him that she was diagnosed in '93, and she
    missed a lot of work from 1993 to 1998 because of
    breathing problems.
         So I showed Mrs. Jordan's social security
    records.  And we can see from the Social Security
    records, in '1993 to '98 were her highest earning
    years.  She got paid by the hour.  They were her
    highest earning years.
         And so I -- I showed that to Mrs. Jordan.  I
    said:  "Mrs. Jordan, weren't you mistaken?  Because
    the social security records show that you must be
    working more hours so were you -- you're mistaken,
    right?"
         And you remember what she said?  She said that
    she was on the clock; she wasn't actually working.
    She was in the break room, not at the grading table.
         And I said:  "Really?  So all those years you
    weren't working, they paid you anyway?
         "Right.  I was on the job but I wasn't actually
    up there grading."
         Well, Champion must be an awfully generous
    employer.
         So here's the bottom line.  This is an Engle
    case and so that requires plaintiff to prove that her COPD manifested on or before November 21st,
    1996.  Since Mrs. Jordan claims that she had no idea
    that her smoking was harming her until she was
    diagnosed, that makes the date of diagnosis the key
    factual issue for manifestation.
         And it's clear that Mrs. Jordan was first
    diagnosed -- if you take the clinical diagnosis, it
    was 1998 by Dr. Tecson.  If you take the real
    diagnosis that both Rothstein and Dr. Frazier told
    you that a PFT is required, it wasn't until June
    1999.
         So the evidence is compelling, members of the
    jury, that Mrs. Jordan was not diagnosed and did not
    manifest within the manifestation window.  And for
    that reason alone, she's not a class member.
         So let's talk about statute of limitations.
    And I'm sure during the trial, you're wondering, why
    are they saying '99 and saying the '80s?  I mean,
    that doesn't make any sense.  I'm sure you were
    confused.  I couldn't wait, frankly, to finally have
    the time -- a chance to talk to you guys and tell
    you, here's why we're putting this evidence; here's
    how it's relevant.
         So let's talk about the statute of limitations.
         Now, it's true that in many cases, people can have or someone can have symptoms of COPD long
    before there's an actual diagnosis.  And that's
    because COPD is a progressive disease that reduces a
    person's lung function.  And for that matter, both
    Rothstein and Frazier, Bill Frazier, not Sandra
    Frazier, told you typically someone has diagnosable
    COPD long before they start experiencing symptoms.
    And remember, here's -- well, I'll take this down.
         There's the Fletcher/Peto.  It shows the
    natural history.  We all lose lung function over
    age.  Susceptible smokers lose it at a much faster
    rate.  You know, when they stop smoking, they go
    back to the normal rate of loss.  But the point is
    you don't usually get symptoms until you're down
    here somewhere.  It depends on your activity.  So
    you can have diagnosable COPD that's diagnosable on
    a PFT before you have symptoms.
         In June of 1999, when Dr. Rothstein gave
    Mrs. Jordan her PFT, he found she already had severe
    COPD.  She was down here.  A 50-year-old lady who
    you'd expect to have COPD right here, 50-year-old
    smoker, if the COPD was just caused by smoking.  But
    her lung function was down here.  So we know that
    she had COPD for a very long time, right?  Whether
    symptoms manifested, whether she recognized it, we know she had it.
         So you know Mrs. Jordan was asked -- when
    Dr. Ticknor did her CME, he -- he asked her a
    question.  He said:  "Okay.  I would like to clarify
    something with you.  At what point did you know that
    smoking was hazardous for your health?  For your
    health, not just in general.  But at what point did
    you realize, did you gain the knowledge that smoking
    was harming your health?"
         Let me stop for a minute before we go on.  You
    remember, we had Dr. Blank on the stand, and I said:
    "Dr. Blank, you're a forensic psychiatrist.  What is
    a forensic psychiatrist?  And, you know, can people,
    you know, remember things differently or kind of
    exaggerate the truth or whatever if there's money
    involved or if they had some sort of interest?"
         She goes:  "Yeah."
         So I said:  "Well, how do you guard against
    that?"
         She says, "Ask them open-ended questions.  You
    don't ask them leading questions to suggest the
    answer.  You try to ask the question in a way that
    you get, you know, the person's own story."
         So look at how that question is phrased.
    "Okay.  I would like to clarify something with you. At what point did you know that smoking was
    hazardous for your health?  For your health, not
    just in general.  But at what point did you realize,
    did you gain the knowledge that smoking was harming
    your health?"
         And she said:  "Around the end of the 1980s.
         "And how did you know that?"
         Again, open-ended, not a leading question.
         "I was getting sick from it.
         "Pardon?
         "I was getting sick where I couldn't breathe,
    coughing real bad.
         "And what health problems did you develop at
    the end of the '80s that you thought smoking was
    harming your health?
         "What health problems?  I just got where I
    couldn't breathe.  I was real tired and coughing
    real bad."
         Now, the circumstances of this interview was
    that Ms. Shamp, a court reporter, a videographer and
    Dr. Ticknor were in a room together.  No one from
    Philip Morris was there, and the doctor had an
    opportunity to examine and ask Mrs. Jordan
    questions, just like Dr. Blank had an opportunity to
    meet with Mrs. Jordan and ask her questions. So Dr. Ticknor asked her this open-ended
    question:  "When did you first realize smoking was
    harming your health?"
         She says:  "The '80s."
         Now, do you remember today in closing argument,
    Ms. Shamp said, we know that she was diagnosed in
    '93 because in '93 she switched to Marlboro Lights,
    and she switched to Marlboro Lights because she had
    COPD so she thought they'd be better.  That's what
    Ms. Shamp told you this morning.
         But what did Mrs. Jordan tell Dr. Ticknor?  "Do
    you remember -- do you remember about what year you
    switched to Marlboro Lights?"
         Again, that's a non-leading question.  He
    didn't say, did you switch to Marlboro Lights in
    1989?  He said:  "Do you remember about what year
    you switched to Marlboro Lights?
         "Yeah, the end of the '80s, '89, somewhere
    around there.
         "Question:  And tell me again why you switched.
         "Why did I switch?  Because I figured the
    lighters was better than the -- Marlboro regulars
    was, like, too strong, so I switched to lighters
    because I couldn't breathe.  So that would be better
    for me to smoke the lighter cigarettes, lower tar and everything going.  So I switched to the lights."
         So according to what Mrs. Jordan told
    Dr. Ticknor, that happened in the '80s.
         One more question.  So Dr. Ticknor said:
    "Okay.  Do you believe now, looking back on it, that
    you were addicted to nicotine in cigarettes?
         "Answer:  Oh, I know I was.
         "Question:  Okay.  When did you come to that
    understanding?  When did you gain the knowledge?
    When did you learn enough to say in retrospect, I
    now know that I was addicted to cigarettes?
         "Answer:  When I really got sick and I seen I
    could not get off cigarettes.
         "And when did you really get sick or -- and
    when did -- you really got sick was when?"
         And what did she say?  "In the late '80s.
         "When you really got sick?
         "When I really got sick, about the end of the
    '80s, up through the '80s."
         So members of the jury, four months ago,
    Mrs. Jordan told Dr. Ticknor in front of Ms. Shamp
    that by the late 1980s, she was sick from smoking.
    She switched to light cigarettes and she knew she
    was addicted.
         And she told you that she switched -- or she got an inhaler when she was diagnosed with COPD.
    And she told -- in June 1999, she told Dr. Rothstein
    she had been using the Ventolin inhaler for about
    ten years.
         You remember, I asked Dr. Rothstein about that.
    I said:  "Dr. Rothstein, it's your opinion she
    doesn't have asthma, right?"
         He goes:  "That's right."
         So remember, I read this to him.  I said:  "If,
    in fact, she were experiencing those symptoms in the
    '80s, what was it?"
         He said:  It was COPD."
         So here's the deal.  You know, you -- you're
    the judge of the facts.  If -- if you believe
    overall that what Mrs. Jordan told Dr. Ticknor is
    true, if you believe that's accurate, that in the
    1980s she knew her smoking was harming her, she was
    having the symptoms of COPD, the things she
    described, the breathing, the coughing, the
    weakness, the tired, that that's why she switched to
    lights, that's when she first got an inhaler, if you
    credit that testimony, then she's time-barred.
    That's Instruction 13.  If you credit that
    testimony, she time-barred, regardless when she's
    diagnosed. If you don't credit that testimony, then she
    wasn't diagnosed till '99.  But she said, I had no
    idea smoking was bad until I was diagnosed.
         So either it's '99 or if she really knew it was
    the late '80s, then someone, some doctor, presumably
    the doctor that prescribed her the inhaler, told
    her, of course, to quit smoking.  And according to
    what we know about the way COPD progresses and
    according to Dr. Rothstein, she would have been
    diagnosed with COPD.
         Okay.  So where are we?  You've heard three
    completely different versions of when Mrs. Jordan's
    COPD first manifested.
         Mrs. Jordan told Dr. Ticknor in April of this
    year that she knew her smoking was making her sick
    in the late '80s when she couldn't breathe and was
    coughing real bad.  Dr. Rothstein said, if
    Mrs. Jordan was having those problems in the '80s,
    they were caused by COPD.  So if you believe that's
    true, she is time-barred by the statute of
    limitations.  And when you get to that -- we'll talk
    about where that is on the verdict form.  So that's
    Version Number 1.
         Version Number 2, last week Mrs. Jordan
    testified for the very first time that she collapsed at work in 1993 and was rushed to Baptist Hospital
    and was diagnosed with COPD.  There is no
    corroborating evidence that that ever happened.
    And, in fact, in 1998, nine years before this case
    was filed, Mrs. Jordan told Dr. Tecson she had an
    asthma attack in 1993, not that she was -- collapsed
    and diagnosed with COPD.
         And finally, Version Number 3, Dr. Rothstein's
    medical records, the Mayo Clinic's medical records,
    the disability records that Rothstein and
    Mrs. Jordan completed, the undisputed fact that the
    first PFT was in June of 1999, and you cannot
    diagnose COPD without a PFT, the social security
    records all prove that Mrs. Jordan was diagnosed
    with COPD in 1999.  And since Mrs. Jordan had no
    idea smoking was harming her until she was
    diagnosed, her COPD did not manifest before November
    21st, 1996, and she's not a member of the Engle
    class.
         Okay.  So let's go to the verdict form.  And
    the first question is:  State whether Elaine Jordan
    is a member of the Engle class.
         So what does plaintiff have to prove to be a
    member of the Engle class?  It's actually -- if you
    look at Instruction 10 -- you don't need to look at it now -- but she has to prove by the greater weight
    of the evidence that she was addicted to cigarettes
    containing nicotine, that her chronic obstructive
    lung disease was caused by addiction to cigarettes
    and that she manifested chronic lung disease by
    November 21st.  We've talked about manifestation.
    Let's talk about the remaining elements.
         You know what?  I thought -- yeah, here it is.
    So what does she have to prove?  This is -- these
    are the remaining elements.
         Was Elaine Jordan, in fact, addicted to
    nicotine?  We'll talk about that.
         If she was addicted, was her addiction a legal
    cause of her COPD and emphysema?  You have to show
    both, not just that she was addicted, but her
    addiction was a legal cause.  As Ms. Shamp said in
    opening statement that she smoked because she was
    addicted.  That's why she smoked, because she was
    addicted.
         And, third, she has to show that cigarette
    smoking is what actually caused her COPD and
    emphysema.  So she has to show, in addition to
    manifestation, that she was, in fact, addicted; her
    addiction was a legal cause.  That's why she smoked.
    And I'll show you the instruction -- and that it was smoking that caused her COPD/emphysema.  So let's
    talk about those things.
         And let's start with addiction.  Was Elaine
    Jordan addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes?
    Well, the answer to that question depends on the
    definition you use.  There's no definition in the
    instructions.  You've heard the definition has
    changed over time.  You heard until 1988, the
    Surgeon General said smoking wasn't addicting.
    You've heard that since 1988, the Surgeon General
    said it is, and Philip Morris has had on its website
    since 2000 that it is.
         Dr. Blank told you that she's never met anyone
    who smoked more than five cigarettes a day that was
    not addicted.  And if you adopt that definition, she
    was addicted.
         Dr. Ticknor told you, no, under DSM-5, I have
    more rigorous requirements.  I look for more extreme
    examples.  I don't lightly diagnose somebody as an
    addict.  I think she had tobacco use disorder.  I
    don't think it rises to addiction.  That was his
    opinion.
         Dr. Frazier came in and said, no, I disagree
    with Ticknor; I agree with Blank.
         But here's the bottom line.  Regardless whether you think she was, in fact, addicted, I'm not sure
    it really matters very much because plaintiff has to
    prove more than that she was, in fact, addicted.
    She has to prove that her addiction was a legal
    cause of her COPD.  And the evidence was that
    it's not.  The law makes a distinction between
    something that is a cause in fact and something's a
    legal cause.
         And we talked about that both in voir dire and
    opening statement.  You remember?  I gave you an
    example of a guy that got hit by the truck.  You
    know, what was the cause in fact; what was the legal
    problem.
         Let me give you a better example.  So here in
    Florida, we all love our beaches, and -- but when we
    go to the doctor, the doctor says, put on sunscreen.
    Wear long-sleeved shirts.  You know, be careful.
    Wear a hat and all that sort of stuff.  So suppose a
    man goes to the doctor and the doctor's checking him
    out, says, hey, you've got a little spot on your
    skin.  You know, it's not a big deal.  On your way
    out, stop at the receptionist, and let's make an
    appointment to take that off.  And he doesn't do
    it.
         So six months later, he comes back, and the doctor says, hey, I thought we were going to take
    care of that?  You've got a skin cancer.  Now, it's
    not a big deal.  You're going to scar.  You've got
    to cut it out.  But stop on your way out and tell my
    receptionist.  Let's get an appointment to get it
    taken off and he doesn't do it.
         Six months later, he comes back.  Doctor, I
    don't feel good at all.  Doctor says, oh, my God,
    you've got a malignant melanoma.  It started on
    your arm.  It spread throughout your body and it's
    bad.
         What's the cause in fact of melanoma?  The sun.
    What's the legal cause?  He didn't take care of
    business and he ignored his doctor's advice.
         You know, from the time Mrs. Jordan became a
    regular smoker, the warning was already on the pack.
    In 1970, just a few years after she became a regular
    smoker, the warning changed, became stronger, said,
    smoking's dangerous, and her dad died of emphysema
    from smoking.  And Mrs. Jordan didn't try to quit.
         In 1985, the warning labels were changed to
    say, smoking causes emphysema.  Quitting smoking now
    greatly reduces serious risk to health.  But she
    ignored those warnings, too.
         Clearly Mrs. Jordan has demonstrated that she has the ability to refrain from smoking and that
    nicotine does not compel her to smoke because on
    February 27th, 2002, she put the cigarettes down and
    never picked up one again.  Until this very day, in
    13 years, she hasn't smoked a single cigarette, even
    though her family smoked around her.  Blank says
    it's virtually impossible to stay quit if somebody
    smokes around you but she's done it.
         She told you till February 27th, 2002, she
    never went a single day without a cigarette.  Even
    when she said she wanted to quit, she would smoke a
    cigarette in the morning.  But Dr. Ticknor told
    you -- and this is not, you know, rocket science --
    that a serious quit attempt is defined as 24 hours.
    I mean, if you're not willing to go 24 hours -- I
    mean, how serious are you if you're not willing to
    go 24 hours?  Until she quit, she didn't.
         So here's the instruction.  An addiction to
    cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of
    Mrs. Jordan's COPD if it directly and in natural and
    continuous sequence produced or contributed
    substantially to producing Mrs. Jordan's COPD so it
    can reasonably be said but for that addiction, her
    COPD would not have occurred.
         The instruction the plaintiff showed you was the second paragraph of the legal instruction.
    That's the concurring cause instruction.  They
    didn't show you this one.  The one they showed you
    just said it doesn't have to be the only cause.
         But here's the deal.  You have to decide, for
    it to be a legal cause, that her addiction is so
    strongly substantiated that but for her addiction,
    her COPD would not have occurred, whereas Ms. Shamp
    said that she smoked because she was addicted.
         Ms. Shamp told you the ability to quit has
    nothing to do with whether you're addicted.  It has
    a whole lot to do with whether addiction is a legal
    cause.  If an addiction doesn't prevent you from
    quitting, if you can set them down anytime, if you
    don't smoke because you're addicted, if it doesn't
    compel you to smoke, that is not a legal cause.
         And let me tell you, all the experts agree, all
    of them, that all smokers, including addicted
    smokers, have the ability to quit.  Where is the
    evidence that Mrs. Jordan was any different than the
    60 million people in this country who quit?  There
    was none.  Whether a smoker quits depends on whether
    she wants to, whether she wants to quit more than
    she wants to smoke.
         And that's what Dr. Blank told you.  Remember my last few questions of Dr. Blank.  And I said:
    "Doctor, a smoker quits when it's more important not
    to smoke than it is to -- to smoke, right?"
         She said:  "That's right."
         And I said:  And the fact is if that were in
    2002, Mrs. Jordan's motivation to quit smoking
    finally overcame her desire to smoke and she quit
    and never smoked again."
         So here the evidence is compelling, as a jury,
    that an addiction to nicotine did not prevent
    Mrs. Jordan from quitting.
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's not
    the standard.
         MR. COFER:  I'll rephrase.
         THE COURT:  All right.
         MR. COFER:  Look at the instruction.  Use your
    common sense.  Look at the evidence.  I think it's
    pretty clear that plaintiff has not met her burden
    of proving that an addiction to nicotine was a legal
    cause of her continuing smoking.
         Okay.  But then you get to the third thing --
    actually the fourth thing.  So you have to prove
    manifestation.  You have to prove you were, in fact,
    addicted.  You had to prove that addiction was a
    legal cause.  And then you still have to prove that smoking is what actually caused the COPD.
         So what was the evidence?  You heard from Bill
    Frazier, the quadruple-boarded pulmonologist from
    Jackson, Mississippi, and Kurt Stonesifer, the
    board-certified pathologist from Tampa who took the
    stand yesterday.  They told you this:  They said,
    sure, Mrs. Jordan has COPD.  She has severe COPD.
    But she has three independent risk factors, each of
    which can cause and can contribute to cause COPD.
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor, based on the
    Court's ruling on the motion in limine.
         THE COURT:  Why don't we come over to sidebar?
         (A sidebar conference was held outside the
hearing of the jury as follows:)
         THE COURT:  If you could refresh my memory.
    Quite candidly, I don't remember.
         MS. SHAMP:  When -- when -- when you said that
    Dr. Frazier could not testify that wood dust was an
    independent risk factor for causing COPD.  And what
    he just said is that the three -- that they both
    said that she had three independent risk factors for
    it.
         THE COURT:  Oh.
         MR. COFER:  Although wood dust came in, she
    opened the door. THE COURT:  It did.
         MS. SHAMP:  No, dust came in, only with causing
    hypersensitivity --
         MR. COFER:  Okay.  I'll clarify that.  I'll
    clarify that.
         THE COURT:  Thank you, Ms. Shamp.
         MR. COFER:  I didn't realize --
         THE COURT:  Thank you.
         (The sidebar conference was concluded, and the
following proceedings were held in open court in the
presence of the jury:)
         MR. COFER:  Okay.  Let me clarify that just a
    little bit.  Frazier and Stonesifer testified that
    Mrs. Jordan had three independent risk factors for
    her COPD and her emphysematous changes, her
    emphysema -- asthma, cigarette smoking and wood
    dust.  And since each of those can independently
    cause COPD and emphysematous changes, there's no way
    to medically apportion which caused it in
    Mrs. Jordan or even how much each of those
    independent factors contributed.
         So what are the facts?  We know that 25 percent
    of susceptible smokers get COPD from smoking.  75
    percent don't.  25 percent of susceptible smokers
    get COPD from smoking.  75 percent of smokers don't. Here's the chart from the Surgeon General's Report.
    These are people, normal lung function, who have
    never smoked, were not susceptible.  These are the
    25 percent of susceptible smokers who get COPD from
    smoking.  Right?
         So -- and what this chart also shows -- and
    these are averages -- that here's a 50-year-old
    smoker, and here's a normal loss of lung function
    that you expect in a 50-year-old susceptible
    smoker --
         Am I blocking anybody's view?
         -- who gets COPD from smoking.  Right here,
    you're about 70 -- 65, 70 percent FEV1.  That's what
    you expect a 50-year-old smoker to have in terms of
    loss of lung function.  This is from the COPD
    report, from the Surgeon General's report.
         There's Mrs. Jordan's PFT on the chart.
    It's 25 percent.  The average smoker with COPD at
    age 50 is right around 70 percent.  She's at 25
    percent.  So what did Frazier say?  Something else
    is going on.  And what else is going on?  He said,
    well, she has long-term asthma.  That's one thing
    that's going on.  And, in fact, it's undisputed.
    Every doctor who testified in the case said, asthma,
    by itself, while initially reversible, can become fixed and turn into COPD, and asthma is not caused
    by smoking.
         In addition, from 1983 to 1999, Mrs. Jordan
    inhaled a lot of wood dust at the sawmill.  How do
    we know that?  She told Dr. Tecson she did.  And
    we've heard evidence about wood dust in sawmills.
    Wood dust, according to Dr. Stonesifer, can actually
    cause COPD.
         What Dr. Frazier told you is it can cause
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis, which mimics the
    symptoms of COPD and they both cause emphysematous
    changes.  And we know that hypersensitivity
    pneumonitis is not caused by smoking, but one of the
    causes is inhaling moldy dust into the lungs.  And
    Dr. Stonesifer told you that includes moldy pine
    dust.
         Sawmill, you bring in fresh lumber, and then
    you take the lumber and then you strip it down.
    Then you cut it into boards at some point and you
    plane it.  And at some point, you put it into a kiln
    and then you dry it.  But not until you strip it
    down and get it to where it's in the shape of the
    boards and that creates dust.
         And Stonesifer told you it's not the dust that
    you see that's the problem; it's the microscopic dust you don't see that gets down in your lungs.
    The big chunks either don't get anywhere, or they're
    caught in your mouth, caught in your nose.  It's the
    microscopic, the small five microns or smaller dust
    particles that get down in your lungs that cause the
    inflammation that cause the infection.
         Then yesterday, you heard from Dr. Stonesifer,
    a board-certified pathologist from Tampa with more
    than 30 years' experience.  Dr. Stonesifer, the only
    witness who you've seen who has testified in Engle
    cases for both plaintiffs and for defendants.  He is
    not aligned with either side.  The side he is
    aligned with is the truth.  And when he thinks
    it's -- the plaintiff's right, he testifies for the
    plaintiff.  When he thinks the defendant's right, he
    gives his opinions that support the defendants.
         He's the pathologist.  He's a doctor's doctor.
    He, himself, is a cancer survivor.  He has a
    perspective, members of the jury, that I think a
    number of the other doctors don't have.  He told you
    that he -- he reviewed all of the pathology, all of
    the medical records, 20,000 of them, all of the
    depositions in this case.  They criticized him
    because he spent a lot time and he got paid.  He
    reviewed everything.  And remember how he did it? Y'all, I thought this was fascinating.
         So he gets the slides and he said, don't tell
    me anything about it.  I don't want medical records.
    I don't want pathology reports.  I don't want --
    just give me the slides because I want to use my
    training, my eye to see what I -- I see just looking
    at the slides.
         And then he gets a judgment.  He says, okay,
    now let's look at the pathology reports.  All right.
    Now let's look at the factual stuff.  I see evidence
    of hypersensitivity pneumonitis.  Where's the
    exposure?  Oh, I see.  Okay.  So she worked at a
    sawmill.  For how long?  16 years, 40 hours a day,
    50 weeks a year.  I mean, you could add it up.
         So what did he tell you?  He said because she
    has three of the risk factors -- smoking asthma,
    exposure to wood dust -- medically, there's no way
    to determine which one or a combination caused her
    lung problems.  But he told you more than that.  He
    said there is no doubt the wood dust was a cause of
    disease in Mrs. Jordan's lungs.  He showed you
    pictures of giant cells and ill-formed granulomas in
    Mrs. Jordan's lungs.  He showed you pictures of her
    lungs.
         He told you these giant cells and granulomas were not caused by smoking but were caused by wood
    dust.  He showed you damage in her lungs that was
    caused by wood dust.  He said, while the granulomas
    are scattered throughout all the lobes, they're
    predominantly in the lower lobe.  And he said, you
    know, when you see inhalation from smoking, it's
    typically in the upper lobes.  But because wood dust
    has mass and because of gravity, it tends to settle
    in the lower lobes.  So he's seeing disease in a
    portion of the lung that you wouldn't expect from
    smoking.  And he's seen cellular changes, giant
    cells and ill-formed granulomas, that are not caused
    by smoking, and he says, this is hypersensitivity
    pneumonitis.  He sees evidence of fibrosis in the
    lower lobes.
         That's what Dr. Stonesifer told you and he
    showed you the pictures.
         So in rebuttal, plaintiff called Dr. Wright.
    And Dr. Wright told you that Mrs. Jordan's lung
    problems were 100 percent caused by cigarette
    smoking.  He also told you that Mrs. Jordan never
    had asthma.  How can he say that?  He didn't look at
    the medical records.  He just looked at a handful of
    pathology records.  How can he say that?  Her
    records are replete with reports of asthma.  She's told doctors she had asthma.  She told doctors at
    Mayo she had asthma.  She told Tecson she had
    asthma.  She told Rothstein she had asthma.
         So this guy comes in and says, she never had
    asthma so that couldn't cause it.  How could he
    possibly say that?  He didn't look at any of the
    depositions.  He looked at none of the radiology.
         You know, I'm glad you got to hear Stonesifer
    and Wright back to back.  I really am.  That doesn't
    happen all the time, where basically the same day,
    you can hear two different pathologists and get a
    chance to really kind of compare their testimony,
    compare their credentials, compare their
    credibility.
         I'll tell you, so Dr. Stonesifer, he's the
    doctor's doctor.  Let me tell you what I mean by
    that.  So when surgeons have people on the table and
    they're trying to determine whether somebody has
    cancer and where it came from, Stonesifer's in the
    room and says, bring me the tissue and let me look
    at it.  I think it's benign.  Or you know what?  No,
    it's not benign.  I think you need to get into the
    lymph nodes.  It doesn't look like it came from the
    lung.  Oncologists, surgeons rely on Dr. Stonesifer
    every day of the week for life-and-death decisions for patients here in the state of Florida.
         In contrast, Dr. Wright, hasn't seen a hospital
    in 35 years.  The last time he was a practicing
    pathologist was 1980.  So how does Dr. Wright spend
    his professional time?  He's a professional witness.
    He's testified at trial or deposition, since 1996,
    672 times.  672 times, he's been paid to give
    testimony.  Trust my math.  That's about 35 times a
    year for about three times a month, month in, month
    out, for 19 years.  That's the best they could do?
    That's the best they could do.
         You know, while Dr. Stonesifer's a doctor's
    doctor, I think it's fair to say that Dr. Wright is
    the lawyer's doctor who happens to be a lawyer
    himself.  You know, he likes all the folksy
    metaphors.  It's the power, you know, have -- you
    know, have gun, will travel.
         All right.  So, members of the jury, we know
    that Mrs. Jordan's lungs were far more damaged than
    smoking can reasonably explain.  We know that she
    has damage in her lungs from wood dust exposure.  We
    know she has fibrosis in portions of her lung that
    shouldn't be caused by cigarette smoking.  We know
    from her very young lung tissue that wood dust did,
    in fact, cause significant damage to her lungs. So how does plaintiff respond to all that?
    They just pretend it's not there.  When you say,
    well, asthma could cause COPD.  Well, she doesn't
    have asthma.  Well, what about the medical records?
    She doesn't have asthma.  It's in your own medical
    records.  She doesn't have asthma.  Well, what about
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis?  Don't see it.  Well,
    here's the pathology report, non-necrotizing
    granulomas, ill-formed granulomas.  No, I don't see
    it.  They just pretend it's not there.
         When you have the burden of proof, you can't
    just wish facts away.  And let me tell you
    something, if a quadruple-boarded pulmonologist and
    a board-certified pathologist of Dr. Stonesifer's
    stature can't tell you which of the three
    independent risk factors was a medical cause of the
    emphysematous changes and the damage to
    Mrs. Jordan's lungs, then they haven't met their
    burden of proof.
         So on Question 1 -- you'll see it -- the issue
    is is Elaine Jordan a member of the class?  Has she
    met her burden?  The answer to that, members of the
    jury, is no.  And it's no for a number of different
    reasons.  In order to prove it, the plaintiff would
    have to prove that the COPD manifested on or about November 21st, 1996.  And she was, in fact, addicted
    and addiction was a legal cause -- she smoked
    because she was addicted.  And smoking is what
    actually caused her COPD/emphysema.  And if you
    believe that she hasn't proved all of those things,
    then you check no and this case is over.
         Okay.  Let's go to Question 2.  Did Mrs. Jordan
    know or by the use of reasonable care, should she
    have known, before May 5th, 1990, that she had COPD
    and that there was a reasonable possibility it was
    caused by smoking?  You know what?  I'm not going to
    spend any time on this.  We talked about it.  This
    is simple.
         If you believe that what she told Dr. Ticknor
    is true, then the late '80s, she knew she was having
    breathing problems caused by smoking; she couldn't
    breathe and that's why she switched to lights; and
    that's when she got an inhaler; and that's when she
    knew when she was addicted; if you believe what she
    told Dr. Ticknor four months ago and then
    Dr. Rothstein said that's COPD, then she's barred by
    the statute of limitations.  And the answer to
    Question 2, if you get that far, is yes.
         Question Number 3:  State whether Philip Morris
    USA, Inc.'s concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of Elaine
    Jordan's injuries.
         Again, legal cause.  We talked about legal
    cause.  I won't go through that again.  Let me tell
    you something about this question and the next
    question, about 3 and 4.  And this is important.
    When we get to Question 5, you're going to hear
    about something called "comparative fault," right?
    It's three questions down the road.  If you answered
    yes to this question or Question 4, comparative
    fault does not apply.  If you answered yes to this
    question or the next question, even if you decide
    that Mrs. Jordan is 99 percent responsible,
    comparative fault does not apply, and she recovers
    100 percent of her damages.  So I -- I just want to
    make sure that everyone understands that.  As you go
    through the jury instructions, it can sometimes, you
    know, be confusing, how it all works.
         And so what does this question ask you?  It
    says, question asked, if Mrs. Jordan reasonably
    relied on a statement that Philip Morris made or
    didn't make.
         Well, the plaintiff never identified a single
    statement that Philip Morris ever made or didn't make that she said fooled her or caused her to begin
    or continue smoking.  Where was the evidence?  There
    was no evidence, absolutely no evidence that
    Mrs. Jordan reasonably relied on anything Philip
    Morris did or did not do in her decisions to begin
    or continue smoking.
         She smoked because her friends and family
    smoked and she liked to smoke.  There's no evidence
    that she was enticed in the beginning or fooled in
    to continuing to smoke.  She started smoking because
    she wanted to fit in.  She wanted to fit in with the
    crowd.
         Before she became a regular smoker, the
    warnings were on the pack.  She didn't pay any
    attention to them.  1970, her dad dies from
    emphysema and the warning gets stronger.  She
    doesn't try to quit.  She saw the warnings in '85,
    but she admits it didn't cause her to change her
    behavior in any way.
         Mrs. Jordan admits that she never read or heard
    The Frank Statement.  She never heard of The Tobacco
    Institute.  She never heard of the Council For
    Tobacco Research.  She never heard of the TIRC.  She
    didn't start smoking filters because of ads.  By the
    time she started smoking Marlboro Lights, ads were off TV.  The warnings were already on the ads
    themselves.
         There was no evidence, none whatsoever that she
    reasonably relied on anything Philip Morris did or
    didn't do, said or didn't say in her decision to
    smoke.  And on the lights, she never said, I
    smoked -- if I wouldn't have smoked lights, I would
    have quit.  There's no evidence that she was -- if
    she switched to lights, it was just brand choice.
    It wasn't because there was any evidence Philip
    Morris fooled her in some way.
         There's simply no evidence that Philip Morris
    tricked Mrs. Jordan or misled Mrs. Jordan into
    becoming and continuing to smoke.  And, members of
    the jury, the answer to Question 4 is no.
         For the same reason, the answer to Question 5
    is also no.  Or I'm sorry.  The answer to Question 3
    is no for the same reason the answer to Question 4
    is no.
         So that takes us to comparative fault.  And let
    me say something so there's no confusion.  You never
    get to this question unless you find she's a class
    member.  Unless she's a class member, you never get
    here.  Unless you find she's proved all the things
    she needs to prove to be a class member, unless you find she wasn't barred by the statute of
    limitations, you never get to comparative fault.
    But if you do get here, here you should have an
    opportunity to compare Mrs. Jordan's role in causing
    her injuries and Philip Morris's role in causing her
    injuries.
         And, you know, I'm not going to belabor it.
    You know, I showed you the time line.  Before she
    ever began smoking, there were studies linking
    smoking to a disease.  I showed you all of the
    newspaper articles, all the information, told you
    about the warnings, told you about her dad.  From
    the time she put the first cigarette in her mouth,
    she was on notice that smoking was dangerous.  There
    were warnings on the pack.  She always had the
    ability to quit.  She never put her cigarette down
    for one day until 2002.
         If she would have quit earlier, according to
    Dr. Burns and Dr. Proctor, she could have avoided
    the risk.  But she made a different decision.
         The evidence is clear, members of the jury,
    that if you get this far that Mrs. Jordan's
    decisions and her choices played a substantial role
    in causing her disease.  And only Mrs. Jordan was in
    a position to act on the information she had. Okay.  So Questions 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 are
    damages.  So if you decide that Philip Morris has
    liability in the case and Philip Morris has
    responsibility; Philip Morris actually injured
    Mrs. Jordan, then here's where you award the amount
    of damages.  And you heard Mr. Spruance testify, and
    Ms. Shamp put some numbers up on the board.  And,
    you know, you heard Spruance, and you'll have to
    decide what credence you basically give his
    testimony.
         But then Ms. Shamp said, well, it's up to you.
    You know, I suggest you award -- award 10 million
    for pain and suffering.  And I couldn't get all the
    numbers down.  But basically when you look all the
    numbers she put down, she was asking or suggesting
    you award somewhere, for actual damages, between 13
    and $15 million.  You know, frankly it's hard for
    most of us to even conceptualize that amount of
    money, to get our arms around it.
         But just to try to put it in context, you
    remember, I talked to Dr. Proctor, when I cross
    examined him.  And Dr. Proctor said he made over $3
    million a year -- not a year.  He made more than $3
    million testifying in these cases.  And I said,
    well, Dr. Proctor, I mean, just kind of put that in context.  The average family in Florida --
         MS. SHAMP:  Objection, Your Honor.  Your Honor,
    I don't think it's appropriate to make an argument
    about compensatory damage and compare it to what
    Dr. Proctor earned.
[#DELETED OBJECTION DIALOGUE#]
         MR. COFER:  So you remember us talking to
    Dr. Proctor and his -- my cross examination.  We
    talked about the amount of money he had been paid,
    and he -- he admitted he's been paid north of $3
    million.  And I said, Dr. Proctor, it would take the
    average family in Florida 60 years to make the $3
    million that you've made.  And so I want thank you
    to think about the amount of money that Ms. Shamp is
    suggesting.
         Do you know how many years it would take the average family in Florida to earn 13 to $15 million,
    going to work every day, whether you felt good or
    not, missing your kids' games, whatever it takes,
    going on a job you may or may not like?  Do you know
    how many years?  Between 260 and 300 years.
         If you get this far, it's up to you to decide
    what's an appropriate amount of money to compensate
    Mrs. Jordan for her loss.  You've heard the
    evidence.  You use your own judgment.
         All right.  Last question, punitive damages.
    You only get here if you answered yes to Question 3
    or yes to Question 4.  If you don't answer yes to
    Question 3 or yes to Question 4, you don't even get
    to the issue of punitive damages.
         But if you do get here, I want you to
    understand what you're being asked.  First of all,
    you must find by clear and convincing evidence, not
    the greater weight of the evidence, clear and
    convincing evidence that punitive damages are
    warranted against Philip Morris in this case.
         So let me talk about what you're being asked to
    decide so there is no confusion.  You're not being
    asked to decide an amount of punitive damages.
    You're being asked to decide whether Mrs. Jordan has
    shown that she's entitled to punitive damages.  If you answer yes, there will be another phase to the
    trial.  Plaintiff will put on evidence.  We'll put
    on evidence.  We'll have closing arguments.  And
    that's when you could decide the amount, if any, to
    award.  So I don't want you thinking about an
    amount.  Focus on the issue of whether plaintiff has
    met her burden of showing by clear and convincing
    evidence that she's entitled to punitive damages.
         Clear and convincing evidence is defined.  It's
    a much higher standard and it's defined in the jury
    instructions.  With respect to punitive damages, you
    will see the evidence must be precise, explicit,
    lacking in confusion and of such weight that it
    produces a firm belief or conviction without
    hesitation about the matter at issue.
         Let me tell you something else.  You have to
    decide, if you get there, that punitive damages are
    warranted based on conduct that harmed Mrs. Jordan.
    This is Mrs. Jordan's case.  You can't punish Philip
    Morris for harm to others.
         Ms. Shamp mentioned what -- how Mrs. Jordan's
    family suffered.  They're not a party to this
    lawsuit.  Mr. Jordan did not bring a consortium
    claim.  They're not seeking damages in this lawsuit.
    If there are other people, if they believe they've been harmed by the actions of Philip Morris, they
    can bring their own lawsuits, and they can have
    juries of their own listen to the evidence and
    decide whether they're entitled to punitive damages.
    This is a case about Elaine Jordan.
         In order to award punitive damages in this
    case, you have to find that Philip Morris did
    something by the greater weight of the evidence that
    harmed Mrs. Jordan and you must find -- and if
    you'll look at the instructions -- that the harm to
    Mrs. Jordan, what we did to Mrs. Jordan, supports
    punitive damages.
         So I want that to be very clear.  You don't
    award punitive damages because kids smoke.  You
    don't award punitive damages because the companies
    advertise.  In fact, there are instructions, members
    of the jury.  Instruction Number 22:  Manufacturing
    and selling and advertising cigarettes are lawful
    activities.  I instruct you that Philip Morris
    cannot be held liable for manufacturing, selling or
    advertising cigarettes.
         You know, it's a legal product.  You don't have
    to use it but it's a legal product.  And we can't be
    held liable.  My client can't be held liable simply
    for selling cigarettes.  Philip Morris, even though they don't advertise -- they haven't advertised
    since 2000.  They haven't had -- I mean, they
    haven't advertised on the backs of magazines since
    2000.  They haven't advertised at all in magazines
    since 2005.  If they wanted to, they have a right
    to.  They have a first amendment right to advertise,
    and you can't punish someone or hold them liable for
    exercising their constitutional rights.
         You know, if you think about this case, the
    first three witnesses that plaintiff called had
    nothing to do with Elaine Jordan.
         Dr. Burns had never met Elaine Jordan.  He
    testified by video deposition.
         Dr. Proctor said, I know nothing about Elaine
    Jordan.  I don't know why she smoked.  I don't know
    what she knew.  I don't know whether her family
    smoked.  I don't know whether she tried to quit.  I
    don't know whether she wanted to quit.  I don't know
    anything about her.
         Dr. Pete Lipowicz was a video deposition of
    Philip Morris.  He was asked questions about the
    company but had nothing to do with Elaine Jordan.
         So that's the focus.  And that's your focus on
    punitive damages in this case.  Where is the
    evidence, the clear and convincing evidence that Philip Morris should be punished in this case based
    on conduct that harmed Mrs. Jordan?
         So the purpose of punitive damages is to punish
    and to deter.  And in terms of deterrence, what did
    you learn from Dr. Proctor?  Well, since 1998, you
    don't see ads on billboards anymore.  You don't see
    ads on public transit.  You don't sponsor sporting
    events.  The Tobacco Institute, the Council For
    Tobacco Research are out of existence, have been
    since 1998.
         Philip Morris put up a website in 2000 to tell
    smokers, smoking causes cancer and other diseases;
    smoking is addictive; there is no such thing as a
    safe cigarette; if you want information on smoking,
    here are links that will connect you to the Surgeon
    General and others.  For -- well, since 2000, for 15
    years, Philip Morris has said, if you want
    information on smoking, go to public health.
         Since 2009, the company's been subject to FDA
    regulation.  And what did Dr. Proctor tell you?
    Philip Morris supported it.  Philip Morris wrote a
    letter to President Obama, saying, sign the
    legislation.  We welcome FDA regulation.
         Now, you know, I know you saw documents, even
    out of context, that probably disturbed you.  You've heard a lot about smoking's toll on society and I
    get that and I'm not trying to minimize that.  But
    that is not a basis for punitive damages in this
    case unless there is conduct that you find by clear
    and convincing evidence harmed Elaine Jordan.
         And I respectfully suggest, members of the
    jury, the plaintiff has not met her burden of proof.
         All right.  So what's this case about?  This
    case is about one smoker, Mrs. Jordan, and whether
    she's a member of the Engle class.  It's a case
    about what she knew and why she smoked and why she
    waited so long to quit.
         I told you in opening statement that the
    evidence would be that she smoked because her
    friends and family smoked, that she always had the
    information she needed to make an informed decision
    of whether to smoke or quit smoking, and I told you
    that she always had the ability to quit whenever she
    decided it was more important for her not to smoke
    than it is to smoke.
         I also told you in opening statement and in
    jury selection, all we wanted was a fair shot, that
    there are two sides to every story, and all we want
    is a fair shot.  We want -- we asked you to listen
    to our side of the story, and I know that you've done that.  And on behalf of my client, I want to
    tell you how much I appreciate it.  I know you've
    done it.
         I also told you in voir dire, it's true that
    our civil justice system is the envy of the world,
    and it's because men and women like you are willing
    to take time in your busy lives -- I know you've got
    stuff to do -- to be here early, be here late, to
    put up with all the delays that lawyers cause, but
    we couldn't have a system like this if it were not
    for jurors like you.
         So on behalf of my client, Philip Morris, on
    behalf of the lawyers, and not just David but the
    other lawyers who work so hard behind the scenes to
    help us bring you information we think you need to
    make the judgment in this case, thank you very much.
    And thank you very, very much for your attention in
    listening to my closing argument.
