         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  First I
    want to say thank you.  I know this has been a long trial and there's been a lot of evidence, and I know
    that you have been paying attention.  I see that
    you've been taking notes.  So I want to thank you.
         Other than serving in the United States
    military, service on a jury is one of the greatest
    services that we give to our country, and I know
    that each of you were plucked from your busy lives
    in order to serve on this jury and to do the work,
    and so I want to thank you on behalf of myself, my
    team, my client Elaine Jordan.
         But importantly, your service is not to us,
    it's not to the plaintiff nor to the defendant or
    even to the court.  Your service is to our country
    and to our system of justice.  And in truth, it's
    service to the truth.
         So what I want to talk about today is where the
    truth lies and what the truth is based on the
    evidence that you've heard in this courtroom.  Not
    smoke or mirrors, but what the truth is and the
    evidence that was presented.
         We started this case three weeks ago with the
    shared belief that there are two sides to every
    story.  And in fact, one of the jurors said in voir
    dire, potential jurors, said there might be more
    than two sides to every story. But I don't know if noticed, but when Mr. Cofer
    gave his opening argument and he put up the timeline
    there's not one event listed on his timeline that
    talks about any of the conduct or actions of his
    client Philip Morris.  Not one.
         We talked a lot about Elaine Jordan, about what
    she did, about her life, about what she said, about
    what she wrote down, about countless and countless,
    what she remembered about names of doctors, about
    things that happened 20 and 30 years ago.
         But what I want to spend some time this morning
    doing is to be sure that you don't lose sight of the
    other side of the story, the conduct, the statements
    the actions of the defendant Philip Morris.
         So I want to start my time with you today by
    reminding you of the witnesses who came before you
    during the course of the trial.  And since it has
    been a long trial, three weeks, some of them
    happened a long time ago, so I want to talk for just
    a moment about each one of those witnesses and what
    the subject matter of their testimony was.
         The first witness that you heard from was Dr.
    Burns.  And you will remember that he was the author
    and editor of 19 different Surgeon General reports.
    He is triple board certified, and he's devoted his life to public health.  He's a public health doctor.
    He actually wrote the chapter in the book that
    medical students all across the country study,
    Harrison's Textbook of Internal Medicine, on what
    nicotine addiction is.  And you'll remember he
    testified that smoking cigarettes causes 440,000
    deaths per year, and that the vast majority of
    cigarette smokers say that they want to quit, would
    like to quit.  The vast majority.  That every year
    almost half, 45 percent try to quit, and that less
    than 2 to 3 percent are successful.
         Imagine that for a moment.  The defendant's
    product that he sells, the vast majority of people
    that buy it don't want to.  They want to quit.  Half
    of them every year try to quit, and only 2 to
    3 percent are successful.
         Dr. Burns also talked about COPD.  And you
    remember he talked about how smoking cigarettes
    causes that damage to the lungs.  And he also talked
    about addiction, and he said what addiction means is
    that you don't have a free choice about the next use
    of the product, that you feel compelled, that you
    cannot not use the product, and therefore your use
    becomes one of compulsive use rather than a decision
    that you want to use the product each time you use it.
         That's a pretty good definition of addiction
    from the person who wrote the chapter on nicotine
    addiction that doctors study.
         It becomes a compulsive use.  So it's not like
    the choice you make, where I'm going to go to dinner
    tonight, or if I want to have Coke or Pepsi.  It's a
    compulsive use of the product, a driven use of the
    product, so that you don't choose anymore.
         That's how Dr. Burns discussed addiction for
    you.  Remember he talked about how powerful the drug
    of nicotine is when it is inhaled.  And I thought
    this was very interesting.  He talked about how the
    nicotine goes into the lungs.  And we have heard a
    lot of testimony about lung tissue and how lung
    tissue works, and how what happens is the blood
    circulation actually goes through our lungs and
    that's how it picks up the oxygen.  Well, if you're
    a cigarette smoker while it's picking up the oxygen
    it's also picking up the nicotine, and because it
    goes into the arteries, our arterial system, it goes
    immediately right up to the brain.  And how really
    impactful that nicotine is, and why that addiction
    is so strong, because of the way it is inhaled and
    the amount of doses of the drug that the brain is getting when someone smokes a pack, two packs of
    cigarettes every single day.  And how that arterial
    system is getting that nicotine into the brain.
         He said that 89 percent of all smokers begin by
    the age of 18, and 60 percent of all cigarette
    smokers start by the age of 16.  60 percent are
    already smoking by the time they're 16 years old.
         He talked from the public health perspective
    what an enormous epidemic and tragic consequences of
    cigarette smoking in the United States.
         The next witness that you heard from was Dr.
    Lipowicz, and you will remember that Dr. Lipowicz
    was the senior scientist at Philip Morris that came
    in to testify.  And he showed several documents with
    Dr. Lipowicz that I think were very powerful, maybe
    some of the most powerful in the whole trial.
         This one.  And y'all remember this is the
    document about Nicorette gum.  Now, because this is
    the first document that I'm showing in the case I
    want to point out one important thing, and that is
    that every document I'll be talking about today has
    a number at the bottom, and I'll try to mention what
    that number is, but it's P, that means Plaintiff's
    Exhibit 391.  And you will have back with you in the
    jury room all of the exhibits which the plaintiff has admitted into evidence, as well as the exhibits
    that the defendant has admitted into evidence.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, there they are over
    in these boxes.  And there will be an index that you
    will have in the front that you will be a able to
    find documents, in which box and which binder the
    documents are in.  When I say it's Plaintiff's 391
    you can find it on here and then actually go look at
    the document, read the document, the entire
    document.  And we put all those documents over there
    that will go back with you into the jury room,
    including this one.  I think one of the most
    powerful.
         And remember this was about the Nicorette gum.
    And what Philip Morris was doing was trying to put
    pressure on Dow Corning, who made Nicorette gum, to
    try and stop them from introducing and marketing
    that product.  And they stopped buying Dow Chemical
    products in their cigarettes to try to put pressure
    on them not to market Nicorette.
         And remember, ladies and gentlemen, this is in
    1982.  This was one of the very first things, the
    very first real tool to come on the market to try
    and help the millions of addicted smokers to try to
    stop.  It's mean-spirited.  And you will have this document to read:  Since our becoming aware of Dow's
    involvement with Nicorette in 1982 we have conducted
    an ongoing dialogue with Dow attempting to
    eliminate, or at least tone down the Nicorette
    marketing and promotional activities.
         Mean-spirited.  1982.  Before there were
    patches, before there was Wellbutrin, before there
    were even drugs.  This is the first one, and they're
    trying to stop it even though millions of Americans
    are addicted and dying.
         Remember Dr. Lipowicz also testified about
    whether it was reasonable for Philip Morris to be
    making the representations that they were making in
    the various documents that you've seen.  They were
    making the representation that smoking hasn't been
    proven to cause lung cancer.  They were making the
    representation that you should continue smoking
    because we'll take out anything if we find there is
    anything dangerous.
         So we asked him in his deposition, do you think
    that is reasonable.  And you'll remember the way he
    looked when we asked him that.  Then we asked him,
    well, if it was reasonable for you to believe that
    it wasn't harmful and causing disease, wasn't it
    reasonable for a 14-year-old, for your customers to not know that it was harmful?  This is what he said:
         And so to be clear, as the corporate
    representative on behalf of Philip Morris, it is
    Philip Morris' testimony that it does not think it
    was unreasonable for it to deny that the evidence
    was sufficient that cigarette smoking caused disease
    prior to the year 2000?
         You know, I think that's not exactly correct.
    What -- what I was trying to say is that, you know,
    at any given time, and certainly looking back, and
    with all the knowledge we have right now it's -- you
    know, I'm not sure how we would approach things, but
    at the time, as I've looked at the way we have
    evaluated the evidence up to 1964, '73, and so on, I
    think the company always thought that what it was
    doing was reasonable.
         So if Philip Morris thought they were
    reasonable at the time, is it Philip Morris'
    position that it was reasonable for its customers to
    think the same thing?
         Well, I think -- you know, I don't think the
    company really had a position on that.  My personal
    opinion is that consumers, smokers had access to a
    wide variety of information.  Information from the
    Surgeon General, information from public health, information from, you know, doctors.  You know,
    there was information from us, but I think consumers
    have to weigh that all in making the decision.
         Well, you had a wide variety of information
    from all those sources, didn't you?
         Yes, we did.
         Don't you think Philip Morris knew more about
    the evidence regarding smoking and disease than its
    customers.
         Yeah, I think we certainly knew it in greater
    detail, but, you know, for us, you know, we knew it
    because we read the scientific articles that came
    out.
         And you will remember that testimony and the
    argument that Philip Morris was reasonable in saying
    it didn't cause lung cancer, but that in 1963 a
    14-year-old girl should have known that it was
    harmful, should have known that it caused disease.
         The next witness you heard from was Dr.
    Proctor.  And you will remember Dr. Proctor and his
    testimony.  Dr. Proctor of course is a professor at
    Stanford University on the history of science, and
    he's read literally thousands and thousands and
    thousands of the documents with respect to what the
    tobacco company did.  He's an expert all around the world.  He was a reviewer on the 2014 Surgeon
    General's report.  You heard him say he was invited
    to the White House when the 2014 Surgeon General's
    report came out.  He's written books about smoking
    and health and about what the tobacco company did.
         And what he did was walk you through the
    history of the conspiracy.  And you will remember we
    talked about many, many documents with him, about
    when the conspiracy began, and what the companies
    did, and how they joined together to do it, and the
    formation of the TI and the TIRC, and that they were
    -- they created distraction science, and that they
    did press releases.
         You remember he went through all of that
    testimony, how the TI and TIRC was established as a
    front and a shield for the tobacco companies.  And
    you'll remember those documents.
         But I want to touch on what he also talked
    about, and that was cigarette design.  And he talked
    a lot about the history of tobacco, and he knew, of
    course, a lot about the history of tobacco, but also
    about how you make a cigarette.  And he talked about
    how the tobacco companies design the cigarettes to
    create and sustain addiction; that these are highly
    engineered products that contain over 600 different additives in them, and that the different additives
    they put in there in order to give the additional
    nicotine kick, and how they monitor the amount of
    nicotine in every single cigarette, the purpose of
    which is to create and sustain addiction by its
    customers.
         Perhaps most significantly, he talked about the
    great filter lie.  He talked about how the tobacco
    companies knew that filtered cigarettes were no
    safer, and yet they marketed them as safer.  And he
    talked about how they knew that their smokers
    compensate by smoking the cigarettes differently
    because they had holes in the filters.  And they
    knew that their machines were being fooled, and so
    if the machine said it was lower tar it did not mean
    that the smoker was getting lower tar.  And he
    talked about that in detail and showed you a lot of
    those documents.
         And he also talked about the Surgeon General's
    report, and also the congressional investigation of
    it.  And we showed you those documents and all of
    the documents with respect to the conspiracy.
         The next witness we called was Dr. Rothstein.
    And you will remember Dr. Rothstein.  He's a
    pulmonologist right here in Jacksonville, and he was Elaine Jordan's doctor.  And that's important.  He
    was the one who actually treated her.  He was the
    one who diagnosed her.  He's not a professional
    witness.  In fact, he never testified in court
    before.
         And he saw and treated her for COPD.  And he
    told you that her COPD was caused by smoking, and
    that he had no doubt about that.  And he examined
    her lungs, and he did x-rays, and he did CT scans of
    her chest, and he did multiple pulmonary function
    tests, and he eventually referred her to get a lung
    transplant, and he told you what caused her disease.
    That it was cigarette smoking.
         And he told you that she didn't have asthma,
    and that oftentimes people come in and think they
    have asthma because they have breathing problems.
    But she didn't have asthma, and he told you that.
         And the defendant talked a lot about
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis and wood dust exposure.
    This is her doctor.  It's her doctor who saw her.
    He never said she had hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
    Never.
         And I asked him, any chance she had it, and he
    said no.  I said why, and he said it would look
    different.  She would come in different.  She would come in with a fever because it's an allergic
    reaction that comes into the lungs, and what we
    would look at is, well, if she's exposed to
    something that's allergic you take them away from
    the allergic she gets a little better.  You evaluate
    that.
         It's not what she had.  It's just not.  And her
    doctor came in to tell you that.
         He also testified that in his opinion he
    believed she was addicted.  He talked to her, he
    counseled her.  You look at those records for that.
    Again you will have all of his records back there,
    and they are Exhibit 10.  All his records back
    there.
         And it said that he prescribed drugs for her,
    that he prescribed the patch for her, that he talked
    to her about counseling, and that every time she was
    in there he counseled her about how important it was
    for her to quit, and that she was trying to quit,
    and he believed she was trying to quit.
         You also heard from -- well, I think I'm
    missing one.
         Gill Spruance will also testify -- also
    testified.  And he, you remember, is the economist.
    And he came in and told you about the damages that plaintiff has suffered, and he went through those
    lengthy calculations, and he calculated lost wages,
    and he gave you a range.  And he gave that range
    based upon different criteria and different things
    he looked at.  And he used charts.  And you remember
    all that testimony.  Ms. Speed put him on the stand
    and asked him all those questions about the
    calculation because she had to stop working in
    1999 -- Dr. Rothstein, you remember, testified she
    was disabled from that time forward -- and how much
    income she lost because she was disabled up to the
    time -- and he stopped the calculation at 65 when
    she would have retired.
         And so that calculation ends up on the low end
    of $379,000, the high end at 436,000 and some
    change.
         And he also talked about future medical costs.
    And remember he talked about how he looked at
    exactly what she was going to need going forward
    based upon what Dr. Rothstein said she was going to
    need going forward, and based upon what we know COPD
    causes as people move forward, things like oxygen,
    hospitalizations, medications.  So the future
    medical costs for her, a range of 219,000 up to
    844,000. Then the minor category also, the loss of
    household services, the things she wouldn't be able
    to do.  He talked about how you put a monetary value
    on that because of her disability and her COPD, and
    the way she wasn't able to do things, and was not
    able to do things based upon her inability to
    breathe.
         So the total range of all those between
    $670,000 and $1.3 million.  And you'll remember Mr.
    Spruance's testimony regarding those.
         And you'll remember Tonya Spencer.  That's
    Mrs. Jordan's daughter.  And she came in and talked
    to you about her mother and what her mother had been
    through.  And importantly, she talked to you about
    when she remembers her mother was diagnosed with
    COPD.  It was very credible testimony, I believe,
    based upon what she linked it to.  And she linked it
    to her own daughter who was two years old at the
    time.  Her daughter was born in 1991, and she
    remembers her mother being diagnosed in 1993.
         So you remember Tonya Spencer's demeanor on the
    stand when she testified and how she linked the
    diagnosis of COPD to 1993.  And she also testified
    about how hard this has been for her mother, and how
    she watched her go through all she's been through. Then we put up Dr. Susan Blank, and you'll
    recall Dr. Blank is a board certified addiction
    psychiatrist.  And in fact, she actually wrote the
    chapter in the book for addiction psychiatrists on
    nicotine dependence.  Remember I showed you the
    chapter in the book.  She is an expert in nicotine
    addiction, and a nationally recognized expert in
    addiction.
         And she talked to you about her belief that
    Elaine Jordan was addicted, and she went through all
    those criteria.
         And then the last thing that we did was I
    actually stood up and read some testimony.  Remember
    that, when I read the testimony from Dr. William
    Frazier, who was the defendant's expert.  And I
    closed our first presentation in the case with that
    because it was extremely important testimony,
    because their own expert confirmed that Elaine
    Jordan had COPD at least five years before Dr.
    Rothstein saw her.  Dr. Rothstein saw her in '99.
    He said for at least five years she had COPD.
         So it's undisputed, Elaine Jordan had COPD in
    1994 from there side and from Dr. Rothstein, all the
    witnesses.  That's why I read that testimony to you
    directly from his deposition.  And you'll recall me doing it.
         Then the defendants put up four witnesses.  Dr.
    Tecson, you will recall they put up by videotape,
    who was her treating doctor.  And you will recall
    Dr. Tecson testified about his record, and his own
    record which he saw her in October 24, 1998, and he
    wrote in his record that she told him then that she
    had emphysema, that she had an asthma attack and
    also had emphysema five years ago.  And he talked to
    you about that in his testimony.
         Then they put up Dr. Frazier.  Dr. Frazier
    confirmed that, yes, that when Dr. Rothstein saw her
    her COPD was severe.  And we talked about that
    little small circle on the spirometry, and how in
    his opinion she had COPD by at least 1994.
         Then they put up Dr. Ticknor who was there
    psychiatric witness, and you will remember Dr.
    Ticknor was a general psychiatrist.  He had no
    specialty training in addiction, he had no
    certifications in addiction, and, importantly, he
    testified that if -- and I was really focussed on
    this when I examined him.  He said that of the
    people he has treated to stop smoking, ones who were
    treating with him to stop smoking, he only thinks 10
    to 20 percent of those are addicted. What he said is that you have to have an
    extreme presentation in order for him to think
    you're addicted.  And extreme presentation, I asked
    the question, means that you either lose your job,
    or are about to lose your job, or you're about to
    get divorced as a result of it.
         His testimony is it has to be an extreme
    position.  But he even goes further than that, and I
    asked him.  He testified that an addiction can't
    cause a disease, which is what under Engle the
    requirement is of class membership, unless the
    person has a mental illness and they cannot control
    their behavior, because everybody else can control
    their behavior and stop.  And remember I asked him
    about those questions.  So in your opinion you have
    to have a serious mental illness.
         Then they put up Dr. Stonesifer.  And you'll
    remember Dr. Stonesifer looked at the slides and
    told you that there were some slides that showed
    these granulomas in them.  And he said he thought
    that they exhibited a pattern.  And he was very
    careful in his testimony.  He said -- and he
    repeated many times, and I'm sure you have this in
    your notes -- there was a pattern of
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis.  Not necessarily that she had it, but that the little pieces of slide he
    looked at showed a pattern.  And as you remember,
    you looked at the pathology reports, and there were
    a few scattered of these granulomas of
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
         But importantly he did not say that
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused what happened.
    He did not say that.  In fact, what he said was that
    smoking could have caused it, this could have caused
    it, that could have caused it.  And when asked he
    said, yes, the smoking contributed.
         Dr. Stonesifer did not say hypersensitivity
    pneumonitis caused it.  In fact, he said, I can't
    tell.  That's all he said.
         Now, we then put up two rebuttal witnesses,
    you'll recall.  Dr. Wright.  And Dr. Wright showed
    you the pathology, and showed you the anthracotic
    pigment in the slides, and that is actual carbon
    spots that come from smoking.  And you'll have those
    slides back in evidence, pictures of them, and you
    can look at them.
         And the important difference between the slides
    that Dr. Wright showed you, and I'm not sure this
    was clear when he testified, and the slides that the
    defendant showed you, was what Dr. Wright showed you was not the hundred-time magnified, because what Dr.
    Wright was showing you was the airspaces in there,
    and if you magnify all the way down in then you
    don't see those enormous airspaces that is the
    emphysema.  But you can see the anthracotic pigment
    throughout as well is the emphysema.
         Then we also put up Dr. Susan -- I mean Dr.
    Sandra Frazier, and Dr. Frazier again is an
    addiction medicine specialist, board certified in
    addiction medicine, and she testified that there is
    nowhere in the DSM-5 that says there has to be an
    extreme presentation in order for them to be
    addicted.  And that Dr. Ticknor saying that, who is
    not expert in addiction medicine, is not proper
    interpretation of what the DSM-5 says.
         Now, those were the witnesses that you heard
    from the stand.  What I want to talk now for a
    minute about is the whole story.  And I thought
    about the best way to do it, and I think the best
    way to do it is a timeline and sort of talk about
    how these events happened over the course of time.
         So start from the beginning, 1900 to 1950.  And
    you'll recall the testimony from Dr. Proctor that
    during that period of time smoking is a part of
    American culture.  And we showed pictures of magazine advertisements, and we showed pictures of
    movies, and everybody smoked everywhere, that 50 to
    60 percent of Americans smoked cigarettes by the
    time 1950 rolls around, that it was a normal part of
    everyday American life.
         That's what the evidence is.  There is no
    contradictory evidence to that.  No contradictory
    evidence that in 1950 it was a normal everyday part
    of American life.
         And we even showed you a clip from the
    astronauts from the Mercury program smoking while
    they were on television.  The astronauts, our best
    and our brightest, the ones kids look up to, smoking
    on television.
         And we looked at the graph of how smoking
    increased from the beginning of the 1900's when
    almost no one smoked cigarettes all the way up to
    what happened in 1950 when half of America was
    smoking cigarettes.
         We talked about some of the reasons for that,
    World War I and cigarettes were put in mens rations,
    World War II cigarettes were part of the men smoking
    when they were overseas.  The advent of mass media,
    the advent of the Bonsack machine that was able to
    roll cigarettes so much faster.  All of those things contributed to this smoking becoming part of the
    American culture, up until 1949.
         And two things happened in 1949.  Elaine Jordan
    was born.  And right about that same time the
    evidence starts to come together linking smoking to
    lung cancer.
         We talked about the four studies that came out
    in 1950 from Wynder and Graham, Doll & Hill, Levin,
    and Schrek, that started saying why are we seeing
    this massive increase in lung cancer which had once
    been a rare disease in America.
         I remember how Dr. Proctor talked about how
    that they would call the medical students out of
    their dorms at night to say, here is a lung cancer
    autopsy, you might never see this again, to what
    became an absolute epidemic in this country.  And
    they started looking at the increase in cigarette
    smoking, how it was on the rise, and how it tracked
    almost exactly the rise of lung cancer.
         So they did what -- these are called
    epidemiological studies, studies of a population,
    and started seeing these connections.
         Then the next thing they wanted to do of course
    was animal studies, so they painted the tar on the
    back of mice and grew tumors on the backs of mice. That was published in 1953.  And when that came
    out big tobacco was scared.  So they had to decide
    what are we going to do, how are we going to respond
    to this mounting evidence that our product is
    causing disease?
         In fact, their own studies and what they had
    been reading showed was true, that there are
    carcinogens in our product, the smoke from our
    product.  It's true.
         So what did they do?  They called together a
    meeting of all the heads of the tobacco companies
    and they met at The Plaza Hotel in December 1953.
    That's an important date.  It's a date you'll see
    when you look at the jury charges.  It's the
    beginning of the conspiracy.
         And we have the documents actually showing the
    very beginning.  Dr. Proctor talked to you about why
    we have those documents, troves and troves that had
    to be turned over.  He's been able to look at them
    and actually find a note from when that first
    meeting happened.  There's a list of all the people
    that were there, including the president of Philip
    Morris Tobacco Company.
         And the notes from the meeting talk about what
    are we going to do.  And they had a choice.  They could have said what we need to do is stop the way
    we're marketing our cigarettes, we need to try and
    put warnings.  We need to let the people know.  We
    need to most importantly keep these out of the hands
    of kids.
         But what did they decide to do?  It was the
    feeling of those present that the industry could
    most effectively face the problem by engaging public
    relations counsel.  They hired a public relations
    firm to spin it for them.  That's what they chose to
    do, and they did.
         And the first thing that they did -- well, the
    first thing they did was met with all the research
    directors.  And this is how we know that they knew
    their product caused cancer then, because they
    indicated -- this forwarding memorandum, you'll have
    that, P168, it's a very important document,
    Plaintiff's 168, because the members of Hill &
    Knowlton, the public relations firm that they hired,
    Hill & Knowlton, sat down and met with directors of
    research at the company, and they said -- one of the
    men said, it's fortunate for us that cigarettes are
    a habit they can't break.
         I probably put that document up two or three
    times now, but so the impact of it to sink in. We make money because it's addictive.  It's
    fortunate for us it's a habit they can't break.
    Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was the
    first to produce a cancer-free cigarette.  What we
    could do to the competition.
         They knew their product caused cancer.  But
    what did they do?  The very heads of the great
    corporations themselves signalled the end of the old
    days, and they linked armed.
         It's a good visual image.  They formed a united
    front against the truth.  They linked arms.  And
    what they did was they engaged in a campaign to
    reassure the public and still their instinctive
    fears.  They are going to try and stop people from
    worrying so they will keep on smoking.
         This is what their program was.  They were
    going to put out the message that you can count on
    cigarette companies who have obligated themselves to
    pour millions of dollars into cancer research to
    take anything out of your cigarette that is a health
    hazard if our science ever really finds such a
    hazard in the wonderful tobacco leaf.
         They knew that there were carcinogens in their
    products.
         And you'll remember the testimony about the Frank Statement, which was a full-page ad.  After
    that memo where they knew that it was addictive and
    caused cancer they gave this memo that went in every
    newspaper with a circulation of over 50,000 across
    the country.  And what did they say?  There is no
    proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes.
         This is in 1954 when Elaine Jordan is four
    years old.  We believe the products we make are not
    injurious to health.  Remember their goal is to
    still their fears so that they'll keep smoking.
         We accept an interest in public health as a
    basic responsibility paramount to every other
    consideration in our business.  Smokers read it,
    they kept on smoking.
         Elaine Jordan was born in 1949.  In 1950 the
    four major studies linking cancer to smoking
    cigarettes come out.  1953 the mouse painting
    studies.  Elaine Jordan is four years old.
    December 1953 The Plaza Hotel meeting, the
    conspiracy begins.  1954 the Frank Statement is
    issued.
         And thus begins their campaign of denial and
    doubt that lasts for decades.  Lasts until the year
    2000.  It's hard to believe 2000 is the first time
    they admitted that cigarettes caused cancer. Remember Dr. Lipowicz said that, not until
    2000, and this campaign of doubt.  And we put up a
    lot of documents about it, and I'll go through some
    of them.
         They put out white papers, and they actually
    sent those to doctors, because remember
    60 percent -- in 1960 60 percent of doctors are
    still smoking.
         This is a speech by the president of Philip
    Morris.  If we had any thought or knowledge that in
    any way we were selling a product harmful to
    customers we would stop business tomorrow.
         Fraud and deceit.  Speech by the president of
    Philip Morris in 1957:  I'll merely assert there is
    not one shred of conclusive evidence to support the
    link between cigarette smoking and cancer.
         Importantly their goal was to create doubt
    amongst smokers so that they will keep smoking
    their product.  You'll remember we played the clip
    from Howard Cullman from Philip Morris as he's
    smoking cigarette on television that said, we want
    to be detectives just as much as the Surgeon
    General.  People watched this and kept smoking.
         They put out press releases actually attacking
    the government officials that are trying to get the public health message out.  That's part of their
    tactic.  Remember that we had showed the clip from
    Bill Dwyer saying Joseph Califano, who was then
    secretary of health and human services, putting
    out -- trying to get out the word, and condemning
    the actual public health authorities.
         They put out press releases.  We believe the
    number one problem is the extent to which these
    officials knowingly mislead the American public.
         There he is, Bill Dwyer.  And you remember you
    saw the clip.  In fact, you'll actually have the DVD
    with these clips.  This is actually an exhibit too.
    P349.  That goes back into the jury room.
         You remember the True magazine article.  This
    was the number one men's magazine at the time, and
    they actually planted a story, and Dr. Proctor
    talked about that, by Stanley Frank, who they paid
    to write the article in the True magazine.  The
    Tobacco Institute paid him to write the article, and
    then he writes article read in the number one
    magazine for men in circulation at that period of
    time.  To smoke or not to smoke, that is still the
    question.
         Then that's picked up and run in the National
    Enquirer.  Cigarette cancer link is bunk, written by the Tobacco Institute.  And the National Enquirer
    was actually very well read.  Full page on the front
    page.  70 million smokers falsely alarmed in the
    checkout counter right next to the cigarettes.
         They continue to put out more press releases
    all the way up to 1979.  You'll remember this person
    who came out and said things go on in congress that
    you don't know about, that doctors still are
    challenging that link.
         Who are the doctors?  Paid members of the
    Tobacco Institute.
         But this isn't us or Dr. Proctor saying that
    they were utilizing the Tobacco Institute and CTR.
    Their own documents say they were using it as a
    front and a shield.  This document, which is
    actually from the committee of counsel, the lawyers.
    And you remember what Dr. Proctor said, it was the
    lawyers who were running the campaign, the committee
    of counsel.
         This memorandum, CTR, which is what TIRC
    became, remember I put that up on the board, began
    as an organization called the Tobacco Industry
    Research Counsel that was set up as an industry
    shield in 1954.  CTR acted as a front.
         These are their own documents.  Their own documents.  Doubt is our product.  Doubt.  To still
    the instinctive fears.  Why?  So Americans will keep
    smoking, keep becoming addicted, continuing to get
    disease and illness and the burden that that causes
    on our society.
         Doubt is our product.  P486.  Their own
    document.
         They tried it to reassure people.  This is
    their document saying we need to give people a
    psychological crutch so that they will keep smoking
    cigarettes.  Their own document.  We need to give
    people a psychological crutch.
         This is 1963.  We must in the near future
    provide some answers that will give smokers a
    psychological crutch and a self rational to continue
    smoking.  P252.
         You saw the clip with Joseph Cullman in 1971
    where he talked about if there's anything in the
    product we'll take it out, but we don't think
    there's anything bad in our product.
         More documents that CTR was organized as a
    public relations effort.  The industry told the
    world CTR would look at the diseases which were
    being associated with smoking.  There was even a
    suggestion by our political spokesmen that if there was a harmful element that turned up the industry
    would try to get it out.
         Then the distraction science.  They paid a lot
    of money for people to do science about things other
    than smoking that caused cancer.
         Let's face it.  We are interested in evidence
    which we believe denies the allegation that
    cigarette smoking causes disease.  Let's face it.
    That's what we want to look at.
         P291.  This is the kind of evidence and
    research that they put out.  Again the psychological
    crutch.  Lung cancer rare in balanced men.  This is
    actually put out in Tobacco Health Research and
    sent to doctors.  It was a publication.  March birth
    lung cancer link.  Lung specialist cites 28 reasons
    for doubting the cigarette cancer link.  You'll have
    all this evidence and all these documents back
    there.
         And you heard lots and lots of evidence about
    this timeline.  1955, the first white paper comes
    out.  Filters begin being added.  There's the Tar
    Derby.  Dr. Proctor talked about that, where people
    are talking about which cigarettes have lower tar.
    There's a speech from President Weisman I just
    talked about.  This is the document that Dr. Proctor talked about where they -- BAT, British American
    Tobacco Company, visited all of them, all the
    tobacco companies and said in the document that they
    all recognize that smoking causes lung cancer.  That
    was in 1958, the same year that Elaine Jordan moved
    to Jacksonville when she was nine years old.
         In 1963 she started smoking at a carnival when
    she was 14.  We showed you the Wakeham report,
    research & development.  That's a picture of
    Wakeham.  An internal TI memo showing that nicotine
    is addictive.  We showed that in Dr. Proctor's
    testimony.
         In 1964 importantly the report of the advisory
    committee to the U.S. Surgeon General.  The first
    Surgeon General's report comes out in 1964, six
    months after Elaine Jordan smokes her first
    cigarette.
         The psychological crutch.  Same year Elaine
    Jordan smokes her first cigarette.  White papers.
    The conspiracy continues through this period of
    time.  By 1965 Elaine Jordan was a regular smoker.
         And it's important that I do this timeline this
    way because I'm trying to show you how these stories
    are connected, the story of her smoking and what the
    tobacco companies were doing and saying, how those two stories are connected.
         1966.  President Cullman saying if something is
    harmful we can remedy it.  1966, January 1st, the
    caution label goes on the packs, right after Elaine
    Jordan becomes a regular smoker.
         The FTC then comes out with their report saying
    how ineffective the warnings have been, and in fact
    there are more people smoking now than when the
    warnings first went on the pack.  It had absolutely
    no impact on smoking rates.
         The internal memo you heard Dr. Proctor talk
    about saying we can certainly be accused of making
    false statements.  The article in True magazine in
    1968.  The Wakeham report in 1969.
         Again, you'll have all these documents back
    there with you.
         1966 Elaine Jordan first tries to quit smoking.
    It's her first attempt when she's pregnant with her
    first child.  Her son Timothy is born.  1969 her
    daughter Cheryl is born.  1971 Joseph Cullman goes
    on Face the Nation.  You heard that clip that he
    did.  Dunn planning memo regarding the product is
    nicotine.  Their strategy of creating doubt.  All
    these happened in 1970.
         1972 she tries to quit again while she's pregnant with her third child Carmen.  1974 she
    divorces Mitchell Johnson, and the conspiracy
    continues all through the 70's.
         In the 80's -- she remembered 1983.  This is an
    important date.  1983 she's moving into the new
    house and she's trying to quit.  She tries to quit 8
    or 9 times in that very year.  And I put this on the
    timeline because that's exactly when Philip Morris
    is putting pressure on Dow Corning not to release
    Nicorette gum.  That very same time when she is
    trying to quit.  And Dow Corning doesn't market its
    nicotine gum.
         She tries to quit again in 1986.  There is a
    quit attempt in 1983.  1983 is the same year she
    started working at Champion Lumber Company.
         1988 the first Surgeon General report on
    nicotine addiction.  And that report is specifically
    directed just to nicotine addiction.
         You heard testimony about movie placements.
    You'll have that, the documents showing where Philip
    Morris gave product to various movies and which
    movies they were.  We showed you the clip showing
    the Marlboro truck in Superman 2.
         1990 she tries to quit again.  1994 there is
    the Surgeon General report on youth smoking.  1993 she first manifested and was diagnosed with COPD.
         She began again to try and quit and
    importantly switches to light cigarettes.  She's
    trying to quit, but she's testified, I was trying to
    quit, but I thought it would be better if I smoked
    the lights.  She testified she saw on the packs that
    they were lower in tar and that's why she picked
    them up and started smoking Marlboro Lights in 1993
    while she was trying to quit.  The psychological
    crutch.
         1994.  They testified in Congress, and you saw
    the clip.  The president of Philip Morris raised his
    hand under oath in front of the United States
    congress and said cigarette smoking is not
    addictive.  You'll have that clip as well.
         Then you heard testimony how she tried
    repeatedly to quit.  1993, 1994, then in 1998 her
    first visit with Dr. Tecson.  1999 she first saw Dr.
    Rothstein, and he diagnosed her with severe COPD.
         In 2002 she's hospitalized and quit smoking for
    good.  In October 2002 she had her first lung
    transplant.  It wasn't until the year 2000 that
    Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies first
    admit that cigarettes cause disease and that
    nicotine is addictive.  December 2012 she has her second lung transplant and the kidney transplant.
         Now, what I want to do with the rest of my time
    is to talk about the verdict form and what you're
    going to be called upon to decide based upon the
    evidence.
         The first issue is the burden of proof, and you
    were instructed about that this morning.  What the
    burden of proof is is that plaintiff must prove her
    claim by the greater weight of the evidence.  And if
    you think about putting one evidence on one side and
    another evidence on the other side, which side has
    the greater weight.
         So as I go through each of the issues that are
    on the verdict form and each of the issues you have
    to decide I'm going to talk about putting the
    evidence on one side versus what is the evidence on
    the other side and where does the greater weight
    lie, where is the truth?
         And the evidence that you have is going to come
    in basically four forms:  The internal documents
    that we have gone through some of them, the
    documents from the TI, and the documents from Philip
    Morris, and some of the documents from the
    co-conspirators.  And you'll remember you actually
    have a charge in there that you can consider the conduct of the conspirators, the other people who
    joined in the conspiracy.
         You're also going to have government documents,
    documents from the Surgeon General.  You'll actually
    have -- we have put these on the Elmo.  You'll have
    the Surgeon General's reports in these boxes of
    documents.  You can actually go in and look at what
    the Surgeon General said in 2010 about cigarette
    addiction, what the Surgeon General said in '94
    about preventing tobacco use among young people, and
    what tobacco advertising has done with respect to
    the initiation of smoking by kids.  Monograph 19
    from the National Cancer Institute you'll have.  The
    role of media in promoting and producing tobacco
    use.  You'll have all of the Surgeon General's
    reports that we have talked about during the course
    of the trial.
         You also of course have the testimony of the
    witnesses.  We have talked about that.  And you'll
    also have the medical records.  And you have
    voluminous medical records in the case.
         And that's the evidence that you will have to
    decide the issues that you're going to be called
    upon to decide.
         So the first issue that you have to decide under Question 1 is class membership.  And just
    briefly we talked about that, that this action comes
    out of the Engle class which was tried before a jury
    in 1999 and that jury made certain findings after
    hearing a year's worth of testimony.  A jury sat in
    a box and listened to this testimony over the course
    of an entire year and came up with certain findings.
         So what you're going to be called upon to
    decide is whether Elaine Jordan is a member of the
    class.  Is she one of the people that this action
    was brought to benefit?  And they define what a
    class member is, what class member definition is.
    It is simple and it's really not complicated as to
    what it takes for a person to be a member of the
    Engle class.
         And if plaintiff is a member of the Engle class
    then she is entitled to these findings.  And the
    judge instructed you on them.  You will have them in
    your jury instructions.
         So what does class membership entail?  To prove
    that Elaine Jordan meets the definition and is a
    member of the Engle class plaintiffs must prove by
    greater weight of evidence the following:  1.  That
    she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine.
    Addiction.  2.  That her chronic obstructive lung disease was caused by her addiction to cigarettes.
    Cause.  3.  That she manifested chronic obstructive
    lung disease by November 21, 1996.
         And that's the actual question on the verdict
    form.  State whether Elaine Jordan is a member of
    the Engle class.
         So that question really has three parts.  So
    I'm going to talk about each one of those parts in
    turn.  But importantly on the issue of addiction I
    want to talk about what the question is not.  And I
    think all of the evidence supports that the question
    is not whether she could quit.  That is not the
    question.  Because every person said addicted people
    can quit.
         So whether she could quit doesn't determine
    whether she is addicted.  That's not the question
    you have to decide.
         Whether she tried hard enough to quit, not the
    question.  Maybe later when you're talking about
    comparative fault you can think about that, but that
    doesn't go in this part of your consideration.
    Whether she tried hard enough to quit is not the
    issue as to whether or not she was addicted.
         Arguments about whether she didn't try hard
    enough, whether she made enough effort, did enough things, that can be considered in the comparative
    fault.
         MR. COFER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Misstates
    the law.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  You may proceed.
         MS. SHAMP:  But this question is simply was she
    addicted.  Whether she was motivated to quit, not
    the question that you have to decide.  Whether she
    knew smoking was harmful, not the question.  Simple
    question.  Was she addicted.  Whether she chose to
    smoke, not the question.
         As all the experts said, of course smokers who
    are addicted choose to smoke.  They walk in the
    door, they pick up the -- they pay their money.
    Nobody has a gun to their head.  But the question is
    whether the addiction compels that choice.  Simple
    question.  Was she addicted.  The question is was
    she addicted.
         So we put on a lot of evidence about this,
    about what is nicotine.  No dispute.  Nicotine a
    drug which means it has pharmacological effects.  It
    creates a certain effect, and it is a drug.  No
    dispute the drug is addictive.  Nicotine is an
    addictive drug.
         Nicotine actually changes the brain.  And both our expert Dr. Blank and Dr. Ticknor agreed nicotine
    changes the brain, causes these extra receptors in
    the brain.  It actually changes the format of the
    brain.  And Dr. Blank talked about how it affects
    the learning centers of the brain and our memory and
    how that is connected in the way that we learn how
    to do things in that very deep section of our brain,
    the survivor section, she called it the primitive
    brain, and it makes changes in the primitive brain
    that actually trick the brain into thinking that
    they need that product to survive.
         It's a very deep part of the brain.  It's a
    very different part than the prefrontal cortex.  The
    part of the brain that decides should I make this
    behavior, should I do this, should I decide.  This
    is affecting the deep part.
         You will recall the testimony regarding
    dopamine and the pathways.  I thought this was very
    interesting how nicotine affects two parts of the
    brain, both the part that stimulates and the part
    that relaxes.  That's why people say it both
    stimulates and relaxes them.  There are not very
    many drugs that affect both of those parts.  And
    because it affects both of those parts it makes the
    connection to nicotine so much stronger. And you remember from the Surgeon General's
    report, and this is an amazing statistic, and you'll
    have that back with you, that one-third of all
    people who try cigarettes will become dependent.
    That's an amazing number.  And you remember the
    statistic that 80 to 90 percent of regular daily
    smokers are addicted.
         Also her testimony that the longer you smoke,
    the more you smoke, the greater the likelihood is
    that you are addicted.  And beginning smoking in
    early teens increases the likelihood of addiction.
         So all of this evidence you have with respect
    to what is nicotine and addiction.  So let's talk
    for a minute about -- this is the slide you'll
    recall about how if you start initiation of tobacco
    in the early adolescents before the brain is fully
    developed, and what is the part of the brain that
    develops last, the prefrontal cortex, the part
    that's capable of making rational informed
    decisions.  If you've got that deep brain with these
    strong connections being drawn between smoking and
    the pleasure that people feel, that creates a
    stronger addiction.
         So what is the evidence?  And this is the part
    we talked about.  Which side has the greater weight as to whether she was addicted?
         1.  We know that nicotine is addictive and it
    changes the brain.  We have Elaine Jordan's smoking
    history, how much she smoked, 2 to 2 1/2 packs per
    day for 37 years.  A strong connection every day
    with this repeated dosing of the brain that much.
         She began when she was 14 years old, again in
    this preadolescent period when the connection is
    still stronger.  What time of day she smoked.
    Remember that was very important when the doctor was
    talking about the DSM.  The first thing in the
    morning.  She smoked first thing in the morning.
    And that was because when you're sleeping at night
    you go into withdrawal and the first thing in the
    morning you want to get that nicotine back to stop
    the withdrawal symptoms.  She smoked throughout the
    day and she smoked at night right before she went to
    bed.
         So we have evidence of addiction, one.
    Evidence about nicotine itself, two.  Evidence about
    the way Elaine Jordan smoked.  These are both pieces
    that go to the evidence of whether she was addicted.
    And she meets the DSM-5 criteria for addiction
    severe.
         And we went through those entire criteria, and even Dr. Ticknor says she meets five of them.  Even
    Dr. Ticknor says she's meets five of them.
         And remember what the preview said, that if you
    meet 2 or 4 of them that is a manifestation of
    clinically significant impairment.
         Now, Dr. Ticknor said you had to meet six in
    order to be addicted.  She met five.  And we talked
    about the three he said she didn't meet.
         But Dr. Blank said she met nine.  Dr. Blank
    said she met nine and that categorized her as
    severe, a severe addiction.
         We also have Dr. Rothstein's opinion.  Dr.
    Rothstein said he uses a different category.  What
    he said -- he put the four, and I put them on the
    board up there, the person wants to smoke -- wants
    to quit and can't, they're trying and they can't,
    that when they try they have withdrawal symptoms.
    The withdrawal symptoms, which are classic,
    irritation, agitation.  He said she had those that.
    But when they smoke it then relieves the withdrawal
    symptoms.  And that they crave tobacco.
         So those are the four criteria he used, and he
    says in my practice I see smokers every day.  He's a
    pulmonologist.  See smokers every day, and he
    diagnoses addiction.  And his opinion was she was addicted.
         You have Dr. Blank's opinion.  Remember Dr.
    Blank.  She's a medical doctor.  She sought and
    obtained board certification in addiction medicine.
    She practices exclusively addiction medicine.
    Remember she runs an addiction treatment center in
    Atlanta.  She wrote the chapter on nicotine abuse in
    the ASAM guidelines.  She currently sees, treats,
    and prescribes for patients with addiction,
    including nicotine addiction, and she went through
    those categories with you.  She's published on
    addiction, she speaks on addiction, and she came in
    and told you her opinion is that Elaine Jordan
    clearly was addicted to nicotine.
         We also brought in Dr. Sandra Frazier in our
    rebuttal case.  She's also a medical doctor,
    fellowship trained in addiction medicine, board
    certified in addiction medicine.  Again she is an
    addiction medicine specialist, unlike Dr. Ticknor.
    She's dean at the University of Alabama school of
    medicine where she teaches addiction to medical
    students and residents, and has for 20 years.  She's
    a diplomat of the American Board of Addiction
    Medicine, past director of an addiction recovery
    program, and she also currently diagnoses professionals with addiction.  And she testified
    that Elaine Jordan was addicted.
         This is the evidence.  When you talk about the
    greater weight what is the evidence of addiction?
    And here it is, the evidence we put on throughout
    this trial.
         In addition, there are Philip Morris' own
    documents which we talked about where Philip Morris
    says we know it's a drug, where Philip Morris says
    we know people smoke in order to get that drug.
         This document.  It's fortunate for us
    cigarettes are a habit they can't break.  They know
    it's addictive.
         Well, what's on the other side?  What is the
    evidence that she wasn't addicted?  The only
    evidence is Dr. Ticknor.  The only evidence the
    defendants put up that Elaine Jordan wasn't addicted
    is Dr. Ticknor.  He's not an not addiction
    specialist, he has no certification in addiction,
    he's never written, never published, never written
    anything on addiction or nicotine.
         We bring in the person who wrote the chapter in
    the book and two addiction medicine specialists.
    They bring in a general psychiatrist.
         He testified that he taught, but remember I asked him.  He wasn't a paid faculty member of any
    school.  And he's been paid over $550,000 by tobacco
    companies, including $69,000 for his testimony just
    in this case.
         Dr. Ticknor testified it had to be an extreme
    presentation.  Remember he testified of the people
    he treats he only thinks 10 to 20 percent are
    addicted, when the national averages are 80 to 90
    percent.  And these are people who are actually
    seeking help from a psychiatrist to help them stop
    smoking.  And he testified that she smoked because
    she liked it.
         So the greater weight of the evidence we think
    clearly shows that Elaine Jordan was addicted.
         The second part of Question 1 is causation.
    Ladies and gentlemen, there's been a lot of
    testimony and what I'll consider was rabbit trails.
    Rabbit trails that we have to chase down.  Maybe it
    was hypersensitivity pneumonitis, maybe it was
    exposure to wood dust, maybe it was asthma.  And we
    chased them down and stopped them off.  Right.
         But the weight of the evidence is overwhelming
    that this was caused by cigarette smoking.
    Overwhelming.
         So this is what the jury instruction will be. In order to be regarded as a legal cause addiction
    to cigarettes need not be the only cause.  Even
    if -- even if the defendant succeeded in showing to
    you that you think there was evidence that
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis played some role, or
    even if her asthma played some role, the plaintiff's
    burden is to prove not that it's the only cause, but
    that it is the legal cause.  An addiction to Philip
    Morris U.S.A.'s cigarettes may be a legal cause of
    injury even though it operates in combination with
    the act of another or some other cause.  If some
    other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction
    and the addiction to smoking cigarettes contributes
    substantially.
         That's what we have to prove, is that the
    smoking contributed substantially.  Not that there
    were no other possibilities out there.
         And remember the two witnesses they put up, Dr.
    Frazier and Dr. Stonesifer both said they couldn't
    even say.  They said maybe this, maybe that, maybe
    this.  But none of them said smoking wasn't a cause.
    None of the evidence put up said smoking wasn't a
    cause.
         So what is the greater weight of the evidence?
    You'll have the Surgeon General's report who says that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason
    that individuals persist in using tobacco products.
    It is the addiction that keeps people smoking.  It
    is the addiction.
         Their own documents.  They know it's a drug.
    Do we really want to tout cigarette smoking as a
    drug?  It is of course.  These are their own
    internal documents.
         I think this one shows, that shows that
    addiction is the reason people continue to smoke.
    We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if
    the person was addicted.  This is their own
    document.  They know that when someone is addicted
    it's the addiction that compels the use and not a
    free choice.
         So what evidence did we put up?  We put up Dr.
    Rothstein, her treating pulmonologist, practices
    right here in this town.  Her pulmonologist said
    smoking is what caused her COPD.
         We put up Dr. Wright, and Dr. Wright showed you
    the emphysematous changes, and he showed you, when
    Ms. Speed was asking him questions, these slides.  I
    want to show you -- you'll have all of these back
    there.  And he talked about these big airspaces are
    emphysema and they're all over.  If you look these big old airspaces.  Look at them.  They are all over
    throughout in the lung tissue.  Also these black
    spots, anthracotic pigment, throughout there.
         What Dr. Stonesifer said is there were a few
    scattered granulomas.  Simply common sense tells you
    that the few scattered granulomas could not cause
    this kind of emphysematous severe changes.  In fact
    their own expert didn't say that it did.  Common
    sense.
         You'll have the pathology.  But not just this,
    you will also have the surgical pathology from the
    pathologist who took out the lung tissue where he
    said severe emphysematous changes throughout the
    lung.  Severe emphysema throughout the lung.
         You also have the testimony that 80 to
    90 percent of all COPD is caused by cigarette
    smoking across the country.  Nobody disputed that.
    80 to 90 percent of all COPD is caused by cigarette
    smoking.
         Think about that for a minute.  The idea that a
    person who smoked for 37 years 2 packs a day, she is
    a heavy cigarette smoker, somehow falls in the 10
    percent that get COPD, that other than the ones
    caused by cigarette smoking does not make any sense,
    based on the fact that she was such a heavy cigarette smoker over the period.
         What is the evidence that cigarette smoking was
    not a cause, not a substantial contributing cause?
    What was evidence on the other side.  None.  No
    evidence that this was not a substantial -- not a
    substantial contributing cause.
         Dr. Frazier -- both their experts both
    testified that smoking contributed to her disease.
    They said they couldn't decide how much, but they
    both said it contributed to her disease.
         I briefly want to talk about hypersensitivity
    pneumonitis.  You'll have with you over 20,000 pages
    of medical records from some of the best
    pulmonologists in the world that practice at the
    Mayo Clinic.  The best pulmonologists in the world.
    And Philip Morris came in and told you she had
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and nobody ever saw
    it.
         And one thing occurred to me yesterday when I
    was listening to Mr.(sic) Stonesifer's testimony.
    She still has a native lung.  So whatever was
    happening in one lung was happening in the other.
    If she had hypersensitivity pneumonitis over there
    she's still got it over here.  Yet she's continued
    to see pulmonologist after pulmonologist, had another second transplant.  The testimony being she
    has this disease, that in fact that disease somehow
    contributed substantially to causing her disease,
    and cigarette smoking didn't, and no doctor ever
    mentioned it.
         Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is an extremely
    rare disease.  Extremely rare.  COPD caused by
    cigarette smoking is not.  And even that cannot
    explain the overwhelming emphysema throughout her
    lung.
         Wood dust.  You've heard countless testimony
    about wood dust.  But what is the evidence?  And Dr.
    Stonesifer said it yesterday.  If it was kiln
    dried -- and the evidence was that it was kiln dried
    before it got to her -- then there could not be any
    spores in there of mold that would have caused any
    kind of disease.  It was kiln dried.
         She worked in a whole different building from
    where they were cutting the wood.  The sawmill is --
    I showed you the diagram, showed you where the mill
    was, that U-shaped building, and her building was
    down here with the round roof on it.  And she worked
    in an air-conditioned cab in that.
         Again rabbit trails.  And we chased them all
    down.  But we think the overwhelming evidence of course establishes the greater weight of the
    evidence that her COPD was caused by smoking
    cigarettes.
         Manifestation.  The jury instruction reads:
    Ms. Jordan had COPD that first manifested itself on
    or before November 21, 1996, if she knew, or in the
    exercise of reasonable care should have known, on or
    before November 21, 1996, 1, that she had COPD, and,
    2, that there was a reasonable probability that her
    COPD was caused by cigarette smoking.
         Okay.  Now, you've heard countless testimony
    about what people remembered happening over 20 years
    ago, whether she wrote something down on a form
    while she was going through a lung transplant.  So
    what I want to talk about is what we know.  Not
    based on somebody's memory, but what we know.
         We know she had COPD in 1993.  That's
    undisputed.  We know that she had COPD in 1993.  Dr.
    Rothstein testified about it, and Dr. Frazier their
    expert agreed she had it.  It's the natural course
    of her disease.
         We looked at her spirometry and we saw that
    tiny circle in the middle.  That's her lung function
    compared to normal.  That doesn't happen overnight.
    It's chronic obstructive lung disease.  That doesn't happen overnight.
         She had COPD in 1993, but clearly before 1996,
    which was 18 months before the spirometry.
         You're looking at November 21, 1996.  The
    spirometry is done in 1999, 2 and-a-half years.
    Clearly.  And there is no dispute about that.  That
    is the fact that everybody agrees to.  She had it.
         We also have Dr. Tecson's records.  Okay.  This
    is an important record, and you will have it back
    with you.  I think I have the typed version right
    there, but I also have the actual -- and this is
    important.  You're going to have both of these with
    you.  This is his actual handwriting, which is very
    hard to read.  But you will have this exhibit with
    you.
         And importantly the difference in here that I
    wanted to point out is that everybody talked about
    what is a SOAP note.  SOAP note.  S-O-A-P, SOAP.
    S-O-A-P, SOAP.
         And the first part is subjective.  It's what
    the patient tells you, the history.  That's up here
    typed up here and here handwritten, but they didn't
    put the S-O-A-P on the typed version.  That's why
    it's important to look at this one too, because this
    is the history that she related.  And what she related was she had a history of asthma five years
    ago, had also emphysema.
         So we know that she told Dr. Tecson that five
    years ago she had emphysema.  This is in 1998.  That
    would have put it exactly when she said she was
    diagnosed in 1993.
         But regardless, we have this document.
    Regardless of her memory and what she says, we have
    this document that shows that she had a history of
    emphysema, that she gave him that history in 1998.
    And we know of course that she had emphysema in
    1993.  These are consistent documents.  This is what
    we know.
         That's the record that you will actually have
    there with you.  It has the SOAP note, which is
    important.
         We also know that she was in Baptist Hospital
    in 1993.  You remember she testified while she was
    working she had an attack and she fell out and that
    they came and they took her to the hospital, and she
    went to the hospital.  That's when she was diagnosed
    with COPD.  We know from her testimony she was in
    the hospital, and from Dr. Rothstein's testimony
    that she was in the hospital.  We know that she's
    got COPD.  That's undisputed.  She's in the hospital in 1993.  And she testified that's when they told me
    I had COPD.
         But an important thing more piece of fact,
    that's when she switched to light cigarettes.  That
    confirms that's when she knew she had COPD.  That's
    when she switched to light cigarettes in 1993.
    That's what we know, that her disease manifested
    before November 1996.
         We have Dr. Rothstein's testimony.  And you
    remember -- this is very important because the judge
    instructed you that you are able to consider Dr.
    Rothstein's testimony.  You'll remember, you will
    have it in your notes, you're able to consider Dr.
    Rothstein's testimony that she was diagnosed in
    1993.  That's important.  Dr. Rothstein testified
    she was diagnosed in 1993.
         Tonya Spencer, her daughter, ties it to her own
    child, being born in '91, when she was two years
    old, and Elaine Jordan's testimony, all said she had
    the diagnosis in 1993.
         All of the evidence lines up, all the facts
    line up that she had the disease before 1996.
         Importantly there is no medical records before
    1998.  So we argue that this test wasn't run, or
    that test wasn't run.  There are no medical records before 1998, because as Dr. Rothstein said, they
    were destroyed.  So we don't know what tests were
    run before 1998 because there is no medical record
    from before 1998.
         What's the evidence on the other side?  The
    evidence on the other side, documents that she
    filled out years later.  But look at them carefully
    about what was filled out, and look at each one of
    them, because some of them I believe the defense put
    up which said she was diagnosed with severe COPD.
    She was diagnosed with severe COPD three years ago.
    In 2002 she said that, and that's completely
    consistent.
         Then there's the disability form.  And you
    remember Dr. Rothstein said, I don't fill that out,
    my assistant does.  But importantly look at what the
    diagnosis is that he writes down.  Hemoptysis, which
    is coughing up blood, and COPD, and she had that for
    the first time in June.  Completely consistent.  She
    had hemoptysis and COPD for the first time in June.
         The idea that Dr. Rothstein would write on a
    piece of paper that she had COPD for the first time
    in June of 1999 when he saw that spirometry is
    absurd.  He knew.  That's absurd.
         Every doctor would agree that disease didn't show up in June of 1999.  What did was the
    hemoptysis, the coughing up blood.  That simply made
    sense.
         The greater weight of the evidence is clear
    that she manifested -- and manifested just means,
    the judge will instruct you, you've got the
    instruction there, shows up.
         MR. COFER:  Objection.  Misstates the law and
    the instruction.
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, I think I pointed them
    directly to what their instructions are.
         MR. COFER:  Same objection, Your Honor.  May we
    approach?
         THE COURT:  Yes.
         (Sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.)
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, he interrupted before I
    finished my sentence, which was going to be that
    manifested means that it shows up and she recognizes
    it, as the instruction says, within the class
    period.
         MR. COFER:  Well, then I apologize.  I was too
    quick to object.
         THE COURT:  Thank you very much.
         (Following sidebar.)
         MS. SHAMP:  What manifested means, as I was saying, is that it shows up and she recognizes it
    within the class period.  That's all it means.
         They have not put up one witness, they have not
    put up one piece of evidence that proves that she
    didn't know she had that disease in 1994.
         MR. COFER:  Objection.  It's the plaintiff's
    burden of proof.
         THE COURT:  It's argument.  I'll overrule.  You
    may proceed.
         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you.
         Plaintiff has presented enormous evidence that
    she had it, that she knew she had, she was diagnosed
    in 1993, including her treating pulmonologist.
         State whether Elaine Jordan is a member of the
    Engle class.  We have chased down a lot of rabbit
    trails.  So the answer to that question clearly,
    based on the evidence and the truth, is yes.
         Now, as the court has instructed you, if you
    find she's a member of the class you're entitled to
    apply the findings in favor of her.  And the
    findings are cigarette smoking causes chronic
    obstructive lung disease, cigarettes are addictive,
    Philip Morris placed cigarettes on the market that
    were dangerous and -- defective and unreasonably
    dangerous, Philip Morris concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or
    available, knowing the material was false or
    misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact
    concerning the health effects or the addictive
    nature of smoking cigarettes, or both.  Philip
    Morris agreed -- conspiracy -- agreed with other
    tobacco companies to conceal or omit information
    regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their
    addictive nature, or both, with the intention,
    intending that smokers and the public would rely on
    this information to their detriment.
         And that last word is important.  To their
    detriment.  To their illness.  To their death.
    Philip Morris was negligent.
         Importantly, the jury instructions you have in
    front of you provide that these finding may not be
    denied, questioned, and they must carry the same
    weight that they would have if you had determined
    them yourselves.
         The next question is the statute of limitations
    question.  Importantly there is a difference in this
    with the statute of limitations.  That means that's
    a defense the defendant has raised, thus they bear
    the burden of proof.  They have to prove it.  The
    burden is on them by the greater weight of the evidence that Ms. Jordan knew, or by use of
    reasonable care should have known, before May of
    1990.
         So in some ways the argument will be on both
    sides.  They're going to try and argue I believe,
    and they have tried to put on evidence that she
    knew -- she didn't know before 1990, or she did, she
    knew before 1990.  By the reasonable care should
    have known before May 1990 that she had COPD, and
    there's a reasonable possibility COPD was caused by
    cigarette smoking.
         Ladies and gentlemen, there is not any
    evidence -- I submit there's not any evidence that
    she knew she had COPD before 1990.  None of the
    evidence that you're going to take back there with
    you, none of the documents, none of the medical
    records will show that she had or knew, her own
    testimony.  Where does that evidence come from?
    Where?
         Ask yourselves when they're arguing what
    evidence do you have of that?  Therefore, we think
    the statute of limitations clearly does not apply.
    They have not met their burden.  That is their
    burden to prove that before 1990 she knew she had
    COPD.  They have not presented any evidence to support that, so no should be checked on Question 2.
         These are the fraudulent concealment and the
    civil conspiracy questions.  State whether Philip
    Morris' concealment or omission of material facts
    about the health effects or addictive nature of
    smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of
    Elaine Jordan's injuries.  Same question, whether
    they're agreement was a legal cause of Elaine
    Jordan's injuries.
         Now, the judge will instruct you what that
    means, and I'm going to read that.  It's a little
    long.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         I think when we took a break I was just about
    to talk about the next question on the jury -- the
    verdict form, which is questions number 3 and 4,
    fraudulent concealment and civil conspiracy to
    fraudulently conceal.
         And this is essentially the fraud counts.  This
    is the question of whether what the defendants did
    was a fraud, and whether that fraud -- there was a
    legal cause of harm to Elaine Jordan.
         And what the jury charge on that is, is that
    Elaine Jordan's reliance on such statements to her
    detriment is a legal cause of loss, injury, or
    damage if it directly, in a natural and continuous
    sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing her loss, injury, or damage, so that it
    can be reasonably said that, but for Elaine Jordan's
    reliance, her loss, injury or damage would not have
    occurred.
         So, really, the question is here, reliance.
    Was the conspiracy in fraud part of why Elaine
    Jordan smoked?  Did she rely upon what they said?
    And there's been a lot of evidence about that.
         The first thing that you have is you have the
    findings, because at this point, if you're at this
    point in the jury form, you have already been
    instructed that the findings apply.
         So we know that Philip Morris concealed or
    omitted material information that was not otherwise
    known, not otherwise known.
         So what we talked about was the campaign of
    doubt and denial.  And I just put up these few
    little pictures to remind you of these various
    individuals that testified and their campaign of
    doubt and denial.
         And then we also talked about that cigarettes
    are the most heavily advertised product in America.
    And this is from the FTC, Federal Trade Commission,
    investigation in 1981.  The most heavily advertised
    product in America. So at the same time that they know that
    cigarette smoking is causing lung cancer and lung
    disease, they're advertising the product in all the
    ways that we put on evidence and showed:  The
    Marlboro man, the out in the country, the fresh and
    wild outdoors.
         So pervasive is cigarette advertising that it
    is virtually impossible for Americans of almost any
    age to avoid cigarette advertising.
         And then we looked at what is the impact of
    that.  And this is, again, in the FTC report:  "The
    Commission believes that the warning label on
    cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming
    the prevalent attitude toward cigarette smoking
    created and maintained by the cigarette companies
    through their advertisements."
         Essentially, the warnings can't compete with
    the massive amount of advertising that presents this
    product as being a natural, healthy part of an
    outdoor lifestyle.
         "Particularly, the barrage of commercials on
    television which portray smoking as a harmless and
    enjoyable social activity that is not habit-forming
    and involves no hazards to health."
         Their overwhelming advertising campaign, even in the face of (inaudible), made people continue to
    smoke.  That was the point of it.  That's the
    purpose of it is to keep people smoking.
         And, importantly, the data indicates that
    smokers are more likely to have incorrect beliefs
    about the relationship between smoking and lung
    cancer than non-smokers."
         And, "Among all smokers, 28 percent," in the
    time this was done, "did not believe smoking caused
    lung cancer; while, among heavier smokers, a pack a
    day or more, nearly a third did not believe or know
    about the link.  38 percent of smokers believe that
    they still haven't proven that smoking causes
    cancer."
         Why am I putting up this evidence?  (Inaudible)
    that their campaign was working, that people didn't
    believe.  The campaign of doubt that they put out,
    the campaign was working.
         And it makes sense.  They were spending
    millions of dollars to do it.  They were spending
    millions of dollars.  And, people, it worked.  It
    worked.  People didn't believe that it would impact
    their own health.
         This, I think, is a very important document,
    the false and misleading advertising in Congress. And you'll see the conclusions from this report.
    "The cigarette manufacturers have deceived the
    American public through their advertising of
    filter-tipped cigarettes.  Without specifically
    claiming that the filter tip removes the agents
    alleged to contribute to heart disease or lung
    cancer, the advertising has emphasized claims such
    as clean smoking, snowy white, pure, miracle tip,
    2000 filters, gives you more of what you change the
    filter for, and other phrases that imply health
    protection, when, actually, most filter cigarettes
    produce as much or more nicotine and tar as
    cigarettes without filters, and, as a result, the
    connection between filter-tipped cigarettes and
    protection has become deeply embedded in the
    public's mind."
         They're advertising a filtered cigarette, a
    cigarette that takes the fear out of smoking.
    That's a Philip Morris ad.
         This is another Philip Morris ad for their
    filtered cigarettes.
         They knew this.  This was an intentional
    misleading campaign because this is their own
    document.  And this is P-283, which is a special
    report:  "The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration."
         And they put out the Marlboro Lights and said
    they were lower in tar, when they knew that they
    were not, and that it afforded no protection, and
    she switched.  Reliance.  This is our evidence
    directly that she relied on what they said.
         And the evidence is clear from her that she
    believed it, and she relied upon it.  And that's
    what the fraud and conspiracy question asks, did she
    rely to her detriment.
         This is from the Surgeon General's report,
    which you'll have back with you, which is P-487:
    "By the mid-seventies, the tobacco industry well
    understood the importance of creating health
    reassurance messages through claims of low delivery
    of tar."  They knew it.  The claims they made that
    she relied upon.
         "At the same time, tobacco company documents
    also clearly demonstrate that the industry
    understood that smokers would not achieve the
    claimed deliveries because of smoker compensation."
    This is evidence directly of reliance.
         So with respect to this question on the verdict
    form, the overwhelming evidence that we've put on of
    this campaign of doubt and denial, the evidence of the low tar, the filter cigarettes, and then we link
    it to Elaine Jordan and her actual behavior.
         What Philip Morris wants to argue, ladies and
    gentlemen, didn't make any difference, nobody relied
    on it.  We spent this millions and millions of
    dollars, but it didn't actually impact anybody.  It
    didn't actually impact anybody.  We were just
    spending these millions of dollars, but nobody
    relied on us.
         One of the jury charges you have is you have to
    use your common sense, use your common sense when
    you make your deliberations.  This campaign of
    denial, this campaign that low tar will be safer for
    you was intended to make smokers rely, and it
    worked.
         And we brought Elaine Jordan to tell you it
    worked on her, and that instead of quitting in 1993,
    she switched to lights and continued to smoke.  It
    worked on her.
         Therefore, with respect to reliance, you may
    use your reason and common sense to reach your
    conclusions, and you may draw reasonable inferences.
    And that's an inference, that this massive campaign,
    that they wouldn't have spent all that money unless
    it worked.  And that's an inference that you can draw.
         Whether Philip Morris' concealment or omission
    of a material fact about the health effects -- and
    that's one of them that the Surgeon General's report
    says that they omitted telling people, it's not any
    lower in tar -- that that was a legal cause of
    Elaine Jordan's injuries.
         Same question with respect to the conspiracy.
    Same issue.  Not just Philip Morris, but together
    they agreed to do this.  Same question.  Same
    answer.
         Now, the next issue that we get to is
    comparative fault.  And we've touched upon that
    before as well; but, that, again, is the defendant's
    defense.  And you remember, the Judge instructed you
    about that, and you'll have those instructions.
    That's something that the defendant has raised as a
    defense.  And their defense is Elaine Jordan was
    responsible, too.
         But, importantly, that's -- they bear the
    burden of proving that Elaine Jordan did something
    wrong.  Okay?
         Philip Morris bears the burden of proving its
    defense of comparative fault by a greater weight of
    the evidence.  If the greater weight of the evidence does not support Philip Morris' defense, and the
    greater weight of the evidence does support
    Ms. Jordan's claim, then your verdict should be for
    Elaine Jordan in the total amount of the damages."
         So the verdict form will ask you:  "Please
    state for each party the percentage of any
    responsibility that you charge to that party for
    legally causing Elaine Jordan's damages."
         What evidence was put on?  If you want to
    compare, that's what that is.
         Philip Morris lied with the intention that
    smokers would rely to their detriment.  Why?  To
    sell more cigarettes.  For money.
         Let's compare that.  Let's compare that kind of
    action to what Elaine Jordan did.
         She didn't try harder; is that their argument?
    When she started smoking when she was 14 years old?
    When she was addicted?  When she tried everything
    she could think of to quit, when they were
    suppressing the sale of even Nicorette gum to help
    her.
         Just compare what they did to what she did.
    And they bear the burden of proving that she did
    something wrong and how much her fault contributed.
    They bear that burden. Ladies and gentlemen, we contend that Philip
    Morris is responsible for this, not Elaine Jordan.
    And if she is, it's a very small amount compared to
    their conduct.  Not trying harder when she was
    addicted.  Not knowing better when she was 14 years
    old.  Compare what they knew and what they did and
    why they did it.  Greed.
         Next, you'll get to the issue of damages,
    ladies and gentlemen.  And there's several questions
    on the verdict form about damages, and we put on
    evidence of this.
         The first evidence is the total amount of
    medical damages, including all medical bills
    sustained by Elaine Jordan.  And the total amount,
    you remember, I put them up there, all those bills,
    which will go back in evidence, but the total from
    their summary of them, over 2 million dollars.
         And the Judge will instruct you that you're not
    to consider any kind of payments that were made or
    insurance or anything, and that's in your
    instructions right there.  The total amount of the
    bills is what the total amount of damages that the
    plaintiff has put on as evidence, $2,092,186.64.
         And then we also put on evidence through
    Mr. Spruance of what the future medicals are.  And you won't have a document back there because this
    comes from his testimony that he did orally in front
    of you; but, the total amount of the future medical
    care costs of 219,744 on the small end, and 844,000
    on the large end.
         And there's a range there, and you'll have to
    go back and decide which end of that range or in the
    middle somewhere you want to or you feel is
    appropriate to award.
         But you should consider things like the cost of
    medicines will go up.  And you should consider
    things like what future expenses she might have and
    what Mr. Spruance said about that within that range.
         And I think you remember Ms. Speed asking, have
    you ever known medical expenses to go down?  So the
    range is there between 219 and 844,000.
         Past lost income, Mr. Spruance also testified
    about.  And, again, there's no evidence on the other
    side of any of these.  This evidence went in
    undisputed.  And the range was 379,000 to 436.  And
    that's a pretty tight range.  And that's based upon
    some different assumptions that he made with respect
    to what she lost; and that's past, from the time she
    had to retire in 1999 up until the time she would
    have retired at the age of 65, that's that loss for that period of time.
         Then the next question -- that's all of
    question number 7.  The next question is:  What is
    the total amount of damages for loss of services
    sustained?
         Again, this also comes from Mr. Spruance's
    testimony.  And the range is 71,000 to 81,000.  And
    I already talked about that, the kinds of things
    she's not able to do because of her COPD, that she
    would have to in the future hire somebody to do for
    her.
         And then now I get to this question, which is
    more difficult.  What the Court will tell you is, is
    that the amount of pain and suffering is up to the
    jury, in the lay conscience of the jury to
    deliberate and decide.
         And it's very difficult to put a number on
    suffering.  And, ladies and gentlemen, I'm no expert
    at it, but there are things that you can think about
    because we put numbers on things all the time that
    are hard to put numbers on.
         So here's some of the things I think that you
    can think about.  One thing you can think about is
    what is the magnitude of this harm?  How bad was the
    pain and suffering? And I think you remember Dr. Rothstein said he
    had never -- in all of his years of practice, never
    seen anybody that went through as much.  The
    magnitude you should consider.
         And so I think of it in my mind.  There's small
    harms, there's medium harms, and then there's major
    harms.  And certainly, this falls in the major.
         The length of time that somebody has this pain
    and suffering.  How long did this last?  And, ladies
    and gentlemen, she was diagnosed in 1993, and this
    is 2015, 22 years.  22 years.
         And what she has gone through, the number of
    surgeries, being near death, in and out of the
    hospital.  You saw the chart when Mr. Spruance put
    it up of how many times in and out of the hospital,
    how many times near death, how many times her chest
    has been cut open, not being able to breathe.  Think
    about that when you're trying to assess pain,
    suffering, disability and physical impairment,
    mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss of the
    capacity for the enjoyment of life, in the past and
    in the future.
         There's two lines there, what she's already
    suffered and what we know she's going to suffer down
    the road because we heard testimony about that.  How long her life lasts, (inaudible), those are all
    things that you can consider.
         And I'm going to ask for a number to put in
    there.  And that number is not the floor, it's not
    the ceiling, because it's going to be up to you to
    deliberate as to what is the appropriate number
    there.
         But based on the evidence that you've heard --
    and I think that that's the way you have to think
    about it, what is the evidence you heard on
    suffering from Dr. Rothstein, from Elaine Jordan
    herself, what is the evidence of the impact itself?
         What I'm going to ask that you put in there is
    5 million dollars for past and 5 million dollars for
    future.  I think that's a fair number for having
    suffered for 22 years with the COPD and the extreme
    pain and suffering that she has been through.
         MR. COFER:  I can't hear her.
         MS. SHAMP:  Then, at the end, there's question
    number 10, where you add all of those lines up for
    all, 6-A through 9-A and B, and come up with a total
    amount of damages.
         And lastly, I want to address just for a moment
    punitive damages.  "Under the circumstances of this
    case, state whether, by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages" -- and we talked about
    this (inaudible).  Punitive damages are given in
    order to punish and deter.  And what the jury
    instructions are is they are warranted if you find
    by clear and convincing evidence the conduct causing
    loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as
    to show a reckless disregard for human life or of
    the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such
    conduct.
         And I think it is overwhelming that the conduct
    of the defendant showed exactly that, disregard for
    human life, total disregard for how their conduct
    affected not just individuals, but --
         MR. COFER:  Your Honor, I can't hear Ms. Shamp.
         MS. SHAMP:  I'm sorry.  I'll speak louder.
         -- not only individuals, but their whole
    family.  Reckless disregard.  We think the evidence
    is clear.
         MR. COFER:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
    improper argument.  May we approach?
         THE COURT:  Yes.
         (The following took place at the bench:)
         MR. COFER:  They can't consider the harm to the
    family.  You can't.  There's no consortium claim.
    You can't consider harm to the family.  They intentionally didn't bring a consortium claim.  I've
    asked for a jury instruction --
         MS. SHAMP:  Your Honor, I think what I was
    saying was right, their disregard for human life and
    safety of persons exposed to such conduct.
         THE COURT:  You said families.  And I think
    what I'm going to do is I'm going to sustain your
    objection, and I'm going to say, when you go back
    out there, to remind them the only person they are
    to award damages for is Ms. Jordan herself.
         MR. COFER:  And there's no claim that the
    family is seeking damages.
         MS. SHAMP:  That's fine.
         THE COURT:  I think that's fair.
         (Bench conference concluded.)
         THE COURT:  I just want to remind our jury that
    the only claim for damages in this case is for
    Ms. Jordan herself, and not for any other
    individual.  So the only person you should consider,
    if you wish to give damages to, is to Ms. Jordan
    herself.
         Please proceed, Ms. Shamp.
         MS. SHAMP:  The punitive damage instruction
    tells you that if we have proven by clear and
    convincing evidence that the conduct of Philip Morris showed an entire lack of care such that
    Philip Morris must have been consciously indifferent
    to the consequences, the conduct showed such an
    entire lack of care that Philip Morris must have
    wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and
    welfare of the public, or the conduct showed such
    reckless and indifference to the rights of others as
    to be equivalent to an intentional violation of
    those rights.
         So I want to talk for a minute about what we
    think the evidence shows with respect to why we
    think punitive damages, damages to punish
    (inaudible) satisfies this.
         And the Court's instruction, it's in your
    instructions, so you can look at them in the
    punitive damages section, says that:  "In
    determining whether punitive damages are warranted,
    you may consider similar harms suffered by other
    persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the
    reprehensibility, the reprehensibility or
    wrongfulness of Philip Morris' actions.
         So you can consider the harms that have been
    suffered by other persons in deciding was their
    conduct reprehensible.
         MR. COFER:  Objection, Your Honor, misstates the law.  May we approach?
         THE COURT:  Yes.
         (The following took place at the bench:)
         MR. COFER:  It must be the same or similar
    conduct that harmed Ms. Jordan.  You can't consider
    harm to others except for the same and similar
    conduct.
         MS. SHAMP:  I believe that's the charge.
         MR. COFER:  But that's not what you said.
         THE COURT:  You said something different, so if
    you would just clarify.
         MS. SHAMP:  I meant to be reading from it.
         THE COURT:  That's fine.  Thank you.  That's
    fine.
         (Bench conference concluded.)
         MS. SHAMP:  Let me read exactly what it says,
    because you'll have this with you:  "In determining
    whether punitive damages are warranted, you may
    consider similar harms suffered by other persons not
    parties to this lawsuit in assessing
    reprehensibility."
         All right.  Let's talk for a minute about
    whether punitive damages are awarded.
         The first thing I want to talk about is their
    statements about whether nicotine was addictive. This is a document from them, the Battelle document,
    I think.  And it's P-238:  "Moreover, nicotine is
    addictive.  We then are in the business of selling
    nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release
    of stress mechanisms that cause or predispose to
    lung cancer."
         And this is from 1963.  And yet, in 1994, their
    President of Philip Morris goes on television and
    says smoking is not addictive.
         The question I think you need to ask yourself
    with respect to punitive damages is how egregious is
    this conduct, how serious is it, is it done with the
    intent to harm, with the intent to addict, and with
    the intent to entice children to their product?
         And we put on evidences of all of those things,
    and you'll have that evidence back.
         One is that Philip Morris studied the smoking
    patterns of children as young as 12 years old.  This
    document that you'll have back there:  "The smoking
    patterns of teenagers are particularly important to
    Philip Morris."
         "It is important to know as much as possible
    about teenage smoking patterns and attitudes.
    Today's teenager is tomorrow's potential regular
    customer, and the overwhelming majority of smokers first begin to smoke while still in their teens."
         And you will have documents back there where
    they'll have studies that show current regular
    smokers at the age of 12 to 14, looking at their
    smoking patterns, looking -- and then developing
    their marketing to attract those individuals, those
    kids to their product.
         This is a document that does just that, talking
    about:  "An upper age limit of 24 was assigned, but
    no lower age limit."  And then it said:
    "Interviewers were instructed to go to the locations
    where young people, as described in their quota
    assignments, were likely to be found, near high
    schools and colleges, around young people's hangouts
    such as soda fountains, recreation areas, parks."
    This is from 1974.
         And there's many documents like this that we
    showed through Dr. Proctor's testimony of how they
    were targeting and marketing to children.
         This is where 18-year-olds and less are
    studied, and they're looking at them in their
    marketing documents.
         This is the document, you'll recall, where they
    actually were -- they said it was an excellent
    suggestion to hand out candy, chocolate cigarettes to children.  You will have that document back
    there.  It's P-172.  "In my opinion, this is an
    excellent suggestion."  And there's more documents
    surrounding that.
         And this is Philip Morris' report to the Board
    of Directors in 1969, where they're studying why
    young people smoke.  "We have to break the question
    into two parts.  The 16-to-20-year-old began smoking
    for psychosocial reasons.  The act of smoking is
    symbolic.  It signifies adulthood.  He smokes to
    enhance his image in the eyes of his peers.  But the
    psychological motive is not enough to explain
    continued smoking.  Some other motive forces take
    over to make smoking rewarding in its own right.
    Long after adolescent preoccupation with self image
    has subsided, the cigarette will preempt food in
    times of scarcity on the smoker's priority list."
         They were studying what teenagers wanted, and
    then marketed directly to them.
         You heard Dr. Proctor talk about placement of
    their product in movies and how -- and you also saw
    Surgeon General's report of how placement in movies
    actually influenced children beginning to smoke.
    And we showed you the clip from Grease and how
    smoking was portrayed as an initiation into adulthood in the Grease movie.
         And, in fact, they supplied product.  And
    Philip Morris, on P-400, you'll see the entire list
    of movies in which they had supplied product for.
         And this is from the Surgeon General's report
    from 1994, which you'll have back there, which
    actually talks about the impact of it.
         And it says:  "Most adolescent smokers are
    addicted to nicotine, and they want to quit but are
    unable to do so.  They experience relapse rates and
    withdrawal symptoms similar to those reported by
    adults."
         Preventing tobacco use among -- this is another
    Surgeon General's report which states that:  "The
    evidence sufficient to conclude that there is a
    causal relationship between advertising and
    promotional efforts of tobacco companies and the
    initiation and progression of tobacco use among
    young people."
         So we've put on evidence not only that they
    marketed to kids, but that it worked.  Not only that
    they marketed to kids, but that it worked.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, we argue that that's
    reprehensible conduct, that that merits punitive
    damages, and that punitive damages for that alone ought to be awarded, in addition to all the other
    evidence that we put on.
         But this is the second piece of that, and that
    is, they didn't just let the tobacco -- roll it, put
    it in a cigarette and smoke it.  They actually
    designed their products in order to addict people.
         And Dr. Proctor talked about that, the specific
    ways in which they did that -- there are documents
    back there -- that they add nicotine to cigarettes
    and define the contribution of nicotine to flavor.
    And that document is P-499.  What the nicotine
    delivery level should be.  And this is a highly
    designed product, and they talk about that,
    including this one:  "Nicotine delivery can be
    controlled via the filter or smoke pH adjustment."
         And you'll remember Dr. Proctor talking
    particularly about Marlboro, and how because of the
    ammonia added, it added that kick.  And Marlboro
    went from being a nobody in the market to being the
    number one product.  That this was a design feature
    designed to create and sustain addiction.
         This isn't just a product that they put out
    there and say, people, smoke it if you want to.
    They intentionally want people to become addicted to
    it.  And, ladies and gentlemen, that merits punitive damages.
         Their own document says:  "We can't defend
    smoking as free choice if the person was addicted."
    And this is from their lawyers.
         I want to mention just for a minute the
    overwhelming battle that the public health community
    is facing.  We showed documents about it, the
    overwhelming battle.  The tobacco industry spent
    more on advertising --
         MR. COFER:  Your Honor, may we approach?
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         (The following took place at the bench:)
         MR. COFER:  This is improper argument for
    punitive damages.  She's on the punitive damages
    part of the argument now.  She's talked about, you
    know, kids and others.  Now she's talking about the
    public health community.  That has nothing to do
    with punitive damages, and it's confusing to the
    jury.
         You can punish for the harm to Ms. Jordan.  If
    similar actions harm others, they can be considered
    reprehensible.  In terms of public health community
    versus cigarette companies, it has nothing to do
    with punitive damages.
         MS. SHAMP:  A part of the punitive damages argument is their advertising campaign, that their
    advertising campaign -- and that's what I was
    arguing -- that their advertising campaign is
    overwhelming, and the public health community has no
    fight against that, and they know that.  And so
    that's part of punitive damages.
         MR. COFER:  She's already arguing about
    advertising.  Frankly, advertising speech.  She has
    to tie our actions to Ms. Jordan.  This has nothing
    to do with Ms. Jordan, and it's time she move on.
    She's argued about this already.  This is improper
    at this point.
         THE COURT:  I do think it's time for you to
    move on, so I'll sustain that.
         MS. SHAMP:  I'm moving.  I'm trying.
         (Bench conference concluded.)
         MS. SHAMP:  Finally, ladies and gentlemen, we
    believe the evidence is clear and convincing that
    plaintiff is entitled to an award of punitive damage
    to punish and deter the conduct of the defendant,
    and that you should check yes in that box.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you,
    again.  Because I am the plaintiff in this case, we
    have -- I represent the plaintiff -- we have the
    right after the conclusion of Mr. Cofer's talking to go up and talk -- to come back and talk to you again
    briefly to rebut what he says.
         Thank you for your attention.


         MS. SHAMP:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
         THE JURORS:  Good afternoon.
         MS. SHAMP:  I just want to address a few of the
    things that Dr. -- that Mr. Cofer said.  And I won't
    address all of them, but I think some of them need
    at least some more conversation about.
         The very last thing that he said, he said to
    you that this case is about one smoker.  This case
    is about one smoker and the conduct of Philip
    Morris.  It's not only about Elaine Jordan, but it's
    also about Philip Morris.  And what Philip Morris
    argues is that nothing that they did caused anybody
    any harm.
         Ladies and gentlemen, as I said, you rely on
    your common sense, and you look at the conduct that
    they engaged in, the totality of the conduct that
    they engaged in.  Mr. Cofer's talked about how there
    was a product that was legal for sale and that they can't be punished for selling a product.  And, in
    fact, that's not what the plaintiff has presented at
    all.  But they can be punished for fraud and the
    conspiracy that they engaged in.
         I want to back up and start with the beginning
    of what he talked about.  And he talked about the
    three questions.  You remember what this case is
    about.  But, ladies and gentlemen, the case is not
    about why Mrs. Jordan smoked.  You will have
    Question 1 about class membership.  You'll have that
    in your jury instructions.  To prove Elaine Jordan
    meets the class definition and is a member of the
    class, she must prove that she was addicted, that
    her chronic obstructive lung disease was caused by
    her addiction to cigarettes and that she manifested
    chronic obstructive lung disease by November 21st,
    1996.  The question is not why she smoked.  The
    question is:  Was she addicted?
         In some ways, the argument Philip Morris makes
    in this case is circular.  On the one hand, they
    argue, well, she did quit and because she didn't
    quit, then she wasn't addicted because she could
    have just put them down.  And then they argue, well,
    she did quit.  She was able to quit and thus she
    wasn't addicted because she could just put them down.  It's a circular argument.  Under his
    argument, no one would be addicted.
         And the suggestion in closing argument that
    his -- that addiction is like making the choice
    whether to get out of bed in the middle of the night
    displays a great misunderstanding of the concept of
    addiction.
         And talk about the way in which Mr. Cofer
    represented some of the evidence that was presented.
    And you took notes and know what the evidence is.
    But Mr. Cofer said in his closing several times -- I
    wrote it down, I think, seven times -- that Elaine
    Jordan's father died of emphysema.
         The evidence which you heard was that Elaine
    Jordan's father died of a stroke and that he had
    emphysema.  And that statement is not what the
    evidence is that Mr. Cofer said.  The evidence is
    that he died of a stroke and that he had emphysema.
         Also, Mr. Cofer said, I think, that there are
    certainly going to be over the thousands of
    employees of Philip Morris; maybe somebody wrote
    down some dumb things.  I heard him make that
    argument.  But I want to point out the documents
    that I put on during our case and who wrote them.
    Not the thousands of employees at Philip Morris, the president.
         This document was written by the vice president
    of Philip Morris, George Weissman, vice president of
    the Philip Morris Association -- Philip Morris
    company, the speech by the president of Philip
    Morris.
         Do you have the pictures?
         MR. M. KALIL:  Oh, I think it's further down.
         MS. SHAMP:  Sorry, oh.
         Howard Cullman, who was on the board of
    directors of Philip Morris; Joseph Cullman, who was
    at one time the president of Philip Morris; William
    Campbell, the president of Philip Morris.  The
    suggestion that we were putting on evidence of
    documents from the thousands of employees of Philip
    Morris doesn't reflect the evidence that you heard.
    These are the highest levels within the company that
    made these representations.
         Mr. Cofer said that we put up documents from
    other manufacturers, and as the Court instructs you,
    those are co-conspirators, that you can -- you can
    consider evidence of co-conspirators.  And there
    were very few documents that came from the other
    manufacturers.  If you'll look at the documents that
    we presented here, they're mostly from Philip Morris, a few from the co-conspirators.  But as the
    Court instructed you, you have the right to read
    those and look at them.
         Now, Mr. -- and I objected but Mr. Cofer said
    that there has to be a link between Philip Morris's
    conduct and Ms. Jordan's injury in order to meet the
    class membership definition and all -- definition.
    And all I'll say to you is you will have the
    instructions with you, and you will see exactly what
    is required.
         And the instructions are Instruction 10 and
    Instruction 14.  And they will tell you exactly what
    has to be.  And what it says is that if the
    plaintiff meets the class membership and there's not
    a statute of limitation, then she has satisfied all
    of her claims -- right? -- and that she's entitled
    to recover them.  That's in Instruction 14.
         We also have put into evidence the full poll of
    what Mr. Cofer was showing you that 90 percent of
    the people had heard.  The full poll is that
    Plaintiff's 932.  And what's important about the
    full poll is that what -- the question that
    Mr. Cofer put up, how many people have heard that
    smoking causes lung cancer?  What we put up is that
    40 percent of the people responded that they didn't believe it, that they didn't believe that smoking
    caused lung cancer.
         So the question of whether people had heard
    something is, of course, very different than whether
    they had believed it.
         I thought it was very interesting when
    Mr. Cofer put up the Surgeon General's Report from
    1964, saying that in that report they decided that
    there was not -- that smoking wasn't an addiction.
    You remember he put up the actual '64 Surgeon
    General's Report.  I think it's very interesting.
         I have to figure out where we are here.
         Because I put up this document from 1963.  And
    what's the importance of that document time-wise is
    the year before the Surgeon General's Report comes
    out, where they said, moreover, nicotine is
    addictive.  Now, the Surgeon General then, of
    course, doesn't say that nicotine is addictive.
    Why?  Because they don't give those research
    documents to the Surgeon General.
         And this's a document you'll have back with
    you, P237.  "Prior to receipt, there's Talic Hoyt of
    the TIRC has agreed to withhold disclosure of the
    Battelle report to the TIRC members or FAU until
    further notice.  Agreed, submission of Battelle or Griffith developments to the Surgeon General is
    undesirable."
         The Surgeon General was kept in the dark by the
    conspiracy, like members of the public were kept in
    the dark by the conspiracy.
         Again, what is the evidence and the truth?
    Mr. Cofer said in his argument that she became a
    regulation smoker in 1966.  You heard the evidence.
    Her child was born the end -- in September 25th,
    would have been a Christmas baby, December 25th,
    in 1965, is when she testified she became a
    regular smoker, not after the warnings went on
    the packages.
         Now, Mr. Cofer went on to say about the -- the
    issue of the light cigarettes and I think that's
    very important.  But you'll have the Surgeon
    General's Report with you.  And the point that he
    made, being that there were some people who were
    saying people should switch to lights, and he showed
    the Surgeon General's Report from 1980s that said
    people should switch to lights and the Surgeon
    General -- well, the Surgeon General's Report from
    2010, which is P487, Page 37 -- and I put this up in
    my closing earlier.  But here, it shows you, at the
    same time, the tobacco company documents also clearly demonstrate that the industry understood
    that smokers would not achieve the claimed
    delivery.
         Again, even the Surgeon General earlier had
    thought that low tars would be a better solution,
    but in 2010, they realized and reported.  And this
    is evidence that you can consider as to whether or
    not the company intentionally misrepresented the
    information that they knew about light cigarettes.
         Again, Mr. Cofer said, she -- why didn't she
    tell her husband of having all that?  There was
    absolutely no evidence that she didn't tell her
    husband.  The question was asked, did she tell her
    other family members when it was asked whether her
    sister knew about the diagnosis?  There is
    absolutely no evidence that she did not tell her
    husband about her diagnosis with COPD.  That's just
    not the case.
         But I want to talk a little bit more about the
    issue of manifestation because I think some of the
    things that Mr. Cofer said don't accurately
    represent what the facts are that you will have.
    Because one thing he left out and that is
    Dr. Rothstein's opinion.
         And you'll remember that the Court said you're to consider Dr. Rothstein's opinion that there was a
    diagnosis in 1993.  And you'll remember
    Dr. Rothstein testifying about what he based that
    opinion on.  And he said he based that opinion upon
    the natural course of her disease.  And he based
    that opinion upon Dr. Tecson's record, where it
    indicated that she had COPD five years earlier.  And
    he based his opinion upon records that he had seen
    from the 1993 hospitalization.
         And all these things together, he testified
    that he believed she had a diagnosis in 1993.  And
    that, ladies and gentlemen, is the actual testimony
    that you have to rely upon, that she had a diagnosis
    of the disease in 1993.
         Now, Mr. Cofer said -- and I think he said that
    Dr. Tecson never said that Ms. Jordan told him she
    had emphysema.  And we went back over the break and
    pulled up the actual --
         MR. COFER:  Your Honor, objection.  May we
    approach, please?
         THE COURT:  Yes.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
         MS. SHAMP:  As I was saying -- good.
         Mr. Cofer said to you that Dr. Tecson had not
    testified that Mrs. Jordan told him that she had
    emphysema five years before.  And this is actually
    what his testimony is.  "Question:  In reporting her
    history to you, did she tell you anything about her
    history of emphysema?
         "Answer:  She had history and -- of asthma and
    emphysema.
         "And when does it say she had that history?
         "This one, October 24, 1998.
         "Well -- okay.  Let's look at the record.  It
    says 'had history of asthma attacks five years ago,
    also had emphysema.'  Do you see that?
         "Yes.
         "So was she reporting to you on October 24th,
    1998, that she had had asthma attacks and emphysema
    five years ago -- five years prior?
         "Answer:  Yes."
         That was what the testimony was of Dr. Tecson.
    And that's why I went through the SOAP, what she had
    reported, and you'll have that document back with
    you.
         One thing that Mr. Cofer put up that I thought was very interesting -- and I know this because I
    hadn't actually noticed it before he put it up --
    and those were the social security records that he
    put up.  And what I noted while he put it up -- and
    you probably noted the same thing -- that in 1993,
    she had a dip in her income of about 15 percent.
    It went from 21,000 in 1992 down to 18,000 in 1990
    and then went back up, more evidence that in 1993,
    when she went to Baptist Hospital, she was diagnosed
    and got sick on that day.  That's additional
    evidence that Mr. Cofer just put up in his closing
    argument.
         You know, what Mr. Cofer said, I think you have
    to look at, the implication of his argument was that
    Tonya Spencer and Elaine Jordan are not telling the
    truth.  That was what he said, that Elaine Jordan,
    because she has an interest in getting money, was
    not being truthful on the stand.
         And Mr. Cofer said, I know it's confusing, when
    he started arguing about the manifestation and the
    statute of limitations and, frankly, I was confused
    too.  Because it appears to me that what they're
    arguing is that she didn't know she had COPD until
    after 1996.  Well, okay.  All right.  Well, then if
    she did know, then it was before 1990.  They're trying to argue out of both sides of their mouth,
    that either she didn't know at all until 1999 or,
    okay, well, then she absolutely knew in 1989.  They
    can't have it both ways.
         They're trying to create some controversy
    around the very simple fact, and that is she was in
    the hospital in Baptist in '93 and got the diagnosis
    of COPD then.  That's what the evidence shows.
    That's what the hard record shows with respect to
    Dr. Tecson's record and Dr. Rothstein's opinion.
         You know, with respect to class membership,
    as -- what Mr. Cofer said, if you think about it,
    there would be no class members.  Because what he
    argued -- and I stood up and objected three times
    during his closing because he said she could quit.
    And, therefore, if she could quit, then it wasn't
    her addiction that caused her disease.  Well, if
    it's true, every single witness -- every person
    who's addicted can quit.  There would be absolutely
    no class members.  But that's not -- that is not the
    standard that you have to look at.  The question is
    not whether she could quit.
         What Dr. Wright said very clearly was is that
    there was no pathological evidence of asthma on her
    slides, showed that.  I can look at the slides and see there is no pathological evidence of asthma.
    And, in fact, if you look -- and you will have them
    back there, all of the Baptist records, where they
    looked -- the surgical records, look at the slides,
    none of them said that she had a pathological
    evidence of asthma on them.  Dr. Rothstein said she
    didn't have asthma.  I tested her; she didn't.
    Looking at the slides, she didn't have asthma.
    That's what they both say.
         Mr. Cofer attacks Dr. Wright but I think that
    Dr. Wright's credentials are extensive.  He was the
    medical examiner and he goes in and testifies in
    court because that's what medical examiners do.
    They come in and say, yes, I can tell by the blood
    spatter pattern; yes, I can tell by the way the
    wound -- the -- that's what they do, medical
    examiners.
         And the other thing they do, which hospital
    pathologists don't do, they determine the cause of
    death.  They sign the death certificate.  They sign
    the death certificate that says this is the cause.
    And that's why we brought the chief medical examiner
    from Miami-Dade County for over 25 years to come in
    and say, this is the cause of what I see in the
    lungs.  And that's what a medical examiner does, not a surgical pathologist.
         And Ms. Speed made that point when she was
    examining Stonesifer.  He doesn't write down when
    he's viewing slides that it's caused by smoking or
    that it was caused by -- that's not what his job is.
    He just says what he sees.  But a medical examiner
    determines the cause, what caused it, signs the
    death certificate, and that's why Dr. Wright came in
    and told you that.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I know that you're
    anxious to get to your deliberation, and I want you
    to go in and do that.  And I talked a lot during the
    course of my closing arguments, both before and
    after Mr. Cofer's, about the truth and where the
    truth lies.  And the reason I talked about that is
    because when you go back into the jury room, you're
    going to render a verdict.  And what verdict means
    is "to speak the truth."  Veritas means truth in
    Latin.  Dicta, like from a Dictaphone, means "to
    speak."  So a verdict is to speak the truth.
         Now, we believe that the evidence will support
    that Elaine Jordan was a member of the class, that
    she suffered extreme and real harm as a result of
    the defendant's conduct, that their fraud and their
    conspiracy, she relied upon it when she switched to smoking light cigarettes.  The Surgeon General's
    Report confirmed that.  And we believe we're
    entitled to an award of punitive damages.  For all
    of the reasons that we discussed, that conduct is
    egregious that you saw from the evidence in the
    stand.  Their conduct is egregious.  And you can
    look at what the standard is.
         Now, the punitive damages phase, Dr. --
    Mr. Cofer was right when he said, you're not to
    consider the amount of punitive damages right now,
    that all you're to consider is whether the plaintiff
    is entitled to it.  The amount can be -- will be
    decided in a second phase, which is very short,
    typically lasts less than a day.
         Plaintiff believes that not only is she a
    member of the class; she's -- on all of the
    questions that I went through on the verdict form
    and perhaps most importantly, that punitive damages
    are warranted in this case based on the evidence
    that was presented to you over the course of the
    last three weeks.
         I want to thank you so much for your attention,
    and I look forward to your verdict.
