MR. BYRD: Good afternoon. So this will be my last
time to speak with you, and I'm not going to be long. I've
said that before, and I think it was a little bit of a
misstatement in my original Phase I, but I'm really not going
to be long this time.
Mr. Kerrivan thanks you for your time and your
verdict, and we really want to thank you for weighing the
evidence, looking at the evidence and taking the time that
you need to make these judgments, and we appreciate it.
You know, it's -- you know, it's hard to know what
to say. In a case like this with the kind of facts that
we're dealing with.
The Judge gave you instructions, and he's going to
give them to you in writing -- they're much shorter than the
last phase -- of what you can do. I think it's really
important to read those instructions.
The evidence that you heard in the first phase of
the trial, you'll hear in the instructions that you can use
in this phase, and I hope you will recall the evidence we
went over in Phase I.
But most importantly, I want to you think about the
evidence you heard in Phase II and, frankly, what Mr. Jupe
and Mr. Borgerding, what any of that had to do at all with
the evidence we put up during Mr. Kerrivan's smoking time.
180 I mean, you know, punitive damages are to punish,
punish. That's the first part. They are to punish and to
deter other companies from doing stuff like this. That's the
purpose of punitive damages.
You know, you get a kid -- you know, your kid does
something wrong or something. You punish. You're trying to
punish for what they did, but you're trying to deter the
future behavior.
That's exactly what punitive damages are here. And
I think when you weigh the evidence of what you heard from
Mr. Jupe, Mr. Borgerding, the judge is going to give you
instructions. What you heard from them doesn't really apply
to what you are going to be instructed to do, which is to
just consider the harms and the conduct that they engaged in
that hurt Mr. Kerrivan.
You know, it's not appropriate just to come in now
and say, "Well, look at what we're doing on our website now."
That's essentially all they said, "Look at what we're doing
on our website."
Well, a lot of good that did for Mr. Kerrivan, age
16, in going all the way up until he got COPD in 1992-'93. A
lot of good that did him. They weren't here to talk about
any of that. No one came in here. R.J. Reynolds and Philip
Morris brought you no witness or evidence to discuss their
conduct that I put over that board, none of that. They don't
181 want to talk about it. They're not going to talk about it.
They're certainly not going to admit to any of that conduct.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor; the same basis
that we've been discussing all day.
THE COURT: Sustained. Go ahead.
MR. DAVIS: May I get a curative on not admitting,
please?
THE COURT: The question here is not what they
admit to or don't admit to. The question here is set forth
in my jury instructions. I would ask you to read them
carefully.
In the course of the argument, the lawyers of free
to make their arguments, and I don't like to interject myself
in it. So all I would tell you is simply this. You look at
my instructions. You pay attention to them and follow those
directions, and you'll be where you need to be.
You may proceed, Mr. Byrd.
MR. BYRD: Thank you, Your Honor.
What the judge is going to instruct you is that
there are three things you should consider. They're going to
be bullet points listed out there.
Now, the first one -- I think the first one is the
nature, extent and degree of the fraudulent misconduct by
R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris.
Now, I think you heard Mr. Jupe say he wasn't here
182 to talk about anything prior to '95. I don't think Mr.
Borgerding did. There was absolutely no evidence on that
point, on point one, at all from Philip Morris or
R.J. Reynolds.
Think about who Mr. Borgerding and Mr. Jupe are.
They are the scientists. They are the chief scientists from
the company.
You didn't hear from their marketing people. You
didn't hear from their -- any of the other folks in the other
departments. They just brought you their scientists.
Number two, you're going to get to consider any
mitigating behavior of R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris and
whether there's a continuing need for punishment and/or
deterrence.
I think this will be the factor that we hear from
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds. That's what they're going
to say Mr. Jupe and Mr. Borgerding were perhaps here for. So
I want to talk about that in a minute.
Then the third factor is there is Philip Morris'
and R.J. Reynolds' net worth, and you didn't hear any
evidence, other than the stipulation, the stipulation we
read. And what you learned there was, essentially, okay, 3.5
billion dollars net worth, Philip Morris, okay; and about
seven billion dollars, net worth, R.J. Reynolds.
Now, you heard some numbers that they wanted to
183 discuss about what they're paying their user fees and the FDA
and that kind of stuff. It doesn't change. The year 2013,
net worth, 3.5 billion, 7 billion for R.J. Reynolds, and
that's something that you can consider. That's a third
factor there that you are supposed to weigh and think about.
Now, this case, we told you originally, was from a
large class action. You made the judgment, and we think
rightly so, that Mr. Kerrivan is a member of that class. And
you will be instructed that other people can go bring their
claims to their damages and their punitive damages.
So when you think about this, Mr. Kerrivan is not a
member of the class, and he -- if you see the class as sort
of a pie, a large pie, this is his sliver, okay, this is his
sliver of the pie --
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor. That is an
argument of compensatory damages. It's an argument that says
the findings can be used at this point. It is simply
inappropriate.
THE COURT: Right.
I did not hear the findings could be used piece of
that, but what I would tell you this is I instructed you that
you can't use the Engle findings, and that's in my
instructions.
The question that we've got here is the punitive
damages necessarily tie to Mr. Kerrivan's claim, and they
184 necessarily must be connected to Mr. Kerrivan's claim and
flow from his claim, and they are designed to punish and
deter. All right?
And as my instructions read, if you read them
carefully, they say what I think both lawyers will argue, and
that is, is that it's not about harm to other people at this
point, even at this stage. It's about harm to Mr. Kerrivan.
So while there's been some evidence of harm to
others, it's there so that you may consider the overall
conduct on the part of the defendant, but the damages are
those necessary to punish and deter the conduct that harmed
Mr. Kerrivan.
Any objection to that?
MR. BYRD: No, Your Honor. That's fine.
MR. DAVIS: No, Your Honor. Thank you.
MS. PATTERSON: No, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Very good.
MR. BYRD: All right. I make this point of his
little sliver as part of this class to say this, to make this
point, which is that I will suggest a number to you for each
defendant that I think is warranted for the harms to Mr.
Kerrivan and the type of conduct that hurt Mr. Kerrivan.
And I'll tell you that because I'm not looking for
any more -- the numbers that I give to you and suggest, I'm
not looking for any more than just his part of that in the
185 Engle class. Okay?
I'll suggest a number, and I don't want any more
than that. I don't want any of the larger part of the pie.
I just want that one sliver because, you know, there are
rules. The judge has instructed you there's law that we have
to follow, and that's what I'm trying to be very careful to
do and make sure you understand as well that we are just
seeking that part, the part that's right for punitive damages
for one smoker, Mr. Kerrivan.
And now let's talk just briefly, and I know we'll
make a suggestion of a number, but let's talk a little bit
about Mr. Borgerding and Mr. Jupe and what they did on that
one factor, one of three factors.
I would submit that you make your own judgment
about the credibility of whether they are different companies
now or changed companies or doing something different. They
point you, on their website, point you to the Surgeon General
reports. But as you heard from Mr. Jupe and I think some
from Mr. Borgerding, they are still some things that they are
not going to agree with the essential elements of what the
Surgeon General said, namely --
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor. It is a
suggestion that a failure to agree is somehow relevant here.
I do object to that.
THE COURT: Sustained.
186 MR. DAVIS: May I get an instruction to disregard
the argument?
THE COURT: I hate to do this. I'm not sure what
you were going to conclude with, so can you --
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. BYRD: May I proceed, Your Honor?
THE COURT: You may.
MR. BYRD: You heard from Mr. Gentry and Mr. Jupe
in Phase I, and you got to hear again from Mr. Jupe here.
What the companies say now, when they point to their website,
is that now they acknowledge smoking can be addictive. Now
they acknowledge smoking may cause disease.
Still not quite sure of the numbers of COPD, 90
percent of COPD is caused by smoking. Mr. Jupe wasn't sure
about that.
But the real problem is that there is not going to
be any discussion from Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds about
addiction causing disease.
I think you heard this in Mr. Jupe's initial
testimony. This idea of chain of causation, if A causes B
and B causes C, you can make a chain of causation from A to
C.
Mr. Borgerding and Mr. Jupe, they are not going to
make that link. And if addiction is not addressed, if these
companies don't think that they need to address addiction,
192 which is what leads to the repeated exposures to all the
cigarettes, that's the conduct. Those type of statements
about that kind of conduct, that's what needs to be deterred.
That's what they need to understand has to stop.
And someone's got to stand up in these companies
and say, you know, maybe it's time to address addiction,
because when people can't quit, just based on free choice
alone, and addiction is really the fundamental reason that
everyone is smoking and 80 percent of our customers are
getting addicted and, you know, if they start younger, it
makes them more addicted, maybe addiction is what they need
to address.
They're not doing that. They're not going to do
it. That's why you have to send a verdict back that talks
about that kind of conduct that we need to deter, because it
hurt people and in this case, Mr. Kerrivan.
Now, I'm not going to go on. I will wait and hear
what my colleagues say, but I will ask this. I think -- Mr.
Kerrivan would submit to you that the correct number for
punitive damages, okay, is -- he smoked Philip Morris
primarily, and I guess how you divide that up between Philip
Morris and R.J. Reynolds will be your call.
But based on all the factors here that the judge
gives you and the instructions, I think 20 million dollars to
Philip Morris and maybe 15 million dollars to R.J. Reynolds.
193 That's sort of a combined 35 million dollars. How you divide
up that 35 million dollars is your decision, but I think
that's the right amount. I don't want a penny more. I'm not
asking for that. I think that's the right amount for Mr.
Kerrivan, for the harms that went to Mr. Kerrivan.
And I don't think it ought to be any less. I think
that is the amount under the instructions, under the law as
we understand it and know it from the judge, that is the
right amount. Not a penny more, not a penny less.
So 20 million to Philip Morris. The reason I
suggest a little bit higher is because I think you heard
evidence more on the amount of products of Marlboro Lights
and the filters and all that that Philip Morris made, and
those are the ones that he smoked the most of.
But the conduct by both companies obviously should
be considered over the years.
I will wait to hear from my colleagues, and then
you'll hear from me one last time briefly. But that's what
we suggest. Thank you.


MR. BYRD: Yes, Your Honor.
You know, just because something's legal doesn't
make it right or appropriate.
You heard a lot of evidence about things the
companies are doing now differently. You know, none of that
change came about -- hardly any of it came about voluntarily.
The changes they made, they were forced to make.
That's when Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds finally start
doing stuff is when they're forced.
When you think about what punishment and deterrence
is, you know, is it too much to ask today for corporations,
Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, to engage in appropriate
behavior without -- before the law requires them to do it?
220 They don't have to wait for the FDA to actually --
I mean, the FDA has authority. You heard a lot of that.
There's no -- there's no -- there's nothing
anywhere that says that the cigarette companies have to wait
to make any changes until the FDA not only has authority, but
actually goes out and engages in the rule making to actually
apply effective change. There is nothing --
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor. Object. That
is essentially character evidence and argument based on
corporate something; but it has nothing to do with the issues
here.
THE COURT: All right. Here's what I think. It's
argument, and there's some latitude given. I think you've
made whatever point you're going to make. You should move on
at this point, Mr. Byrd.
MR. BYRD: Thank you, Your Honor.
You know, I jotted down a few things. So I'll skip
around.
You know, words matter. Words matter. And, you
know, the issue of their website and the things they claim
they're saying now, the issue -- the issue is what they know
and they don't say. The issue is the evidence that you
heard. Where was there any discussion about all the lies and
misstatements and concealments they made when they were
advertising.
221 MR. DAVIS: I object, move to strike and ask for an
instruction that that is not an appropriate basis for
punitive damages in this case.
THE COURT: All right.
MR. BYRD: I'm trying to stick it to the
intentional torts.
THE COURT: Right. And the issue is, of course,
that you may consider the nature, extent and the fraudulent
misconduct of R.J. Reynolds in the past as Mr. Kerrivan
relied upon it. Now -- and that is entirely appropriate.
The question as we look forward, it becomes is
there evidence that that sort of same activity is going on.
I took the argument on the punitive damages here as
going to past conduct, not the current conduct.
I presume you did the same.
To the extent that someone is confused that it may
be going to current conduct, I would just tell you that
unless there's evidence that that's actually going on, you
can't consider it, right?
So that's how I took it.
Any objection to that, Mr. Byrd?
MR. BYRD: No.
THE COURT: Mr. Davis, is that sufficient?
MR. DAVIS: Your Honor, it's still a failure to
acknowledge, which we've discussed over and over again. That
222 was the thrust that I heard of the argument, and we've been
down this road so many times in the course of today.
THE COURT: Well, we've been down this road, and
here's what I said in my instructions is that the defendants
have no duty to apologize. If you read my instructions,
they're pretty clear.
It's not about apologizing, acknowledging. I don't
care really what words you put on it. It's not about that.
If you read my instructions, it's about what was
said and done in the past, how it hurt Mr. Kerrivan, what he
relied upon, and then that's the extent of it.
At this point you just have to realize that there
is no ongoing duty to apologize, right? And I don't know how
many times I can say that. I think everybody understands
that.
You may go on, Mr. Byrd.
MR. BYRD: I'm not suggesting that.
THE COURT: I understand. You may go on.
MR. BYRD: Where did the statements come from? I
mean, you heard counsel -- opposing counsel talk about which
statements.
The truth squad statements, the lies made in the
concealments, the advertisements, where did the statements
come from? What statements? We showed you the statements in
Phase I. They were on that big board and other things.
223 They don't get to just wipe that off the table.
You are the only jury that will judge for Mr.
Kerrivan, will punish them for the conduct they engaged in
that hurt Mr. Kerrivan. There's no other jury that's going
to do that.
And we wouldn't be here if you don't have a right
to do it. Of course you have a right to do it. And this
concept of who the money goes to, that's not -- that's not
for consideration. There's nothing in the -- that's not the
law about whether it matters where it goes. And if you want
to talk about that, you know, when you punish someone --
let's take a traffic -- a misdemeanor traffic, you know,
speeding, reckless driving and all that. Somebody pays a
fine. Nobody goes out there and says, "Well, it shouldn't go
to the government. I mean, don't give the government any
more money."
That's not the point. The point is they have it,
and it's about punishment. It's going to either stay with
them or not. And that's what punishment and deterrence is.
And you hope that, you know, punishment like that for when
you do things that hurt people, like Mr. Kerrivan, that that
makes a difference.
But this concept, if you've already fully
compensated him, that's Phase I. We're not here for that
part of the phase. This is the time for punishment, and they
224 don't get a free pass because of the determinations you made
in Phase I.
Words matter. And I think you'll notice, both
websites, Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds, and you can
consider the evidence from their websites they gave you,
words matter. And if you'll notice they were very careful
what they say. "If you are concerned about your health, you
should quit." Think about that statement. "If you are
concerned about your health, then you should quit."
Shouldn't everybody quit? Shouldn't everybody be
concerned?
Think about the words they choose. Think about how
carefully they choose their words and the statements they
make.
Look at the Phase I evidence, the documents that
you've already considered. That evidence is still evidence
in this phase of the trial. You saw a lot of evidence on
youth marketing.
Mr. Kerrivan started at age 16 smoking, and you saw
some documents.
Here's the deal. Teenagers, like Mr. Kerrivan, are
not opportunities.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor; harm to others,
Williams-State Farm, unconnected to the issues.
THE COURT: All right. To the extent that it's
225 tied to Mr. Kerrivan, I think that has been done. It would
be appropriate.
The objection is overruled.
MR. BYRD: Thank you, Your Honor.
Today's teenagers are not supposed to be tomorrow's
regular customers. That's Philip Morris's own words. That
evidence should be considered.
Mr. Davis pointed you to one paragraph in the
instructions. I submit that you should read all of the
instructions. And in that one paragraph that he does point
you to, I think that's all the more reason when you have to
think about the specific conduct that they engaged in that
hurt Mr. Kerrivan, all the more reason why -- I don't know if
Mr. Jupe or Mr. Borgerding offered you anything that's
relevant to your consideration.
They didn't talk about anything about the conduct,
nothing. They didn't want to. They didn't talk about any
conduct related to Mr. Kerrivan. Think about that.
I think under their own argument that means -- I
don't know why Mr. Jupe and Mr. Borgerding were here if
that's not relevant.
I think you heard some argument about that Philip
Morris is a -- or maybe both of them. It's puzzling.
They're puzzled by a question about whether addiction causes
disease, that that's puzzling.
226 I don't think executives, top executives, Mr. Jupe,
Mr. Borgerding, I don't think they are puzzled, truly puzzled
about what we mean or what is meant about the --
MR. DAVIS: Your Honor, I object. The state of
mind of people is irrelevant to this determination. It is
contrary to the instructions, Williams-State Farm.
THE COURT: I'm going to sustain the objection at
this point.
Why don't you go ahead.
MR. BYRD: Well, you heard Mr. Davis argue about
whether nicotine actually caused disease, that that question
of addiction, it was puzzling. it's not my word. They were
puzzled by that. I don't think the issues in this case that
you've considered and that you're going to consider, I don't
think they're that puzzling.
MR. DAVIS: Objection, Your Honor. It's the same
argument that he just made. It has to do with statements
made, not state of mind. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Okay. The only thing I see is that you
have argument. You have some leeway. What he's saying is "I
don't think," and that's a personal opinion of Mr. Byrd.
Here's the deal. Mr. Byrd's opinions are set forth
to help you, to guide you there. They are no substitute for
the facts of the law. It's left to you to decide. I think
that's a sufficient instruction.
227 I would make the same instruction for every lawyer
that makes an argument; and that is, they're going to tell
you some of their opinions. They're only there to help and
guide you in the end, which you would make the decision on
the facts and the law.
Go ahead.
MR. BYRD: Let me try it again and rephrase it. It
doesn't matter what I think.
You heard the argument that Mr. Jupe was puzzled
about that type of question. You are permitted to judge for
yourself on the credibility of statements like that.
I've given you the numbers that I think are
appropriate. This concept that, you know -- we heard several
arguments over and over that, you know, it would be some sort
of windfall.
There's no evidence in the record of where this
money goes and what happens. There's some sort of windfall.
Punishment -- but punishment -- money that punishes
and deters shouldn't stick with the culprit either. So
there's nothing in the record -- and I submit that there's no
reason to wonder or determine the type of things that --
where it goes, how it goes, to whatever. That's not the
point. There's nothing in the instructions about that. I
think that that is playing to bias more than anything.
This is about punishment and deterrence, money and
228 the right amount to do that. This is about Philip Morris and
R.J. Reynolds, and that's why the number is important, and
that's why it is important to do, and that's why you have the
power to do that.
I thank you for your time. We appreciate -- it's
been a little over two weeks, and we appreciate it.
Mr. Kerrivan appreciates it and my team does.
And we look forward to hearing from you. Thank
you.
