MR. DAVIS: Mr. Kerrivan, counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, after we received
your verdict yesterday, I have spent time studying it and
194 thinking about it.
In the first part of this case, you were asked to
decide how much in compensatory damages to award to Mr.
Kerrivan to compensate him for his injuries, and you did
that, and you awarded him an amount that, in your judgment,
would fully and fairly compensate him for the pain and
suffering, for his injuries and the pain and suffering that
followed from it, both in the past and in the future.
And, in fact, you gave him even more than the
number that Mr. Byrd suggested when he first spoke to you
about an amount.
And as part of your determination, you found that
Mr. Kerrivan relied on statements made by Philip Morris that
concealed or omitted material information about the health
effects of smoking or its addictive nature. And that based
on that concealment, you found that punitive damages were
warranted.
I want to go -- if I could get the Elmo, would that
be possible? And I want to show you how I read the Verdict
Form and analyzed it in understanding what you did. And then
I want to tie that back to -- let me get by the microphone.
I want to tie that back to the law as Judge Erickson
instructed you at the outset of this phase of the trial.
Okay. We are here, of course, because you answered
yes to question ten, and you decided that as to each
195 defendant, it was warranted to have this phase of the trial
to determine whether punitive damages should be awarded to
punish and deter.
And you got there because you answered yes to
either question four or six and, in fact, you answered yes to
both of those questions.
Question four stated: "Please state as to each
defendant whether Mr. Kerrivan justifiably relied to his
detriment on statements made by that defendant that concealed
or omitted material information concerning the health effects
and/or addictive nature of cigarette smoking, and if so,
whether Kenneth Kerrivan's reliance was a legal cause of his
COPD."
Question four is what we have been referring to as
the fraud claim or the concealment claim, and you've heard
that in the course of the trial.
And you answered yes as to both defendants. And
that, of course, was enough in itself to get us to question
ten, where you would -- otherwise you would not have been
there unless you answered question six, and you answered it
yes, too.
But I want to just point out the similarity of
question six, which is the conspiracy claim as we've tended
to call it in the trial. Again: "Please state has to each
defendant whether Kenneth Kerrivan justifiably relied to his
196 detriment on statements made in furtherance of that
defendant's agreement with other tobacco companies or
entities to conceal or omit material information concerning
the health effects and/or addictive nature of cigarette
smoking, and if so, whether Kenneth Kerrivan's reliance was a
legal cause of his COPD."
And you answered yes to both of those questions,
which then, just back where we started, got us to ten,
because it says: "If you answered yes to question four or
question six, please proceed to answer question ten," which
you did.
But if you had answered no to question four and
question six for both defendants, you never would have gotten
to ten, and we wouldn't be here.
So it is because -- so that's what I know. That's
what I know from looking at the Verdict Form and studying it.
We know that you found that there were statements
that Mr. Kerrivan relied upon, and those statements concealed
or omitted material information about either the health
effects of smoking or its addictive nature; and that his
reliance on those statements was a legal cause of his COPD.
And you know what legal cause was.
So that meant that whatever that information was
that was concealed or omitted that concerned the health
effects of smoking or the addictive nature of cigarettes,
197 that but for his reliance on it, he would never have gotten
COPD.
Now, we don't know what those statements were, and
we're not entitled to know it. No one will ever know it.
That's the way our jury system works.
But what I know is that you found statements -- a
statement or statements that, in your judgment, concealed
information about either smoking and health or addiction,
that if Mr. Kerrivan had known it, he would not have gotten
COPD, because that's what makes it a legal cause.
So I know those were the statements, and only you
know whether it was one statement or two statements or three
or four or five. And only you know and will ever know what
the specific information that you thought if he had had at
the time had not been concealed from him, whether it relates
to smoking and health or addiction, if he had had it, he
could have quit in time to avoid his COPD. He would not have
gotten his COPD but for the reliance on that statement.
So how does that tie then? You know and can go
back and you can list -- maybe you have a list. I don't
know. Maybe you have a list of the statements, the specific
statements that Philip Morris made that you believe -- that
concealed that information and were a but for cause, had he
had that information of his COPD. How does that tie to where
we are now?
198 Well, it's in this instruction that Judge Erickson
gave you at the start of today. Let me -- if I can go back
to the Elmo -- I apologize for talking to you from over
there, but I can show it here better.
This is on page three of the instruction. "In
determining --" I'm looking at this paragraph here. "In
determining the amount of punitive damages to be awarded
against R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris, if any, you may
punish R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris only for injury caused
to Mr. Kerrivan by the specific conduct of R.J. Reynolds or
Philip Morris that was the basis for your findings that
R.J. Reynolds or Philip Morris is liable to Mr. Kerrivan on
his claims involving fraudulent concealment and conspiracy to
fraudulently conceal. You should not consider the conduct
underlying Mr. Kerrivan's claims for strict liability."
So what that is telling you is that at this stage,
at this phase, you must look specifically at the statements
that you found concealed or omitted material information
about the health effects of smoking or its addictive nature,
look at each of those that you determined were a legal cause
of his injury, that had he known that information, he would
not have gotten COPD. And that is the body of evidence that
you use to determine the amount of punitive damages.
MR. BYRD: Objection, Your Honor. I think the
instructions speak for themselves as a whole.
199 THE COURT: They do indeed speak for themselves as
a whole. And I would just, once again, say what I've said a
number of times, read all the instructions and follow them.
MR. DAVIS: I couldn't agree more. You do need to
read this as a whole, and I want you to read it. But this is
an important part of it. It's a very important part of it,
and you will find as you read this as a whole and study it,
that there is reference after reference in these
instructions, which is the law, that the amount of punitive
damages is based on the fraudulent concealment claim, the
conspiracy claim as you found the facts to be, the
statements.
That's what the law is, not the negligence claim
and what we call the product claim, the defective product.
It's not about whether or not there were things done to
cigarettes. It's not about manipulation of pH or whatever.
It's not about the design of cigarettes.
It's about the statements that were made that form
the basis of your judgment that these companies committed
intentional torts of fraudulent concealment and the
statements that came out of the fraudulent concealment that
were a but for cause of his COPD.
MR. BYRD: Objection, Your Honor. It's a
misstatement of law.
THE COURT: Once again, what I'm going to say is I
200 just want you to read the entire instruction. I think if you
do that, you'll understand what the law is as I've given it.
MR. DAVIS: I agree.
I really am not -- I want you to read the entire
language. As I say, you'll see it over and over again. Page
two: "The amount you award must be limited to the damage you
find by a preponderance of the evidence to have been suffered
by Plaintiff Kenneth Kerrivan and legally caused by such
fraudulent misconduct." That's page two.
Okay. Now, I don't know what the statements -- the
specific statements that you found were, as I say, but there
are other limitations on this phase that I do want to call
your attention to, because this is not about compensation.
One limitation is -- and you've heard it -- is that
it's not about smokers in general. It's not about any other
smoker.
You may consider for limited purposes, as Judge
Erickson has instructed you, harm to others; but the ground
of your decision as to the amount of punitive damages, if
any, to award is the harm to Mr. Kerrivan. And, again, not
just any harm, but the harm that arose from the statements
that you found he relied upon that had -- that concealed or
omitted that material information about the health effects of
smoking or its addictive nature that were a legal cause that
if he had known, he wouldn't have gotten his disease.
201 Now, there's a statement in here specifically that
you've heard evidence concerning harms by persons who are not
parties to this case, and you may not impose punitive damages
to punish Philip Morris for harms to these other individuals.
Other individuals who have been harmed can bring their own
suits and seek compensatory and punitive damages in their own
right.
This is not just a hypothetical or theoretical
possibility. You heard Mr. Byrd talked about the number of
suits and the large number of suits that have arisen out of
the Engle litigation seeking both compensatory and punitive
damages.
As I say, I don't know what specific statements you
found. And understanding those limitations, I want to talk
to you about what we tried to do today in bringing you Mr.
Jupe and why I suggest to you that we were trying to address
the specific statements that you found without knowing what
they were, because we can't.
The statements that Philip Morris makes today in
public about the health effects and addictive nature of
smoking are very relevant to the question of whether there is
a continuing need to punish and deter Philip Morris. The
focus of your decision is today, because it says: "With
regard --" you'll see it in the instructions. "With regard
to the amount of punitive damages that are to be assessed,
202 you can consider, among other things" -- it's number two --
"any mitigating behavior of Philip Morris and whether there
is a continuing need for punishment and deterrence." A
continuing need from this point forward.
So let's talk about what you've heard about whether
there is a continuing need for punishment or deterrence.
You saw the statements made by Philip Morris on its
website that smoking is dangerous and addictive.
Can we put that up? I'm sorry.
I can't see it, but "Philip Morris USA agrees with
the overwhelming medical and scientific consensus that
cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease,
emphysema and other serious diseases in smokers. Smokers are
far more likely to develop serious diseases like lung cancer
than non-smokers. There is no safe cigarette."
That's been there since 1999, 2000.
"Addiction. Philip Morris USA agrees with the
overwhelming medical and scientific consensus that cigarette
smoking is addictive. It can be very difficult to quit
smoking, but this should not deter smokers who want to quit
from trying to do so. Learn more."
That is what Philip Morris says today about the
very issues that you found it wasn't talking about when it
made statements that were the legal cause of Mr. Kerrivan's
harm. And the issue then is it's just that. They
203 acknowledge that cigarettes cause serious disease, and that
will never change.
They say there is no safe cigarette. That will
never change. That's what the public position is.
And this will continue on in the future. That's
what you will see on the website. They talk about the
addictive nature of smoking and nicotine. They point people
to the public health community, to the Surgeon General's
report.
Now, Mr. Jupe said, "Do we agree with everything in
there?"
"No."
You know from looking at the Surgeon General's
report that the Surgeon General's goal is to have a
tobacco-free society.
There's just going to be a conflict between a
company that makes cigarette and a Surgeon General that
doesn't want there to be cigarettes. But the question is not
whether there is a disagreement. It's what is Philip Morris
saying?
This issue of whether addiction causes disease,
scientists look and hear that term and you heard Mr. Jupe.
Does addiction cause disease?
It's puzzling to them because nicotine is the
substance that makes cigarettes addictive, and nicotine
204 doesn't cause disease.
Smoking causes disease, and that's what they say.
So as a scientist, it is puzzling to him; but
here's the point, because the focus is what they are saying
publicly today, just as what they said, whatever you found
Philip Morris said that was the legal cause that concealed
that information, that was the legal cause of Mr. Kerrivan's
injury was to him, to him.
They don't air their disagreement publicly. There
is no evidence -- and I suggest to you there never would
be -- that Philip Morris publicly says the kind -- we
disagree with this. We disagree with that.
Mr. Jupe swore to you, "We do not publicly
disagree. If we have internal issues about semantics, we
keep it internal."
You can go -- there is no evidence whatsoever that
they have ever said publicly what -- anything other than here
now, now. That's what's important.
Now, it provides links to the FDA. You can go look
at the FDA. You can go in here -- you can go on there,
consumers can go on there, people today can go on the website
and jump off not only to the Surgeon General but to the FDA
and to the World Health Organization. They point people
there. That's the relevant point.
Now, you learned -- heard a lot in the first phase
205 of this trial about conflicting messages between the tobacco
company and the public health community. That's no longer
the case. All the public statements are in -- point people
to the public health community.
Philip Morris does not make statements anymore that
disagree with what the Surgeon General and the other people
in the public health community are saying. It refers those
people to the public health community.
You heard about FDA regulation that started in
2009. In 2009 the United States Congress, our elected
representatives, passed the Family Smoking Prevention and
Tobacco Control Act. And what they did is that they gave the
FDA, as you heard, significant, essentially, control over
every aspect of what Philip Morris does with respect to the
sale and the design and the marketing of cigarettes.
As you heard Mr. Jupe, they control what goes into
a cigarette, they control what comes out of a cigarette, and
they control every statement that's made about cigarettes by
tobacco companies.
MR. BYRD: Your Honor, that entirely misstates any
testimony.
Honor.
MR. DAVIS: That's the evidence he gave, Your
THE COURT: The jury is directed to the evidence
that was given. The factual testimony that's received by the
206 jury is within the province of the jury to decide. And if
there's been a statement that is consistent or inconsistent,
that's clearly within your province as jurors.
MR. DAVIS: I suggest to you respectfully that you
heard the evidence, the specifics of how that regulation
works. I'm not going to repeat it.
Did they ban cigarettes? No. They did not. The
United States Congress in that act did not ban cigarettes.
The FDA cannot ban cigarettes. That's the legal
judgment that Congress made. They cannot order, it's in the
statute, you heard Mr. Jupe say, that nicotine go to zero.
His testimony was you can't take nicotine to zero,
but you did hear the specifics of the relationship between
the federal government as a regulator and the aspects of
cigarette design and marketing and ingredients and
statements.
So what does that mean for you when you go back to
your room?
The question is we know -- you found statements.
We don't know what they are. But with respect to each of
those statements on your list that supported the yes answers
to question four and the yes answers to question six, the
question I respectfully suggest to you is, does it exist
today? Will it happen tomorrow?
If you were concerned about what Philip Morris and
207 the other tobacco companies -- the statements they made about
the health risks of smoking that were at odds with the public
health community, you've seen now what they say publicly.
These are their statements: "Smoking causes diseases.
Nicotine and cigarettes are addictive. No equivocation."
If you were concerned about advertising and
marketing in any form, you know that Philip Morris does not
advertise on television, on radio, on billboards, any type of
mass transportation, not in magazines. The only
advertising -- Mr. Jupe explained to you, the only
advertising that Philip Morris does for its products now is
point of sale advertising, the place where you buy
cigarettes, and direct advertising and interchange with its
customers who are age verified.
You have to choose to go to Marlboro.com, and you
have a right to go there if you can pass the two layers of
age security to get in.
And as you know from the instructions in Phase I,
the manufacturer and the advertising and the marketing of
cigarettes is not itself illegal.
If what concerned you was the use of the word
"light" as a descriptor on packages, it's gone. It's against
the law to use it.
If what was concerning you was the internal
documents that we saw or that the companies were doing
208 research and not sharing the results with the general public,
you heard that under those settlement agreements when all the
Attorney Generals in every state sued every tobacco company
in the '90s and they entered into what was known as the
Master Settlement Agreement or the equivalent here in Florida
that had those same terms, all those documents are available.
And it's not just those documents. It's an ongoing
obligation forever to turn over the categories of documents
that Mr. Jupe expressed. It's every single day there are
documents being added in, and it will continue forever.
You also learned that the FDA has access to Philip
Morris's research on smoking and health, and the FDA has the
right to inspect the facilities. It has inspected the
facilities.
Every plant in which -- and place where Philip
Morris manufactures cigarettes, you heard him, has been
subject to rigorous inspection, on-site inspection without
notice by the FDA. And if they found something wrong -- they
haven't, but if they found something wrong, they could shut
it down. If they found products that were defective, they
could seize them. You heard that.
MR. BYRD: Objection, Your Honor. That is not what
the FDA law does.
MR. DAVIS: It was the evidence, Your Honor.
MR. BYRD: Can we side bar this, Your Honor?
209 THE COURT: Yes.
(Bench conference as follows:)
THE COURT: What's your objection?
MR. DAVIS: The evidence came in. It came in
without objection. The evidence came in that they can seize
products if they find them defective in some way. He
testified to that. It was without objection.
MR. BYRD: That is very vague and ambiguous.
Defective -- that is not what the FDA is permitted to do. If
a product is defective in our terms of defective and
unreasonably dangerous that we're dealing with --
MR. DAVIS: That is bad. Come on, Judge. He's
just interrupting my -- oh, man.
THE COURT: Here's the thing. I'm going to
overrule the objection. I think the term "defective" as used
here was not in the same sense as what was at issue with his
unreasonably dangerous product, which is not before this jury
at this point anyhow. If I start trying to instruct on that,
I'm just going to -- we'll be in a quagmire because I'll have
to sit down and say the FDA has this authority or that
authority, and I just don't want to go there.
I want you to be very careful about that, too, Mr.
Davis.
MR. DAVIS: Defective, I didn't mean it in any
legal sense. But vague and ambiguous is not an objection in
210 the middle of closing argument.
THE COURT: That part is true.
MR. BYRD: But the representation of when we use
the term "defective," given what the jury has heard, the term
"defective" over and over, that is my concern, and I think
that is just not what the FDA does.
THE COURT: I appreciate the objection and why it
was raised because I think that the problem is we have these
sort of overlapping areas of law, and as lawyers we're
sitting there going we hear the word "defective" and we say
hold on, we are not talking about unreasonably dangerous
products here. We're talking about the misrepresentations.
Now, you've said this, but I don't know of any way to fix it
other than to say let's be a little more precise.
MR. DAVIS: I'll be a little more precise. I'll
fix it.
THE COURT: All right. Very good.
(In open court.)
MR. DAVIS: You heard the evidence about the FDA's
authority to seize products that they do not feel meet the
regulatory requirement, whatever the term is that you -- or
they would apply to it. But the fact is there's no dispute.
You heard the evidence from Mr. Jupe. If they find products
that in the FDA's judgment should not be on the market
because of the regulatory structure, they can pull it off.
211 All right. Members of the jury, things are
different now than they were in the '50s, in the '60s, in the
'70s, in the '80s. There is no question today that Philip
Morris operates in a more restrictive environment that is
closely controlled by the FDA.
In terms of the instructions again, net worth,
of course, you can consider net worth, but you must take care
that your consideration is limited to addressing the
appropriate amount of punitive damages, if any, that should
be awarded against the defendant and not allow it to become
an appeal to emotion, passion or prejudice.
And you know from the time that we first met, when
we talked in jury selection, the premise of that work that we
did in talking to you about your feelings, was that there is
a lot of emotion that floats around issues of smoking and
health. But you took the oath to put that aside and to not
base decisions on passion and anger, but on the law, because
this is a courtroom, and this is where we follow the law.
You have awarded Mr. Kerrivan full and fair
compensation for his injuries.
Mr. Byrd is asking for 20 million dollars more from
Philip Morris. And I suggest to you that if you think about
what -- this piece of paper, which is the legal instruction
that you will have in deliberating the amount, and follow it
through, questions four and question six and the specific
212 statements that you found justified saying yes to those
questions, that you will see in here there is no basis for
any additional award, much less the 20 million dollars that
Mr. Byrd has asked for.
I thank you very much for your time and
consideration. I will not have a chance to speak to you
again.


MS. PATTERSON: Good afternoon, ladies and
gentlemen. Thank you for the time that you took on Friday
and on yesterday arriving at your verdict. We respect your
decision, and we accept your decision.
I want you all to know that Reynolds takes your
decision very seriously. You've found that Reynolds' conduct
harmed Mr. Kerrivan, and you've expressed your disapproval of
the conduct that you heard about in the '50 and moving
forward, and you've settled on an amount of damages that
fully, fully compensates Mr. Kerrivan for his injury.
So now you have to decide if you're going to award
an additional amount to Mr. Kerrivan in punitive damages, if
any, having already made him whole with your verdict
yesterday.
213 So I'd like you to consider the issues of punitive
damages in light of the company today, in light of who
Reynolds is today. Everything you've heard in the first
phase of this trial about Reynolds and tobacco companies from
decades ago, that's not what you're being asked to punish and
deter today.
I know you're going to go back and read Judge
Erickson's instructions, but I'd like to just point out one
of the instructions to pay close attention to as you're
making your decisions.
One of Judge Erickson's instructions that you've
already heard says: "That the amount you award must be
limited to the damage that you find to have been suffered by
Mr. Kerrivan and legally caused by such fraudulent
misconduct, and that you may not award punitive damages for
any harm that may have been suffered by parents or parties
other than Mr. Kerrivan."
Any award that you give Mr. Kerrivan in this phase,
it's going to go directly to Mr. Kerrivan, no one else.
The judge is also going to tell you that -- or has
already told you that to impose punitive damages only, if you
conclude that the monetary liability beyond your award of
compensatory damages is necessary to accomplish punishment
and deterrence. So that's why we're looking at who you would
be punishing and deterring today. It's Reynolds of today.
214 Just a few moments ago you were able to meet and
hear from one of Reynolds senior members of the management
team. That was Dr. Borgerding, and he came down from
Winston-Salem to talk to you about Reynolds of the 21st
century and to show you how it's different than Reynolds of
the 20th century, and he talked with you about how things
have changed.
And the reality is that the people whose conduct
that you found to warrant punishment, people like Jim
Johnston that you saw, a former CEO, those are people who are
not with the company anymore. So I'd ask you to please keep
that in mind as you make your decision moving forward.
You also heard about Reynolds' current positions on
smoking and health and on addiction. And you saw that on the
website. You saw that the Reynolds of today openly agrees
that nicotine is addictive. There's no question about that.
Reynolds of today openly agrees that smoking
significantly increases the risk of serious diseases,
diseases like COPD and diseases like lung cancer.
Reynolds tells people who are concerned about their
health to quit smoking. Reynolds tells people that quitting
reduces the risk of their disease.
On that same website, Reynolds offers links to the
Surgeon General's reports and to other public health
community members. And Reynolds says that's where you should
215 go for your information on health, that that's who you should
rely on to day.
This is very different than what you heard in the
first phase of trial when you were shown public and press
releases from Dr. Proctor and Dr. Grunberg. There are no
statements today made to dispute anything that the Surgeon
General says or anything that the public health community
says.
You also heard about the FDA. Today Reynolds is a
transparent company. It's an open company. Dr. Borgerding
told you that the FDA regulation, that's something that
wasn't in place when Mr. Kerrivan was smoking. That's
something that's in place today.
And the FDA has the broad authority to now regulate
cigarettes. It has authority, as you've heard earlier this
afternoon and this morning, over manufacturing and labeling
and advertisement. It has authority over changes in products
and development. It has authority over regulation of tar and
nicotine. It has authority over disclosing information about
ingredients and about health and dependency research.
So if you thought that the public -- that the
tobacco companies lacked any government oversight, that's
surely not the case today.
And you also heard that Reynolds and other tobacco
companies are paying for that regulation through their user
216 fees.
You also heard about obligations under the Master
Settlement Agreement. Among many things, that agreement
restricts what Reynolds can do as far as advertising on
billboards, at stadium signs and transit signs and includes
many more restrictions, and I know that you all just heard
about theirs. So there's no need to deter the Reynolds of
today.
Now, I saved punishment for last because it
inevitably involves money, and it's about how much money that
you might award Mr. Kerrivan, if any.
So I'd like to talk about that.
Mr. Byrd asked for a lot of money from Reynolds on
top of what you already awarded Mr. Kerrivan yesterday that
made him whole.
So I want to stay a couple things with respect to
that. You heard some net worth numbers this morning that Mr.
Byrd read, or Ms. London. And I'd ask you to remember as
you're considering those numbers what Judge Erickson told you
when we started trial, and that you can't punish Reynolds for
merely selling cigarettes, that cigarettes are lawful to
manufacture, they're lawful to sell, they're lawful to
advertise.
So please keep that in mind as you're considering
that number.
217 This isn't just an abstract concept to Reynolds.
Reynolds isn't just some faceless company that doesn't
understand the verdict that you've already entered, and
that's what you heard from Mr. Borgerding.
So that brings me to the Verdict Form and this is
the question that asks about the amount of money, if any,
that you're going to choose to award Mr. Kerrivan as punitive
damages, and I'd ask you not to pick a number based on
emotion or sympathy. I'd like to respectfully give you
something to consider.
It shouldn't come out of thin air. It shouldn't be
a windfall to Mr. Kerrivan. It shouldn't be something that's
not based on a rational decision based on something that's
not related to Mr. Kerrivan.
So I went back last night after your verdict, and I
really thought about it. I have a copy of the Verdict Form
that you all filled out, and I thought about what you decided
and the decisions that you made, and I'd like to respectfully
suggest a number based on your decision.
You, of course, will decide, make your own
decisions, but I would like to suggest that in the first
phase of this trial that you awarded 15.8 million dollars,
which is obviously a very large amount of money.
But you also divided the percentage of fault, and
you gave 19 percent fault to Mr. Kerrivan and you also gave
218 31 percent fault to Reynolds.
So what I would suggest is that if you decide that
you're going to award Mr. Kerrivan any more money, that you
would give Mr. Kerrivan Reynolds' share of his 19 percent
fault. And I did some math, and that comes out to about 1.1
million dollars. To be exact, it comes out to $1,148,914.
That's a lot of money, and that's a lot of money in addition
to the 15.8 million dollars that you already awarded to Mr.
Kerrivan yesterday.
He's already been compensated, and this would be
money on top of that.
I think that under the facts of this case that it's
a rational number, it's a reasonable number, and it's a
number that's based on Mr. Kerrivan, and it's a number based
on the percentage of fault that you've all decided yesterday.
So I would just respectfully ask that you would
consider that.
Now, I want to be really clear about something.
That comparative fault percentage that you found yesterday,
that will not apply to the punitive damages that you were to
award, if any, today.
If you award punitive damages, that full amount
would go to Mr. Kerrivan and to Mr. Kerrivan only.
So I'd like you to -- I'd like to leave you with
the thought to please keep an open mind and at least think
219 about the Reynolds of today and the decisions that are being
made and the leadership and the people that you heard from
today.
Reynolds is making a sincere effort to be open and
transparent, and today we're under a very strict government
regulation that you heard about.
So I'd like to end by thanking you again for your
service as jurors. This is the last time that I'm going to
have a chance to talk with you all. So on behalf of myself
and my client, thank you again.
