           MR. KACZYNSKI:  Well, we are finally winding
      down.  And you are probably going to guess that
      Mr. Gary and I have not agreed and will not agree
      on a lot in this trial.  But one thing we do, is
      that we are all thankful and appreciative and
      grateful for your attention and service.  You know, 4300 in this country there are a range of ways that
      people make sacrifices for the privilege of being
      here.  And they could be as simple as paying your
      taxes or as serious as the ultimate sacrifice given
      by people that rest in Arlington and places like
      that.  Your service is on the upper end of that
      scale.  And whatever the verdict, whatever the
      verdict, when it's done you can go back to your
      family and your friends and your coworkers and tell
      them that you contributed to making the system
      work, because you did.  And again, I don't think
      people could thank you enough, but I want to thank
      you once again for your service.
           Two weeks ago I told you this case was about
      Leroy Kirkland and the choices that he made.  Two
      weeks later it still is.  Two weeks ago, actually
      two weeks and a couple of days, I guess, I told you
      that the plaintiffs here would try to retry the
      Engle class action to prove to you some things that
      the Judge said are already decided.  In fact,
      yesterday you saw the big boards that Mr. Socias
      had up here, and he pointed to them and he said,
      The things on this board are conclusively
      established.  The things on this board are not up
      for discussion.  But for the last two weeks they 4301 tried to establish them and they tried to discuss
      them.
           I told you they would inundate you with video
      and with live testimony that had nothing to do with
      Mr. Kirkland.  And they did.  Two weeks ago I told
      you, you would see dozens of Philip Morris
      documents.  And you saw 10 of them again yesterday.
      And the ones you saw were designed to get you mad.
      They were the ones designed most to get you mad.
      The document that you saw that talked about a dose
      unit of nicotine, that was a Philip Morris
      document, not Reynolds.  The "bury-it" document.
      That was a Philip Morris document, not Reynolds.
      The ones about the rats pulling the levers, that
      was a Philip Morris document, not Reynolds.  And I
      said it before, I'll say it again, Philip Morris is
      not my client.
           I told you you were going to see ads for
      brands that Mr. Kirkland never smoked.  And you
      did.  I told you you would see ads that he never
      saw.  And you did.  Testimony about organizations
      he never heard of.  And you did.  Hours upon hours
      of what you heard is about what went on in
      Winston-Salem or Richmond or Louisville or
      Washington, but not a whole lot about what went on 4302 in Tampa, Florida.  Two weeks later you saw memos
      from a Dr. Osdene and Dr. Dunn and Dr. Wakeham, all
      Philip Morris scientists who had nothing to do with
      R.J. Reynolds.  Again, you saw 10 of them again
      yesterday.  A video of Dr. Farone, a former Philip
      Morris scientist who never had anything to do with
      R.J. Reynolds.  A memo with advice from a law firm
      that represents Philip Morris.  Ads for Winston and
      Camel and Marlboro and that Johnny Roventini, the
      guy in the bellhop outfit for Philip Morris.  My
      client is not Philip Morris.  And all those brands,
      all of them are brands that Mr. Kirkland never
      smoked.
           Dr. Proctor was here on the witness stand
      impugning the research funded by the Council for
      Tobacco -- Council for Tobacco Research, an
      organization Mr. Kirkland never heard of.
           You heard about Tobacco Institute white papers
      that went to doctors, not longshoremen or shipyard
      workers like Mr. Kirkland.
           Yesterday you heard a little bit about World
      War I soldiers and their ration packs.  World War I
      started and was over before Mr. Kirkland was ever
      born.
           And remember in opening I asked you to ask 4303 yourself this question as the evidence came in.
      Here it is.  What has this got to do with Leroy
      Kirkland?  And for two weeks the answer has largely
      been nothing.  Yesterday Mr. Gary talked about the
      scales of justice.  Well, here are the scales of
      justice that reflect what happened in this trial.
      Lots of things that had nothing to do with
      Mr. Kirkland and very little that did.
           I also told you two weeks ago that you get
      half the story from the plaintiff's witnesses.  And
      you did, especially from Dr. Proctor and Dr.
      Henningfield.  First of all, neither of them said a
      word, not one word about Leroy Kirkland or what
      happened in Tampa, Florida.  Everything they said
      related to that other case, the case -- the case of
      generic smokers, the case of the general public.
           You didn't get the whole story from the
      plaintiff's case.  For example, on direct
      examination you heard Dr. Proctor say that the
      companies met in December 1953 motivated by greed.
      It was on cross-examination that you heard the
      tobacco companies were called upon to fund research
      by an editorial in the New England Journal of
      Medicine in September 1953 and again by the
      American College of Surgeons in October 1953.  And 4304 we, not them, showed you the evidence of those
      calls.  And in December the companies responded.
           But I asked myself over and over again, What
      has this got to do with Leroy Kirkland?
           Dr. Proctor said that the companies secretly
      believed in 1953 that cigarettes caused cancer, and
      their meeting was designed to set up a front
      organization to mislead the public about it.  On
      cross-examination, you found the companies had no
      desire to set up a front organization.  The
      industry was convinced that there was no scientific
      basis, and they thought the National Cancer
      Institute agreed with them.  How do we know that?
      This is a plaintiff's exhibit they didn't show you.
      Plaintiff's exhibit.  That says all those things
      that you just saw on the chart.
           In fact, we saw even eight years later Dr.
      Rodgman from R.J. Reynolds in an internal memo sent
      to scientists inside Reynolds, not designed to go
      to the general public, where they expressed what
      they really thought.  And here, even in 1962 Dr.
      Rodgman is saying, It seems as likely or stronger
      in favor of air pollution than it does cigarettes.
           Now, you can call him wrong, you can call him
      stubborn, but what you can't call him is a liar. 4305 But again, what's this got to do with Leroy
      Kirkland?
           On direct examination, Dr. Proctor told you
      about the Frank Statement to Smokers and made it
      out to seem to be a big deal.  On cross-examination
      you learned it ran only once, once, one day.  And
      we found on cross that frank statements were
      common.  Fur prices, people over 35 who retired,
      baldness and constipation.  But you also learned on
      cross-examination -- they didn't show you this
      either -- for those people that did pay attention
      to the Frank Statement, it scared them.  People --
      it reminded them of what they were seeing in the
      newspapers and magazines around them about links
      between smoking and disease.  People cut down and
      in some cases stopped.
           But again, what does this have to do with
      Leroy Kirkland?
           On direct examination, Dr. Proctor said there
      was a consensus in the mid 1950s that smoking
      caused cancer and that companies were lying to the
      public in the face of this consensus.  On cross you
      learned the companies had plenty of company on that
      issue.  A Dr. Wynder, a doctor who wrote the
      national -- Journal of the National Cancer 4306 Institute, a top official in the National Cancer
      Institute; Dr. Hammond, from the Cancer Society;
      Dr. Hess, the president of the AMA; the surgeon
      general, Leroy Burney; the founder of the Mayo
      Clinic, and Dr. Lewis Robbins, a senior official in
      the U.S. Public Health Service.
           Well, what has this got to do with Leroy
      Kirkland?  You heard from Dr. Proctor that the
      Tobacco Institute issued press releases.  But you
      learned on cross that we don't know if anybody ever
      saw those or the substance of those press releases,
      whether it be the Tampa Tribune, The St. Pete Times
      or anywhere, because he never looked.
           Now, Mr. Kirkland never heard of the Tobacco
      Institute, so again, what does this have to do with
      Leroy Kirkland?
           On direct, Dr. Proctor, who, let's remember,
      is a historian and not a scientist, he said CTR
      funded research designed to exonerate smoking.  He
      called it distraction research that had nothing to
      do with smoking and health.  But he didn't show you
      a single example, not one to prove that point.
           But what did we show you?  On
      cross-examination, we showed you the CTR funded
      studies that linked smoking to heart disease, lung 4307 cancer, and addiction in the 1960s.  That's hardly
      unrelated to smoking and health.  And that one
      article that talked about addiction, it called
      smokers "addicts."  That was 25 years before the
      surgeon general concluded that.  Unrelated to
      smoking and health?  I don't think so.
           You learned that CTR-funded studies were cited
      repeatedly in surgeon general's reports.  How does
      something unrelated to smoking and health get
      repeatedly cited in a publication that's supposed
      to have everything to do with smoking and health?
           But again, what has this got to do with Leroy
      Kirkland?
           Remember the "Green Monster"?  Dr. Proctor
      called it -- and I want to get this right -- the
      bibliographic fundament of the conspiracy.  I have
      no idea what that means.  But whatever it means, if
      it came from Dr. Proctor we know it wasn't a
      compliment.  But on cross-examination you learned
      Dr. Henningfield has cited this "Green Monster" in
      his articles; Dr. Benowitz has consulted the "Green
      Monster" in the past.  And the surgeon general's
      report didn't slur it like Dr. Proctor did.  It
      called it a basic reference source and it was used
      in preparing the 1964 surgeon general's report. 4308 But what has this got to do with Leroy
      Kirkland?
           Drs. Proctor and Henningfield both -- and this
      is very important -- said that nicotine levels were
      manipulated to maintain addiction.  And ladies and
      gentlemen, that's the most cynical charge of all.
      On cross-examination you learned that nicotine
      levels were investigated in conjunction with a
      program with the National Cancer Institute to
      explore ways of making a less hazardous cigarette.
      This is an effort supported and encouraged by
      prominent scientists like Dr. Michael Russell in
      Britain, Dr. Sir Richard Doll, knighted by the
      Queen of England for his cancer research, one of
      the most famous cancer researcher in the world.
      Dr. Schachter of Columbia.  Dr. Jarvik of UCLA,
      co-inventor of the nicotine patch.  And finally by
      the nation's top doctor, the top physician in the
      country.  In 1981, the surgeon general of the
      United States said you should conduct this
      research.  And the companies did.
           Remember the words of Dr. Russell?  People
      smoke for the nicotine but they die from tar.  And
      the whole idea is get tar down as low as you can,
      because it's the tar that causes the disease.  But 4309 since people smoke for nicotine, and nicotine goes
      down along with the tar, you've got to get a level
      of nicotine to maintain it so the people will smoke
      the less hazardous cigarette.
           I want you to pay particular attention to what
      Dr. Doll wrote in 1977.  Again, one of the most
      famous cancer researchers in the would.  And what
      he said, The introduction of a low nicotine
      cigarette may lead a smoker to adjust his dose --
      dose of nicotine by making -- by smoking more
      cigarettes -- as probably happened in the 1960s --
      by inhaling more deeply or by puffing more often.
      It may be, therefore, that the most effective
      policy would be to produce low tar cigarettes with
      an artificially high content of nicotine, though
      care would have to be taken not to make the content
      so high that addiction is aggravated.
           Now, there's two things I want you to think
      about what Dr. Doll wrote.  First is the word
      "dose."  You saw the word "dose" referring to
      nicotine in a Philip Morris document yesterday.  It
      may be in Reynolds' documents.  But what this shows
      you is that referring to nicotine by the word
      "dose" was not something that tobacco -- was only
      the tobacco companies.  It appears that it was 4310 common use in the scientific community, both inside
      and outside the tobacco companies, including by one
      of the most prominent cancer researchers in the
      world.
           The second thing I want you to pay attention
      to is Dr. Doll says I don't want it -- I don't want
      it so low that people smoke more, but I don't want
      it too high that it will aggravate addiction.
           That sounds awful familiar, doesn't it.  Does
      that sound like Dr. Henningfield's sweet spot?  The
      sweet spot, only Dr. Henningfield said that the
      companies were going after the sweet spot to
      maintain addiction.  Dr. Doll is calling for a
      sweet spot to make less hazardous cigarettes so
      they will smoke the lower tar brand but not smoke
      more.
           The documents they showed you from Reynolds
      and from Philip Morris -- and you saw 10 of them
      from Philip Morris yesterday -- are from the 1970s
      and 1980s, which is exactly when Drs. Russell, Dr.
      Doll, Dr. Jarvik, Dr. Schachter and the surgeon
      general were telling them to look into the levels
      of nicotine, investigate the optimum levels of
      nicotine.
           But if you look at these exhibits, the Doll, 4311 the Schachter, the Russell, they're in evidence.
      You will have them back in the jury room.  This is
      not something I'm making up in the year 2011 to
      defend a lawsuit.  This is what was going on at the
      time.  Calls to investigate nicotine levels in the
      1970s and 1980s from people interested in the
      public health.  And the companies responded to
      this.  The public health community told them to do
      this research.  And they did this research, and now
      they are being sued for conducting this research.
      Damned if you do and damned if you don't.
           Now, some of the language in these company
      documents I'll admit is stupid, but it was not
      evil.  And it's absolutely cynical to say that it
      was.
           At the end of the day, though, again, what has
      this got to do with Leroy Kirkland?
           Drs. Proctor and Henningfield suggest that
      raising the pH of tobacco smoke was designed to
      maintain addiction.  On cross-examination you
      learned again that this was something suggested by
      the National Cancer Institute as a way to make a
      safer cigarette.  And again the companies
      responded, and again they are being called evil and
      sued for doing it.  Damned if you do and damned if 4312 you don't.
           But again, what has this got to do with Leroy
      Kirkland?
           Dr. Henningfield, who has never -- he designed
      a cigarette in his life -- trashed filter
      ventilation.
           Dr. Farone, the plaintiff's expert who has
      designed cigarettes in the past and who designed
      cigarettes at Philip Morris, said filter
      ventilation worked.
           Dr. Proctor, who never designed a cigarette,
      called filters fraudulent.  You saw that testimony
      on a board yesterday.
           Dr. Farone, the plaintiff's expert who has
      designed cigarettes, is proud of his filter work.
           Dr. Henningfield, who has never designed a
      cigarette, trashed expanded tobacco.
           Dr. Farone, the plaintiff's expert who did
      design cigarettes, said expanded tobacco worked.
           Dr. Henningfield said the FTC test for
      measuring tar and nicotine doesn't tell you what a
      smoker actually gets.  Guess what?  Back in the
      1960s the Federal Trade Commission and R.J.
      Reynolds said the exact same thing, a half century
      ago. 4313 But what has this got to go with Leroy
      Kirkland?
           Now, Dr. Henningfield did say that the surgeon
      general decided that mouse skin painting is the
      best test for the safety of cigarettes.  What he
      did not tell you is that the National Cancer
      Institute tested almost all of the cigarette
      designs that he trashed.  And what did they find?
      They used mouse skin painting.  And what they found
      was cigarettes with high porosity paper made with
      tobacco stems only, reconstituted tobacco, all
      produced fewer tumors on the backs of mice and may
      be less hazardous.
           And the 1979 surgeon general's report found
      the same thing.  In other words, they worked.
           Dr. Henningfield suggested that the companies
      had all kinds of information about addiction and
      nicotine that the outside world didn't.  On
      cross-examination you learned he never made a
      systematic comparison between the two, internal and
      external research so that he could come in and tell
      you under oath what he told you.  He never looked.
      He never looked.
           Now, you do know that, after hearing the
      testimony of Dr. Benowitz for the plaintiff and Dr. 4314 Hoffman, who Mr. Gary called that nice little
      lady -- and she is a nice little lady -- again, Dr.
      Hoffman for the defense, you learned that addiction
      and nicotine having no secrets for many, many
      years.  Dr. Benowitz told us it has been known for
      over 100 years that smoking could be difficult to
      quit.  Difficulty in quitting smoking has been part
      of the popular culture for a long time.  Terms like
      nicotine fiend or nicotine fit have been part of
      our culture for a long time.
           You also heard from Dr. Benowitz, nicotine
      occurs naturally in tobacco.  Mother Nature put it
      there.  You heard some suggestion yesterday that
      the companies were pumping nicotine into
      cigarettes.  Mother Nature put it there.  And
      that's been known for over a hundred years.
           It's been known that it's a drug for over a
      hundred years.  Maybe that's why scientists outside
      the companies are comfortably using the term
      "dose."  Known that nicotine has a pharmacological
      effect, drug effect on the body for over 100 years.
           You saw Florida Health Notes from 1906.  Today
      the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the
      very worst form of tobacco addiction.  A hundred,
      over a 100 years ago. 4315 Now if we line this up alongside one of Dr.
      Benowitz's opinions, it's a dead bang match.  Some
      secret.  A hundred years ago.
           You saw the surgeon general reported that
      researchers concluded that nicotine is why people
      smoke in the 1920s and 1930s.  And look at what
      that 1942 study by Dr. Lennox Johnston said.
      Smoking tobacco is essentially a means of
      administering nicotine, just as smoking opium is a
      means of administering morphine.
           This is decades before you saw a tobacco
      company document that made the same suggestion.
      Not exactly a secret.
           And this news about nicotine and addiction was
      reported in a Reader's Digest in the 1930s and the
      1940s.  And Reader's Digest, as you heard, was the
      most popular periodical in America.
           Ladies and gentlemen, you will have these
      documents in the jury room.  The Reader's Digest
      articles, the Florida Health Notes.  You will have
      them.  Read them.  We're not making this up.  Terms
      like "addiction" and "addicts" and "drug" were used
      almost 100 years ago.
           So what's the big deal here?  Well, apparently
      it's all about the Waxman hearings.  Yesterday you 4316 heard Mr. Gary talk about lying to Congress.  His
      words, not mine.  It's about the Waxman hearings in
      1994.  The year, by the way, Mr. Kirkland quit
      smoking.  So whatever happened there obviously
      didn't have a big impact on him.  And there is no
      evidence that he was sitting there watching C-SPAN
      as the Waxman committees took place.
           The question at the hearing was, Did the
      companies believe that nicotine was addictive?  And
      let's tell the whole story.  In 1964 the surgeon
      general had to decide whether smoking was an
      addiction or a habit.  And that -- at that time,
      back in 1964, to define something as an addiction,
      it had to be intoxicating, it had to promote
      socially deviant behavior, and it had to have
      severe or life-threatening consequences.  And
      smoking did not then and does not now meet those
      criteria.  If those criteria existed today, smoking
      would still be a habit and not an addiction.
           Now, Dr. Benowitz in his video also told you
      that a certain stigma attached to the term
      "addiction," associated with people getting high,
      people getting frenzied, antisocial behavior,
      criminal behavior.  And in 1964 the surgeon general
      didn't want to attribute that stigma to smokers. 4317 So what happened?  In 1964, because of those three
      criteria, the surgeon general decided that smoking
      did not meet the criteria for addiction and he
      called it a habit.
           Then over the years what changed?  Well, the
      criteria for addiction changed.  You didn't need
      intoxication anymore, you didn't need socially
      deviant behavior anymore, and didn't need severe
      withdrawal symptoms anymore.  And with those three
      criteria gone, the surgeon general in 1988 found it
      to be an addiction.  There was no new science.
      There were no scientific breakthroughs.  It's this
      simple.  In 1987 smoking was a habit.  In 1988 it
      was an addiction.  Nothing else changed.
           So let's fast forward to the political
      publicity stunt called the Waxman committee
      hearings.  You saw the clip of the Reynolds CEO Jim
      Johnston, who was asked, Is smoking addictive?  And
      you heard that he was cut off as he was beginning
      to answer by Congressman White.  Dr. Henningfield,
      though, acknowledged what Mr. Johnston was trying
      to say.  What he was trying to say is smoking and
      nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definition
      of addiction because there is no intoxication and
      then he was cut off.  What he was doing clearly was 4318 quoting, or trying to, the 1964 definition by the
      surgeon general.  He never said smoking is easy to
      quit.  He never said that.  He was simply saying he
      prefers to call it a habit rather than an
      addiction.  In 1994, as in 1964, he didn't want to
      call smokers addicts.  He didn't want to equate
      smokers with heroin users shooting up, or cocaine
      users sniffing or alcoholics on skid row.  You can
      call his testimony stubborn, you can call it
      outdated, but what you can't call it is a lie.
      Because it wasn't.
           But again, this whole thing about the Waxman
      committee hearings, what has this got to do with
      Leroy Kirkland?
           Yesterday, Mr. Socias started off by calling
      the defense experts names.  He called them a stable
      of experts, he said they do circuits around the
      country, and he called them a traveling side show.
      Really, let's see who has the traveling side show.
           Dr. Myers testified -- has worked on a handful
      of cases and has testified three times.
           Dr. Bertino has consulted for a long time.
      He's testified three times.
           Dr. Hoffman has testified three times.
           Now let's look at the plaintiff's witnesses 4319 lineup, shall we?
           Dr. Benowitz earns $4,800 a day and has
      testified, as he said, in over 20 trials.  Twenty.
           Dr. Proctor makes $4,800 a day, over $700,000
      so far, and just this past week, he flew here on
      Saturday, $4,800; stayed here Sunday, 4,800; stayed
      here Monday, $4,800; testified Tuesday, $4,800;
      went home Wednesday, $4,800.  Almost $25,000 for a
      half a week's work.  And he's had 13 trials.
           Dr. Burns earns $500 an hour, over 1.1 million
      so far.  He's testified in 40 trials and over 100
      depositions.  This is a man who writes surgeon
      general's reports and uses those credentials to
      market his witness services around the country.
      And when he writes the surgeon general's reports,
      he doesn't disclose that he's also a witness
      against the tobacco companies.
           Now, Dr. Farone is $250 an hour.  He's
      cheaper.  Maybe it's because you have heard and
      will hear again, he actually has some nice things
      to say about my client.
           Dr. Dolgin is $10,000 a day.
           Now, which side has the witnesses who testify
      so often that their testimony is recorded on
      videotape and played all over the state of Florida? 4320 You saw some of them here.
           To suggest the defense witnesses are a
      traveling side show or in it for the money, while
      on the other hand the plaintiff's witnesses are
      health advocates is ridiculous.  It's profitable to
      testify against cigarette companies, and these
      folks have profited mightily.
           But again, this is itself a side show, because
      what does this have to do with Leroy Kirkland?
           Now, I spent a lot more time than I planned --
      and I get less time than they do -- to talk about
      things that have nothing to do with Mr. Kirkland.
      And I guess sometimes I wonder why you were made to
      hear this evidence.  Why did they retry the Engle
      case?  Why did they retry to reprove things that
      Mr. Socias has already said has been conclusively
      established?  Why did they bombard you with Philip
      Morris documents and irrelevant ads?  Why did you
      hear yesterday over and over again about 440,000
      deaths a year in the case of a living, breathing
      human being?  And the answer is to get you mad.
      The answer is hope that you will violate your oath
      as jurors to try the facts of this case, to decide
      this case.  Because the facts of this case are
      suborn things, and if you focus on the suborn facts 4321 of this case, plaintiff loses.
           Yesterday Mr. Gary -- and I'm not going to put
      his name up on a board like he did mine yesterday.
      Which, by the way, when he did that, that put my
      name on a board one more time than Leroy Kirkland's
      name showed up on a board.
           He said this case is not about Mr. Kirkland.
      That Mr. Kirkland is an instrument; an
      instrument -- his words, not mine -- to get to
      punitive damages.
           Now, first of all, when he said that he was
      dead wrong for two reasons.  First of all,
      Mr. Kirkland is not an instrument.  He's a human
      being, and it's disrespectful to call him one.
           But second of all, he is dead wrong, because
      this case is not about punitive damages.  That's
      like trying to get to the Super Bowl without
      playing the season first.  This isn't a cause, this
      isn't a crusade, this isn't making the world right.
      This is a case about Leroy Kirkland.  And because
      it is, their case crumbles.
           You heard, for example, in a few short
      answers, Mr. Kirkland told you that Mr. Proctor --
      Dr. Proctor's entire day of testimony had nothing
      to do with him.  It was this simple.  He's never 4322 heard of the Tobacco Institute, never heard of the
      Hill and Knowlton, never read the Frank Statement,
      never heard of those organizations.  And Dr.
      Proctor went on and on and on about them.
      Irrelevant.  He told us again and again that he
      never relied on anything that tobacco companies did
      or said.
           There is going to be a question on the verdict
      form that asks you if he relied on anything R.J.
      Reynolds did or said.  And the answer has got to be
      no.  They didn't -- he didn't rely on his choice to
      smoke or his choice to continue to smoke.  His
      choice to smoke, to the extent it was influenced by
      anybody at all, was by his cousin Marie.  Remember
      that?
           He told us that again:  She got you to smoke?
           She taught, not Reynolds.
           And again:  She taught you to inhale.
           It was nothing that Reynolds did.
           And again:  You didn't smoke because of
      anything a tobacco company did.
           Not because of the Flintstones, not because of
      Santa Claus, not because of something he saw on TV
      or heard on the radio.  It was his cousin.
           And again, he didn't start smoking because of 4323 tobacco companies.  No, it wasn't the tobacco
      companies.
           And yeah, he might have been young.  But
      because he was smoking, started smoking when he was
      young doesn't make it my client's fault.  These
      facts are stubborn things.
           Mr. Kirkland told us that nothing that
      Reynolds did influenced his choice to continue to
      smoke.  He chose to continue to smoke because
      that's what he wanted to do.  He told us that
      Reynolds didn't influence his choice to smoke Pall
      Mall.  A friend did.  He told us Reynolds didn't
      influence his choice to smoke Salem.  A friend did.
      In fact, he told us he never bought a brand of
      cigarettes because of cigarette promotions, and he
      never saw an ad that said cigarettes are healthy.
      He told us why he smoked.  He smoked because he
      enjoyed it.  He liked to smoke, he enjoyed the
      smell, they made him relax, they helped him
      concentrate a little bit better.
           And even Dr. Henningfield admitted in his
      video that there are some people who get some
      pleasure of smoking, and there are some people who
      are smoking who don't want to quit.  And these
      facts are stubborn things. 4324 When people got on Mr. Kirkland about him
      smoking, what was his response?  Oh, I'm addicted?
      No.  Mind your own business.  Mind your own
      business.
           He told us he knew smoking was unhealthy from
      an early age.  He knew it wasn't good for him.  He
      was warned by a whole bunch of people.  He was
      warned by his parents.  He was warned in Middleton
      High School.
           Remember that school?  Now, this was back in
      the segregated era in the south, but this was not
      an inferior school.  In fact, as you heard from Dr.
      Hoffman who researched that school, it was at the
      time one of the best schools in the state.  This
      was not a two-room schoolhouse with dirt floors.
           He was warned by his basketball coach, his
      wife, his Aunt Rosemary, his church, his brother
      Otto, who ratted him out to their parents; his
      brother Harry, who also ratted him out to their
      parents; CBS News, Walter Cronkite and Edward R.
      Murrow, the Tampa Tribune, and the St. Pete Times.
      These facts are stubborn things.
           You saw from the testimony of Dr. Hoffman that
      from the time Mr. Kirkland was taught to inhale by
      his cousin Marie until he quit smoking in 1994, 4325 there was news coverage of the links between
      smoking and disease.  And it was in newspapers.
           And I'm not showing you the New York Times
      here.  I'm showing you the Tampa Tribune and the
      St. Pete Times.
           And, in fact, in those two papers in 1964, the
      surgeon general's report was front-page,
      above-the-fold news.  You heard that it was covered
      in magazines like Life and Time and Newsweek and
      Reader's Digest.  You heard there was coverage in
      the TV news.  You heard that Mr. Kirkland watched
      the TV news.  Walter Cronkite and Edward R. Murrow.
           Now, you also may remember on redirect
      examination, Mr. Gary tried to get Mr. Kirkland to
      say he really didn't know who these people were.
      And it kind of backfired.
           Edward R. Murrow or Morrell.  Do you know who
      that is?
           Yeah.  That was a news reporter.
           And you listened to him?
           Yes, sir.
           Do you know who Walter Cronkite was?
           He was a news reporter.
           And we showed you some of that news from both
      Edward R. Murrow, the See It Now Program, sort of 4326 the 60 Minutes of its era, as you heard, and from
      Walter Cronkite.
           And Mr. Kirkland was warned by the warning
      label that was on every pack of cigarettes he
      smoked for 28 years.  This is the warning label
      from 1966, the warning label from 1970, and then
      the rotating warning labels from 1985.
           Now, Mr. Kirkland testified that he says he
      never saw the warning label that was on his pack
      and carton of cigarette -- cigarettes for 28 years.
      But he also told us this.  He ignored public
      information about the dangers of smoking because it
      wasn't what he wanted to hear, and he ignored it
      because he wanted to smoke.
           If it were otherwise, before 1994, if he
      wanted to quit, you saw there was plenty of
      information to help him do that.  Information about
      how smoke -- how quitting reduced the risks of
      smoking and information about where you could get
      help to reduce -- quit and reduce the risk of
      disease.  And about that one day every year when
      people, millions of people stopped smoking for one
      day in the hope that they will stop smoking for
      good.  The Great American Smokeout.
           The information was out there for everybody to 4327 see -- for you, for me, for Leroy Kirkland -- if
      they want to see it and if they want to heed it.
      And that's the key.  He didn't.  He didn't until
      1994.
           Now, folks, I'm going to stop talking about
      irrelevancies and I'm going to start talking about
      Leroy Kirkland.  And you know why?  Because it was
      the defense, not the plaintiff in this case, that
      investigated the case of Leroy Kirkland, that gave
      you evidence about his case.  And we didn't treat
      him as an instrument.  We treated him as the
      plaintiff.
           It wasn't Dr. Proctor or it wasn't Dr.
      Henningfield and it wasn't Dr. Benowitz and it
      wasn't Dr. Farone.  In fact, you didn't hear really
      that much about Leroy Kirkland yesterday.  The
      person who talked about Leroy Kirkland was Dr.
      Hoffman, that nice little lady for the defense.
      She focused on Mr. Kirkland.  She focused on his
      family, what they told him.  Focused on his
      schools, what they taught him.  She focused on his
      church, what it taught him.  Focused on what
      newspapers he read and what TV news he watched.
           Now, when Dr. Hoffman was cross-examined, you
      would think that the cross-examination would be 4328 about those things she talked about -- the schools,
      the parents, the church, the newspapers, the TV
      news.  But it wasn't.  It was about the
      irrelevancies again.  She was cross-examined about
      women smoking during the Roaring 20s.  Mr. Kirkland
      wasn't a woman in the Roaring 20s.  She was
      cross-examined about that article in the New York
      Times that he never read; about materials sent to
      doctors.  He's not a doctor.  Three ads for Philip
      Morris, which, again, is not my client.  But he
      never saw those ads.  Two ads for L&M.  He never
      smoked that brand.  A video of the Tobacco
      Institute spokesperson.  He never heard of the
      Tobacco Institute.  And a Philip Morris executive
      and Face the Nation and on and on and on.
           When they cross-examined Dr. Hoffman, they
      chose not to deal with the stubborn facts of this
      case.  So they chose to present the irrelevancies
      from the other case.  Basically they cross-examined
      Dr. Hoffman with the direct examination of Dr.
      Proctor.  And what that was was irrelevancies to
      this case times two.
           So it comes down really to the questions you
      are going to be asked on the verdict form.  Was
      Mr. Kirkland a member of the Engle class?  And as I 4329 told you in opening statement, that requires you to
      resolve two issues.  No. 1, was Mr. Kirkland
      addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?  And
      No. 2.  Did addiction cause his injury?  Or was it
      caused by his choice to smoke and to continue to
      smoke.
           And yesterday you heard that "choice" is going
      to be a word not on the verdict form.  And that's
      right.  But "cause" sure is.  And you are going to
      have to decide what the legal cause of
      Mr. Kirkland's injuries were, whether it was
      something Reynolds did or whether it was his choice
      to smoke and to continue to smoke.
           Now, let's address these one at a time.
           Was Leroy Kirkland addicted to cigarettes
      containing nicotine?  Dr. Dolgin told you yes; Dr.
      Myers told you no.  Let's compare the two doctors.
           Dr. Myers is a psychiatrist.  Dr. Dolgin is an
      ear, nose and throat doctor.
           Dr. Myers read all the depositions.
      Dr. Dolgin only read the deposition of the person
      in this courtroom suing for money.
           Dr. Myers examined Mr. Kirkland for three
      hours.  Dr. Dolgin examined him for 25 minutes, and
      part of that was a physical examination. 4330 Dr. Myers examined him and evaluated him using
      DSM-IV.  Dr. Dolgin had no particular criteria.
           And by the way, even Dr. Dolgin, even Dr.
      Benowitz and even Dr. Henningfield acknowledged the
      DSM-IV is the Bible for the psychiatric profession.
      This book.
           Dr. Myers was trained in addiction issues.
      Dr. Dolgin, on-the-job training.
           Dr. Myers teaches addiction treatment.
      Dr. Dolgin hasn't even taken a course in addiction
      treatment.  In fact, Dr. Dolgin's principal
      qualification to give you an opinion on addiction
      seems to be that Medicaid will pay him for it.
           Dr. Myers is not from Providence, Rhode
      Island, as Mr. Gary at one point tried to suggest.
      He is from right here in Tampa, Florida.  He lives
      today in Providence, and this winter is regretting
      it.
           Dr. Myers has, in fact, diagnosed smokers as
      nicotine dependent.
           Now, yesterday Mr. Socias said that nobody
      could meet Dr. Myers' definition of addiction
      because it included the term "impairment."  Well,
      if you listen to Dr. Myers' testimony, it's not Dr.
      Myers that requires impairment.  It's this book. 4331 It's DSM-IV, the Bible for the psychiatric
      profession.  And people can and do meet that
      criteria.
           Dr. Myers has designated his -- diagnosed
      people as nicotine dependent, and he guesstimates
      that about half the 50 million smokers who quit
      probably also met the criteria for nicotine
      dependence.  But not this one.  Not this one.  Not
      Mr. Kirkland.  Mr. Myers testified that, according
      to the standards established by the psychiatric
      profession in DSM-IV, Mr. Kirkland was not nicotine
      dependent or addicted.
           Now, what factors did he consider?  Yesterday
      Mr. Gary suggested that Dr. Myers' entire opinion
      was based on the fact there was no withdrawal
      symptoms -- his entire opinion -- and that he
      nailed him because he showed him in DSM-IV that
      that's not required; withdrawal is not required.
      He said he was busted.
           Well, he wasn't busted, because Dr. Myers
      considered all these things.  And it wasn't any one
      factor that tipped the balance.  It was all of
      them.  It wasn't just that he tried to quit before.
      It wasn't just that he was strong willed.  It
      wasn't just that he enjoyed smoking.  It wasn't 4332 just that he was successful on his first trial.  It
      wasn't just that he quit cold turkey.  It wasn't
      just that he had never smoked again.  It wasn't
      just that he couldn't stand to be around cigarettes
      anymore.  It was all of these together.
           Don't you remember?  He kept talking about
      another piece of the puzzle.  It was all of these
      together.  He said DSM-IV is not a cookbook.  A
      psychiatrist has to evaluate the seven criteria for
      addiction in this book, and according to his
      judgment, his training and his experience.  Which
      is why an ENT or a cardiologist or a pulmonologist
      or a pharmacologist or Mr. Kirkland's daughter or
      Mr. Kirkland's boss can't make that diagnosis.  It
      takes someone with Dr. Myers' expertise.  And Dr.
      Myers applied the criteria to Mr. Kirkland, and he
      found that Mr. Kirkland was not nicotine dependent
      or addicted.
           We're not talking about addictions here the
      way we talked about them in jury selection.
      Remember, all of us with addictions to food?  We
      are talking about a medically grounded diagnosis.
      This is a diagnosis of legal consequences.  And Dr.
      Myers was the only witness to step foot in this
      courtroom that's qualified to give that diagnosis. 4333 And he gave it to you using recognized scientific
      criteria, not something people make up along the
      way.
           You remember his cross-examination?  It was
      that whole issue about whether he shredded his
      notes.  Where are your notes?  Well, his notes of
      the interview -- by the way, at which
      Mr. Kirkland's lawyer was present.  This wasn't
      some secret proceeding.  He said when he moved from
      Tampa to the snows of Rhode Island, either they
      were put in the wrong box or he shredded some old
      notes.  He didn't know.
           But we all have his report.  And his report
      captures what his notes had.  Irrelevancy.  A red
      herring.
           But, folks, the best evidence on addiction and
      Mr. Kirkland quitting came right here from
      Mr. Kirkland when he said, Made up your mind and
      decided to quit, and he didn't have any trouble
      quitting.
           You made up your mind and you quit.  Isn't
      that true?
           It's true.
           And he never smoked again.
           Now, at this trial we also got a definition of 4334 addiction from Dr. Henningfield, the
      psychopharmacologist.  And he called it --
           And I use what's similar to what the National
      Institute on Drug Abuse says.  A chronic, relapsing
      brain disease or brain disorder.  And we know that
      Mr. Kirkland stopped forever.  No trouble staying
      quit.  In fact, Mr. Kirkland never relapsed.  So
      even under Dr. Henningfield's definition of
      addiction, Mr. Kirkland does not meet it.
           Now, in this trial, Mr. Kirkland and his
      lawyers tried to salvage their addiction issue.  On
      some key issues Mr. Kirkland told a different story
      to you than he told in his deposition or that he
      told to Dr. Myers.  And every time, oddly enough,
      the different story he told helped his case.
           Remember Mr. Williams having to constantly
      pull up the deposition and confront Mr. Kirkland
      with what he said before under oath with his
      earlier and different answer?  There are a lot of
      them, but there's two.  The two greatest hits are
      these.
           In his deposition and to Dr. Myers, he said it
      was not hard to quit.
           At trial in front of you, he said it was hard
      to quit. 4335 In his deposition and to Dr. Myers, he said he
      never tried to quit before 1994.
           At trial here he said he did try to quit
      before 1994.
           You are the judges of the facts.  And you have
      to determine what's true.  But Mr. Kirkland's
      deposition testimony and his discussions with Dr.
      Myers are stubborn, stubborn facts.
           Now, we asked Dr. Myers on the witness stand,
      Let's assume you were wrong and let's assume that
      you conclude that Mr. Kirkland was addicted.  He
      smoked for a long time, and even though he never
      tried to quit, even though he quit on his first
      try, even though he didn't have any withdrawal
      symptoms, even though he never relapsed, we think
      he was addicted.  Suppose you conclude that.  Is
      that the end of the inquiry?  Part of it.  Part of
      it.
           What did we learn from Dr. Benowitz.  Any
      smoker can quit smoking.  Three hundred -- I'm
      sorry -- 3,000 smokers quit every day, 60,000,000
      smokers have quit smoking, and more than half the
      people who have ever smoked have quit.
           In fact, even the surgeon general that
      commissioned -- that issued the 1988 report on 4336 addiction, Dr. C. Everett Koop, the guy with the
      beard and uniform you may remember from the news,
      hero of Dr. Henningfield, this is what he says on
      his website.  And this is very, very important.
           When you are engaged in internal warfare with
      yourself about whether or not to light up a
      cigarette, you could fortify yourself by
      remembering this important fact.
           Ultimately you are the one that has control
      over your behavior.  Ultimately you are the one
      that has control over your behavior.  The cigarette
      is not going to light itself and jump into your
      mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced
      hypnotic trance and light the cigarette.  No matter
      how much you smoke or how much you like to smoke,
      the choice -- there's that pesky word again -- the
      choice to light up is always yours.
           This is from the surgeon general who called
      smoking addictive.
           Now, in opening I showed you the word "choice"
      in the 1978 surgeon general's report, personal
      choice health behavior; the 1982 surgeon general's
      report, personal choice behavior; and the 1986
      surgeon general's report, to decide whether or not
      to continue the behavior. 4337 And today you saw, and during Dr.
      Henningfield's testimony you saw, that the surgeon
      general who called smoking addictive, today on his
      website has that smoking is a choice.
           And remember this language.  This is -- this
      is very, very important.  Ultimately, ultimately
      you are the one that has control over your
      behavior.  It's a choice made by a smoker every
      time he lights a cigarette.
           Which brings us to the chart Dr. Myers used
      during his testimony.  This is a diagram of what he
      was saying, you have got addiction, and you've got
      disease.  Addiction does not actually cause the
      disease.  It's the person deciding, choosing over
      the course of a long period of time typically to
      keep putting that poisonous substance or substances
      in their body and exposing themselves to the toxin
      and eventually it causes the disease.
           There is a person in the middle, and that
      person here was Mr. Kirkland.
           So let's go to the key question for Engle
      class membership.
           Was Mr. Kirkland's injury caused by an
      addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine or by
      his choice to smoke or continue to smoke?  In his 4338 testimony, Dr. Myers answered that question.  And
      on his website, Dr. Koop answers that question.
      Ultimately, you are the one that has control over
      behavior.  You.  Not R.J. Reynolds, not Philip
      Morris, not John Wayne, not Santa Claus, not the
      Flintstones, not Joe Louis, not even Cousin Marie.
      As Dr. Myers and Dr. Koop tell us, there's a person
      between an addiction and injury -- a you, a me, a
      Leroy Kirkland.  And you don't get a pass from your
      responsibility because of nicotine.
           Look at what Dr. Benowitz, the plaintiff's
      expert says.  Nicotine does not affect your thought
      process.  Nicotine does not prevent you from
      understanding warning information.  Nicotine does
      not cause smokers to lose the ability to be
      responsible for their own actions.
           And that's what this lawsuit is all about.
      Responsibility for your own actions.
           That's what Dr. Myers said.  That's what Dr.
      Koop said.  That's what Dr. Benowitz said, that's
      pretty much what everybody except Dr. Dolgin, the
      ear nose and throat doctor, said.  Mr. Kirkland is
      responsible for his own actions.  I know it's an
      old fashioned concept.  It's almost retro in this
      era of victimhood. 4339 Let's go back to Dr. Koop again.  Ultimately,
      you are the one that has control over your
      behavior.
           This is not R.J. Reynolds saying that Leroy
      Kirkland is responsible for his behavior.  It's not
      me with my name on a board saying that Mr. Kirkland
      is responsible for his own behavior.  It's the
      former surgeon general of the United States who
      issued the 1988 surgeon general's report on
      addiction.  Every -- who says every smoker,
      addicted or not, highly addicted or not, is
      responsible for their own behavior.
           Ladies and gentlemen, there may be people out
      there every day who struggle with addiction.  There
      certainly are.  There certainly are people out
      there who every day have an ordeal to keep away
      from cigarettes, who don't go to bars because it
      makes them want to smoke, who don't -- give up
      coffee because it reminds them of cigarettes.
      There may be Engle class members out there, and
      there surely are.  But Mr. Kirkland is not one of
      them.
           In fact, under Mr. Kirkland's own definition
      of addiction, he's not addicted.
           What's your understanding of addiction? 4340 Addiction is something that's hard to stop using;
      is that right?
           Yes, sir.
           And you didn't have any trouble quitting,
      correct?
           Correct.
           Now, whether his daughter or his boss thought
      him addicted, Mr. Kirkland in his own mind never
      saw himself as addicted.  Until this lawsuit, of
      course, where he has become an instrument, an
      instrument for punitive damages.
           Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Kirkland was that
      man in the middle who stood between addiction and
      injury.  As Dr. Koop might have said, Mr. Kirkland
      and only Mr. Kirkland was the one that has control
      over his behavior.  Not 10 percent, like they told
      you yesterday, not 50 percent, but 100 percent.
      Ultimately you are the one that has control of your
      own behavior.  If Leroy Kirkland's injury was
      caused by smoking, it was caused by his choice not
      to exercise that control.  It was by his choice to
      smoke and continue to smoke.  It was by his choice
      to ignore negative information about smoking, his
      choice to ignore the warning label, his choice to
      ignore the warnings of family and friends. 4341 This -- what this lawsuit is all about is
      asking you to second guess those choices.  It's
      asking you to make him a victim.  He isn't a
      victim.  For most of his life, he chose to live
      life in the fast lane.  That was a choice.  To
      drink, to smoke, to smoke marijuana.  And that was
      a choice.  Life in the fast lane to the extent he
      had some problems with the law, to the extent he
      had problems that put him in an alcohol rehab
      program, to the extent he was told not to go to
      places that served alcohol.  He lived his life the
      way he wanted to and lived it that way as long as
      he wanted to.  And when he wanted to change it, he
      did.  And that was a choice -- a good choice, a
      smart choice.  He quit drinking without problems.
      He quit smoking without problems.
           And by the way, yesterday you heard that he
      stopped smoking when he was coughing up blood.
      That's not true.  You remember.  He stopped smoking
      before he developed his cancer.  His cancer had
      nothing to do with it.  And he returned to his
      church.  And that's great.  He is deserving of
      praise.  But it does not make him deserving of
      money.  And it does not make him an Engle class
      member. 4342 So ladies and gentlemen, when you get the
      verdict form with the first question that asks you
      is he an Engle class member, I'm asking you to
      check no.
           Now, if we get beyond that first question and
      you find him to be an Engle class member, you are
      going to have to decide whether anything that
      Reynolds did caused his injury.  You will have to
      decide, and Judge Levens will instruct you, or has
      actually in the instructions you have, on the
      meaning of legal cause.  You have already seen
      evidence that nothing that Reynolds did affected
      anything -- any smoking decision Mr. Kirkland made.
      You already heard evidence he didn't rely on
      anything that Reynolds or any tobacco company did
      or said.  And there will be a question on the
      verdict form that asked you that, and you should
      check no there.
           But we also have the question of what caused
      his laryngeal cancer.  Was it smoking or was it
      something else?  And we went through this in
      opening.  The basic facts about laryngeal cancer.
      Smoking causes laryngeal cancer.  Smoking does not
      cause all laryngeal cancer.  Asbestos insulation
      causes laryngeal cancer, alcohol consumption causes 4343 laryngeal cancer, and marijuana use may cause
      laryngeal cancer.
           Applied to Mr. Kirkland, he smoked, he wore an
      asbestos vest for years while working as a welder,
      he worked in shipyards, which are notorious places
      for exposure to airborne asbestos fibers; he drank
      substantial amounts of alcohol for many years, and
      he smoked marijuana.
           As the trial unfolded, it became clear that
      until he quit drinking in 1993, Mr. Kirkland had a
      substantial problem with alcohol.  It wasn't an
      occasional beer, as was suggested yesterday.
           We heard he liked his scotch, perhaps a little
      bit too much.  And we learned the following:
           He began drinking in his teens.
           He passed out in a bar in his 20s.
           He had a liter of alcohol per week.  And there
      was back and forth about whether it was a liter of
      hard liquor or beer.  He told Dr. Dolgin, he told
      Dr. Myers and he told us in this courtroom, that
      scotch was his beverage of choice.
           His daughter asked him to stop drinking.  It's
      so bad, Dad, please stop.
           He was ordered to alcohol rehab, as Dr. Dolgin
      told us.  Ordered to avoid the use of alcohol, 4344 ordered to avoid places that served alcohol.  This
      does not happen to social drinkers.  This does not
      happen to people that have an occasional beer, as
      you heard yesterday.
           Is a liter of alcohol a week enough to
      increase risk of laryngeal cancer?  Dr. Dolgin says
      yes, and Dr. Bertino agrees.
           Does alcohol bathe the epiglottis and
      supraglottis?  Dr. Dolgin says yes and Dr. Bertino
      agrees.
           The only point of disagreement is whether
      alcohol comes in contact with that part of the
      larynx where the tumor was found.  Ladies and
      gentlemen, you don't need anybody's testimony on
      that.  You saw the videos.  Dr. Bertino showed you
      a tape that was not made for litigation, the tape
      of an actual patient.  And you saw that when the
      tape was rolling, the green goop covered
      everything, everything including where
      Mr. Kirkland's tumor was found.
           Dr. Dolgin came back for a second try to try
      to convince you that he was right.  And when he did
      that, Dr. Dolgin could be renamed, I think, Dr.
      Absolutely Certain.  You want to talk about
      advocates.  Dr. Dolgin was Dr. Absolutely Certain. 4345 Absolutely certain that smoking causes the
      laryngeal cancer.  Absolutely certain that
      Dr. Bertino's swallow test was abnormal.
      Absolutely certain that he's never seen a
      supraglottis cancer caused by alcohol.  Absolutely
      certain where Mr. Kirkland's tumor started.  Even
      the pathologist didn't say that.  Dr. Dolgin knows
      absolutely certain.
           He was so absolutely certain with his -- about
      his opinions that he disagreed with Mr. Kirkland's
      treating pathologist, the man who actually looked
      at the specimen.  Dr. Stonesifer, you heard, the
      treating pathologist, said he that couldn't say
      that smoking caused the cancer.  Dr. Dolgin can.
           Neither did Dr. Wilbur.  Dr. Wilbur couldn't
      say that smoking caused the cancer.  But Dr. Dolgin
      can.  And Dr. Stonesifer couldn't rule out alcohol
      as a cause.  But Dr. Absolutely Certain can;
      Dr. Dolgin can.
           You saw the battle of the green goop videos.
      You can decide for yourself.  But consider this.
      Last Friday when Dr. Bertino was on cross and was
      being beat about the head and shoulders because in
      two other cases he gave an opinion that he couldn't
      tell -- couldn't tell the jury what -- what the 4346 cause was of a particular laryngeal cancer.  And he
      made those opinions because the smoker had other
      risk factors.  Well, in this case he was able to
      identify the cause, and he said the cause was
      alcohol.  And the reason for him saying that is the
      same thing you hear from realtors -- location,
      location, location.
           You have to be a pretty big believer in
      coincidences to believe that in a heavy and
      long-time drinker of alcohol the tumor is found in
      exactly the place where alcohol not only touches
      but where it lingers.  Huge coincidence to believe
      the tumor was not caused by alcohol in a case with
      stubborn facts about drinking like this one.
           Ladies and gentlemen, the greater weight of
      the evidence in this case is that long-term and
      heavy alcohol use caused this tumor, not smoking.
           Dr. Bertino did not say, as Mr. Gary suggested
      yesterday, that smoking contributed to the -- to
      the tumor and there was this other stuff, these
      other risk factors.  That's not what he said.  He
      said the most significant cause was alcohol, and
      though these other factors were present, you
      couldn't determine how much they contributed, all
      because of the location. 4347 Ladies and gentlemen, they have not met their
      burden of proving that smoking caused the tumor.
           Now, if you find everything that I have said
      so far unpersuasive and you decide to return a
      verdict for Mr. Kirkland, you have to decide on an
      amount of damages.  And this is hard.  It's hard to
      put a value on the quality of life.  Mr. Kirkland
      is cured.  Everybody agrees with that.  But he is
      not functioning normally.  Mr. Gary asked you for
      over $96,000,000.  A lot of money.  A lot of money.
           You were instructed, and it's in your
      instructions to take back to the jury room, if you
      should choose to give an award, that it should be
      fair and just in light of the evidence you have
      heard in the case.
           So what evidence did you hear?  You learned
      that Mr. Kirkland lived life in the fast lane.  He
      smoked, he drank, he smoked marijuana, and he
      developed a cancer that caused him distress and
      pain.  Even if you decide that smoking caused that
      cancer, you've got to also figure that drinking to
      the extent he did where he is ordered to refrain
      from drinking, and he is put in an alcohol rehab
      program, drinking to the extent your daughter comes
      and she says Dad, stop drinking, that certainly 4348 couldn't have helped.  And smoking marijuana, which
      he did as an adult, by the way, not as a child,
      certainly couldn't have helped.  Living life in the
      fast line as long as he did certainly couldn't have
      helped, though.  That's the facts in this case.
      And it's facts in this case that have nothing to do
      with my client.
           But he did develop a cancer and the cancer did
      change his life.  He was cured.  He was able to
      return to work, the same job, the same pay.  He
      worked until he was 65 part-time -- full-time and
      part-time after that.  Now he's retired.
           One of you asked the question, and it was
      answered.  He has health insurance and prescription
      drug coverage and will for the rest of his life.
           Yeah, his life has changed.  He can't swim, he
      can't sing.  He has restricted use of his left arm.
      Thank goodness he is a right-hander.  He's on pain
      medication, although in his deposition he said that
      it was for a work-related injury on his back.  And
      at trial he said, Well, it's for my back and my
      neck.  But he beat the cancer.
           We all feel compassion.  We all wish him the
      best.  But neither of those is a reason to put
      aside common sense and good judgment.  And 4349 yesterday Mr. Gary invited you to wildly put aside
      common sense and good judgment.
           I would suggest that the evidence in this
      case, the facts of this case, the facts about
      Mr. Kirkland, if you decide to award him anything,
      suggest an award in the thousands, not in the
      millions.  If you make an award, compensate
      Mr. Kirkland, not his lawyers, and compensate him
      based on the evidence about him, not his lawyer's
      argument, not his lawyer's crusade --
           MR. GARY:  I'm going to object to this and
      move that any reference to lawyers --
           THE COURT:  The objection is overruled.
           MR. KACZYNSKI:  Finally -- and I say finally,
      because for me I don't get to speak again -- if you
      get all the way through the verdict form, you are
      going to have to decide whether punitive damages
      are warranted.  If you get that far, you will have
      already fully compensated Mr. Kirkland for his
      injury.  Punitive damages, as the Judge instructed
      you, are not about compensation or making somebody
      whole.  Punitive damages are about money.  More
      money.  As Judge Levens told you, punitive damages
      is designed to punish and deter.  Punish for
      conduct tantamount to reckless disregard of human 4350 life.  And the plaintiffs have a higher burden of
      proof for punitive damages.  It's called clear and
      convincing evidence.
           Now, from the earliest moments of jury
      selection through yesterday, Mr. Gary said this
      case is all about punitive damages.  And yesterday
      he called Mr. Kirkland an instrument.  In opening
      he called him a vehicle to get to punitive damages.
           And I'm obviously here to argue that punitive
      damages are not warranted and this case is not
      about punitive damages.  Punish Reynolds?  Despite
      what Dr. Farone said, the Philip Morris guy,
      Reynolds did try to take carcinogens out of
      cigarette smoke, and they tried from the 1950s
      forward.  You are going to have evidence back in
      the jury room --
           And by the way, this is a plaintiff's exhibit
      that the plaintiffs didn't show you.
           From 1959, having confirmed and extended the
      early published findings on polycyclic hydrocarbons
      in cigarette smoke, we initiated a lengthy research
      program to develop methods to lessen the amounts of
      these potentially dangerous compounds in cigarette
      smoke.  We investigated the following five main
      approaches to the problem. 4351 And there are five scientific methods they
      went through.  Okay.  Next, please.
           The experimental variations in these
      investigations were such that over 120 separate
      experiments were conducted involving almost one
      half million cigarettes.
           This is 1959.  They were trying to make a
      better cigarette that far back.
           You heard evidence in this case that Reynolds
      tried to cooperate with the federal government to
      develop a less hazardous cigarette.  This is a memo
      from the president of the company to the head of
      research and development.  Areas of special
      emphasis.  In cooperation with others, you should
      push the work concerning tobacco and health.  You
      should prepare a plan to foster any relationship
      with government personnel in the quest for mutual
      understanding of facts, ultimately to gain their
      cooperation in proper research of this subject.  If
      there is a safer cigarette, let's continue and
      increase our efforts in this program.  Please
      prepare a plan to carry it out.
           Now, this wasn't written in 1968 to be a trial
      exhibit in 2011.  It was written because this is
      what the president of Reynolds wanted done. 4352 Another one of those documents that wasn't supposed
      to see the light of day.  Another one of those
      documents that tells you what people were really
      thinking.  And that's what they were really
      thinking:  If there is a safer cigarette, let's
      continue and increase our efforts in this program.
           You heard that Reynolds participated with the
      National Cancer Institute and public health
      authorities in the Tobacco Working Group.  Among
      the people involved there, you see it was from the
      National Cancer Institute.  You see the goal was a
      less hazardous cigarette.  Dr. Rodgman from
      Reynold's; Dr. Senkus from Reynold's; Dr. Jesse L.
      Steinfeld, a former -- a future surgeon general;
      Dr. T. C. Tso -- he was from the Agriculture
      Department; and Dr. Wynder, the famous man who did
      the skin painting.  And at the bottom you see that
      Reynolds is thanked for being involved.
           In conjunction with the Tobacco Working Group,
      one of those efforts was the one I talked about
      earlier -- the efforts to come up with a low-tar,
      medium-nicotine cigarette, the one that was called
      for by the NCI, National Cancer Institute.  Dr.
      Doll, Dr. Jarvik, Dr. Russell and the surgeon
      general.  Here is a report on that, 1976.  Dr. Gory 4353 from the National Cancer Institute.  Dr. Owen from
      the National Cancer Institute, and Dr. Senkus from
      Reynold's, the man who got the memo from the
      president of Reynolds saying cooperate in the
      program and let's go after a safer cigarette.  And
      this was one of those efforts, not to hook smokers,
      but to make a less hazardous cigarette in
      conjunction with the federal government.
           You heard that Reynolds scientists have
      published articles.  Dr. Benowitz has acknowledged
      as much.  They have published studies on nicotine.
      And what Dr. Benowitz says, they published studies
      on nicotine:  Yeah, I've seen it from your company.
      Less from the others.
           It's all still Philip Morris documents.  Here
      is Dr. Benowitz, a plaintiff's expert, saying your
      companies publish more on nicotine than anybody
      else.
           You saw that Reynolds scientists would often
      wind up being cited by the surgeon general.  And
      even Dr. Farone acknowledged that Reynolds did and
      is making continuing efforts to make cigarettes
      safer.  It began in the fifties and it's going on
      today.
           You heard about in Dr. Farone's testimony, a 4354 revolutionary breakthrough in a cigarette called
      Premier.  Premier is a cigarette that heats instead
      of burns tobacco.  Has a remarkable reduction in
      the harmful substances in tobacco.  Dr. Farone, the
      plaintiff's expert, on his video tape said:
           In your opinion, Premier was a safer
      cigarette?
           Correct.
           A safer cigarette manufactured by my client.
      And Dr. Farone, the plaintiff's expert, says so.
      This is why they only pay him $250 an hour.
           Reynolds tested Premier, and it published this
      book with the test results.  It's called The
      Premier Monograph.  And Dr. Farone says he's got a
      copy of The Premier Monograph.  And he says it's a
      book that has information drawn up to explain an
      entire body of research or endeavor concerning
      Premier.  It talks about the basis for it.  Talks
      about the research.  Provides the results.  Talks
      about methodology.  And the publication of that
      book, in my opinion, is a good thing.  A good
      thing.
           Punish Reynolds for developing Premier?  For
      trying to get carcinogens out of tobacco smoke?
      For publishing this?  I don't think so. 4355 And finally, Dr. Farone said that smokers
      should switch to Premier.  The plaintiff's expert
      is telling smokers to smoke the product made by my
      client because it's safer.  Well, unfortunately,
      they didn't.  And you heard that Premier failed in
      the marketplace, after which Reynolds introduced a
      product called Eclipse.
           Eclipse Dr. Farone says is a similar type of
      product developed by Reynolds as a successor
      product.  A similar product being a safer product.
      And ladies and gentlemen, Eclipse is in the
      marketplace today.  A safer cigarette in the
      marketplace today.  And even though it's out there
      and even though even Dr. Farone says it's safer,
      Dr. Farone tells you they are still working to
      improve it.  A safer cigarette in the marketplace
      that they are still trying to make better.
           And finally and most recently, you heard from
      Dr. Farone that Philip Morris and Reynolds
      discovered that one of the methods that was being
      used to cure tobacco increased nitrosamines,
      carcinogens, in that tobacco.  So they came up with
      a new way to cure.  And they shared it with
      farmers.  And this new way of curing tobacco
      reduced nitrosamine.  You heard about it from 4356 Dr. Farone.  They found out if you applied direct
      heat, you were increasing them.  And when that was
      discovered, they went to tobacco farmers and told
      them to change the method.  Yeah, they started
      programs that caused that to be changed.  Again,
      trying to reduce harmful -- harmful elements in
      cigarettes.
           And this isn't something you hear marketed.
      This isn't something you see in advertising.  This
      is something they are doing to make the product
      safer.
           Here is the score card.  From the 1950s they
      tried to reduce or eliminate suspect compounds from
      tobacco smoke.
           Since the 1950s, you heard in the surgeon
      general's report they lowered tar and nicotine in
      response to calls from the public health community.
           In the sixties and seventies, they worked with
      the National Cancer Institute to develop a less
      hazardous cigarette.  The president of the company
      ordered them to and they did.
           In the seventies and eighties they
      investigated nicotine's level to develop less
      hazardous cigarettes in response to calls from Drs.
      Russell and Doll and Jarvik and the surgeon general 4357 in 1981.
           In the 1980s they developed Premier.
      Dr. Farone called it a step in the right direction
      and one of the best cigarettes ever marketed.
           In the 1990s they discovered and introduced
      Eclipse, the successor, safer product to Premier.
           In the 1990s they discovered and implemented a
      method of curing tobacco to reduce tobacco-specific
      nitrosamines.
           In every decade since the 1950s, Reynolds was
      working to making its products better.
           Now, I'll tell you right now the company's
      track record is far from perfect.  You saw some
      stupid memos along the way.  And maybe Reynolds
      waited too long to admit what everybody else
      thought.  But the record up there, work on safer
      cigarettes from the 1950s, over 50 years, is not a
      record of a reckless disregard of human life.  It's
      not a record that requires punishment and it's not
      a record that requires deterrence.
           So I'm asking you, if you get to the end of
      the verdict form, to find that punitive damages,
      extra money, extra dollars, are not warranted in
      this case.
           Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Kirkland made 4358 choices throughout his life.  He chose his
      lifestyle.  He chose to expose himself to alcohol
      and marijuana and chose to smoke.  The choice to
      smoke was made in another era at another time and
      in a place lost to history, starting with a cousin
      Marie.  We should respect that choice.  He made a
      choice to continue to smoke.  And he made it every
      day, every time he lit up a cigarette.  And he made
      that for 28 years while staring a warning label in
      the face -- a choice to continue to smoke in the
      face of news reports about the risks of smoking, a
      choice to continue to smoke made in the face of
      warnings from friends and family about the risks of
      smoking.  And we should respect that choice as
      well.
           And then in reforming his life, he chose to
      quit smoking.  And we should respect that choice
      and we should praise that choice.  But Mr. Kirkland
      is not a victim.  He lived his life the way he
      wanted.  He did what he wanted, when he wanted.
      Don't make him a victim in this lawsuit.
           Remember in opening statement I closed by
      talking about the railroad tracks.  One railroad
      track was R.J. Reynolds and one railroad track was
      Leroy Kirkland.  I told you in opening statement 4359 that even though it may be an optical illusion in
      the distance that they cross, but they never did --
      they never do.  In this case, they never did.
           This is the only chance here I get to speak
      with you.  Plaintiff has the burden of proof.
      Plaintiff gets a rebuttal.  Mr. Gary yesterday
      asked you to do the right thing, and so am I.  In
      this case, the right thing is to follow the law.
      In this case, the right thing is to find that those
      railroad tracks do not intersect, to find that what
      Reynolds did didn't have any effect on Mr.
      Kirkland.  As Mr. Kirkland told us over and over
      and over again, nothing he did developed from R.J.
      Reynolds; no smoking decision he made was based on
      anything R.J. Reynolds did or said.
           Because I don't get to respond to what comes
      after me, I would ask one of you to be my advocate
      in the jury room to answer as you think I would.
           Ladies and gentlemen, as I said, this is the
      last chance I get to speak with you, and I'm going
      to end as I began, thanking you for your service,
      thanking you for your attention and thanking you
      for the hard work that you are going to put in in
      deliberating on this case.  Thank you very much.


           MS. HOFFLER:  May it please the Court, Your
      Honor.
           Ladies and gentlemen.  I'm C. K. Hoffler.  And
      I have been waiting for a chance to talk to you 4361 about some of the evidence in this case, and
      especially right after R.J. Reynolds came into this
      courtroom and made a mockery of the justice system.
           Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, R.J.
      Reynolds and the plaintiff Leroy Kirkland agree on
      one thing.  Only one thing.  And that's that this
      case is about choice.  R.J. Reynolds wanted to talk
      about choice.  Let's talk about choice.
           And I'm going to go through some boards here
      for purposes of demonstration to talk about what
      the evidence in this case revealed about choice.
           Firstly, ladies and gentlemen of the jury,
      R.J. Reynolds is the one that made the choice to
      manufacture and sell cigarettes to consumers in
      America.  That was R.J. Reynolds.  That wasn't
      Leroy Kirkland.  That wasn't anybody with the last
      name Kirkland.  That was R.J. Reynolds.
           R.J. Reynolds.  We talked about choices.  R.J.
      Reynolds.  And this cigarette is one of the most
      deadly drugs known to mankind.  This is not just
      tobacco rolled in paper.  This is a drug that has
      carcinogens.  This is a drug that kills.  We have
      heard testimony about that.
           R.J. Reynolds is the one who made the decision
      to determine who to market its cigarettes to in the 4362 1940s, 1950s, 1960s when Leroy Kirkland was
      smoking.
           You heard the defense lawyers say, What does
      all this have to do with Leroy Kirkland?  R.J.
      Reynolds' decision to sell, to market to youth in
      the forties, the fifties, and the sixties has
      everything to do with Mr. Kirkland.  Because as you
      heard their experts say, there was a climate.
      There was a climate that existed where all this
      information, everywhere around.  People got it
      through osmosis.  That's what Dr. Hoffman said.
           So R.J. Reynolds made a deliberate effort to
      market in the 1940s and '50s and '60s.  That was
      during the time that Leroy Kirkland was smoking; in
      fact, when he first started smoking.
           Who determined to which level tar and
      nicotine?  We've heard about the dangers of
      nicotine.  Who made that determination?  It was
      R.J. Reynolds.  Not Mr. Kirkland.  R.J. Reynolds.
           And what type of tobacco?  We heard about
      tobacco leaf and we heard about the reconstituted
      tobacco that was put in to make the nicotine more
      addictive.  You know, they deny that.  Because the
      one thing that was absolutely astounding about R.J.
      Reynolds' presentation here -- and they are nothing 4363 if not consistent -- was that they failed to take
      responsibility.  They act as though they
      manufactured and sold some type of a nice feel-good
      instrument, feel-good product, not a deadly weapon
      that kills people.  We have heard of 440,000 people
      today in America.  We heard of 300,000 people when
      the 1980 surgeon general's report was released.
      But what we didn't hear about is the people like
      Leroy Kirkland.  They don't have a voice.  They
      don't have part of their neck.  They don't have
      part of their tongue.  They can't talk every day.
      He cannot use both hands and talk at the same time.
      Yes, they don't want to talk about that.
           So who made the determination on what type of
      tobacco leaf to use?  That was R.J. Reynolds.  Who
      made the determination on the chemical additives to
      use in cigarettes?  You remember that long list?
      Dr. Henningfield went through this long list of
      chemical additives -- formaldehyde, ammonia.  That
      was R.J. Reynolds.
           Who made the decision to make a product that,
      when burned, produces smoke containing thousands of
      chemicals, including hundreds which are toxic,
      toxic, 50 which cause cancer?  That was R.J.
      Reynolds. 4364 And what about a product, that when it burns,
      it contains radioactive polonium?  That was R.J.
      Reynolds.  They knew.  This was not by
      happenstance.  They spent millions and millions of
      dollars over the years, decades, perfecting this
      cigarette, perfecting it so it could hook its
      smokers.  And they did.  They succeeded.  But you
      didn't hear R.J. Reynolds talk about that, because
      they don't even take responsibility for that.
           And then let's go further.  Talked about
      ammonia in the cigarettes.  Formaldehyde.
           Now, Leroy Kirkland came into the courtroom
      and he looked at you in the eye, members of the
      jury, and he told you, I take responsibility in
      part for my actions.  He told you that.  He's
      taking responsibility.  You heard Mr. Gary
      yesterday talk about perhaps an apportionment of
      fault.  He's not running away.  He is not perfect.
      But he didn't manufacture these cigarettes.  So
      Mr. Kirkland did take responsibility for smoking
      cigarettes.  Mr. Kirkland did take responsibility
      for buying his first pack of RJR cigarettes.
           And by the way, that whole discussion about
      Premier, Eclipse -- and we'll get to that a little
      later if time permits -- Mr. Kirkland never smoked 4365 Premier or Eclipse.  Premier failed.  In fact, it
      wasn't even allowed to be marketed here in Florida.
      So that little notion about the good corporate
      citizen that RJR is because they tried to make a
      safer cigarette that failed, that didn't come to
      Florida, that he didn't smoke?  That's a ruse.  You
      talk about a red herring.  Defense counsel used the
      term red herring.  That's a red herring.  Look
      here, not there.  Look everywhere.  It's everybody
      else's fault but the person who manufactured
      cigarettes.
           So let's go further, ladies and gentlemen of
      the jury.  Let's talk about other choices, other
      choices.  This is what the evidence has reflected.
           The boards are a little big and heavy.
           Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, who chose to
      promote products through television and print ads
      in the fifties when Mr. Kirkland was smoking, in
      the sixties, through celebrities, sports figures,
      doctors, nurses and counting?  That wasn't
      Mr. Kirkland.  He's not an ad person.  He didn't do
      that.  That was R.J. Reynolds.  That was part of
      their campaign when Mr. Kirkland was smoking.
           It doesn't matter whether he saw the
      television programs.  That was the climate and that 4366 was the environment that they created, R.J.
      Reynolds, so their smokers would smoking their
      deadly -- their deadly drug.
           And then who denied for decades, for decades
      that nicotine in tobacco products or cigarettes
      were addictive?  I guess they want to blame that on
      Mr. Kirkland.  But it wasn't Mr. Kirkland.  You
      have heard the evidence.  R.J. Reynolds denied for
      decades.  Denied.  It wasn't me.  We didn't do it.
      It's not addictive.
           And, of course, you saw the spin, you saw the
      spin that R.J. Reynolds gave you today on that
      testimony that their CEO gave to members of
      Congress.  You remember that video when the
      Congressman said, Do you find cigarettes to be
      addictive?  Those other CEOs, they just said no,
      no.  R.J. Reynolds wanted to explain:  Well, you
      see.  No.  Yes.  Kind of.  So no.  No.  No.
           The bottom line is in 1994 their CEO told
      members of Congress, told the American public, told
      everyone and took an oath that cigarettes were not
      addictive.
           And do you know when they finally admitted?
      Forced to.  When they admitted?  That was in the
      year 2000.  In the year 2000, R.J. Reynolds finally 4367 admitted, yes, cigarettes are addictive.  Yes,
      cigarettes can cause lung cancer.  Yes, cigarettes
      can cause laryngeal cancer.  2000, 11 years ago.
      Eleven years ago.  But if you listen to them,
      ladies and gentlemen of the jury, everybody knew
      about it.  The Native Americans knew about it.
      Right?  The Native Americans knew about it.  In the
      1500s.  John Quincy Adams knew about it in 1485.
      He knew it was addictive.  It was everywhere.  If
      you listen to Dr. Hoffman, everybody knew it was
      addictive.
           Well, if everybody knew it was addictive,
      ladies and gentlemen of the jury, why did their CEO
      deny it publicly before Congress under oath?  Why?
      Why?  Because of money, that's why.  Because to
      admit to addiction would cause people certainly to
      stop -- to stop smoking.  But they wanted people
      to continue smoking so people would continue to buy
      their cigarettes.
           And 2000 is an important year.  Because, you
      see, their expert on causation, Dr. Bertino, he
      testified that it wasn't until 2000 that he, a
      laryngeal expert, their expert, that he believed --
      2000, 11 years ago -- that laryngeal cancer is
      caused by cigarette smoking. 4368 Now, what kind of sense does that make, ladies
      and gentlemen of the jury?  This is their expert
      that they brought into this courtroom.  Now, I
      guess what he did is they coordinated.  He admitted
      it when they admitted it.
           Now, let's talk about Dr. Bertino, since
      defense counsel has talked about him.
           THE CLERK:  Ten minutes, Counsel.
           MS. HOFFMAN:  I'm sorry?
           THE COURT:  Ten minutes.
           MS. HOFFMAN:  Thank you very much.
           I don't have a lot of time, ladies and
      gentlemen of the jury.  So if I have to talk
      quickly, please forgive me.
           Dr. Bertino.  Dr. Bertino took the position in
      the beginning until five days before trial, I
      really don't know what causes laryngeal cancer.  I
      can't tell.  I read the documents.  I looked at
      this, this, this, this, blah, blah.  That was his
      testimony.  But interestingly enough, right before
      trial, five days before trial, January 19th, we get
      the document.  He said, Oh.  Okay.  Now I know.  It
      was caused by alcohol.  That's what it is.
      Alcohol.
           Now what happened, what transpired over that 4369 two-year period when he read everything, he saw
      everything, records conflicting to five days
      before?  Of course, what happened is he knew he had
      to come up with something.  But that's not how it
      should work.  That's not how it should work, ladies
      and gentlemen of the jury.
           And while we're talking about Dr. Bertino,
      let's talk about that swallow test.  He sat and he
      looked at you in the eye, and he did that little
      green gook swallow test.  And he said this was a
      normal swallow.  Normal.  Normal swallow.  You
      remember that?  Dr. Dolgin came back and he
      explained to you, members of the jury, why it could
      not have been a normal swallow.  There was scar
      tissue, evidence of chemotherapy.  Part of the
      tongue was missing.  That's not normal.  That's not
      normal.  That probably is what the Leroy
      Kirkland's, what that looks like after having his
      tongue removed, after having chemotherapy and
      radiation.  But that's not a normal swallow.  But
      he looked at you in the eye and said.  And
      Dr. Dolgin showed you what a normal swallow is.
           So when they bring and parade their expert to
      come five days before trial to say, Oh yes, it was
      alcohol, not smoking, don't go for that, ladies and 4370 gentlemen of the jury.
           And let's also talk, though, about what
      Dr. Bertino did admit.  And this is going to be
      very important for the jury instruction.  He did
      say, however -- Dr. Bertino -- that he agreed with
      Mr. Kirkland's treating physician, Dr. Jimmie
      Wilbur, that Mr. Kirkland's nicotine use
      contributed to the development of laryngeal cancer.
      He did say that.  He did say that when pressed on
      cross-examination by my partner, Ms. Sperando.
           So let's continue, ladies and gentlemen, about
      these choices that R.J. Reynolds made.  They
      implemented a marketing campaign in the fifties and
      sixties for filters to give people a sense of, oh,
      yes, cigarettes are safer.
           Well, you heard testimony that that was just a
      ruse; that didn't mean anything.  Because, in fact,
      filters, there is no evidence that filters actually
      were safer.
           You also heard and you saw evidence that they
      designed cigarettes and added chemical compounds to
      make it easier to inhale.  That's just -- that's
      not disputed.  No one came into this courtroom from
      R.J. Reynolds to dispute --
           MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.  Motion 4371 in limine.
           THE COURT:  Sustained.  The jury will
      disregard that last remark.
           MS. HOFFMAN:  There was no evidence that came
      into this courtroom -- there was no evidence that
      you all heard to dispute that the designs, the
      cigarettes designed by R.J. Reynolds added chemical
      compounds to make it easier to inhale.  No evidence
      to dispute that the flavoring compounds like
      chocolate and menthol were added to cigarettes for
      there to be a better taste so that people could
      overcome the aversion to inhale.  That was all the
      choice of R.J. Reynolds.
           Also, there was no evidence to refute that
      press release of the FTC.  They talked about how
      they cooperated with the government.  Remember, the
      FTC issued a press release, and they said in 2008
      they rescinded that FTC test and they said, The FTC
      will not be a smoke screen for tobacco companies'
      shameful marketing practices.  Shameful.  That was
      a choice.  Those shameful marketing practices.
      That was a choice of R.J. Reynolds.
           And then there are other things they chose to
      do.  Paper porosity, like the holes in the paper,
      that -- to determine the placement of those vent 4372 holes.  Remember, Dr. Henningfield dissected a
      cigarette and he had the vent holes.  Well, who
      knew about the vent holes?  Did the smokers know
      about the vent holes?  They didn't want the smokers
      to know about it, because if the smoker knew, they
      would know where it was placed and they wouldn't
      cover it because it was supposed to reduce the
      amount of tar and nicotine.  They didn't want them
      to know, because if they knew they may take in
      less.  And guess what.  At some point they may stop
      smoking cigarettes.  That's not what they wanted,
      so they just did that to kind of satisfy the
      government.
           Reconstituted tobacco.  These are all choices
      that RJR made.
           They denied for decades nicotine was
      addictive.  They hired a public relations firm to
      snow the country to counter the negativity of
      respected doctors who first linked in the 1950s,
      early 1950s that there was a linkage between
      cigarette smoking and cancer.
           They didn't want that, so they got together.
      You heard about at the Plaza Hotel.  They started
      this CTR thing.  That was their choice to create
      this controversy and doubt, much like they have 4373 created a controversy and doubt -- don't focus
      here, focus there.  Don't focus on addiction.
      Don't focus on nicotine.  Don't focus on us.  Focus
      on them.  These doctors are crazy.
           That's what they did.
           THE CLERK:  Five minutes, Counselor.
           MS. HOFFMAN:  The Frank Statement.  And I can
      go on and on.  They issued A Frank Statement, and
      they are the ones that put together the Tobacco
      Institute.  They created confusion and doubt.  They
      engaged in this marketing.  They decided what
      information to share with the federal government.
      And that's not much.
           Ladies and gentlemen, this conduct is
      reprehensible.
           Now, R.J. Reynolds came in this courtroom.
      They don't dispute they did all those things.  They
      can't, because those secret documents, they reflect
      that.
           And this is not going to be a trick question,
      but who made the determination to sell cigarettes
      that eliminated nicotine and tar from cigarettes?
      That would be no one.  Because even though they had
      the power, resources and ability to manufacture a
      cigarette that had no nicotine, they never did it. 4374 Do you mean to tell me, with all of the money and
      resources, scientists from all over the world,
      research centers overseas, that R.J. Reynolds could
      not manufacture a cigarette that didn't contain
      nicotine?  It doesn't make sense.  Because they
      don't want to.  Because if they do that, and if
      people start smoking, people who are hooked start
      smoking it, guess what.  They'll start buying the
      other cigarettes.  They don't want that.  Because
      that is responsible for their Brinks trucks, Brinks
      trucks filled with money.  This is all about money.
      It's not about health, in consideration for health
      for the people, for Mr. Kirkland.
           This case has everything to do with Kirkland.
      All of these choices that R.J. Reynolds made
      impacted Mr. Kirkland directly, indirectly, in
      every way.  Lying, misrepresenting to members of
      congress, misrepresenting to the federal
      government.  The federal government washed their
      hands at some level of many different things of the
      tobacco industry.  You heard the testimony.
      Because their information was simply not credible.
      They concealed documents.  And it was only until
      the mid 1990's that they got those documents.  I'm
      not going to go over all that again. 4375 You know, pH labels.  They didn't inform the
      smokers that diseases like laryngeal cancer are
      side effects of nicotine addiction.
           And you heard Mr. Kirkland.  Now, we had
      witness after witness, including Dr. Dolgin,
      including the treating physicians, say that
      Mr. Kirkland was addicted.  That he was addicted.
      Mr. Kirkland said he was addicted.  He had
      cravings.  They didn't talk about that.  He did
      have previous quit attempts.  That's what their
      expert, Dr. Myers said.  He did have nicotine fits.
      He did try to quit.  He went to the Lord, he went
      to church, he had his church praying for him so he
      could quit before he was diagnosed with cancer.
      Why would he go to church to seek the intervention
      of the church to quit unless he had tried to quit
      and didn't do it?
           THE CLERK:  Two minutes, Counsel.
           MS. HOFFMAN:  You don't need to leave your
      common sense at the door, ladies and gentlemen of
      the jury.
           Now, you are going to be asked in this case to
      evaluate whether R.J. Reynolds acted in a
      reprehensible manner.  There should be no -- there
      shouldn't be two different standards, corporation, 4376 individual.  If a corporation lies and cheats,
      conceals information, hides health effects that
      kill people, they should be held accountable.
      That's what this case is about.  That's what this
      case is about.
           Mr. Kirkland smoked his cigarettes.  Two packs
      a day.  Whether he was -- there is no question he
      was addicted.  He bought these cigarettes.  He did.
      He takes responsibility for spending his money and
      buying those cigarettes.  But he was hooked when he
      was 17, before warning labels.  Before warning
      labels.  And it wasn't even a warning label that
      came out at first.  It was a caution label.  All
      those labels.  Caution.  Very, very mild.  And the
      cigarette companies were fighting and kicking
      against those warnings labels.  They didn't want to
      do it.  They were forced to do it.  Reprehensible.
      And all the while denying, when Mr. Kirkland was
      buying and smoking those cigarettes, up to 40 a
      day, up to two packs a day, the cigarette industry
      still denied that there was anything harmful.  When
      he stopped smoking, they were still denying that
      there was anything harmful.  Reprehensible.
      Reckless.  They just did not care.
           It's about Mr. Kirkland, ladies and gentlemen 4377 of the jury.  This case is about Mr. Kirkland and
      it's about R.J. Reynolds taking responsibility for
      what it did.  All those choices, all those choices.
      He made the choice to start smoking.  They made the
      choice to manufacture, to sell, to market a deadly
      drug that they knew would kill people eventually.
           Consequences of your actions.  Those are the
      consequences.  Mr. Leroy Kirkland has taken
      responsibility.  Consequences.  R.J. Reynolds came
      into this courtroom and has taken no
      responsibility.  Not one.  Not even for
      manufacturing this cigarette.  Not even for the
      440,000 Americans that die every day in these
      United States of America.  They don't believe in
      taking responsibility.  And they are nothing if not
      consistent, because they failed in history to take
      responsibility.
           But you have the power, you have the power in
      this case about Mr. Kirkland to change that, to say
      in America, If you are going to be a corporation,
      you have to take responsibility.  If you are going
      to lie, there are consequences.  If you are going
      to cheat, there are consequences.  If you are going
      to conceal, there are consequences.  There should
      be a level playing field.  Mr. Kirkland had 4378 accepted --
           THE CLERK:  Your time has expired.
           MS. HOFFLER:  Excuse me.
           THE COURT:  Your time is up.
           MS. HOFFMAN:  Thank you very much.  I know you
      are going to do the right thing.  I know you are
      going to do the right thing.
