         MR. SOCIAS:  May it please the Court.
         Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the
    jury.  As you may recall, my name is Manny Socias,
    and I'm a member of the trial team, the lawyers that
    have had the privilege over the last three weeks of
    representing the gentleman sitting right here, the
    plaintiff, Leroy Kirkland.
         It's hard to believe, but we've been here for
    three weeks already.  And all of you are painfully
    aware you've taken three weeks out from your lives,
    from your problems, from your families, to come to
    court every day and listen attentively to witnesses,
    people you've never met, people you've never seen
    before.  You've paid attention, you've seen dozens
    of documents, you've looked at dozens of videos.
    And, basically, you've put aside your lives for
    three weeks, the things that concern you the most
    personally, to come here and help resolve the
    dispute between two parties that are strangers to
    you. 4209 And on behalf of Mr. Kirkland, on behalf of, I
    think, all of the attorneys in the courtroom, we
    want to thank you.  Well, we want to thank you for
    being so attentive for the last three weeks, we want
    to thank you for your time, and we want to thank you
    for the obvious effort that you put in to listen to
    the evidence and try to understand the case so that
    you can come up with a fair and just ruling at the
    end, which we're at now.
         There's absolutely -- there's really nothing
    more that anyone, any lawyer, any party, could ask
    of a jury than what you've given us.  And without
    reservation, we deeply appreciate your service.  And
    without people like you that are willing to come
    here and sacrifice weeks of your lives to listen to
    evidence like this, we in the United States could
    not have the justice system that we have.  And,
    again, thank you.
         The evidence is over.  And you've heard from
    our witnesses and you've heard from the tobacco
    industry witnesses.  And I want to start by talking
    about the tobacco industry witnesses you've heard
    from.
         Every single witness that you saw come in to
    testify on behalf of R.J. Reynolds, the tobacco 4210 company, was an expert, an expert witness.  They
    were part of a stable of experts that have made the
    circuit around the country for over a decade
    testifying in tobacco trials for R.J. Reynolds and
    other tobacco companies.  And they came to court and
    they told you that, yeah, cigarettes are addictive.
    Sure, they're addictive, but not Mr. Kirkland; he
    wasn't addicted.  Sure, cigarettes cause cancer, but
    not for Mr. Kirkland; they didn't cause
    Mr. Kirkland's cancer.
         And when you think about it, what they
    presented here for you today is really just a
    tweaking, a tweaking of that PR campaign that they
    started --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Pretrial ruling.
         THE COURT:  Come up.  Approach.
         (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  I said what I said because I
    didn't want to make a speaking objection, but,
    Your Honor, this is the old defending the case is
    another part of a conspiracy and part of the PR
    campaign, it's part of 50 years of deception.
         MR. SOCIAS:  My position is, and what I intend 4211 to argue is, that this is a tweaking of the position
    they've been defending cases on for 50 years.
         THE COURT:  It's not saying that they don't
    have -- I mean, what I ruled pretrial was, yes, they
    certainly have a right to defend themselves.
         Based on what he said and where he's going, I'm
    going to overrule the objection.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. SOCIAS:  And, basically, what you've heard
    is a tweaking of a PR campaign that the tobacco
    company started to defend themselves way back in the
    '50s.
         In fact, when you look at the documents, and
    you've seen the documents already, you'll see that
    the defense that they've mounted in this case
    against Mr. Kirkland is something they came up with
    when Mr. Kirkland was 14 years old.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
    what's the subject of your pretrial ruling.
         THE COURT:  Objection overruled.
         MR. SOCIAS:  And this is a document that goes
    back to 1979.  And I'll show you some that go all
    the way back to the '50s where the public relations
    counsel for the tobacco industry was laying out
    their position.  And this is what it was. 4212 "The counsel exists today because the complex
    etiology of these constitutional diseases remains
    unraveled," the report said.  "The overall
    importance of genetic factors is being increasingly
    recognized, accepted, and studied," the report
    continued.  "Much recent and current research
    supports the statement of many years ago that we
    live in a sea of carcinogens," the report said.
         And that's the defense you've heard here today,
    a sea of carcinogens; asbestos where he worked,
    alcohol whenever he had a beer, viruses whenever he
    walked outdoors.  Anything in the sea of cancer
    caused, according to the tobacco industry,
    Mr. Kirkland's -- Mr. Kirkland's cancer.  Anything.
         This goes back into the '50s.  A report by six
    U.S. scientists citing evidence showing, they say,
    that air pollution played a definite role in
    causation and rise in the frequency of lung cancer
    during recent decades.
         And they go on to say, "20 times more
    frequently among patients with tuberculosis than in
    the general population."
         Again, they're going to any other cause of
    cancer, anything that they can come up with that
    causes cancer, except the obvious. 4213 Here's another document, tobacco industry
    document.  "The scientists said the results would
    seem to detract from the importance of cigarette
    smoke as an injurious agent."  Then it goes on to
    say, "The study by four British scientists suggests
    that smokers live it up more.  This may lower their
    resistance and expose them to conditions that may
    cause cancer."
         And you've heard that here today.  Mr. Kirkland
    liked to drink.  Mr. Kirkland liked to occasionally
    have a beer.  He liked to occasionally have a
    Scotch.  He liked to have a gin.  He liked to live
    it up.
         So they come -- they have experts who come here
    today and they tell you, well, that's the cause,
    that's the cause of the cancer.  In fact, they come
    here and they tell you that the cause of the cancer
    is anything and everything except the fact that for
    40 years, 40 years, Mr. Kirkland, day in and day
    out, bathed his larynx in R.J. Reynolds' products,
    R.J. Reynolds' smoke.  40 years.  That, they don't
    mention.  They want to talk about an occasional
    drink, a possible virus, asbestos, everything under
    the sun except 40 years of heavy smoking.
         And they use Dr. Bertino, an expert that came 4214 in to talk about that, to talk about what it is that
    he thought caused Mr. Kirkland's cancer.  And
    following the game plan, following their PR
    campaign, he said alcohol, asbestos, viruses.
         But you saw Dr. Bertino's been part of the
    tobacco company's traveling side show for over a
    decade.  Before 1994, he was making the circuits
    around the country, wherever anyone would sue a
    tobacco company, saying cigarettes can't cause
    cancer; therefore, it couldn't have caused this
    plaintiff's cancer, because there's no link between
    cigarettes and cancer.
         Now there's a court order.  Now it's been
    determined that it does cause cancer.  He can't come
    in here and deny that anymore, so he does the next
    best thing; he conjures up another cause.  And he's
    still part of their traveling side show, part of the
    tobacco company dog-and-pony show that makes the
    circuit around the country.
         In fact, he's never found a plaintiff, he's
    never found anybody that sued a tobacco company
    where he thought their cancer was caused by
    cigarette smoking.  That's his job.  He goes and
    finds something else.  And nothing could be easier,
    because we all live in a world that has things like 4215 pesticides.  It has things like beer.  It has things
    like Scotch.  It has things that can be
    carcinogenic.  And this expert goes around the
    country, ignores the fact that someone is smoking
    heavily, saturating themselves with R.J. Reynolds'
    products, and simply blames the cancer on anything
    else that he can.
         That's what he did, and that's what he started
    doing when he could no longer and was no longer
    allowed to testify that cigarettes don't cause
    cancer.
         And he comes up with a claim that alcohol did
    it in this case.  Alcohol.  Alcohol was the
    substantial cause.  And you heard the -- excuse me.
    You heard the cross-examination.  He conjured that
    up just a few days before the trial.  He decided,
    well, it has to be alcohol.  Blames it on
    everything, everything except Mr. Kirkland puffing
    R.J. Reynolds' cigarettes 30 -- I mean -- pardon
    me -- yeah, 30 to 60 cigarettes a day every day of
    his life right up until the day he started coughing
    up blood.
         R.J. Reynolds, ladies and gentlemen, has done
    everything it can to smokescreen what's the obvious
    and commonsense cause of his cancer, 40 years of 4216 heavy smoking, 40 years of chain smoking.
         Now, after the tobacco company spent half a
    century -- and you've heard that testimony from
    Dr. Proctor, the historian -- half a century
    spreading lies about their product, they come here.
    They come here into court, and through their experts
    and through their arguments, they tell you, well, it
    was Mr. Kirkland's choice.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.  Your
    pretrial ruling.
         THE COURT:  I sustain that objection.
         MR. SOCIAS:  Okay.  They argue that it was
    Mr. Kirkland's choice to begin smoking.  They gloss
    over the fact that that happened when he was 11
    years old.  And then they blame him for his choice
    to continue smoking.  In essence, they tell you that
    he was stupid enough to buy their products and now
    whatever happens is his problem.
         But even the tobacco industry, ladies and
    gentlemen, as you saw, recognized a problem with
    that choice defense, with saying it was the smoker's
    choice to smoke, it was the smoker's choice not to
    quit, it was the smoker's choice to continue
    smoking.
         Internal tobacco company document, September 9, 4217 1980.  I just want to focus on this bottom bubble
    there.  "We can't defend continued smoking as free
    choice if the person was addicted."  The tobacco
    industry knew that if a plaintiff was addicted, they
    couldn't come in and convincingly make any kind of
    argument that there was free choice.
         And that's because, when someone is addicted,
    the addiction influences the choice, physiologically
    influences the choice.  You've heard testimony that
    the addiction actually changes the structure of the
    brain.  It hinders and affects an individual's
    ability to exercise his free will.
         You've heard from Dr. Farone, who told you
    addiction always affects free will.  It's something
    that decreases your ability to stop doing that which
    you are addicted to.  No one refuted that.  No one
    refutes that from the tobacco industry.  No expert
    refuted Dr. Farone on that.
         You heard from Dr. Burns, and he said, "And
    then, as they move through the adolescent
    process" -- talking about a smoker -- "they're using
    the nicotine often enough that they're dosing their
    own brains repetitively, and now, all of a sudden,
    they have an increase in nicotine receptors.  They
    have now a perception of unhappiness, of not feeling 4218 normal when they stop smoking, and they have
    difficulty quitting."
         This is the pattern.  You start when you're a
    kid, you start when you're young, and before you
    know it, it's changed the structure of your brain.
    You have extra nicotine receptors.  Becomes hard,
    and for some people, almost impossible to quit.  Not
    a single expert, no witness on behalf of the tobacco
    industry, has come in and contradicted a word
    Dr. Burns said on the subject.
         You heard the testimony of Dr. Henningfield.
    He said, but what a drug does, an addictive drug, it
    is a biological pressure, it alters your choice.
    Again, consistent with the other two experts.
    Unrebutted by the tobacco industry.  Unrebutted by
    any of their experts.
         So R.J. Reynolds comes here, and they do the
    only thing they can do.  They can't win, and they
    know it.
         If Leroy Kirkland -- if you believe Leroy
    Kirkland is addicted, they lose, because there's no
    free choice.  That does away with their defense.
         So what do they do?  What's the only option
    open to them?  They come in here and they say, well,
    he's not addicted. 4219 But what you're going to see is, and what you
    saw in the evidence is, that Leroy Kirkland was the
    typical addicted smoker.  He is a poster child for
    how people become addicted and stay addicted to
    cigarettes, according to the tobacco industry's own
    documents, according to their own version of events.
         You'll see that Mr. Kirkland started smoking in
    the very early '50s.  And this is when the tobacco
    companies were targeting children in their
    marketing.  At this time, Mr. Kirkland was 11 years
    old.  Not even a teenager.  He was a child.
         And you heard the testimony of Dr. Burns,
    "People who were in adolescence in the '40s and '50s
    would have received a much higher frequency of
    exposure to very powerful tobacco advertising
    images."
         That was unrebutted.  This is -- and this is
    when Mr. Kirkland was an adolescent.  This is when
    Mr. Kirkland was growing up.  This is when
    Mr. Kirkland started experimenting with smoking.
    This is when Mr. Kirkland increased his smoking to
    the point where he finally became addicted.
         Unrebutted.  Unrebutted by anyone on behalf of
    the tobacco industry.
         And you saw how Mr. Kirkland went on to smoke 4220 Pall Malls.  Then he smoked Salem, almost two packs
    a day, day in, day out, for 34 years.  All of them
    R.J. Reynolds products.  He smoked them and he
    smoked them and he smoked them until one day he just
    started coughing up blood in 1993.
         Now, you heard testimony that Salem was a
    menthol cigarette, and you heard why menthol was
    added to cigarettes.  Menthol is an anesthetic.  It
    cools the throat.  It makes smoking easier.
         Dr. Proctor, you remember him saying -- he
    said, When you put the menthol in the cigarette, the
    menthol doesn't hurt you, but it helps the poison go
    down easier.  You can smoke without hurting your
    throat.  It has a cooling sensation.  You put
    menthol in a cigarette, it makes smoking two packs a
    day easier, just like Mr. Kirkland was doing.  It
    makes selling cigarettes easier.  You sell more
    cigarettes.  People smoke more when it doesn't hurt
    their throats, when it cools their throats.  And it
    makes getting cancer easier because you smoke more
    cigarettes.
         Two to three cigarettes, ladies and gentlemen,
    Mr. Kirkland smoked for almost 40 years, every day
    of his life.  First thing in the morning, last thing
    at night.  And they come in here and they tell you 4221 he's not addicted.  Their own documents show that he
    fits the -- he fits the industry, the tobacco
    industry, own definition of addiction.
         This is a tobacco industry March 20, 1984
    document.  The cigarette consumer.  What did the
    tobacco industry say about their customers and why
    they kept coming back and buying their product?
    "For the most part, people continue to smoke because
    they find it too uncomfortable to quit."
         Here's an industry that's saying people buy our
    stuff because they just can't handle not buying our
    stuff.  And they recognize over 85 percent of their
    customers agree either very strongly or strongly, I
    wish I had never began smoking.  Over 80 percent
    have attempted to quit.  A unique industry, ladies
    and gentlemen, and an industry that knows internally
    that the only reason people buy their stuff is
    because they can't stop using it and that most of
    them wish to God they'd never started buying their
    products.
         Another internal tobacco company document.
    This is what they're talking about is happening to
    their customers.  "We sell a product that is bought
    often and used from 10 to 60 times a day."
         That's Mr. Kirkland.  60 times a day.  Day in, 4222 day out.
         "We provide a product that is an essential
    commodity in a habitual act."
         They knew what they were selling to
    Mr. Kirkland.  A habitual act.
         "It is inevitable, therefore" -- and this is
    inexcusable.  This is inexcusable.  "It is
    inevitable, therefore, that we focus upon habit
    formation."
         This is how they want to sell their cigarettes.
    This is how they want to market.  This is how they
    want to present it.  They want habit formation in
    their customers.  Habit formation.  That's for the
    young smokers.  Once you get started, what they want
    to focus on, a habit maintenance.  They want you to
    form the habit, then they want you to maintain the
    habit.  Code word for addiction.  They want to
    addict their customers, and they're focusing on how
    they can make that happen.
         "And that we make use of a conceptual model
    specifically designed to explain habit formation."
    This is how the tobacco company was talking
    internally about the addictiveness of what they were
    selling to Leroy Kirkland.  And they knew this was
    addictive. 4223 I mean, this is -- smoker psychology research,
    1969.  Cigarette industry.  "The cigarette will even
    preempt food in times of scarcity on the smoker's
    priority list."
         They knew that what they were selling was so
    addictive that people would rather have a
    cigarette -- a smoker without a cigarette would
    rather smoke a cigarette than have his dinner.
    That's addiction, ladies and gentlemen.  That's what
    they were selling.  That's what they knew they were
    selling.  That's what they intended to market.
         Another tobacco company document.  They come in
    here and they say Mr. Kirkland is not addicted.
    "With the exception of sleeping, eating, smoking is
    the most regular and most repeated part of a
    cigarette smoker's life.  Indeed, among the great
    majority of cigarette smokers, it outstrips sleeping
    and eating in frequency of repetition."
         Addiction, ladies and gentlemen.  That's
    addiction.  They knew what they were selling.
    That's what they were intending to sell.  This is
    their words.  These are their documents, their
    secret documents that only recently came to light.
         If there is any doubt, if there is any doubt,
    look at how their people talked about what they were 4224 selling internally.  You saw the ads.  You saw the
    ads with the doctors saying so many doctors smoked
    cigarettes.  You saw the beautiful people lighting
    up cigarettes on the beach during a clambake.
    Internally, they know what they're selling.  They're
    not selling taste.  They're not selling a fun time
    at a clambake.
         The cigarette should be conceived not as a
    product, but as package.  What are they selling?
    The product is nicotine.  That's what the cigarette
    companies knew was their product.
         "Think of the cigarette pack as a storage
    container for a day's supply of nicotine.  Think of
    the cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of
    nicotine."  That's the way doctors talk.  That's the
    way drug addicts talk.  That's the way drug dealers
    talk.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Stricken.  The jury
    will disregard, please.
         MR. SOCIAS:  A dose unit of nicotine, that's
    what they're selling.  That's what they were selling
    Leroy Kirkland for 40 years, dose units of nicotine.
    And they knew it, and that's -- and that's what they
    called it.  They made no bones about it internally. 4225 They go on to say, "Smoking the cigarette is
    the lever press.  The effect of the smoking act" --
    well, let me back up a little bit.
         And you saw that Leroy Kirkland, after 40
    years, really became exactly, exactly what the
    tobacco industry knew he would become and intended
    that he would become.  And that's basically a rat
    pushing a lever to get that cigarette, to get that
    next fix to make himself feel better.
         Smoking a lever is -- "Smoking a cigarette is
    the lever press."  They're talking about those rats
    that you put in cages and they press a lever and
    they get a pellet of food.  The effect of that
    smoking act upon his person is the reward.  He comes
    to push the lever 10 to 60 times a day.
         That's what happened to Mr. Kirkland.  He came
    to push that lever, open that cigarette pack, pull
    out 40 cigarettes a day, and smoke them.  Kept
    pushing that lever.
         And then the cigarette companies go on to say,
    "Our task is to understand the reinforcing mechanism
    or process whereby the habit is established and
    maintained.  Such is our model."
         Not only did they turn Leroy Kirkland into a
    rat pushing a lever time and time and time again, 40 4226 times a day to get a cigarette fix, that's what they
    wanted to do with their marketing.  That's what they
    did with their marketing.  Their task was to
    understand that process where that habit was
    established and maintained.  That was their goal.
    They were selling dose units of nicotine, and they
    wanted Mr. Kirkland to keep hitting that lever to
    get his dose and pay them for their pack after pack
    after pack of cigarettes.
         Now, you see that R.J. Reynolds comes to defend
    this case with really a red herring.  They spend a
    lot of time, a lot of time talking about choice;
    which, ladies and gentlemen, really is a distraction
    that has absolutely nothing to do with any law or
    any instruction that Judge Levens is going to give
    you.  In fact, he's already given you most of the
    instructions, and you haven't seen the word "choice"
    in it.
         They're going to argue to you that Leroy
    Kirkland made a free choice to continue smoking
    because he showed he could quit cold turkey in 1994.
    But you're going to see nothing in the Court's
    instruction that's going to suggest to you that an
    ability to beat an addiction, even cold turkey,
    means you're not addicted. 4227 And you heard the testimony from the witnesses.
    Heroin addicts quit.  Happens all the time.  Cocaine
    addicts quit.  Happens all the time.  Alcoholics
    quit.  Happens all the time.  You hold a loaded gun
    to a heroin addict's head and he's convinced the
    trigger will be pulled if he has a heroin fix, a lot
    of heroin addicts are going to beat the addiction.
    It doesn't mean they weren't addicted.  It just
    means that some people can beat addictions, given
    enough motivation.
         Now, just because Leroy Kirkland, in 1993,
    after he starts hemorrhaging blood from his throat,
    when he becomes terrified for his life -- obviously,
    who wouldn't be -- when he turns to God and church
    for help and to prayer for help, he was able to beat
    the addiction.  That doesn't mean he wasn't
    addicted.
         And while RJR, Reynolds, claims that smoking is
    choice, is always choice, they ignore what they knew
    and what you've heard in evidence, which is that
    most smokers start smoking before the age 16.  Most
    smokers.  60 percent start by age 16.  These are
    kids.  These are high school kids.  R.J. Reynolds
    knows that.  The tobacco company knows that.
         By age 18, by the time they graduate from high 4228 school and are starting college, 89 percent of
    smokers are already smoking.  This is how they get
    them.
         And you saw it in the documents.  You start as
    adolescents.  They start when they're young.  And
    before you know it, they're hooked, they're pressing
    that lever time and time again, buying that pack of
    cigarettes to get the nicotine fix.
         In the case of Leroy Kirkland, ladies and
    gentlemen, we're not even talking about an
    adolescent.  We're not talking about age 12.  He's
    off the charts.  He started at age 11.  Age 11.
    He's a child.  And they call it free choice.
         Reynolds brought in one of their stable of
    experts.  Remember Dr. Myers, the psychiatrist?  He
    talked about addiction to claim that Leroy Kirkland
    wasn't addicted.  Now, he's an expert.  He's another
    one of the traveling side show that the tobacco
    company has that makes a circuit around the country
    and says whoever is suing the tobacco companies,
    cancer came from something else, the person wasn't
    addicted, whatever they have, whatever they have to
    say.
         Now, if you recall, Dr. Myers has never seen a
    tobacco plaintiff that was addicted to nicotine. 4229 Never seen them.  Not surprising.  He's on the
    tobacco company payroll.  He's one of their experts.
    But you see, it's obvious why he can say this.  It's
    obvious why he can say that the plaintiffs aren't
    addicted, that Mr. Kirkland isn't addicted, that
    plaintiffs in tobacco cases aren't addicted.
    Because if you look at his definition, the
    definition that he used of addiction, it required
    impairment.  And that's very important.
         This is Dr. Myers.  He said you have to look at
    the use of the substance, this would be nicotine,
    and whether it's impairing the person or not,
    whether it's causing them significant distress.  So
    if the substance isn't impairing you and it's not
    causing you significant distress, well, then, you're
    not an addict.  You're not addicted to it, according
    to Dr. Myers.  Which is why he's never found a
    tobacco plaintiff to be addicted to nicotine.
         And ladies and gentlemen, use commonsense.
    Nicotine doesn't impair.  Nicotine doesn't make
    people drunk.  Nicotine doesn't cause people to lose
    their jobs.  Cigarettes don't cause people to lose
    their families the way cocaine, the way heroin, the
    way alcohol does.  It doesn't cause people to lose
    their homes.  It doesn't change their personalities. 4230 It's not that type of drug.  That's what makes it
    deadly, that's what makes it dangerous, and that's
    what makes it sneaky.
         Because when you're addicted to nicotine,
    everything feels fine.  You're in good health,
    you're with your family, you have your job,
    everything is good, until then, all of a sudden,
    like with Mr. Kirkland, one day it's not; you're
    coughing up blood, and then the nightmare of cancer
    begins.  No impairment along the way.
         And that's just what happened to Leroy
    Kirkland.  And the fact is that Dr. Myers is still
    reciting the playbook, the tobacco company playbook
    going back to the '50s.
         Now, he doesn't say that.  He can't say that,
    because by court order it's been found to be
    addictive.  And the Court has already instructed you
    that cigarettes are addictive.  So he can't say it's
    addictive.  So, like I said, he comes in the back
    door and he just sneaks in impairment as a
    requirement for addiction; which, of course,
    nicotine doesn't qualify.  And whoever happens to be
    suing the tobacco company, he testifies under oath,
    yeah, they're not addicted, no impairment.  How can
    you possibly get impaired smoking cigarettes?  It 4231 just doesn't happen.
         Ladies and gentlemen, don't fall for Reynolds's
    word game, not when we're talking about life and
    death, not when we're talking about the health of
    Leroy Kirkland, not when we're talking about the
    health of people in our society, and not when it's
    contrary to the law that the Court will read you and
    has read you.
         The Court already has instructed you on the law
    and will give you some additional instructions
    before you go back to retire.  Judge Levens isn't
    going to say a single word about addiction requiring
    impairment.  That's a fabrication.  That's not going
    to be in your instructions.  He's not going to say a
    single word of those instructions about choices.
    He's not going to say a single word in those
    instructions about the ability to quit.  That's a
    ruse.  It's a red herring.  It's not the law.  It
    has nothing to do with this case.
         The only thing he's going to ask you to decide
    in this regard is whether Leroy Kirkland was
    addicted to cigarettes.  Nothing more.  Everything
    else is just smoke and mirrors from R.J. Reynolds.
         Now, a long time ago, the courts recognized
    that simply compensating people for certain personal 4232 damages in some types of cases wasn't enough.
    Wasn't enough to protect society from corporate bean
    counters, people that place a dollar value on human
    life and suffering and then weigh that dollar value
    against their profits.  And that's why our justice
    system came to recognize and recognizes punitive
    damages, so companies can't profit from intentional,
    from malicious, from reprehensible acts that hurt
    others.
         Punitive damages are designed to punish bad
    acts, to deter companies from continuing to do those
    bad acts, and to make an example of them for the
    harm that they cause to the plaintiff.  In this
    case, for the harm that they caused to Leroy
    Kirkland.
         And ladies and gentlemen, in this case, we want
    compensatory damages.  But the real heart of this
    case, the real heart of this case are punitive
    damages, because only punitive damages can bring
    justice to Leroy Kirkland and justice to the
    situation that you've seen unfold here over the last
    three weeks.
         R.J. Reynolds would be happy to pay Leroy
    Kirkland's medical bill in pain and suffering
    because they know they can do that and still come 4233 out ahead in dollars, in dollars and cents.  That's
    all they care about.  Their bean counters made that
    decision years ago.  But by your verdict, by a
    decision to award punitive damages, you can clearly
    tell Reynolds that their actions are not acceptable
    in our society, that what they did to Leroy Kirkland
    is not acceptable in our society.  You can punish
    R.J. Reynolds, you can deter R.J. Reynolds, and you
    can make an example of them.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Williams.
         THE COURT:  Sustained as to the last remark.  I
    will instruct the jury on punitive damages.  And if
    there is -- this is right now entitlement, right?
         MR. SOCIAS:  Yes, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         MR. SOCIAS:  I'm not going to get into dollar
    amounts.
         THE COURT:  Proceed.
         MR. SOCIAS:  Only you, ladies and gentlemen, no
    one else, not the Judge, not the lawyers, not anyone
    in this courtroom, can bring justice to Leroy
    Kirkland.
         Now think, how do you get the attention, how do
    you get the attention of a cold-blooded company 4234 whose greed -- whose greed for money exceeds their
    concern for human life, for human health; whose
    greed exceeded their concern for the health of Leroy
    Kirkland?  How do you get the attention of a company
    that values money more than life?
         Well, there's only one way to do that.  You
    take away some of that money.  You award punitive
    damages.  Only when it's more expensive for a
    company like R.J. Reynolds to kill than to do the
    right thing can you be sure that they do the right
    thing.
         Now, let's just look at what R.J. Reynolds has
    done.  This is not up for discussion.  The Court has
    told you that these are the Engle findings.  They
    found that smoking cigarettes causes 16 general
    disease conditions, all types of cancers, including
    laryngeal cancer, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer.  I
    won't read all the types of cancers, but it goes on
    for a page of cancers.  That nicotine in cigarettes
    is addictive.  That R.J. Reynolds placed cigarettes
    on the market that were defective and unreasonably
    dangerous.  That Reynolds concealed or omitted
    material information that wasn't known or available,
    knowing that the material was false or misleading,
    or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the 4235 health effects or addictive nature of smoking
    cigarettes or both.
         That Reynolds agreed to conceal, conspired to
    conceal or omit information regarding the health
    effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with
    the intention that smokers and the public would rely
    on this information to their detriment.
         That Reynolds sold or supplied cigarettes that
    were defective.  And that Reynolds sold or supplied
    cigarettes that at the time of the sale or supply
    did not conform to the representations.  That's
    already been established.  They can't come in and
    tell you that didn't happen.  It's not up for
    discussion.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, what's really
    shocking, what's really horrible is the reason they
    did it.  Let's look at the reason they did it.
         This is a memorandum to the planning committee
    where, if you recall, research directors of the
    tobacco industry were interviewed.  I'm just going
    to focus on this last bubble.
         Said another, "Suppose everybody smoked just
    one cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40
    billion a dollars a year."
         That's why they did it.  Everything that's on 4236 that Engle board, that's why they did it.  People
    started quitting.  Billions and billions of dollars
    would be lost to the tobacco industry.
         And you heard Dr. Proctor, a man that's made
    his life studying the history of the tobacco
    industry.  And he started studying it before he ever
    testified for the first time in any tobacco case.
    This was his specialty.  He started testifying
    because people knew he had this specialty.  He
    wasn't hired and then came up with this opinion.
         And what did he say?  "Making cigarettes is
    like printing money.  And it was like printing
    money, so they wanted to keep doing it."
         And that's why they did it, ladies and
    gentlemen.  They killed people for money.  They
    killed people because the bean counters told them
    they could kill people and make money.
         That is reprehensible.  I submit to you, that's
    as reprehensible as any conduct can be.
         Oh, and they were successful.  They were
    successful.  You remember when the first news report
    started coming out into the public around 1953, when
    you heard the stories linking cigarettes to cancer
    of the airways and lung cancer?  And the cigarette
    companies responded with their conspiracy, their 4237 massive PR campaign.
         When the news, when the bad news first hit
    cigarettes are dangerous, right around '53, there it
    started happening.  People stopped smoking.  They
    got worried.  That was a little bit of a gun to
    their head.  Hey, we're killing ourselves.  Then the
    tobacco companies kicked in with their PR campaign,
    with their conspiracy, with their people that fanned
    out across the country and said, Don't listen to the
    Attorney General [sic].  It's a publicity stunt.
    There's no proof.  We need more research.  Maybe
    it's viruses, maybe it's alcohol, maybe it's air
    pollution.  It's a sea of carcinogens.
         That didn't stop smoking.  It went right back
    up.  40 billion dollars for every cigarette that
    people kept smoking.  It was like printing money.
    For the money.
         This is the testimony of Dr. Burns, where he
    was asked -- and it relates to this -- what would
    happen if the tobacco -- basically what he's asked
    is, What would happen if the tobacco companies had
    been honest, if they hadn't done that -- their
    conspiracy, if they hadn't done that massive PR
    campaign.
         "Doctor, if that chart had continued down, 4238 right here, at the slope that we saw in the early
    '50s, instead of rebounding, what effect, if any, do
    you believe it would have on today's incidence of
    cigarette-related diseases?"
         This is what Dr. Burns said:  "If that decline
    had continued with the same slope, the vast majority
    of tobacco-related disease and death that's
    occurring currently would have been avoided.
    Probably close to 90 to 95 percent of the 440,000
    deaths that are currently occurring" -- and this is
    yearly -- "could have been avoided."
         95 percent, ladies and gentlemen.  Hundreds and
    hundreds of thousands of lives would have been
    saved.  Instead of being where we're eventually
    going to be here, if this had not happened,
    thousands and thousands.  Hundreds of thousands of
    lives a year would have been saved.
         And not one witness, no one from the cigarette
    companies, not one of their experts came here and
    took issue with that math and with that statement.
    That is completely unrebutted testimony as to the
    number of lives that would have been saved had the
    tobacco company behaved decently instead of the way
    they behaved.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, you saw the tobacco 4239 company's own document showing that that was their
    strategy.  That was their strategy, to keep people
    smoking, to keep this slope from going down and
    going up.
         This is a 1972 document.  For nearly 20 years,
    this industry has employed a single strategy to
    defend itself on three major fronts; litigation,
    politics, and public opinion.  It has always been a
    holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about
    the health charge without actually denying it,
    advocating the public's right to smoke without
    actually urging them to take up the practice.
         What do they say themselves?  How do they
    evaluate their own actions?  On the litigation
    front, for which the strategy was designed, it has
    been successful.  No one can sue the tobacco
    companies.  They can sue, they bring in their cadre
    of experts that back then could testify cigarettes
    don't cause lung cancer, cigarettes aren't
    addictive, and that was the end of the story.
    People kept dying.  The slope started going up and
    they made billions and billions of dollars.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, it's not over yet.
    It's not over yet.  You heard the testimony of
    Dr. Proctor.  He said the conspiracy is ongoing.  I 4240 think it's just more of the same from the tobacco
    industry.  Doubt, doubt, doubt, you know.  You know,
    side show.  This side show, that.  You know,
    dismissing the truth, covering up the truth.  My
    fundamental views haven't changed.  It's a side show
    that Dr. Proctor was telling you they took across
    the country, a side show that they brought here
    today and displayed in front of you.  The conspiracy
    is ongoing.
         Has anyone -- has anyone -- think about it.
    Has anyone come in and said that the conspiracy is
    not ongoing?  That's unrebutted testimony,
    completely unrebutted testimony.
         Now, you remember Dr. Henningfield, he was an
    expert witness.  But in a sense, he was also a fact
    witness because he was there when the
    Surgeon General reports were being drafted.  He was
    part of the drafting.  What did he say?  "We had no
    idea the extent to which the product was being
    manipulated to deceive people.  The Federal Trade
    Commission had no idea.  And we are still getting
    information.  We still don't have all the
    information."
         The conspiracy is ongoing.  Did anyone -- did
    you see -- did you hear a single witness from 4241 Reynolds come in and say --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         MR. SOCIAS:  -- this is wrong?
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  You want to approach?
         MR. SOCIAS:  Yes, sir.
         (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury:)
         THE COURT:  I explicitly ruled that there was
    to be no comment on the absence of a corporate
    representative.  Did that message not get to you?
         MR. SOCIAS:  Yes, sir, but I didn't comment.  I
    said it's unrebutted by anyone he called as a
    witness.  I haven't said anything about a corporate
    representative.  I think none of their experts --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  You said a witness from
    Reynolds.
         MR. SOCIAS:  Well, I mean, that's semantics.
    It was not my intent to suggest the corporate rep,
    just that it's unrebutted.
         THE COURT:  I think the best way to handle it
    is just to --
         MR. SOCIAS:  I'll reword it.
         THE COURT:  -- just to tread lightly and stay
    away from what now is restricted information.
         MR. SOCIAS:  Can I just refer that this is 4242 unrebutted?
         THE COURT:  That's good enough.  Just don't
    talk about who Reynolds brought --
         MR. SOCIAS:  I'll stay away from it.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Your Honor, he already put the
    idea in the jury's head.  I have to move for a
    mistrial.  This is a direct violation of the order.
         THE COURT:  Understood.  Denied.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. SOCIAS:  Unrebutted.  Unrebutted.
         Ladies and gentlemen, today you can help end
    this travesty.  Today, really, you have the power.
    As I said earlier, not the Judge, not the attorneys,
    not the government.  You.  You have the power.  You
    have the power to change Leroy Kirkland's life.  You
    have the power to change R.J. Reynolds.  You have
    the power to help fix some of the damage caused by
    half a century of lies by R.J. Reynolds and its
    co-conspirators.  And Leroy Kirkland is here today
    looking you in the eye and asking you that by your
    verdict you bring justice to this situation, and
    that you do it by awarding him punitive damages.


         MR. GARY:  Thank you.  Judge Levens, ladies and
    gentlemen of the jury, good evening.  Good
    afternoon.
         JURORS WHO RESPONDED:  Good evening.
         MR. GARY:  Let me express my thanks, just as my
    partner did, to all of you for just being here.  You
    see, because I know that for some and for many, it's
    not easy.  And I know jury service is not easy.  And
    I thank God every day for people like you all,
    because at the end of the day, without you, the
    system wouldn't work.  And I thank God for you
    because we have a system that gives you the power to
    make a terrible wrong right.  You can do that.
    That's what you're charged to do.
         I remember about 17 days ago, we stood here and 4245 we talked to you.  A lot of people.  Do you all
    remember that?  A whole lot of people.
         But of all the people that -- there were over a
    hundred, and all the questions came down to you all.
    Came to be here, because we knew one thing.  No
    matter what happens in this courtroom, you're going
    to do the right thing.  You're going to do the right
    thing.
         Now, members of the jury -- and I say that,
    because you have a lot of power.  And don't take it
    lightly.  You have a lot of power.  And that's the
    jury system, because sometimes that's the only way
    you can get things done is through the jury system.
    You have the power, members of the jury, to see
    wrong and make it right.  And you know you've seen
    some wrong in this courtroom.
         And what I like about it is that, you know,
    when it comes to you, no matter who it is, no matter
    how big they are, how much money they have, it
    really doesn't matter.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Because at the end of the day, when
    you come here, it's judgment day.  It's judgment
    day.  So members of the jury, don't you take your 4246 power lightly.  And I know you won't.
         As I indicated, you have the power to see
    suffering like you've seen here with Mr. Kirkland
    and to see senseless killings.  You can stop it.
         You're going to have to be bold, courageous,
    but you can do it.  That's what you're going to have
    to do, because that's the only thing.
         Can you imagine 450,000 senseless killings all
    because of the love of money, the dollars stuffing
    their pockets?
         They have the cleverness to put together what
    they put together here.  And it's hard.  It's tough.
    They have the best of lawyers.  And you've seen
    their experts.  They've gotten the best.  Because as
    they indicated early on, the strategy was on the
    litigation front, and it's been working for them.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.  Your
    pretrial order.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  And, Your Honor, I renew that
    motion I earlier made.
         THE COURT:  Jury will disregard the last
    comment.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Sorry.
         THE COURT:  Motion denied. 4247 MR. GARY:  And members of the jury, let me just
    say this before I go any further.  On behalf of our
    trial team and on behalf of Mr. Kirkland, we want to
    say thank you.
         As a matter of fact, Mr. Kirkland can barely
    talk and he can't even breathe through his nose, but
    he said to me, "Can I say something?"
         And I said, "No.  Evidence is in.  Now is final
    time for the jury to hear the arguments of the
    lawyers."
         He said, "But can I just say something?"
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, he wanted me to
    tell you thank you.
         Now, this service that you've rendered,
    obviously, is good for the country, for
    Mr. Kirkland.  But it's been good for you because,
    you know, when this case is over and you've rendered
    your verdict, you've done your job, in years to
    come, you're going to look back on this service and
    you're going to be real proud to say I was there.  I
    made a difference.  I helped save some lives.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled. 4248 MR. GARY:  That's what you're going to be able
    to say, and you're going to be proud of it.
         Then on top of all that, you made friendships
    that's going to last here, so it's been good for you
    too.  You know, you made friendships that will
    withstand the test of time.  So it's been a good --
    it's been a good coming together.
         Now, members of the jury, Mr. Kirkland is
    really an instrument.  He's a catalyst for change in
    the way big corporations do business.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Williams.
         THE COURT:  That objection is sustained.
         MR. GARY:  You can make a difference, members
    of the jury.  You can say to this defendant, no
    more.
         And you have an opportunity, really, in a real
    sense, to be just like a former president of ours,
    Abe Lincoln, and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.  They
    were drum majors for justice and righteousness.  You
    can be just like them.  You can be a drum major for
    life and for good health, because that's what this
    is really all about.
         Had his voice box cut out, tongue partially cut
    off because of these defendants and their greed. 4249 And that's what it is, members of the jury.  440,000
    working patriotic Americans died just last year, in
    one year.  One year, members of the jury.  All
    because of this defendant and the tobacco industry
    was greedy and money driven.  And you can't get
    around it.
         One thing -- you're going to base your decision
    on the evidence and the law, but one thing the
    instructions may tell you is that you don't have to
    check your commonsense at the door.  And you know
    what has gone down over the last 50 years.  American
    people, including Mr. Kirkland, haven't been treated
    right by these people.  They haven't played fair.
         Now, if I make a decision, I make it.  If I
    perish, let me perish, if it's my decision, but
    don't lie and cheat and mislead and misinform the
    little people, innocent people, voiceless people.
    It's not right.  You know it's not right.
         Members of the jury, Mr. Proctor said --
    Dr. Proctor said -- and I won't go over his
    qualification, but he said, "This is the largest and
    deadliest conspiracy in the history of America."
    That's what he said, members of the jury.
         And then he went on to say, "They encouraged
    cigarettes to be distributed to soldiers on the 4250 front."
         And then, "Many of them didn't even want to
    smoke.  A whole generation of soldiers came home
    from World War I addicted to tobacco."  A whole
    generation.
         You heard him talk about the packs, the
    rationings.  Here it is.  Breakfast, dinner.  Even
    for breakfast, what they have?  Cigarettes.
    Cigarettes.  Cigarettes.  Free.  Free.  Because they
    get you hooked, they get you addicted, and they let
    you die.  They let you die.  That's what they do,
    members of the jury.
         And that's why punitive damages in this case is
    more, more than -- and we're going to talk about
    that.  But we're going to talk about compensatory
    damages in just a minute.
         You remember the doctor.  They exploited
    addiction.  For what?  For money.
         Why would you get somebody hooked?  Even if
    they should, why would you get somebody hooked on a
    drug that you know is a drug and you lied.  You even
    go before Congressmen, put your hand before man and
    God and you lie.  It's not right.  People are dying.
    People are losing their lives.
         Oh, sure, you bring experts in here like 4251 Dr. Myers and these other people.  That's not right,
    members of the jury.  This is about what's right.
    Maybe you can get away with it through the law.  How
    do they go to sleep at night?
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GARY:  The cigarette industry -- listen to
    this.  Now, this is serious here.  This is serious.
         They knew how to remove or reduce harmful
    agents in the cigarettes, but they refused to do so.
    That's not right, members of the jury.  I don't care
    who makes the choice.  You can't do that to people.
    These are -- these are hard-working people,
    full-blooded hard -- these are not addicts in the
    sense of people that's doing nothing or just laying
    around.  These are -- I'm talking about hard-working
    people.
         You saw those people in those commercials who
    were making -- smoking and puffing on cigarettes.
    They sucker-punched everybody.  But the part about
    it is, they could have done something about it.
         Well, members of the jury, if they have to make
    a cheaper cigarette, they have to make less money,
    so what.  If you're going to stop the gravediggers
    from digging for 440,000 people, is it worth it? 4252 You know it is if it's just for one.  If you save
    one lung, one voice box, is it worth it?
         To them, why are they still doing it?  Because
    they're going to fight.  And they got a right to
    fight.  But you're going to have -- you don't have
    to buy it, members of the jury.  You can say enough
    is enough, and you're going to change -- you're
    going to have changed the way they do business.
    You're going to make them do it the right way.  And
    the only thing they understand -- a smack on the
    wrist doesn't get it.
         Members of the jury, without smoking, they
    would not have those diseases.  You know it's
    nicotine.  It's the nicotine.  And they pump it in
    and they pump it in.  They find ways to add more.
    More.
         And members of the jury, now, this is -- when
    they went to New York, and they had their big
    meeting, and they got to planning and plotting, and
    they put their planning sessions together, and this
    is one of the statements from one of their documents
    they thought would never see the light of day.
    "Confidential.  Highly private."
         Members of the jury, they were like
    high-fiving.  They were like, gee, this is great. 4253 What does it say?  One of the men said -- this is
    one of the tobacco men now, "It is fortunate for us
    that the cigarettes are a habit that they can't
    break."
         And they -- they happy about it.  They're
    killing people.  It's not right, members of the
    jury.  And you know it's not right what they doing.
    Talking about it's fortunate.
         And members of the jury, they could have done
    better.  They could have done better.  And they can
    do better and they can do different.  They can make
    a different cigarette.
         See, don't get -- we don't want to take --
    people need their jobs.  We understand that.  We're
    not trying to cost anybody their jobs, but 440,000
    people dying every year.  That's a lot of caskets,
    that's a lot of tombstones, that's --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. GARY:  It's not right, members of the jury.
         What did they say?  Could they have got --
    could they do anything about it?  Could they get
    some of the nicotine out of those cigarettes?  Could
    they?  If forced to.
         Who's going to force them to do it?  It ain't 4254 going to happen.  You're going to have to make it
    happen.  All you got to say is just do the right
    thing, clean up your act.
         Members of the jury, they make a lot of money.
    Billions and billions of dollars.  Billions.  That's
    why 440,000 dying ain't stopping them.  It ain't
    stopping them because they are making a lot of
    money.
         They want you to -- Mr. Kirkland should be
    penalized because he stopped smoking without having
    any symptoms.  He stopped smoking without having --
    what's the word?
         MS. HOFFLER:  Withdrawal.
         MR. GARY:  Withdrawals.
         That's a shame.  The man decided to quit.  Now,
    that's what everybody is saying.  And he took it
    to -- he told you he prayed about it.  He got his
    church together and they took it to the Lord in
    prayer.
         And they still -- they still tried to find --
    you heard Mr. -- Dr. Myers talk about his brain
    damage.  They still want to trap him on this, trap
    him on that.  You said this, you said that.  Little
    bitty stuff.  But that's the way they do it, because
    they make you look bad. 4255 They know you got to go back -- what you did
    when you was 11 years old, what you did when you --
    in 1955.  They know they're going to get you.
         Dr. Proctor, why do they do this?  Why do they
    do this?  Greed.  The only sin known to man is
    greed, members of the jury.
         Making cigarettes is like printing money.  They
    know it.  It's billions and trillions of dollars.
    That's what it is.  And members of the jury,
    maximize profits.  Maximize profits.
         You know, that lady, a very nice lady who
    testified the last day of the trial --
         MS. HOFFLER:  Ms. Hoffman.
         MR. GARY:  Ms. Hoffman.  Very nice lady.
    Really nice lady.  But members of the jury, why
    didn't she -- she told you about everything that was
    in the newspapers, everything that was on
    television, on TV.  But why didn't she show you one
    time, talk about the school books?  Why didn't she
    show you one time where big tobacco, those folks,
    went into the schools and said, look, to the kids,
    don't smoke?
         Why didn't she show us a program where they had
    on TV back during -- and then when we got the
    warnings on cigarettes, they didn't agree to it. 4256 They fought them.  They didn't want them.
         But why didn't they go to the schools?  She
    talking about, well, it was in the school books.  I
    haven't seen the school book yet that she was
    talking about, but that's okay too.  Nice lady.  And
    she -- you know, no doubt about it.  But that's not
    what we're about.  It ain't about being nice.  It's
    about the right thing.
         Members of the jury, why didn't she have one
    article?  If we want to talk about what the kids
    knew, and she said -- she even talked about a kid in
    first grade should be able to read the book and know
    that you shouldn't smoke.  But that's okay too.
         But why -- what about these companies?  What
    about big tobacco?  You can put -- you heard the
    word "cancer sticks" and "nails in the coffins."
    Well, you can put a nail in their coffin.  You can
    stop them.  And you have the power to do that,
    members of the jury.  It's about making profits to
    them.
         Not one time have we heard anybody come in here
    and say what they did or how they had classes --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection.  Your Honor, this is
    Phase II.
         THE COURT:  May I see that, please. 4257 MR. GARY:  I'm not asking anything.  I'm just
    saying --
         THE COURT:  Objection sustained.
         MR. GARY:  Okay.  Now, members of the jury,
    from Day One, all that they've been concerned about
    is how to get the Brinks trucks rolling, get the
    money to the bank.  They promised, you can count on
    us.  You can count on us.  If we find anything in
    our cigarettes that's not good for you or that's a
    health hazard, we'll tell you about it.
         Have they ever -- even to this day, have you
    heard a single witness from the defense come in and
    admit that cancer is killing people?  The only one
    that came close to it was Dr. Myers, and he
    basically just told them.  He said it.  He told you
    that you can't sell cigarettes to children.
         Because I asked him about it.  And I'll show
    you his testimony in just a minute.  But he said,
    no, I -- he didn't even go for that.  As a matter of
    fact, he said they should be banned.  They should be
    banned, but they weren't --
         You know, I can't feel for them making a living
    off of killing people.  I'm sorry.  People need
    their jobs and that's fine, but not at the expense
    of people losing their lives. 4258 Members of the jury, 1968, one of their own is
    telling them.  Said, look, our position in the
    cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and
    may be subject to a finding that we are making,
    what, false and misleading statements to promote
    sales.  It's their own people talking to each other.
    They knew what they were doing, and they knew it
    wasn't right, members of the jury.
         Now, this was the biggest fraud that you can
    get.  We're going to put a filter on the cigarette.
    You're going to be safe.  We're removing the poisons
    from the cigarette.
         Well, that was false.  They knew they weren't
    doing that.  Every way they could lead people to
    keep them interested, a crutch, a psychological
    crutch to keep them going, they did it, members of
    the jury.  And they did it -- and they were excited
    about it.  Like the board I showed you just a few
    minutes ago, they were like, boy, am I glad, am I
    happy that we got them hooked and they can't quit.
         440,000 lives.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.  Could
    we approach?
         THE COURT:  Yes, sir.
         (The following bench conference took place 4259
outside the hearing of the jury:)
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Just since Mr. Gary started
    speaking, we've heard "440, 450 thousand deaths a
    year" at least a half dozen times.  Your Honor, this
    isn't a death case.
         THE COURT:  Well, if that's the objection, it's
    overruled.  I know it's not a death case.  But in
    terms of the Williams case, the Supreme Court case,
    the action that pertains to nonparties can be
    mentioned, although the harm can only be directed to
    punishing for the plaintiff, for this individual.
    But it pretty explicitly said you could talk about
    other nonparties.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  In the Phase I or Phase II?  I
    think it may be relevant to Phase II.  But we've
    heard the deaths now about a half dozen times, and
    this isn't a death case.
         MR. GARY:  Sir, you don't get to Phase II
    without establishing the egregiousness of the
    situation.
         THE COURT:  I don't know in the state where
    that case was tried whether --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Oregon.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  I don't know whether they --
    how they bifurcated it or trifurcated it or 4260 unificated it, but whatever it was, I think, for
    Phase I purposes, my interpretation of the Supreme
    Court case is that it's not inappropriate.  If it
    becomes too much of a theme, that's a matter for the
    appellate courts to deal with.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you.
         THE COURT:  You can be cautious, if you like.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, these people
    were bad.  They were really real bad.
         It gets worse.  It gets -- you think -- I mean,
    from agreeing to do underhanded kind of stuff to you
    name it.  I mean, here they talk about -- and this
    is a -- well, a proposed study that it turned out
    that it could -- it may have shown that nicotine was
    similar to what you find in morphine and caffeine
    and all of that.
         And they say, look, I've given Carolyn approval
    to proceed with this study.  If, however, the
    results with the nicotine are similar to a morphine
    and this other, then we want to do what to it?  Bury
    it.  That's the way they do business.  Bury it.
         So, accordingly, there are only two copies of
    it, one attached and the original I have.  If it 4261 doesn't come out like we want it, you bury it.
         That's the way they do business, members of the
    jury.  That's cold-blooded, as my partner indicated.
    Now, you're talking about lives.
         Here's another study.  This is their own
    people, the Roper study.  Well, you know what that
    was about?  They wanted to make sure that it didn't
    turn out or didn't -- didn't -- didn't verify that
    smoking was bad for people, that it caused lung
    cancer.  They said, boy, this would open the door to
    legal suits in which the industry would have no,
    what, defense.  Shut it down.  Shut it down.  Stop
    it.  That's what we're talking about with this
    defendant.
         Members of the jury, this was intentional.
    This wasn't no accident.  The way they went about
    orchestrating your right, killing 440,000 people,
    Mr. Kirkland having his voice box cut out, part of
    his tongue cut out, and they're making dollars.
    They're making dollars, dollar after dollar.  And it
    was in -- they designed a cigarette to create and
    sustain addiction.  That's what Dr. Proctor told
    you.
         And another thing about Dr. Proctor and all of
    our experts, one thing, do you remember, every time 4262 they had -- on cross-examination they'd say, yes,
    yes, yes, yes.  Those people, the witnesses that
    they brought in here, you couldn't stop them from
    talking.  I mean, you would ask them what time it
    was and they'd tell you how to build a house.
    Members of the jury, I mean, you couldn't shut them
    down.  On and on and on.
         And the Judge told you, you can judge the
    demeanor of a witness based on their frankness or
    lack of frankness.  You can judge all of that.  And,
    also, whether or not they are an advocate.  So you
    think about it.
         And Dr. Proctor was straight up with you.  They
    were denying that tobacco was killing large numbers.
    They really set out to deny this starting down in
    the -- what -- in the '50s.  They knew it from Day
    One.
         Here, he gave you the numbers.  The numbers.
    Over 440,000.  Mr. Kirkland, he ain't the only one
    losing his -- losing his ability to even talk or to
    breathe out of his nose or -- I mean, members of the
    jury, they knew these things were going on and they
    just do it over and over and over and over again.
         Dr. Wade was their witness.  He knew about
    this.  I said, Have you seen those figures, 440,000 4263 in the United States alone?  This ain't worldwide.
    Correct, that's what I've seen.  Everybody knows
    about it.
         This defendant and the tobacco industry think
    they can get away with anything.  They just think
    they can get away with it.  They can fight it.  And
    in more cases than not, you're not going to be able
    to stand up to them.  You know, we're not going to
    back down from them, because it's the right thing to
    do.
         Members of the jury, they want you, if you
    start out -- if you -- like my partner said, nowhere
    in those instructions are you going to see any word
    "choice."  But they developed choice, because they
    know that that's where, with the propaganda and with
    the public relations, they can come in and bring
    folks like him, like the nice lady that came in, and
    show that cigarettes were out there and it's all
    your fault.  Forget about the drug that they sell,
    the nicotine that gets people hooked.
         But I said, Let me just ask you; do you think
    it's fair to blame an 11-year-old child for making a
    choice?  They can't vote, they can't think, they
    can't go to war and die for their country, they
    can't even drive a car.  And they are in a position 4264 to make a choice?
         And even he agreed, no, they should not have
    sold cigarettes to an 11-year-old child.
         Members of the jury, when Mr. Kirkland was
    starting smoking, smoking was everywhere.  Smoke --
    you could get -- he went to the store at 11 years of
    age and these folks, these money-hungry folks, sold
    him cigarettes.  A child.  And I don't want to blame
    him for getting hooked.  By the time he was 17, he
    was hooked, and you blame him.
         Well, I wanted to say this, but I'm glad their
    own expert told you this.  Do you think -- I mean,
    do you think they should be done away with?  And I'm
    talking about cigarettes.
         And what's his answer?  Yes.  Even he knew.
    Now, this is a guy that they are paying $500,000 an
    hour -- I mean, $500 an hour.  And why do you think
    that?  I think it would be better for the health of
    the country and the population, yes.
         Members of the jury, do you think all of these
    people, the people that they had in the ads and
    everybody, do you think that they're just all crazy?
    I mean, they just -- it's all their fault, tobacco
    has nothing to do with it?
         President Ronald Reagan, Bob Hope, Joe Lewis, 4265 Henry Fonda, John Wayne, Danny Thomas, Frank
    Sinatra, Bing Crosby, Dennis Stewart, Jack Benny,
    all of these people?  And Lord knows, the faceless
    and the nameless numbers that you will never hear
    about because they're too small.  They weren't movie
    stars, but they're real people and they're dying.
    Dying.  It's not right and we know it's not right.
         And then what is their position?  Let me just
    say something before I show you this.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Your Honor, I object to this.
    This is not evidence in the case.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         (The following bench conference took place
    outside the hearing of the jury:)
         MR. GARY:  He said he was 100 percent at fault.
    This is what the attorney said in opening statement,
    he was 100 percent at fault.  I can comment on that.
         THE COURT:  Your thoughts?
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  It's not evidence.  To put it
    on the board, you have to have -- to put it on the
    board, you would need the evidence.  Our position is
    that.  But not to display it on a board.
         THE COURT:  I don't know that it's improper.
    I'll overrule the objection.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you. 4266 (End of bench conference.)
         MR. GARY:  Now, members of the jury, I want to
    make something real clear to you right now.  He
    accepted his responsibility.  He accepted his
    responsibility.  He's not trying to duck or dodge
    his responsibility, even though he was at the tender
    age of 11, on to 17.  So that issue about --
    that's -- you know, he is accepting some
    responsibility.
         But can you imagine that after all that these
    defendants have done in this case that they will get
    up here and say Mr. Kirkland is 100 percent?  They
    don't accept even one iota of blame.  Just think of
    it, not one iota.  He's 100 percent.  Now, that's
    what they said in their opening statement.
         Members of the jury, when we were talking to
    you, you said that everybody, no matter who you are,
    you have to give an account for your actions.  It's
    a two-way street.  It's a two-way street.
         But that's the way they do business.  That's
    the way they do business.  And maybe they'll get
    away with it.  Maybe they'll get away with it.  But,
    you know, somehow I feel that maybe this is the end
    of the road for them.  This is the end of the road
    for them. 4267 So members of the jury, talk about choice.
    They know choice is compromised when you're drugged
    up.  They know when you're drugged up, they get you
    drugged, they -- they orchestrated their cigarettes,
    they pumped the cocaine -- I mean, the nicotine in
    them more and more and more and more.  They get you
    hooked.  They let you lose your voice box, lose a
    lung, or you just die, and they come in and defend
    it because they're going to say you made the choice.
         Well, let's see what the Surgeon General said
    about choice.  See what the Surgeon General said
    about choice.  This is the 1989 report.  The Age of
    Initiation of Smoking.
         Y'all all -- I mean, even throughout this
    trial, in terms of when people started smoking, you
    know they were in their teens.  I mean, they -- even
    back in the '50s, they went after teens like
    gangbusters.  11-year-olds smoked, 13-year-olds
    smoked.
         It just didn't happen, members of the jury.
    This is a billion, a trillion dollar business.
    These people spent billions of dollars on
    advertising.  But they said, look, if you're going
    to talk about -- especially, you know, the age of
    initiation of smoking, it's early. 4268 Nicotine addiction, you've got to consider that
    if you're going to talk about choice.  These two
    factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter
    of free choice.  Most smokers start smoking when
    they are teenagers.  This is the Surgeon General.
    That's the top doctor in America speaking about
    choice.
         Members of the jury, back in 1980, their
    lawyers told them -- what did they tell them about
    this choice?  Said, look, we can't defend it
    anymore, stop it.  Free choice.  If a person is
    addicted, forget it.  You can't get someone
    addicted.  You can't drug them out, get them hooked
    on two packs a day.  That's 40 cigarettes for every
    24 hours.  And over and over for years and years and
    years, and then you get them addicted, then you're
    going to raise that you made the choice, it's your
    fault, you could have stopped.  They get you hooked,
    members of the jury.
         And speaking of addiction in this case, let's
    just talk about addiction.  Let's look at who --
    Dr. Dolgin said --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Your Honor, I'm going to object
    to this.  There are people on here who did not
    testify in this case. 4269 MR. GARY:  Yes, Your Honor, they testified by
    way of deposition, and the experts said what they
    said.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Dr. Goodman is on that list.
         THE COURT:  You can talk about the witnesses
    who testified and the evidence upon which they
    relied.  I sustain the objection.
         MR. GARY:  Yes.
         THE COURT:  I sustain the objection as to the
    board.
         MR. GARY:  I can talk about them, but not the
    board.  Okay.
         Members of the jury, okay, but other than
    Dr. Myers, who did you hear say he was not addicted?
    Think about it.  Other than Dr. Myers, who did they
    bring in here and say he was not addicted?
         Now, Dr. Myers, he's -- this guy, he's
    testified over 300 times, 300 times in depositions
    or court testimony.  He's a professional testifier.
    And he was good.  He got 15,000 -- that's what I
    said.  And he said, I think it's more than that.
    He's a money machine.  Three hundred times.  If you
    did -- just think, 300 times.  If he made over
    15,000 or more, that's a lot of money.  And he's
    good at it.  You saw how he sit there and he looked 4270 at you.  And, boy, you know, he knew his -- he knew
    his trade.
         But even Dr. Myers had -- and I went over
    his -- I said, look, show me one time have you
    written on nicotine related to tobacco.  Not a
    single time.  Show me one time -- well, how many
    people have you treated solely for the purpose of
    cigarette addiction?  Not a single one.  But he's
    the top gun.  He's the man.
         But members of the jury, he's the one that his
    opinion was that because there were no withdrawals,
    because he didn't have any problems, and this man
    had gone to his church and he prayed and prayed
    about it and he was able to get off of the
    cigarettes, and thank God he did, but he's -- they
    want to blame him for that, because, well, you
    didn't have any withdrawals so, therefore, you could
    not have been addicted.
         Well, he got busted on that one big time,
    because look what I said.  I'm going to show you in
    his own book.
         Is withdrawal necessary in the determination of
    whether or not somebody is addicted to nicotine or
    not?  What was his answer?  No.  I said, Based on
    your book -- where is it, the book he brought in 4271 here?
         MR. ACOSTA:  Right there.  No, that one.
         MR. GARY:  This one.  Y'all remember the
    DSM-IV, his book?  His Bible that he relies on?  He
    got busted on this one.  Right?  Because I said,
    "Based on your book" -- because he knew I had it in
    here.  "Based on your book, withdrawal within itself
    is not necessary -- necessarily a requirement -- a
    required criteria, is it?
         "That's correct."
         But he had said it.  I mean, he got caught
    right in the thick of it.
         And then, again, members of the jury, he
    didn't -- sounds familiar, doesn't it?  He didn't
    even come in here with the file, a complete file.
    And before I asked those questions, his file -- his
    notes are so important and helps him to do this and
    helps him to do that -- I said, "Where are your
    notes?
         "Some of my materials I shredded that were no
    longer anything that I'd be using again."
         Well, he knew he was coming to court.  Why
    would you shred evidence?  If there was a question
    about something that was said or some history, you
    took the notes, you took the records, 90 minutes, 4272 you gave him a test, you did all of this stuff and
    you shredded the records?  Take my word for it.  I
    typically keep my notes in every case.
         Now, members of the jury, back to -- I know
    it's getting late.  Please bear with us.  It won't
    be long.
         When you puff a cigarette, you inhale the vapor
    and the nicotine is absorbed very quickly.  It gets
    to your brain in 10 to 15 seconds.
         And they orchestrated it that way, members of
    the jury.  They orchestrated it that way.  They knew
    they were getting people hooked, they were getting
    addicted.
         It goes along with the concept -- and this is
    Dr. Benowitz talking -- your brain is really
    different.  They can get you.  They can get you for
    the rest of your life.  That's what he's saying,
    members of the jury.
         And members of the jury, to this day, why do
    they have to still keep pumping and pumping all of
    this nicotine into cigarettes?  They could stay in
    business.  We're not trying to put them out of
    business.  They want you hooked because you spend
    more money and it's more dollars for them, billions
    and billions and billions of dollars. 4273 The Surgeon General.  Now, members of the jury,
    our Surgeon General has to account for something.
    It's our top doctor in the United States.  It's our
    top doctor.  And he said, look, smoking is one of
    the most addictive drugs in, what, society.
    Addictive.  Addictive because of the drug that's in
    it.
         And he has voiced his opinion -- or his support
    for persons suing tobacco companies.  He knows that
    it's not right.  He knows that it --
         And members of the jury, they think they could
    use their money and do anything.  They paid for the
    Surgeon General's report.  They give grants for it.
    That's the way they do business.
         The industry, who is the industry?  The tobacco
    industry.  They recognized that the average smoker,
    just a regular guy, a regular lady, a regular
    person, just regular people -- they're not
    engineers, they don't have access to all of this
    information, they don't know that the -- no one was
    going around -- the tobacco company wasn't in the
    '60s and in the '50s saying, look, you know, smoking
    cigarettes could take your life, give you cancer or
    you could get addicted, you could become addicted to
    this, get hooked on it.  Then they didn't know there 4274 was poison in it.
         He said, Everybody knows that cigarettes are
    bad for you.  Sure.  That's what the nice lady,
    Dr. Hoffman, said.  They knew it was bad.  They knew
    it was bad, cigarettes were bad.  But members of the
    jury, people didn't know that it could flat out kill
    you until later, until later.
         Mr. Kirkland, he was born in 1939.  And she --
    she showed you all of those articles about Tampa and
    Tampa and Tampa.  He was in Georgia most of that
    time, in the country.  Said it's different.  If you
    tell me that I've got a 50 percent chance of dying
    before you sell me, it could be a stick of candy or
    anything, I'm going to think twice about it.  It's
    going to make a difference.  They withheld that
    information.
         Now, let's talk about his damages.  His
    damages, members of the jury.  And their own
    witness, Dr. Michael Bertino, agreed with
    Mr. Kirkland's treating physician.  Because my
    partner, Maria Sperando, asked, "Well, Dr. Jimmie
    Wilbur said that nicotine contributed to the
    development of his cancer of the voice box.  Do you
    agree with that?"
         He agreed with her.  He agreed with her, 4275 members of the jury.  On that stand, under oath, he
    said he agreed with her.
         So in terms of that issue, as to his cancer
    coming from smoking, there's no issue about that.
    He gave in on that.  What he did was, he just said,
    well, there may be some other reasons, like alcohol.
         And you heard the Judge's ruling.  So even if
    his cancer came as a result of smoking, alcohol, and
    something else, or whatever the case may be, that's
    it.  It really doesn't matter.  But we know, we
    know, that his cancer came from smoking, 40 years of
    smoking and smoking, two packs a day.  Members of
    the jury, two packs a day is 40 cigarettes in one
    day.
         And then I questioned Dr. Myers.  I said,
    "Well, Dr. Myers" -- I said, "Are you saying that he
    could -- he smoked 40 years and couldn't be
    addicted?
         "That's right."
         I said, "Well, if someone smoked 50 years,
    three packs day, based on your criteria, if they
    didn't have withdrawals, they wouldn't be addicted?"
         He said that's right.
         So, I mean, he is a tobacco man.  He's a
    tobacco man, without a doubt. 4276 Now, we talked about -- let's talk about his
    damages, members of the jury.  Dr. Dolgin said every
    day is scary for him.  He could choke.  He could go
    to a restaurant and something go down that pipe.  He
    has no control over it.  He could die.  It could be
    life threatening.
         "Dr. Myers, is it not implausible for him to
    have vascular disease of the brain?
         "I think it's a possibility, yes."
         Mr. Kirkland has really, really taken a
    beating, and he's accepted some of his
    responsibility.  He can't use both hands and talk at
    the same time.  He got caught in a situation where
    he had to plead for his life and use both hands at
    the same time, he couldn't do it.  He couldn't do
    it.  And members of the jury, there's not a day
    pass, he feels like he's a walking time bomb.
         You know, and thank God.  He thanks God every
    day that the cancer was -- they got the cancer and
    he's doing okay and he's making it.  But he lives
    with it.  Can you -- the mental anguish that he has
    to deal with every day not knowing whether the next
    doctor visit is going to show up that he's back to
    where he started?
         Hey, we -- members of the jury, you know, 4277 everybody's pulling for him, but he knows what he's
    dealing with.
         And the reason why -- members of the jury, this
    is -- this is an egregious case.  His damages are
    awesome.  Really are.  And not just -- I'm talking
    about compensatory damages.  We'll talk about the
    punitive damages later.  Because I could tell you
    about episodes -- here is another one where his
    prosthesis fell down into his trachea and blocked
    part of his airway.  That's down his throat.  He had
    to be rushed to the hospital then.  This is after --
    this is way after they had cut his voice box out and
    part of his tongue he lost.
         And sometimes the opening will stretch or it
    will pop out.  And the first thing it could do is go
    right down your windpipe.  That can kill you,
    members of the jury.  This is nothing to play with.
         Taking a shower?  He needs to protect it from
    the water.  He could just drown from taking a shower
    if he doesn't watch it.
         "Are these disabilities that you just
    described, are they permanent?
         "Yes, they are permanent."
         You all saw the diagram here.  This is what
    that cancer from smoking is like.  You saw it. 4278 That's what it's like.  It's a serious condition.
         60 to 80 pack years.  That's basically saying
    that for almost 47 years, he smoked one and a half
    to two packs of cigarettes a day, and they want to
    say that he's not addicted.  He's not addicted.
         Members of the jury, then they get creative.
    They're clever.  They drum up this, well, he drunk a
    beer here, he had some Scotch.  He liked Scotch, he
    liked this, he liked that.  And before you know it,
    they try to snow you.
         40 cigarettes a day for over 30 years, members
    of the jury.  With ten puffs in each cigarette.
    That's millions and millions and millions of doses
    of the drug nicotine.
         As a matter of fact, recap of his smoking
    history.  From 1955 to 1994, one and a half to two
    packs a day.  That's between four and five million
    doses of the drug nicotine.  Between four and five
    million of the drug nicotine.
         The damages, members of the jury, he has a life
    expectancy of 17 years -- I mean, 12.3 years.  The
    past, since 1974, 17 years.  29.3 years.
         You know, their own expert yesterday told you
    that for every pack of cigarettes one smoked, that
    you -- they lose six hours off of their life.  Six 4279 hours off of their life.  For the -- on this case.
    On this case.
         For the permanent disability, the permanent
    disfigurement, the mental anguish, inability to lead
    a normal life, the pain and suffering, and the
    mental anguish that he's going through and will go
    through for the rest of his life and on this case,
    based on these people and what they've done to him,
    we are asking for $96,250,500.  $96,250,500.  Not a
    dime less, members of the jury.  Because what
    they've done to this man, not right.
         Now, you make a choice.  It's your choice.  You
    do the right thing, and he'll live with that.  He'll
    live with that.  Because the damages, the real
    damages in this case is punitive damages.  He wants
    to stop them.  You do the right thing here.  You do
    what you think is right.  He want to stop -- he want
    them to change the way they do business.  He want
    them to change the way they do business.
    $96,250,500.
         And members of the jury, he lives it every day.
    Look.  That's what he's left with.  That's what he's
    left with.  He has to breathe through the hole in
    his neck and his throat.  The pain and suffering.
    The surgery they had to do on his neck and his arm 4280 and his shoulders and all of that has left him
    disfigured, and he's disabled there.
         But you know what?  He's not a crybaby.  Even
    after this surgery, he got up and he went back to
    work.  He went to work on a job where, members of
    the jury, just to talk to his coworkers, he didn't
    have but one hand, because he couldn't talk and
    communicate and do everything.  He had to use a hand
    just to talk.
         There it is.  Every day.  Every day.  That's
    permanent disfigurement in the worst way, members of
    the jury.
         Now, members of the jury, I mean --
         How much time do I have, Judge?  Madame Clerk?
         THE CLERK:  You have 20 minutes, sir.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Your Honor, you going to look
    at this one before it goes up?
         (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. GARY:  And that's not a board.  This is in
    evidence.  It's a document that they say.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  Can I see the whole thing?
         MR. GARY:  They say that they are selling
    drugs.  That's what they say.  And I'm prepared to
    show it to you. 4281 MR. KACZYNSKI:  I have an objection to the
    heading on this.
         MR. GARY:  They say that what we sell is drugs.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Just a moment.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  The implication is clear that
    it's like selling drugs on the street.  Selling
    drugs.
         MR. GARY:  They got a point there.
         THE COURT:  The objection's overruled.
         MR. GARY:  Thank you.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. GARY:  Before I get into this, members of
    the jury -- before I talk about this, the drugs that
    they sell through this nicotine every year, let me
    just show you that I'm not just talking about it.
    This is real.  This is one of their documents from
    1963.
         And you know the real sad part about this?
    This was in '63 that they admitted that they were
    selling the drug nicotine and that it was addictive.
    Some -- '63, '73, '83, some 20 years later, you saw
    them in Washington D.C. before our Congress under
    oath committing perjury.
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained. 4282 MR. GARY:  You saw, members of the jury, they
    were up there saying that nicotine was not
    addictive.
         Now, this is one of their documents all the way
    back in 1963.  They never thought it would see the
    light of day in a courtroom.  All of their
    documents, "Confidential, Private."
         Selling -- "Moreover, nicotine is addictive.
    We are, then, in the business of selling nicotine,
    an addictive drug."  Now, those are their words.
         And what have they sold?  Anyway you take it,
    for this defendant, if it's -- and it's over 25
    million people and maybe close to 30, but let's just
    look at 20 million smokers.
         One pack a day, in a year, they sell
    1,460,000,000 doses of the drug nicotine in their
    cigarettes.  That's what they're selling, and they
    admit it.
         25 million smokers, they sell 1,825,000,000
    doses of nicotine.
         30 million smokers, and they have that many.
    At one pack, ten puffs off each cigarette, that's
    2,190,000,000 doses of nicotine.
         It's big business for them, members of the
    jury, and they sell it.  They sell it.  This is 4283 their document.  Stayed in their files for years.
    1963.  And they still admitting -- they don't want
    to admit.  Got up in Washington, D.C. and said
    nicotine wasn't addictive.
         They don't know what the truth is, members of
    the jury.  It's not right.
         After they had said that they were selling the
    drug that was addictive, here it is, years later,
    "Claims that cigarettes are addictive is
    irresponsible and scare tactics."  It's from their
    document.  From their document.  That's the way they
    do business.
         Members of the jury, this business is so big
    for these folks, it is so huge, and there was
    talk -- and this is from one of their people.
    Members of the jury, these are their documents to
    members of the planning committee.  Said, look, if
    we give up one inch, if we give up -- if all of our
    smokers give up one cigarette a day for one year,
    that's 40 billion.  One cigarette.  That's how big
    this business is.  You don't touch them.  You don't
    even -- you don't tackle them, because --
         Members of the jury, let me tell you what I
    think about this choice.  He was 11 years old.  If
    you want to say he made that choice, if you want to 4284 say after 11 he didn't stop, maybe that's 10 percent
    his fault.  He was a child.  He was a baby.
         You know what?  Everything you heard about when
    people start smoking in this courtroom, you heard
    the teens.  You heard anybody start smoking when
    they were 30, 25?  They're babies.  And even back in
    the '50s, back in the '60s, they -- they
    orchestrated it that way to get the kids.  Get the
    children, because you get them, you got long-time
    customers, more money.  And if you orchestrate the
    cigarette to get them addicted, you got them, you
    got them.  You got customers for life.
         Choice to smoke versus a choice to kill.
    440,000.  Over 160-something thousand that lose
    their voice boxes, have their throats cut.
         They are really heartless people, members of
    the jury.  They really are.
         You know, if you sell a bad iPad or you sell a
    bad telephone to a customer, they get upset.  You
    exchange and maybe you make it right.  You sell a
    product that you know is killing people, and you
    know it, you can't make it right.  He's a walking
    time bomb.  Cancer could come back any day.
         Members of the jury, just one more here you got
    to see.  Got to see this.  The date.  See the date? 4285 1961.  They knew.  They knew it.  But guess what
    they wanted?  They want -- well, as long as you knew
    that we were killing you, you know, and you didn't
    do anything about it, we should be able to get away
    with it.  It's not right, members of the jury.
         In '61, their private document, confidential
    document, "There are biological active materials
    present in cigarette tobacco, and these are cancer
    causing, cancer promoting, poisonous."
         Members of the jury, that was in 1961.  And
    then they came up with this research center.  It was
    their propaganda machine.  Keeping people guessing
    as to whether it does or whether it doesn't.
    Because they kept you guessing that maybe it doesn't
    cause cancer, it kept you smoking, right?  That
    was -- but at the end of the day, they said, "This
    is the best and the cheapest insurance the tobacco
    industry can buy, and without it, the industry would
    have to invent it or we would be dead."
         That was their propaganda machine.  That was
    their -- that was that coverup.  They were hiding
    behind that.  Said they were giving all kind of
    money to schools and to colleges and all of this and
    going to let them be independent and all of that.
    Members of the jury, all of it was false.  All of it 4286 was false.
         And I wish I -- one of their own members of the
    group said, Look, wait a minute, we -- in the "Frank
    Statement," we told people that they could trust us.
    That's not right.  We're not doing what we said we
    were going to do.  We're hurting people.
         And members of the jury, Mr. -- Dr. Wade --
    Dr. Myers said -- now, I know this was playing on
    your intelligence.  When you heard it, I know how
    you must have felt.
         He said that it's pretty clear from science
    that it's not the nicotine itself that people are
    smoking for.
         Now, where has he been?  Everybody on God's
    earth knows that nicotine -- look here.  If he felt
    that way -- and the PowerPoint they put up there,
    and I hope they put it up again for you where he
    said that the reasons why people smoke, oh, they
    like it, it tastes good.
         I said, "What about -- what about the nicotine?
         "Oh, that's mild.  That's mild.  That's not a
    big deal."
         Well, evidently, he hadn't talked to the people
    that hired him, because they say they believe that
    the thing we sell the most is what?  It's nicotine. 4287 And I could just go on and on.
         These people, 1973 --
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  Objection, Your Honor.  Could
    we approach?  This board has got to come down.
         THE COURT:  Please let me see the board.
         (The following bench conference took place
outside the hearing of the jury.)
         MR. KACZYNSKI:  This is a document where you
    ordered the document redacted.  That's the -- the
    version that you showed the jury was not redacted to
    take out the market part.  Right there.
         THE COURT:  Yeah, he's right.
         MR. GARY:  I won't use it.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         (End of bench conference.)
         MR. GARY:  Members of the jury, let me just
    close by saying this.  I really think that, you
    know -- well, I don't think.  I know you're going to
    do the right thing.  Whatever that is, you know,
    that's okay.  Just do -- do search your hearts.  Do
    what you feel is right.
         What the lawyers say is not evidence.  You
    heard it from the witness stand.
         And I can tell you one thing.  And I don't say
    this just to be saying it, but I feel confident that 4288 you're a good group.  You don't make a decision
    based on -- I watch you taking the notes, I watch
    you looking, I watch you watching the witnesses.
    You're paying attention.  You all are into this
    trial, and nobody is going to sucker-punch you.
    You're not going to fall for that no matter what the
    presentation is.  And so just know we thank you, and
    we -- we feel without a shadow of a doubt that
    you're going to do the right thing.
         Members of the jury, we talked about a lady
    when we were picking the jury, and we used her as an
    example.  You all remember the lady with the scales,
    Lady Justice?  We talked about Lady Justice.  She's
    blindfolded.  She can't see.  She doesn't even want
    to see.  All she's concerned about is justice.
    Justice.  That's all.
         Thank you.  And may God bless you.
