          MR. PANTAZIS:  If that's in the way, just let
     me know.
          May it please the Court.
          I think I began three weeks ago talking to
     you, and so you have me one more time.  And I have
     to apologize again, because the last time I did a
     closing, I said I constantly look at my watch
     because I talk too much, and I still have that
     habit.  Of course, you know that because you've
     heard me for three weeks.
          I want to first begin by telling you how much all the parties appreciate your time.  Jury service
     is a very important aspect of our freedom in this
     country, and most jurors serve one or two days,
     maybe a week.
          You've gone above and beyond, you are here
     three weeks, and that's an extraordinary service to
     the community and to the parties.  And on behalf of
     all the parties, we want you to know we appreciate
     that and we appreciate your time.
          This case is very simple.  What did R.J.
     Reynolds know and what did they tell the public,
     including Ms. Koballa, about the product they were
     selling?
          Most of the time when you hear a case in the
     corporate world, you make decisions on what a
     corporation does, you hear witnesses, you see
     facts.  In this case, we have something a little
     bit unusual, we have all of their internal
     documents.  This is evidence, exhibits that have
     been admitted by the Court that will go back with
     you.
          I have picked out about 18 that I'm going to
     talk to you about, but just because I picked out
     18, and I would certainly call your attention to
     these 18, but feel free to look at any of the evidence in the case.  And I think these 18 tell
     the story.
          And so, see, the story begins really about
     companies in this country and about how companies
     in 1940 and 1950 behaved.  Most companies in this
     country, they're the backbone of our economy.  We
     need them to sustain our living, we need them, they
     produce food.  We trust what they say, and
     particularly post World War II.
          The generation that Ms. Koballa came from
     believed in its government and believed that
     companies told them the right thing about their
     product.  We even do that a little bit today, even
     though we're a skeptical society today.  If you see
     a product that says new and improved, you believe
     it's new and improved.
          So there is a great deal of trust in someone
     who manufactures a product and puts it into the
     market.  It's not -- it's not a casual
     relationship.
          When somebody puts a product in the
     marketplace to be consumed by a consumer, they must
     be honest with you.  Doesn't mean the product may
     not have problems, but they can't hide it, they
     can't distort it, they can't create billions of dollars to tell you something is not this, it's
     this.
          This case is not about whether in the
     community, in the society, people thought or
     believed cigarettes caused cancer and cigarettes
     are addictive.  This case is about that company's
     conduct, what they knew internally and what they
     told the public, spent billions of dollars telling
     the public.
          Why were they doing this?  One purpose.  To
     sell cigarettes and make a profit.  Is there
     something wrong about making a profit?  Absolutely
     not.  Every company in this country that does
     business the right way should make a profit.  But
     you don't make a profit on the backs and the health
     of your customers, your consumers, by telling them
     wrong information, by keeping information, by
     playing mind games with them.  That's what this
     case is about.
          The defendants want to focus all their
     attention on Ms. Koballa.  And you're going to hear
     Mr. Reid, who is a very fine lawyer, you know that,
     you've heard him.  He's going to tell you all these
     things that Ms. Koballa should have known.
          But what he's not going to tell you is what his client knew internally and what his client told
     Ms. Koballa about their product.  He's not going to
     tell you about the facts that you've already known,
     and as a matter of fact, that other jury already
     developed, that they planned and conceived an idea,
     we've got to create disinformation, we've got to
     inundate with advertising.  That's what they did.
          It's about R.J. Reynolds' conduct and how that
     conduct affected Ms. Koballa.  Ms. Koballa as being
     just another consumer, just somebody else buying
     their products in the '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s,
     and early '90s.
          I think in order to understand this story, we
     first have to go back a little bit.  I don't like
     time machines.  I never liked that movie, so I --
     but we do have to go back.  Let's go back into the
     '40s, when Ms. Koballa was a teenager, a child, and
     look and see what the companies were trying to do,
     particularly R.J. Reynolds was trying to do.
          R.J. Reynolds identifies its customers in two
     categories.  Number one is confirmed smoker.
     That's a buzz word for addiction, addicted smokers.
     Those are the people that are already addicted and
     the nicotine is driving their desire.
          The other part of their market is what they call replacement smokers.  And it's in their
     documents.  And we'll talk about that.  Replacement
     smokers is youth market, young adult.
          They wanted to increase -- you remember, this
     was a -- it's crude, but it's very accurate,
     Dr. Proctor drew a sales chart of cigarettes.  They
     wanted to grow their sales.
          So in 1940, they were interested in growing
     their sales.  They already had these confirmed
     smokers, and there was information out in the '40s
     about cancer and addiction, but it wasn't that
     much.  But there was information out there.  There
     is no question.  You're going to see news reels and
     you're going to see all kind.  But it was kind of
     quiet.  It really didn't start until '53.
          But in the '40s, when Ms. Koballa was a child,
     what did R.J. Reynolds do?  Well, we know they had
     a plan to sell cigarettes to children.  How do we
     know that?  We know what their documents say.
          Miss Thomason.
          This is a 1927 document, it's in your record,
     and let me -- let me get my -- this is Exhibit 51,
     if you want to write that down.  This is Exhibit
     51.
          These aren't my words.  You know, lawyers can make up things and do things, not intentionally,
     but we can comment on evidence and sometimes you
     get our version.  These are not my version.  These
     are their words.  "School days are here.  That
     means big business for somebody.  Let's get it."
          That's pretty bad.  But what's even worse is
     this, how they were going to market to children.
     "Line up the leaders and the most popular
     students."
          Remember Ms. Koballa talking about peer
     pressure, remember Dr. Goldberg talking about peer
     marketing.  That's what they're talking about.
     "Get a good distribution on our brands with the
     nearest dealers."  That was their plan.  We don't
     have to guess.  It's their document.
          Ms. Koballa was 16 when she started smoking in
     the '40s.  Do we have other evidence that they were
     targeting or considering or researching children
     and their smoking habits?  Sure.
          Can we go to Exhibit Number 60?
          It's another exhibit I would suggest to you
     you might want to look at.  Now, this one is
     entitled Younger Adult Smokers, Strategies and
     Opportunities.
          Could we go to the second -- page 64? Why is this important?  Younger Adult Smokers,
     Strategies and Opportunities.  That word means they
     were looking at them and they were seeing what kind
     of advantages they could take.  And this is a look
     back of 50 years of smoking during the period in
     which Ms. Koballa was a child and during the period
     in which Ms. Koballa began smoking.
          What age are they looking?  13 up here.  12
     here.  This company wanted to expand its markets,
     so it marketed to children.
          Can we go to the next document?
          This is Exhibit 80.  And it's another
     example --
          Can we blow that up?
          This is looking back in 1950.  Ms. Koballa I
     think was 17 in 1950.  One of the children.  It
     talks first let's look at the growing importance of
     a young adult in cigarette market.  In 1950, this
     young adult market was 14 through 24.  These are
     not my words.  These are their documents.
          Ms. Koballa also talked to you, she took the
     stand twice.  One of the things that was very
     clear, she began smoking as a young girl because of
     the glamour campaign.  Not any specific ad, but the
     campaign, which is parts of the ad, peer pressure, putting it into movies, creating a glamour.
          Some of the commercial -- some of the ads that
     reflected glamour --
          Could we see 58?
          This is in -- although it looks kind of hokey
     to us in 2011, in 1946, '47, '48, '50, this was
     glamorous to a young girl.  This is what a young
     girl wanted to be, a movie star, be in a beautiful
     gown.
          Could we see the next one?
          This is a young girl, I don't know how old she
     is, but she's certainly not a mature adult.  This
     is a type of ad they pushed to create glamour.
          And it didn't stop here.  They also took their
     money, and you know they spent $8 million dollars a
     day during the 50 years of Ms. Koballa's smoking,
     $8 million dollars a day.  That number was put up
     and nobody disputes it.  They took some of their
     money and not only bought ads in newspapers and
     magazines, they also put their products in movies.
          Could we see the next exhibit?  Can you blow
     the middle part up?
          I'm just going to read this little one for
     you.  Let me give you the exhibit number because I
     know you may want to go back and look at this. This is Exhibit Number 69.  Why is this
     important?  And this is a little bit further down
     the line, but it was true then and it was true
     before.  They placed products in important
     pictures, television programs with popular stars
     and they let them listen to it.
          This is how -- and they talk about how
     important it is if the star were the people whom we
     would want the product associated with.  They put
     their cigarette products in movies.  Now, there was
     not an ad.  That's products just in the movies that
     a young person would see.
          Now, do we know they did that during Ms.
     Koballa's time?  Absolutely.  You remember that
     Humphrey Bogart skit?  That was a show that they
     plugged in Lucky Strikes into the dialogue, into
     the comedy routine, and they paid for that.
          Now somebody watching it -- today we're a
     little bit more sophisticated, we know they're
     selling that product, but back then, a young person
     would not.  That's called product placement.
          Well, the glamour campaign was successful.
     Ms. Koballa bought that first lie that cigarettes
     were glamorous and she took the stand and said I'm
     at fault for believing that.  I'm at fault for that first fib, untruth, that cigarettes are glamorous.
     And Ms. Koballa --
          If we could have the next slide.  Exhibit 1.
          This is an interesting slide.  This is Exhibit
     1 and Exhibit 58.  This is Ms. Koballa.  You want
     to see how successful this glamour campaign was?
     Ms. Koballa, at her senior prom, Lucky Strikes,
     drinking a Coca-Cola, smoking Lucky Strikes.  Now,
     she said they were her date's, but she said she
     smoked them.
          Here's an ad that was typical during that
     period of time and afterwards.  What's that girl
     holding up?  A prom ticket.  Who goes to a prom?
     High school students.  Heck, the haircut is almost
     identical to Ms. Koballa's.  I almost cried when I
     saw that picture.
          You know, Ms. Koballa bought their story,
     bought that first lie.  And she became a smoker.
     And you heard Dr. Frazier say that around 19 --
     early '50s, mid '50s, she became an addicted
     smoker, or in the terms that Reynolds uses, one of
     their confirmed smokers.  She became addicted.  And
     then the choices of cigarettes were driven by that
     addiction and the information and manipulation that
     R.J. Reynolds did. Something else happened in the -- in the mid
     '50s.  That's when the information about cancer
     started to become a little bit more prevalent.
     They did the mouse studies.  The news was coming
     out with it.  They had the British studies.  It was
     starting to get around.
          And you saw in the internal documents what did
     R.J. Reynolds do when these studies came out that
     their cigarettes were addictive, that they caused
     cancer, caused lung cancer?  Did they say, oh,
     let's stop selling it?  Let's tell our customers
     exactly what's in them so they'll know and be
     informed?
          No.  They were worried about these sales.  So
     what did they do?  None of this evidence is -- is
     in -- is in conflict, either.  All of the big heads
     of tobacco, of the big tobacco companies, went to a
     secret meeting in 1953 and 1954 in New York, that's
     the genesis of this conspiracy.
          They went to this meeting and they said, guys,
     our business is about to end if we don't do
     something.  So what did they do?  They came up with
     a plan.  They all agreed to fund this plan.  They
     created T.I.R.C., and later T.I.  These are just
     entities that they basically did so that they could work together, fund it together, and do this
     conspiracy together.
          What was the conspiracy?  They wanted to do --
     they came to an agreement, R.J. Reynolds and all of
     the other tobacco companies in a secret meeting in
     New York, they were going to do -- one, they were
     going to continue with a massive advertising,
     product placement.  Again, $8 million a day.
          Number two, they were going to create a
     disinformation campaign.  And that disinformation
     campaign was going to be in three parts.  We were
     going to create doubt, that cigarettes don't really
     cause cancer even though the Surgeon General, even
     though the American Cancer -- why were they going
     to create doubt?
          They were going to do that so that addicted
     smoker would hang onto that doubt as a rational
     reason why she or he would smoke.  They were going
     to try to kill stories.  Anytime they saw an
     antitobacco story, if it was in a major paper or
     magazine that they had money, advertising, they
     were going to kill it.  And then they were going to
     attack.  They were going to attack the pieces to
     discredit them, to show that they weren't real.
          Why were they doing all this?  This is what that other jury found.  This is what the jury that
     lasted for two years found, said, hey, folks, we've
     looked at all their documents, and that jury had
     thousands and thousands of pages --
          MR. REID:  Your Honor, I object, that's not in
     the record.
          THE COURT:  Sustained.
          MR. REID:  Move to strike.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  I'll withdraw that, Your Honor.
          In any event, that is the genesis of this
     conspiracy to deceive and that is what -- is one of
     the findings that we'll talk about.  So they had
     this meeting.
          How did they start, how do we know they
     created this disinformation?  Well, the first
     documents, first thing they did, they hired this
     company called Hill and Knowlton, you've heard
     about that, that's the biggest, very prestigious ad
     agency, P.R., to shape their messages.
          So let's look at their documents and see what
     they say about doubt.
          Could I have 44, page one?
          Could you blow that up?
          This is a document in '72 but looking back as
     to the strategy they did in the '50s. So could we pull up the middle paragraph?
          "For nearly 20 years, this industry has
     employed a single strategy to defend itself on
     three fronts, litigation, politics, and public
     opinion.
          "While the strategy was brilliantly conceived
     and executed over the years helping us win
     important battles, it's only fair to say that it is
     not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for
     victory.  On the contrary, it has been always a
     holding strategy consistent of creating doubt about
     the health charges without actually denying it."
          I don't have to interpret that document.
     That's their words.
          Are there more documents?  By the way, that
     document is 44, if you want to write that down.
     And that's page one on 44.
          Another document that speaks to it is document
     number 46, page four.  And in this document, even
     more clear, "Doubt is our product since it's the
     best means of competing with the body of facts that
     exist in the minds of the general public."   My
     goodness.  The general public has got one version
     of the truth and they're going to create doubt.
          It also says, "It's also means of establishing a controversy."  So they created this controversy.
     These are not my words, these are their words, on
     Exhibit 46, page four.
          They went further.  And if you look at a
     document, Exhibit 42, it's a 1964 document, it's
     hard to read, but you'll have the paper copy back
     there.
          Sorry?
          And this is in response to an anticipated
     Surgeon General.  You remember what I said whenever
     they put any positive information out about -- or
     any information about cancer and addiction, they
     would come back with a vengeance to create doubt.
          Here is something very interesting.  What did
     they do?  "However, at some point, reflecting on
     the same seriousness with which we met the report,
     we must, in the near future, provide some answers
     which will give smokers a psychological crutch."
          Now, what is that talking to?  That's talking
     to that addiction.  If you have an addicted smoker,
     you give them a -- a chance, because they want that
     product.  They want to believe it's -- because they
     need that product.  So they put enough
     disinformation so that they can have a crutch to
     believe that even though the Surgeon General says this, even though their doctors say that.
          This is what the companies were doing, that
     were selling the products.  And they knew their
     products were cancer causing and they knew their
     products were addictive.
          Attack.  What evidence do we have of an
     attack?  Well, you're going to hear and you've
     probably already heard a lot about Reader's Digest.
     But don't forget, they attacked the Reader's Digest
     every time it came out.  Don't have to believe me.
     Let's look and see what they said.
          Exhibit number 76.  This is what they said in
     1976.  "Certainly on the Reader's Digest, we
     counterattack it every time we can."  Does that --
     does that sound like a company that's saying, "you
     know, Ms. Koballa, these cigarettes may be
     dangerous for you.  You shouldn't smoke."
          No, they're going out saying don't believe
     that Reader's Digest story, they went out and put
     their own advertisement, their own information.
          Kill stories.  Exhibit 77.  I'm not going to
     go much, but this -- here's a document where their
     ad agency, Exhibit 77, says specifically, "We went
     out and killed many potential antitobacco stories."
     Does that sound like a company that's responsible that's selling a product that's dangerous, that
     knows it can kill, that it can addict, and it cares
     about its customers?  Is that reasonable?
     Absolutely not.  That is a company that doesn't
     care about anything but profit, even if it hurts,
     kills, or causes their -- their customers to become
     addicted.
          400,000 people a year die from cigarettes.
     400,000.  We have been in this trial for three
     weeks.  That's 30,000 more people have died since
     we've been in this trial.  This is the kind of
     conduct we're talking about.  This is why it's so
     important.  And this is why your job is so
     important.
          What did the companies know?  I've showed you
     how they acted.  Do we have internal documents that
     they knew that they were cancer causing?
     Absolutely.  It's really a question of what they
     knew and what they said.
          Can we show Exhibit 28, page one?
          I have to get close, and I apologize.
          Your Honor, may I move over here?
          THE COURT:  You may.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  What did this company know?
     This is 1959.  This is -- this is a report and document in their files.  1954 -- by the way,
     that's very early in Ms. Koballa's smoking,
     probably just became addicted, based on what Dr.
     Frazier said.
          "The first report of presence of carcinogenic,
     cancer producing, elements in cigarette smoke was
     published.  Since then, approximately 60 similar
     compounds have been isolated from smoke."  They
     knew back then, 60 different compounds in their
     cigarettes were cancer causing.  If they were
     spinning doubt, let's create a psychological
     crutch, let's kill these articles.
          Exhibit 32, page 17.
          Here is another document.  "The closely
     paralleled increase in cigarette smoking has led to
     the suspicion that tobacco smoking is an important
     epidemiological," I can't even speak, "factor in
     intro" -- "in induction of primary cancer of the
     lung."
          These are their documents.  These are not the
     Surgeon General's, these are not the A.M.A.'s,
     these are their documents where they knew it was
     causing cancer and yet they're telling the public,
     and particularly Stella Koballa, don't worry,
     nothing's been proven. 37, Exhibit 37, page four, please.
          Now, this is kind of a grainy picture, but
     it's real important to see.  This is one that says,
     "We assume the Surgeon General's committee to say
     despite benefit effects of nicotine," I don't know
     what benefit effects, but they think it has some,
     "have certain unattractive side effects."
          What's the number one unattractive side effect
     that they say?  They cause or predispose to lung
     cancer.  Ladies and gentlemen, I don't know about
     you, but I don't think lung cancer is an
     unattractive side effect.  I think it's a serious,
     serious disease, life threatening.
          They knew all this information, but what were
     they telling the people?  What were they telling
     their customers?
          Could we see --
          You saw this, but I want you to kind of take
     it in context with what the -- their documents,
     everything I'm showing you is not Ms. Koballa, it's
     not me, it's their documents.  What did they say
     when they knew these things caused cancer?
          Well, there was a big program, Edward R.
     Murrow.
          I'm sorry? MS. THOMASON:  Sound.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Thank you.
          And listen to the president.  Listen to what
     this man says.
          (Video clip played.)
          MR. PANTAZIS:  Found none, even though we know
     they did find some, 60, found none and said if we
     do find them, no matter when, we'll remove them.
          Cigarettes today are deadly, they were deadly
     then, and they're deadly today.  400,000 people a
     year die from it.  How successful was this
     disinformation campaign that the family heads of
     tobacco companies got together in New York in '53
     to plan out?
          Well, we have two report cards.  The first one
     is a 1959.  This is -- this is how many, how many
     years, five, six, seven years?  And this is a
     report card.  And they asked in this, the question
     above it says -- and by the way, this is Exhibit,
     if you want to write this down to look at this
     exhibit, it's Exhibit 74.
          And this comes from the company's files as
     well.  This is not my survey, this is not my report
     card, this is what Hill and Knowlton sent to its
     bosses, the tobacco companies. They wanted to show how well they did.  Here's
     what it says.  "In a sense, everybody is a gambler.
     Every time we cross the street, there is a chance
     that we will get hit by a car.  Assuming a person
     does all the following things, which one of these
     activities do you think is most dangerous to life?"
          That's what they asked.  And they had a whole
     list of them, everything -- number one I think was
     going for a long swim on the lake.  They had riding
     in an airplane, taking a trip in a car, drinking a
     couple of glasses of alcohol, which was 15, but
     they got down to smoking a pack or more of
     cigarettes a day.  Only 11 percent, 11 percent
     thought that was dangerous.  Climbing out of the
     bathtub got ten.
          Does that tell you, no matter what Mr. Lacy,
     their paid expert, says, does that give you an idea
     how successful that campaign of disinformation that
     was targeting Ms. Koballa and other smokers?  I
     think so.  That's why they gave it to their bosses.
          We have another report card, and this one is
     Exhibit 66, another report card that Hill and
     Knowlton sent their bosses as a survey that they
     had taken or commissioned.
          In this one, smokers were asked four-part-scale question on how they were affected
     by talk about cigarette smoking and health.  Almost
     two-thirds of the smokers profess "not to be
     worried by the talk."  And it even shows --
          If we could, pull up the bottom.
          The first category is 35 percent, "It neither
     bothered me at first and this continuing talk of
     how cigarettes can affect your health still doesn't
     worry me."  Why?  Because of that disinformation.
          This next category is 29 percent, "It did
     bother me at first, but this continuing talk of how
     cigarettes can seriously affect your health doesn't
     seem to bother me as much as it did."
          I wonder why?  Could it be all this
     disinformation, these millions and billions of
     dollars they put out?
          The interesting thing about both of those
     exhibits is they brought you an expert, supposedly
     a historian.  And they did not let him look at any
     of their internal documents.  They didn't give him
     any of them.  He didn't ask to see any of them.  He
     didn't even ask to see how successful their program
     was in affecting public opinion.  He chose not to.
     I wonder why.
          The other side of this plan, disinformation, the other side is spending millions and billions of
     dollars on marketing.
          Could we see the graph, please?
          This is not an exhibit.  This was a
     demonstrative piece that I think Dr. Goldberg used,
     but it comes from a -- from an F.T.C. 19 -- 2005
     source, it's a reprint of it.
          Interesting thing about this document, because
     some testimony came in by Dr. Lacy, remember their
     Civil War historian, a couple things happened,
     first it shows in billions how much money they
     spent, the tobacco companies, in this particular
     instance it was almost 9 billion, the lowest during
     '86, and it goes back further, but this was just
     since the Surgeon General, the lowest is 4 billion,
     almost 4 1/2 billion.
          This little blue right here, starting to creep
     up, that's what the Tobacco Control Committee
     spent.  Can you see the difference in billions of
     dollars and small micro dollars of what the health
     industry was spending?
          Do you think that if you spent this much
     compared to that much in advertising in billion --
     what is that, 7 billion, which message is going to
     get across? This case is not about what the community --
     what the public knew about smoking at this time.
     That story is not what this case is about.
          This case is about what R.J.R. knew and what
     they did with that information and how it affected
     Ms. Koballa, their customer.  They -- they knew the
     product was unreasonably dangerous, they knew it
     caused cancer, they knew it was addictive, and what
     did they do?
          They continued to sell it, part one, but more
     importantly, they said we've go to put some
     information out there to keep them a customer,
     create doubt that it causes a problem, develop a
     psychological crutch.
          This case is about their behavior, not whether
     the Surgeon General came out with a report, not
     whether a doctor said to quit smoking.  It's about
     their behavior.
          And their -- their behavior is interesting
     because they were interested in one thing, profit.
     And like I said, I am not against a company making
     a profit.  I believe in the companies making
     profit.  But not at the cost of the health of the
     customers they're selling it to when they are not
     telling you the truth.  And that's what was happening.
          Ms. Koballa has suffered injury.  But before
     we do that, let's see.  Ms. Koballa has had an
     injury, the injury is pretty obvious.  She had a
     doctor -- and by the way, on the statute of
     limitation, I'm only going to mention this, but you
     need to take a look at it.  The medical records
     will be in there.
          In 1992, Dr. Sia gave her a clean bill of
     health, you remember?  Mr. Reid even said that.
     Mr. Reid said 1992 she had a clean bill of health,
     no lung cancer.  The statute of limitation is 1990.
     So clearly, she didn't have cancer in 1992.  They
     admitted that in the first part and now they want
     to raise it again.
          In any event, look at the records, 1992, clean
     bill of health.  First time she ever had any lung
     cancer, 1996, six years after the statute of
     limitation.  The answer to the statute of
     limitation is she is clearly within the right to
     bring a lawsuit.
          What is -- what does lung cancer do?  Well, in
     Ms. Koballa's case, she is a very fortunate lady,
     and we are not here telling you that she is going
     to die from this lung cancer.  We thank God every day on our knees that we will have her hopefully
     for many more years.  But that doesn't mean she
     hasn't suffered an injury.
          When she got the news of lung cancer, it's
     probably the most devastating news anybody can get,
     maybe with the exception of a loss of a child.
          In any event, she prayed.  She was told she
     had to have surgery, and her worst fears came true,
     she had lung cancer, adenocarcinoma.  The surgery
     was not that pleasant.  She has a huge scar.  She
     had -- they took out part of her rib, and they took
     out 20 percent of her lung.
          After surgery, she had complications.  She had
     pain and suffering as a result of that.  And
     further, for many years she thought that cancer was
     going to come back, every time she coughed, every
     time she had a pain.  That's her injury, the
     physical, the mental, the fear.
          Now, one thing you know for sure, it's kind of
     unusual, in this case, in the first half, Dr.
     Thompson was their psychologist, you remember, and
     he did a test on Ms. Koballa called a truthfulness
     test to measure how truthful a person is.
          And he said Ms. Koballa proved out to be very
     reliable and truthful.  And I appreciate his honesty.  I wish I could have taken R.J. Reynolds'
     executive and see what his truth meter would be,
     but I didn't.
          You've been here for three weeks.  The lawyers
     have been here for three weeks.  We put on
     witnesses after witness.  You've got hundreds if
     not thousands of pages of documents.  The one thing
     you haven't heard is an employee of R.J. Reynolds
     take that stand.  I wonder why?
          Ms. Koballa accepts responsibility for
     believing that first lie.  She is not -- she is not
     backing off of that.  She knows.  She is a
     responsible person.  She bought the glamour.  She
     started smoking.  That's her fault.  And when you
     go and assess fault, she says that's my fault for
     doing that.
          But once she became addicted, in that '53, '55
     period, and they went with knowledge and went and
     created doubt and be- -- and sold her that
     addictive product year after year, when she tried
     to quit, they continued doubting, they continued
     developing that psychological crutch, every year
     thereafter, that's their fault.
          I don't know how much fault you should do in
     the formula.  That's a choice you will have to do. If it was me, I think Ms. Koballa, the first three
     to five years is probably liable and at fault for
     that period, and since she smoked 45 years or 48
     years, that's about 10 to 15 percent.  That's the
     way I would do it.  But that's a decision for you
     to make.  I think R.J. Reynolds is responsible for
     90 to 85 percent of it.
          Who had the money, the power, and the
     knowledge, and who was the victim, the addicted
     victim of their product?
          I do want to touch a little bit, if I could.
     These are the findings the judge just read to you,
     but it's very important to focus on it because this
     case is not just about the evidence, it's about
     what you must follow about what's already been
     established.
          Cigarettes cause lung cancer.  Nicotine is
     addictive.  The cigarette -- to place cigarettes on
     the market were defective and unreasonably
     dangerous.  That is a given.  That's not to be
     relitigated.
          Concealed or omitted material, information,
     not otherwise known or available, knowing the
     material was false or misleading or failed to
     disclose a material fact concerning health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both.
          That's a finding already against R.J.
     Reynolds.
          Number five, agreed to conceal or omit
     information regarding the health effects of
     cigarettes or their addictive nature with the
     intent that smokers and the public would rely on
     the information in their documents.
          My goodness, this is doubt?  Psychological
     crutch?  Advertising?  That's what these are.  R.J.
     Reynolds was negligent along with the other tobacco
     companies.  That is a finding.  That is not in
     dispute.
          How much damages?  That's in your corner.  But
     from my standpoint, if they spent 8 million dollars
     a day for the last -- for the 45 to 50 years that
     Ms. Koballa was smoking, that's -- that's 3 billion
     plus each year, I think they ought to pay at least
     8 million dollars for the damage to her lungs and
     the cost that they gave her.  But that's me.  You
     must make that decision.
          The judge instructed you, and I assume you
     have -- will take the instructions back, about
     punitives.  When I talked about the 8 million and
     Mrs. Koballa's lungs, that's compensatory, both past and future.  Punitive is to punish.  And
     juries and courts all over the state of Florida,
     when they find a company has --
          MR. REID:  Objection, Your Honor, the Golden
     Rule.  We're not to that phase yet.
          THE COURT:  Overruled.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  When they find a company that
     has done an act intentionally or reckless disregard
     as the judge has instructed you and they harm the
     intended person, the public, and by the way, Ms.
     Koballa was their intended purpose -- person, there
     is nobody else they were intending to harm other
     than other people like Ms. Koballa, then you as a
     jury can award punitive damages to punish a company
     for that behavior.
          The purpose of it is to cause companies all
     over the state, all over the country, most
     companies are good and they don't need any
     guidance, but some companies, if the cost of doing
     something wrong is more expensive, they don't do
     the wrong thing.  And that's what punitive damages
     is, is a preventative.  And that will be in your
     sound discretion.
          Do I think they should have punitive damages?
     Absolutely.  There is no way you can tell me that they would use -- had this knowledge, sold this
     product to children, including Ms. Koballa, the
     government, the health people came out with this
     information, and they spent billions of dollars
     each year for disinformation, and for them to say,
     okay, we're at fault, but don't punish us, because
     we've been punished enough.  They ought to be
     punished every day.  400,000 people every year die
     from cigarettes.
          R.J. Reynolds knew this.
          Could I see Exhibit 30?
          They knew that if they did not do this
     disinformation, they were going to be out of
     business.
          "Evidence to date."
          No, is that 30?  I'm sorry.  I said Exhibit
     30, please.  Thank you.
          Exhibit 30.  You want to write this down, it's
     an important exhibit, because I think it tells the
     whole story.  "However, we cannot be comfortable
     selling a product," this is an internal memo,
     inside, "which most of our customers would stop
     using if they could."
          Isn't that amazing that you're going to hear
     somebody stand up here and tell you that she could have stopped.
          "That is to say if the exit gate of our market
     should suddenly open, we could be out of business
     overnight."
          My goodness.  So they were worried about the
     exit gate, meaning people stopped smoking, and they
     would be out of business.  So they continued with
     the deceit and the untruths and the doubt and the
     psychological crutch for the addicted customers
     like Ms. Koballa, and they didn't care whether they
     got cancer, they died, or anything else.
          There is also evidence, and I think you heard
     Dr. Proctor talk about this, I think it was Dr.
     Proctor, I can't remember which one, but when you
     start smoking younger, and you smoke a lot more
     because you've -- one, your time period is more,
     and two, your tolerance to the nicotine and
     cigarettes becomes greater, in other words, you get
     used to it.
          So what they did not only to the adults, but
     what they did to a child, and in particular a child
     that was Stella Koballa, I know it's hard, you see
     this graceful old lady, excuse me, Ms. Koballa, but
     one day, she was a teenager, and that's who they
     were selling to, selling to her knowing it causes cancer and it would make her an addicted -- a
     slave, as they say it was.
          If we went back into the boardroom and asked
     R.J. at the time they were making these decisions
     why they made them, there was only one reason they
     were making them, money.  They didn't want to go
     out of business, they wanted to grow the market
     share, and they knew the only way to get smokers is
     with replacement smokers and keep the addicted
     smoker confirmed by creating doubt.
          And if you go back to that boardroom, you will
     see another document.
          Could I see Exhibit 29?
          This is a document you have seen before.  But
     they were planning -- I said this to you before,
     but I think you see why it's even more important in
     this stage, they were planning Ms. Koballa's
     defense of her case in 1962.
          "Obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated
     to date" -- "to indict cigarette smoke as a health
     hazard is overwhelming.  The evidence challenging
     this indictment is scant.  Attempts to shift the
     blame to other factors, I" -- "e.g., air
     pollutants, necessitates accepting" -- "acceptance
     of data similar to those denied in a cigarette smoke case."
          In 1962, when she was working at the grocery
     store, raising children, not worried about her
     lungs, not worried about the cancer, not worried
     about being addicted, sure, there was information
     out there, absolutely was.  Did she hear it?
     Absolutely.  Did it sink in?  Absolutely not.  Why
     not?  Because they created an aura of doubt, they
     created that psychological crutch that used the
     nicotine.
          You don't have to take my word for it.  This
     is their internal document.  And remember that
     other internal document which said if our customers
     could quit, we would be out of business, the exit
     gate.  That's what they said then.
          Today, through their lawyers, you'll hear a
     different story.  But that's what juries are for,
     to cut through and listen to the real facts, listen
     to the real truth.
          This case is not about anybody else's
     behavior, it's not about the Surgeon General, it's
     not about a newspaper article, it's about R.J.
     Reynolds.  It's what they knew, what they said, why
     they did it for profit, and who they hurt, Ms.
     Koballa.  And Ms. Koballa is responsible for taking that first few cigarettes.  They are responsible
     for the rest.
          You know, I said the first phase of this case
     was common sense.  And I -- we entitled this phase
     of the case the rest of the story.  But it really
     is common sense.
          I mean, you never could see a case where you
     could put on so much internal documents.  This case
     is proved through their documents, through their
     mouth, and that's why we didn't see anybody come
     here from the company as an employee testifying.
          Could I see the verdict form?
          I'm going to reserve the rest of my time after
     this so I can get a chance to talk to you for one
     little bit more.  But the verdict form you are
     going to get --
          Can we pull them up one at a time, can we do
     that, Miss Thomason?
          This is your verdict form.  And don't --
     because I suggest how it should be filled out, I
     don't mean to intrude upon your right as a juror to
     make that decision, but it is your verdict form.
     Mine are suggestions.
          "Was the negligence on the part of R.J.
     Reynolds in placing defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes on the market a legal cause of
     Stella Koballa's lung cancer and damages?"  In my
     opinion, absolutely yes.
          Number 2, "Were the defective and unreasonably
     dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by R.J.
     Reynolds a legal cause of Stella Koballa's lung
     cancer and damages?"  Absolutely yes.
          "Please state the percentages of any
     responsibility that was the legal cause of Stella
     Koballa's lung cancer and damages that you charge
     to."  Here you would put what you think R.J.
     Reynolds' responsibility, here is what you would
     put for Stella Koballa.  They must equal a hundred
     percent.  My suggestion is 10 or 15 percent for
     Stella, 90 or 85 for R.J. Reynolds.
          Next one, please.
          "Please state the amount of damages sustained
     by Stella Koballa for pain and suffering,
     disability, physical impairment, disfigurement,
     mental anguish, inconvenience, loss of capacity for
     enjoyment of life, past and future."
          I told you, if they made -- if they spent 8
     million dollars a day for the last 45 to 50 years,
     this is the damages that she should be compensated
     for her lung damage, for the cancer. Next one, please.
          "Was R.J. Reynolds' agreement to conceal
     information and actual concealment of information a
     legal cause for Stella Koballa's lung cancer and
     damages?"
          This one is the clearest of all.  Absolutely.
     There is nobody disputes, no witness took the stand
     and said, you know, Ms. Koballa did this for this
     reason or that reason.  Ms. Koballa was addicted to
     nicotine.
          The testimony is her addiction to nicotine and
     these disinformation, these lies, this public
     manipulation of the truth is what gave her that
     psychological crutch to continue to smoke, even if
     there was other information.  Absolutely the answer
     is yes.
          "Under the circumstances in this case, state
     whether punitive damages are warranted against R.J.
     Reynolds."  Again, if this case does not warrant
     punitive damages, I don't know what.  That's my
     personal belief.  But it's this conduct --
          MR. REID:  Objection as to personal belief,
     Your Honor.
          THE COURT:  Sustain.
          MR. REID:  That's inappropriate. MR. PANTAZIS:  I apologize.
          This case -- the conduct in this case is so
     gross of what they knew, what they did with that
     knowledge, and the gravity of the decision, human
     beings' lives, people dying of cancer, to the
     extent of 400,000 people a day -- a year.
          Next one, please.
          "Did Stella Koballa know or by the use of
     reasonable care should she have known by May 5th,
     1990, that she had sustained a lung cancer" --
     excuse me, "sustained the lung cancer of which she
     complains and that there was a reasonable
     possibility the lung cancer was caused by her
     cigarette smoking?"
          I think you've got the cleanest evidence of
     all, Dr. Sia's 1992 report.  Mr. Reid even in the
     closing argument of the first phase, remember when
     he put on the board she's got a clean bill of
     health, he put that on the board, 1992.  Way after
     1990.  There is just absolutely no evidence to
     this.  The answer for that is no.
          And then it will be signed.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to sit down, I
     think, make sure I don't have any more boards.  I
     do get a chance to come back.  But again, my time is not more than Mr. Reid, we just -- I just get
     the opportunity to split it.  I get to go first and
     then what remaining time I have left I can go after
     Mr. Reid.
          I do want you to pay attention to Mr. Reid
     because I think he is a great lawyer and he's going
     to say some things that I'm going to want you to
     listen to.  You should hear both sides of the case
     in making your decision.
          But listen very carefully if Mr. Reid pulls a
     document -- finds a document where R.J. Reynolds
     said they didn't do what I told you, that says that
     they didn't create doubt.  See if there is any
     internal document.  See if there is any witness
     that says that.  See if there's any witness that
     they didn't know the causes that -- that cigarettes
     cause lung cancer or were addictive.  You won't
     hear any of that from Mr. Reid, I don't think.  But
     you listen very carefully.
          Thank you for your time, and I apologize for
     being a little too long.
          Your Honor, at this time, I would like to
     reserve the balance.


          MR. PANTAZIS:  May it please the Court, ladies
     and gentlemen of the jury, I'm going to try to be
     brief, and I really mean that, but I have to
     address some of the things that were mentioned by
     Mr. Reid. First of all, as the judge said, closing
     arguments, for the most part, are lawyers'
     commenting on the evidence.  So I'm not suggesting
     anybody did anything wrong here, but I remember Ms.
     Koballa's testimony very well, and I don't believe
     her testimony was that she wasn't surprised when --
     she said the opposite, I was surprised.  That's my
     recollection.  But you must use your recollection
     on that evidence.  Does it matter?  I don't think
     so.
          Could we pull up first the medical record?
          Well, can we go back for just a minute?  Go
     back to the -- I would like to have up the
     charge -- I mean the verdict form, and I would like
     to go to the last one.  And let's talk about
     statute of limitations.
          The first thing that I want to address is what
     is the statute of limitation asking, that she had
     "sustained the lung cancer," not bronchitis, not
     granulomas, nothing else.  If it was bronchitis, if
     it was granulomas, that would be in here.
          "Sustained lung cancer."  Very important.  No
     one diagnosed her with lung cancer until 1996.
     There is no question that was before '90.  But we
     even have another medical record. If you would.
          This is a 1996 x-ray, and if you will look
     here, "The right upper lobe mass was not present on
     the prior study," in '92.  So here is a piece of
     evidence, there was no mass in '92.  So obviously,
     it occurred after 1990.  There is no question,
     ladies and gentlemen.
          Why does R.J. Reynolds want you to think that
     way?  I -- R.J. Reynolds is doing anything it can
     to divert attention from itself, including trying
     to allege that her lung cancer was -- was found
     before 1990 when there is absolutely no evidence.
          And to go even farther to show their conduct,
     they argued for a week last week that she had a
     clean bill of health, had that big chart, we put a
     sticky note on it.  But today, because they know
     they are facing a jury of truth, they all of a
     sudden say, oh, she had cancer before 1990.
          Look through it.  Common sense.  What's their
     motivation for doing that?  It's to divert you.
     And that's pretty much what you heard.
          This case is not -- no one has ever said this
     case is that the only knowledge about cigarette
     hazard smoke was from R.J. Reynolds.  Absolutely
     not.  We know that the -- there was a lot of evidence in the domain.  We know that.  That's not
     the issue.  That is a red herring to take you off
     guard.  They said, well, you've got to show that it
     was the sole information, that's where this
     information they withheld, that's the only
     information.
          Take a look, when he talked about cause, take
     a look at the findings.  And remember, you are
     bound to follow these.
          What does it say?  And this is something
     already found, and you are to apply to this case,
     "concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise
     known or available knowing that that material was
     false."  There is already a finding that they
     already did that.  "Not otherwise known or
     available."  That issue has been decided.  That is
     not for you to decide.
          So why did they do that again?  It's another
     one of these red herrings to take you off the --
     off the issue.  The issue is very clear.  And I
     asked before I sat down, are they going to show you
     any documents in their file that's going to say we
     didn't have this plan, to create doubt, to feed
     that addiction?
          I showed you three, four.  That was what they called it.  They also called it a psychological
     crutch.  Why do you think they chose that?  It's
     not that information wasn't out there.  They gave
     that addicted person some hope that it was not
     going to hurt them, and that's what an addicted
     person reached for.
          I mean, some of the arguments are amazing.  He
     put on the board all these good things, we're
     trying to find a safe cigarette.  Now, think for
     yourself, common sense, that ain't got anything to
     do with this case, number one; but, number two, why
     would a company want to find a safe cigarette?  You
     think it might be worth billions of dollars?
          Do you think that they care about the public?
     I don't think so.  I think it's all about money.
     Same reason why they created this doubt, this
     crutch.  It's all about let's divert the attention.
          He brought in an expert that threw in hundreds
     of articles.  Mean nothing.  You didn't see us
     dispute that.  That is not the case.  You already
     have a finding, a legal, binding finding that the
     information they concealed was not otherwise known.
     You already have a finding that they -- that they
     acted in concert among other tobacco companies.
          You know, Mr. Reid also wanted to talk about this meeting.  That wasn't any bad meeting.  "We
     told" -- "we sent it in to the Surgeon General."
     Oh, yeah, they sent in some bylaws, but they didn't
     send in the internal papers that you're going to
     have that shows the real purpose.
          And again, they've already been found guilty
     as a member of a conspiracy to do exactly what I've
     just told you, that's one of your findings.
          He said, well, they didn't prove that the
     cigarettes are dangerous.  That's what number
     three, placed cigarettes in the market that were
     defective and unreasonably dangerous.  That is a
     finding.  I don't know why he talked about it, but
     it's irrelevant, it's already a finding.
          Mr. Reid also talked about -- so as -- before
     we leave this, as to causation, was this
     information not otherwise known?  That big
     causation bridge that he talked about?  That's the
     bridge, and it's made out of concrete and metal,
     and it's strong, because this is something you, as
     jurors, were instructed and you agreed to apply.
          Let's take a look at another issue that was
     raised about all of these great scientists and
     health officials.
          Could I have Exhibit 68? What he didn't tell you is the Tobacco
     Institute, and this is a 1968, this is Exhibit 68,
     if you want to write it down and you can look at
     it.  And by the way, you can look at -- I want you
     to look at all of them, I was just trying to
     highlight some of the ones that I think are germane
     to this argument.
          Remember he said, oh, we published all these
     great articles, we did all this wonderful stuff?
     Well, let's look at something.  The criteria --
     this is a 1968, it's, in subject, tobacco and
     health research procedure manual or memo.
          So what did they say they were looking for?
     Criteria for selection.  First criteria.  This
     means how are they going to pick the articles that
     go in there, this fair and -- position that he
     says.
          "A report in which the statistics of a
     smoking-associated disease are questioned."  Oh.
     So the first criteria is if you want to get
     published, you've got to say that that disease
     isn't caused by smoking, it's questioned.  Now, why
     would they do that?  To create the doubt.  To
     create the psychological crutch.
          What else did it say?  Here is another criteria.  One showing that many lung cancers may
     be metastac- -- I can't pronounce words -- from
     other organs.  Why would he say that?  Because
     again, if it doesn't come from the lung, then we
     can say something else caused it.
          This memo shows, if there is a smoking gun on
     their intent, this is it, when they tried to tell,
     oh, we did this great research, their criteria was
     let's publish articles that show smoking doesn't
     cause cancer.  Why?  Because Ms. Koballa and other
     people will hang on that article, that hope that's
     driven by this addiction, and they will continue to
     smoke, because they believed it.
          That's why this court and your order to follow
     found the material information was not otherwise
     known or available.  That is a legal cause.  And
     it's already been established.
          I asked a question before I sat down, I said
     maybe Mr. Reid might tell you why they didn't bring
     a witness.  He didn't.  He didn't mention it.
     Maybe Mr. Reid will pull information out of their
     documents and show you they didn't do what I told
     you, they didn't create this conspiracy, they
     didn't create this doubt, they didn't create this
     entire plan. I was very clear with what I said happened.
     Did you see or hear them say anything that that
     didn't occur?  Not one piece of evidence that --
     that he told you that didn't occur.  Not one time
     did he say Mr. Pantazis is wrong, that didn't
     happen.  He was deathly silent.  And he's a great
     lawyer.  When a great lawyer can't make an
     argument, that ought to tell you something.
          There are other issues.  He says alcohol
     companies, they don't -- are they guilty of a
     conspiracy?  I don't know of any alcohol company
     that knew of information that their product was
     dangerous beyond and kept it from the public.  This
     is the only company that I know of that planned
     this conspiracy.
          We're not saying because products are
     dangerous that you can't sell them.  What we're
     saying is you as a manufacturer, a corporation, if
     you sell to the public a consumer item, you cannot
     manipulate the truth about the health hazard.
     Whether it's slight, whether it's psychological,
     you can't do it.  And that's what that finding
     shows.  Because it's the underpinning of our
     society.
          When we buy products, we trust them.  When somebody says it's this, we trust them.  And when
     companies like R.J. Reynolds take the truth and
     manipulate the psychology and the power of their
     money so that the addicted people, they feed that
     addiction, that addicted person has to continue
     buying that product, even though it's to his or her
     detriment, that's why, and that's what this case is
     about, that's why we have these findings.
          Ms. Koballa is a poster child for these
     findings.  She is the person that fits this case
     better than any person.  She was a child when she
     started smoking in the '40s, right when that '53
     cigarette controversy began.  She was the target of
     the doubt campaign, she was the target of the
     glamour campaign.
          Ms. Koballa smoked for 45 years.  Loyal
     customer.  And what she got out of it was less
     money, still addicted to cigarettes, by the way.
     You're always addicted.  You remember the experts,
     once addicted, always addicted.
          Half -- or 20 percent of her lung gone.  Ribs
     gone.  Large scars.  Had to think real hard about
     seeing her maker.  Worried year after year,
     particularly the first five years after the
     surgery, is it going to come back, are my kids going to see me die little by little?  That's her
     damage.  Now, how much is that worth?  What is that
     value?  That's your call.  That's your call.
          Should punitive damages be awarded for their
     conduct?  If you are a corporation and you have
     information that's not otherwise known and you have
     a product that is addicted -- addictive and you
     play on the addictive nature so that your customers
     continue to buy that product and use that product,
     you remember what they said, we've got to create
     doubt, we've got to build the psych -- psych --
     this crutch, when you do that, that's wrong.  Not a
     little bit wrong, that's intentional wrong, and
     that's exactly what needs to be punished.
          The fact that R.J. Reynolds tried to make a
     new cigarette, they don't get any credit for that.
     That's because that's a new market that they want
     to do to make profits.  I don't have a problem with
     that.  They shouldn't be punished for that, nor
     should they be rewarded for that.  They should be
     punished for creating this plan and implementing
     it, not only against Ms. Koballa, but everybody
     that they targeted.
          And I keep going back to this.  He says, well,
     we haven't shown where Ms. Koballa originally -- Could I see these two again?
          To me -- strike that.
          This is the clearest sign that she was the
     target of their campaign.
          Are we up or do we need to change it here?
          MR. CORR:  No.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  And I know it's a simple
     picture, but sometimes simple pictures cut through
     with clarity.  Stella Koballa was the target of
     their advertising.  Stella Koballa was that person
     who they sold that cigarette by glamour and in a
     youth campaign.  Do I -- I never said selling
     cigarettes to 16-year-olds in Pennsylvania was
     illegal, but I do think it's wrong.
          When we make decisions as individuals, we have
     barometers.  In some people, that barometer is
     their parents raising them or grandparents or a
     special adult that raises them, and they teach you
     right and wrong.  Some people call that a moral
     compass.  My grandmother raised me -- well, strike
     that.
          I believe -- I'm trying to -- Your Honor, I'm
     trying to be good about the "I believe".
          Some people think that moral compasses for
     human beings are how we make decisions. Corporations are a little different.  They are no
     worse and they are no better than human beings.
     They are like human beings because they are made up
     of human beings.
          You have good people, they make good
     decisions, you have good corporations that make
     good decisions.  But you also have corporations
     that take advantage, that sell unreasonably
     dangerous products, defective, that conspire to
     hide information that's not otherwise available,
     they prey on the weaknesses of their consumers,
     like an addicted person like Ms. Koballa, they know
     ultimately she will suffer a significant, horrific
     disease.  And they do it for one reason, money.
          I put up that one about them going out of
     business.
          Could I have that one again?
          This tells the whole story about why.  It's
     all about money.  They didn't want to go out of
     business.  "However, we cannot ever be comfortable
     selling a product which most of our customers would
     stop using if they could; that is to say, if the
     exit gate for our market should suddenly open, we
     could be almost out of business overnight."
          That was the motivation.  We need to stay in business to make money, so anything and everything
     is okay.  You never heard Mr. Reid talk one thing,
     justifying or denying that conduct.
          So what did they do?  Very simply, they made a
     choice.  R.J. Reynolds made the choice in this
     case.  They made a choice to implement this heinous
     plan to pollute and take advantage of the addicted
     smokers, their customer, even though that they knew
     it was going to cause them cancer and other
     diseases, and they did it for money.
          That's punitive damages, ladies and gentlemen.
     If that's not punitive damages, we need to tear the
     punitive damage chapter out of the book and throw
     it away.  That's in black and white.  And there has
     been no evidence to even dispute that.
          Could I see the verdict form, please?
          MR. CORR:  Ten minutes.
          MR. PANTAZIS:  This may surprise you, I'm
     going to finish early.
          I'm going to quickly go back through this
     because I think this is an important way of
     summarizing where we are at.
          "Was the negligence on the part of R.J.
     Reynolds in placing a defective and unreasonably
     dangerous cigarette on the market the legal cause of Stella Koballa's cancer and damages?"
     Absolutely.  Take a look over here.  Not otherwise
     known that they placed this defective and
     unreasonable product.
          "Were the defective and unreasonably dangerous
     cigarettes placed on the market by R.J. Reynolds
     the legal cause of her lung cancer?"  Absolutely.
          Now, there is no question that smoking
     cigarettes caused it.  There is no question that
     she continued to smoke because of feeding that
     addiction with a campaign of doubt.  Doesn't mean
     there wasn't other information.  It means did they
     do something to keep her.  If you remember, it
     doesn't have to be the only cause, it can be just
     one of the substantial causes.
          Now, the next one, number 3, says, "Please
     state the percentages of any reasonable" --
     "responsibility", excuse me, "that was a legal
     cause of Stella Koballa's lung cancer and damages
     that you charge to."
          One of the things that's very important, you
     first must decide, after finding the first two
     questions, how much each party was responsible.
     You heard Ms. Koballa say I was responsible, in
     part, for my problem.  That's an honest person. That's what their psychologist said and I think you
     saw.
          Did you hear Mr. Reid ever step up here, even
     in the face of all these documents, ever say, "You
     know, we're responsible for this, too"?  The answer
     was no.
          I would submit 10 to 15 percent for Ms.
     Koballa, 90 to 85 percent, based on the evidence,
     for R.J. Reynolds.
          Could I see number 4?
          This is the amount of damages, past and
     future.  Not only the surgery, the pain, the
     suffering, the mental anguish of in a hospital, are
     you going to live or die after the diagnosis, the
     complications, the removal and disfigurement of
     ribs and scars, and then the years that followed of
     worry, is cancer coming back, that's all part of
     her damage.
          How much?  Ladies and gentlemen, that's your
     call.  But it's a substantial damage amount.  No
     one should have to suffer that, and thank God she
     is cured.  I'm not going to tell you -- knock on
     wood, thank God, she is cured, but that doesn't --
     that's 18 year, 15 to 18 years later.  What has she
     gone through till now?  Those are the damages that you must find.
          Was R.J. Reynolds' agreement to conceal
     information and actual concealment of information a
     legal cause?  Well, we know that.  They concealed
     it.  It was not otherwise known.  That's a finding.
     You know that.  And it was a legal cause of her
     lung cancer.
          "Under the circumstances of this case, state
     whether punitive damages are warranted against R.J.
     Reynolds."  Now, you must answer yes to 5 in order
     to go to 6 and 7.  So if you answer no here, follow
     your questionnaire, but you would not answer 6 and
     7.
          "Under the circumstances of this case, state
     whether punitive damages are warranted against R.J.
     Reynolds."  I don't know how you could have but one
     answer.  I don't know how we could ever trust
     corporations unless the answer is yes.
          Number 7, "Did Stella Koballa know or by other
     use of reasonable care should she have known before
     May 5th, 1990 that she had sustained the lung
     cancer of which she complains and that there is a
     reasonable possibility the lung cancer was caused
     by her cigarette smoking?"
          There is absolutely no evidence that her lung
