MR. PANTAZIS: Thank you.
May it please the Court.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. I talked to you at the beginning of this case that we were going to give you an outline, that was the opening. We then moved to evidence and law.
You've heard a lot of evidence, and on behalf of both parties, we would like to thank you for participating, carving out two to three weeks of your time to resolve this problem for both parties, and I'm sure the tobacco company as well as Ms. Koballa both appreciate you giving up the time to
make and help resolve this problem.
I start this position by trying to say what is the questions? What is asked of you? And then how -- what tools does the Court give you to answer those questions?
So let's begin with what are the questions?
And this is — a lot of this information you've seen before. I want to talk about it a little bit.
What are the questions? Well, you heard the Court, there are really only three questions. Is Ms. Koballa addicted to cigarettes? And if the answer to that is yes, then the next question you must answer is was it a cause of her C.O.P.D. and was it a cause of her lung cancer, either/or.
You don't have to find that both of those were caused by her addiction to cigarettes, but you do have to find that she was addicted and that she has - that the cigarettes addiction caused at least one of those in order to go to phase two, as you heard from the Court.
What tools do you have? Again, this is a slide I showed you at the beginning, but I think it’s important. The first tool is the law. And lawyers don't make up the law, we don't give you the law. The law only comes from one place, and
that's His Honor.
What we do is use the law and apply the facts to the law to come up and help you answer those questions, and only you answer the fact questions, not lawyers, not judges; the jury.
I think you heard in the opening -- in the voir dire, the term "voir dire," which is the phrase we use to ask you if you have any prejudices or you have any biases, means to speak the truth, because the jury is the only judge of the true facts, that's you.
You will hear us disagree with these people, you will hear me get -- and you have already seen me get angiy, you have already seen me get upset, and I apologize for that, because we believe in our cases. But it's your job to listen to the facts, apply it to the law, and answer the truth, and that's your verdict.
So what law did we begin with? Well, this is an unusual case because the judge has already instructed you as a matter of law that cigarettes are addictive. That question --
Excuse me, could we go back?
That's fine, you can leave it there.
That's — that cigarettes are addictive, and
cigarettes cause chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or C.O.P.D., and cigarettes cause lung cancer. That is not in dispute. Even though I think we heard one of the tobacco company's experts question that, you cannot. It is the law.
Cigarettes are addictive and cigarettes cause those diseases.
It's also stipulated, if you go into the facts and evidence, that Ms. Koballa has both of those diseases.
What other law do we have? The judge has instructed you and you just heard him --
Go to the next line, please.
That cigarettes containing nicotine are addictive, that cigarettes containing nicotine cause lung cancer and chronic pulmonary disease, C.O.P.D., including emphysema. And I think you've heard and you'll hear again that Ms. Koballa has emphysema, a component of C.O.P.D.
The judge has instructed you further, in order to be regarded as a legal cause, this is the second part of that, of an injury, the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. We've heard a lot of different things. I think one chart called it the insults to the lungs.
The question is, is nicotine a cause. In my opinion, and you'll hear me argue very, very strongly, I believe it's the only cause. But you may not. You may think it's one of the causes.
And it's a substantial cause. And as this court will tell you, you may find that as a legal cause.
"An addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of injury even though it operates in combination with the acts of another or some other cause if the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine contributes substantially to producing the injury."
Now, that is the law. That's not lawyer talk. That means that if you believe that cigarette smoke contributed substantially, even though it had --she may have had other issues, that is legal causation that it caused her injury.
Okay? Becky?
The Courtalso indicated — excuse me, Miss Thomason.
The Court also indicated the term "greater weight of evidence." Now, I didn't bring the stacks of paper, but I think you might remember in the voir dire process, Mr. Ogle questioned you and he illustrated what greater weight of the evidence
is. It's a scale.
And we start this case with facts being exactly equal. That's the way our system of justice is, it's a fairness. They're exactly even. And if those scales, I think he had two packs of paper, if I remember correctly, and if those scales are slightly more than one side, for example, if one additional piece of paper, even though they're thousands, if one additional piece of paper is on this side, that is the greater weight. It is not the burdens you see on T.V., it is the greater weight between the two.
The Court has instructed you greater weight of evidence means the more persuasive, convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case.
Now, why is that an important instruction? Lawyers, including me, sometimes like to pick a piece of evidence and say, "Ah-ha" Well, that's not the case. It's not one piece of evidence.
It's not one witness. It's the totality of the evidence and it's the documents, it's what you heard.
So that instruction is a very, very important tool for you because it gives you the opportunity
and the instruction to look at all the evidence, not just the ones that the lawyers like to pick out.
Now, I'm going to confess my sin to you, I'm going to pick out some evidence for you to consider and review, but I will tell you look at all the evidence. I just think this is the most persuasive evidence, but you are the final judge of that.
Now, as you —
Could I have the tools back up?
That is the law of the case that comes from the Court. You use that and apply that to the evidence. And I'm going to talk about the evidence. But (he evidence is limited now, although I'm married to a lawyer, so I love lawyers, we don't give you evidence. The witness gives you evidence and documents. All we do is explain and present the evidence.
So what I say is not evidence. What Mr. Reid or another lawyer for their side says is not the evidence. We are just simply explaining the evidence. Evidence comes from that witness stand.
And in this case, we've had great evidence.
We've had a week and a half of witnesses come in and give you information that maybe you knew, maybe
you didn't. So let's look at what evidence we have as your second tool in answering those questions.
Well, the first piece of evidence you had is that the usage of cigarettes by Stella Koballa.
Now, we put this chart up in the opening, and I think it's important for a lot of different reasons.
When you get into a trial, sometimes you get into the minutiae, and you don’t look at what really, really happened here. This is a fact that is clear and is very important never to lose sight of. Ms. Koballa smoked cigarettes from 1948 as a 16-year-old until 1996. I think that's 48 years if my math is right. It may be a year off.
She began with a few cigarettes and ultimately came up to a pack and a half, and in her later life, two packs. That is not in dispute. That 48-year pack and a half to two packs of cigarettes is not in dispute.
And the interesting thing, from 18 to 30 years old, I think that's 12 years if my math is correct, and I'm bad at math, that's why I guess I'm a lawyer, is the Lucky Strikes did not have filters. Those were unfiltered cigarettes.
Why is that important? Because that is also
an effect to her lungs during that period of time.
So from 1952, when she began as a regular smoker, until 1996.
Now, there has been a lot of evidence of things that the defendants think and want you to believe had some effect on her. But you didn't hear anybody, any witness come in here and say, you know, she had so much exposure to coal mines, she had so much exposure to coke furnaces, she had so much exposure to this particular chemical.
You remember the questions, and we're going to look at that evidence, where we talk about dose?
The only dose in a clinical, scientific method is how much exposure of a particular substance somebody has. And before you can find causation, that this product caused these or substantially contributed, you must know the dose.
The only dose that you heard is this, the 48 years pack of cigarettes, one and a half totwo packs.
Next slide, please.
I want to talk about addiction first in reviewing the evidence. There were two witnesses that testified about addiction. And I pulled up --we had Dr. Sandra Frazier, and the defendants,
tobacco company, called Dr. John Thompson.
I pulled out things out of their resumes that dealt with addiction to substance. And if you looked at their resume, and I think you heard the testimony, that's what their resume would look like.
Now, you heard the Court, as one of those instructions, that you can weigh the credibility of each witness. Just because a man or woman swears that they are an expert and gives an expert opinion doesn't mean you have to believe it. You can see how reasonable it is based on their experience, their judgment, and what their whole testimony said.
So let's see what evidence was on addiction.
Go back to that last slide, please.
The reason I wanted to go back to that last slide, I wanted eveiyone to recognize that the type of presentation that Miss — Dr. Frazier gave on addiction, she has been published in it, she has taught in it, she has treated thousands of patients that have been nicotine dependent, she has diagnosed them dependent addicted and nonaddicted.
I think you heard Dr. Thompson say that he had never, never diagnosed anyone that was nicotine
dependent by itself. But he came here to tell you that she's not nicotine dependent.
Let's go to the first slide, please.
You also heard Dr. Frazier tell you that cigarettes are a nicotine delivery device. Why is that important? We think of cigarettes as something — like food sometimes. The only thing a cigarette is is a delivery device for nicotine.
If you were injecting heroin, the needle would be the inject — would be the delivery device. And it's -- and in nicotine, the cigarette is primarily the delivery device.
Next slide, please.
She told you -- and this is an interesting thing. There was a lot of testimony about how nicotine - and she went into great details how nicotine affects and binds to the brain and permanently changes.
She didn't just tell you that. She showed you that. She showed you how a brain with three cigarettes is totally saturated with nicotine, and that the -- and her testimony is that is not just a temporary thing.
Could we go to the next slide?
And I asked her the question, "I know those
are binding to the parts of the brain. Does the nicotine in an addict, a chemically-addicted brain, does the brain actually change compared to the nonaddicted brain?"
What was her answer? "Yes, the brain changes, like that slide I showed you about those circuits,
Hie circuitries in the brain change when you become addicted."
Now, the interesting thing is they tried to say wouldn't that change when you drink milk or chocolate? And the answer was it change — it doesn't change the brain but it affects the brain.
Did you see any slide — we've been here for two weeks. This trial — this case has been pending two years. Did you see any slide where the brain under a PET scan drinking milk was changed, or coffee? No. The only evidence you saw of a physical change in the brain was nicotine.
Ask yourself, and that's that last tool, and we'll get to that, common sense, if the brain changes on these other things, why didn't you see a slide on it? You didn't because it doesn't. And here is our answer.
"Is that in milk? There is something in chocolate that works on receptors?"
Answer: "Yes. Anything that can cause pleasure can work on those receptors and cause an increase in dopamine, but they don't change the brain."
That is why the DSM-IV only lists a certain group of chemicals that are dependent or addictive, because they physically change the brain.
Next slide.
Her testimony went on. "Okay, is it your opinion that in the early 20s — in her early 20s, which would have been in the mid 1950s, she became addicted; is that correct?”
Her answer, "That is correct.
"And at that point in time, since then, has her addiction gone away?"
And this is a very important point. "No.
Once addicted, always addicted."
You go into remission, addiction is a disease, just like others, and you may not ever get out of remission or you may, you are never cured. She testified Ms. Koballa was addicted since the 1950s, and most importantly in 1996, when she was diagnosed with lung cancer and C.O.P.D. emphysema, she was addicted.
She also says, consequently, she is addicted
today. And you heard that from Ms. Koballa. She wants a cigarette every day of her life.
The other interesting factor, why we know the brain changes, is you heard Dr. Frazier tell you that when a smoker goes back to smoking after stopping for a while, they pick up at the exact level they were before.
That is — that is classic evidence of addicted brain, because the receptors have been changed. You don't have that break-in period like you did when you first began smoking.
Next slide.
And there was a lot of lawyer talk that if somebody stops, that's telling us they're not addicted. Well, Dr. Frazier totally disagreed with that. And not only Dr. Frazier, I'm going to show you in a minute, their expert, Dr. Thompson, totally disagreed with that.
Do you know what caused her to go into remission in 1996? Fear of dying is what she told me.
"In your clinical training and your history and background, is that inconsistent or consistent with what you have experienced with other addicts?"
Answer: "Oh, very consistent. When you have
an external motivator and something personally happens to you, you have a crisis, that's when it's kind of a rock — it's called a rock bottom, that's when people get motivated to really stop.
"And so she could have had someone close to her die of lung cancer, I don't know, I'm not saying that happened, but people with addictions may have somebody die that's close to them of lung cancer, but they think, shew, it wasn't me.
"So until something unusual happens to them personally, a huge external factor that gets their attention, a lot of times they will not be successful."
And by the way, that's exactly the evidence you heard, and we're going to talk about that here in a second. How many times did Ms. Koballa attempt to stop smoking? This is a -- you heard Dr. Thompson say she is a strong-willed lady, we did all these tests, and if she wanted to quit, just like he said, she could have quit.
But she couldn't. She went and tried to get hypnosis. She paid someone to put her under hypnosis, not once, but twice. And then she went and had acupuncture to stop. Does that sound like somebody that had control over it? I don't think
so.
Next slide.
I'm not going to go in great detail, but Dr.
Frazier applied the DSM-IV criteria She didn't just tell you they don't apply or they do apply; she gave you facts and specifics.
Dr. Thompson, he didn't tell you what he used.
I don't know what he used to make his decision.
All I know is, she's not addicted. Just like the other four tobacco trials that he's participated in, they're not addicted, either.
Dr. Frazier went through the DSM-IV and gave facts and specifics as how Ms. Koballa met each of those DSM-IV criteria And one of those says, "Many" -- this is out of the DSM-IV.
"Many individuals that smoke cigarettes consume more than 20 cigarettes a day, an amount that would produce a symptom of toxicity when they first started smoking." That's Ms. Koballa, no question about that.
"Tolerance to nicotine is manifest by more intense effect of nicotine the first time it's used during the day."
What was the testimony? That first cigarette, before I hit — my feet Hit the ground. This is
not — this is not things that experts were testifying to. This came right out of the book.
Next slide.
What other criteria? These are symptoms of withdrawal, she's got to have four. There was no evidence of depressed mood. She couldn't sleep. That's one.
Irritability, edgy, kids got on my nerves.
When I needed a cigarette, she was very edgy, she was very short-tempered. Anxiety, felt anxious. Those were all in both of their records. And you remember, I asked Dr. Thompson, "Did you find this information?"
"Yes."
He just didn't use it.
Next slide.
Difficulty concentrating. She couldn't focus.
She couldn't read a book. All she thought about was a cigarette. Restlessness, fidgety, antsy, antsy, had to be doing something. So she took up crocheting to do something with her hands.
Increased appetite.
Dr. Thompson didn't even look at the record to see that her weight from when she quit in 1996 or stopped or went into remission in 1996 went from
140 to 1998,165. That's in her medical records.
She clearly met all of those. Dr. Thompson didn't apply them, but he agreed they were there.
Second criteria, as soon as she lit up, she inhaled, she was fine, her attitude changed and relaxed.
She tried to quit, many, many times. And we're going to put a chart on this. I'm not --1 know you remember these things, but I think it's important to kind of point them out. One of the phrases that I thought was interesting is what she said to herself.
"Well, you think to yourself, okay, I'll have this cigarette but I won't have another one till later. Well, your whole being says I want a cigarette." He said that was in the testimony.
Next slide.
She tried to cut back, she went through hypnosis, patches. "I quit every morning, and you would go to bed and say to yourself I'll quit tomorrow, but again you began smoking."
Next slide.
She smoked one and a half to two packs, that’s equivalent to five to seven hours per day spent smoking. Can you imagine that, five to seven hours
a day being exposed to a chemical, and we're going to talk about the chemicals in the cigarette, for 48 years. And they say she's not addicted and they say that didn't have any effect on her health.
There was no evidence to support six, but you only needed three of the criteria, and she met I think six of them.
The seventh criteria is that continued using in spite of dangerous health consequences. Well, you saw the records. She had a cough and she continued to smoke. The doctors told her stop smoking while you have this cough, but she smoked. That's classic criteria for number seven.
Next slide.
So in summary, I don't think it's a close question at all, but I've told you, I'm prejudiced. That's a decision for you to make. If Mrs. Koballa is not addicted, 48 years of one and a half to two packs a day, multiple attempts, twice hypnosis, needles with acupuncture, patches, if she is not addicted, and cigarettes are addictive, and the DSM says they're -- 80 percent of smokers are addicted, who is?
Next slide.
This is Dr. Thompson. And the reason I
brought this piece out is because there was some evidence or some discussion that if somebody stopped, that means they're not addicted. So I asked him, this is Dr. Thompson:
"And you will further agree with me that addicts eveiy day stop?
"They do.
"And they go into short-term remission?
"Yes.
"And long-term remission?
"Yes.
"And that includes cigarette addicts and nicotine addicts — or nicotine addicts?
"That includes those individuals.
"So the fact that someone stops doesn't mean they're not an addict?
"That is true."
Next slide, please.
I'm not going to go through the Fagerstrom test, but she scored six, and we went through all those facts before, but I don't want to belabor those too much, she scored nine out of it, and she only needed six, and that moved her to a severe nicotine dependent. That's not Dr. Frazier, that is the DSM-IV and Fagerstrom.
Next slide.
We have one more piece of evidence about addiction. I mean, there's a lot of evidence, I didn't go through it all, but one more significant piece of evidence.
In 1992 you heard Dr. Sia, who was one of her treating physicians, he diagnosed her as nicotine or cigarette addicted. This is a 1992 medical record. This is before her cancer. This is before anything. He says she is addicted.
So you have a clinical professional addiction board certified person clearly says that she is addicted. You have her treating physician before any health issues say that she is addicted.
Let's go to the next slide.
I don't think there's any doubt that Ms. Koballa is addicted. I don't think — I don't think the evidence is close. I think she is addicted.
So the next question you have to ask, did this addiction to cigarettes cause her lung cancer and her C.O.P.D.? Well, we heard from two pulmonologists, Dr. Bums and Dr. Klein.
And once again, I just kind of pulled out, because you don't know a lot when somebody sits
down there, but this is from their resumes and other things, this is what Dr. Bums' qualifications are, and it's not all of them. And I didn't put all of Dr. Klein's. But what I tried to do is put their publications and their things dealing with this case. And this is what I found.
Next slide.
Dr. Bums told you that these chemicals are in cigarette smoke. And by the way, did you hear any witness say they were not? This is pretty much uncontested. D.D.T., benzene, all of these different cancer-causing agents, all these things that destroy lung tissue are in cigarettes.
If they weren't, you can bet your bottom dollar those folks would have had somebody up here saying, no, here's what's in them. But you didn't hear anything. Every one of these cancer-causing elements were in the cigarettes that Ms. Koballa smoked.
Next slide, please.
Another factor is children start smoking. Why is that important? They become addicted. I think this says 92 1/2 or 90 - 92.9 percent of all people who began smoking are teens. That's Dr. Burns' testimony.
Dr. Bums also said another thing. Remember I talked about dose? I gave you the dose, the number of cigarettes, we call them pack-years. If she smoked two packs a day and it was for 45 years, even though it's 48, I'll do it easy on my math, that equals 70. I mean, excuse me, equals 90, two times 45. If it's one and a half, you downgrade the multiplying factor. That's what pack-years are.
But the interesting thing that Dr. Bums said is that the more duration of smoking, and Ms.
Koballa smoked about 49 — 48 years, there is a direct relationship to the relative risk of contracting lung cancer.
It is not guesswork. This is science. This is what — this is what's proven by both the government as well as the learned papers.
Next slide.
What else did Dr. Bums say? He was asked, "Doctor, what approximate percentage of lung cancer is attributed to smoking cigarettes?
"85 to 90 percent of all lung cancers that occur in the United States is caused by cigarette smoking."
But they want you to believe that her lung
cancer fits into the 10 percent rather than the 90 percent.
Next slide.
"All right, Doctor, do you have an opinion within a reasonable medical degree" — "medical probability that as of November 1st, 1996" — "November 21st, 1996, Ms. Koballa had or had previously suffered from a disease or condition caused by smoking cigarettes?"
He said, "Yes, I do.
"What's the basis of that opinion, Doctor?
"That she had two diseases caused by cigarette smoking, one was chronic obstructive lung disease and the other is lung cancer. Both were caused by smoking cigarettes."
That's Dr. Bums. This is the guy who helped write the Surgeon General's report.
Next slide.
This is an interesting — she had adenocarcinoma, that's the type of lung cancer. And I don't think there is any dispute. I think all the doctors agree she had adenocarcinoma
"What percentage of adenocarcinoma is attributed to lung smoking" - "smoking cigarettes?"
"It varies with the time period, but approximately 80 percent."
Another strong statistic that that lung cancer was caused by her smoking.
Next slide.
There was a lot of talk about granulomas.
We're going to talk a little bit more about that.
He was asked, "And, Doctor, do you have an opinion whether the granulomas that were found in the lobe of her lung have any causative effect on her lung cancer?"
His answer, "I do."
"What is your opinion?
"My opinion is that this type of granuloma does not increase the risk of developing lung function.
"And specific to Ms. Koballa, did these granulomas have anything to do with her particular lung cancer?
"No, in my opinion, these granulomas had no" --
Do we have that other slide? If we don't, that's fine, we'll go on.
I'm trying -1 apologize for the herky-jerky, but I'm tiying to give you a recollection of the
evidence without giving you too much and inundating you. 7 know you've taken - you have a good opinion as to what happened, and I don't want to take any more time than I need to.
Here is another quote from him:
"And, Doctor, do you have an opinion whether the granulomas that were found in her lobe in the lung have a causative effect" —
Here it is, the same question. No wonder I had two. Here is the answer to that question. We asked about meat wrapper's.
"Doctor, do you have an opinion as to whether or not meat wrapper's asthma or irritation from meat-wrapping asthma" - "meat-wrapping fumes is recognized in the reliable medical literature as a" - "causing any permanent effect on those who have it?"
His answer is, "No, I'm not aware of any competent review body that has concluded that meat wrapper's asthma causes increased risk of either chronic lung disease or cancer."
Interesting point here. We've brought in Dr. Tuthill. You heard his testimony. Dr. Tuthill treated her for meat wrapper's asthma. There is no question that she had some irritation from meat
wrapper's asthma. Matter of fact, Ms. Koballa said that she is probably the one who first came up or told him of the phrase because it was being spread at work.
You didn't hear Dr. Tuthill tell you anything at all that meat wrapper's asthma causes lung disease. You didn't hear that. Why? Because it doesn't. Here is a guy who wrote papers on it.
You didn't hear him say anything about lung cancer. Why? Because it doesn't. It's just a way of diverting your attention.
Next slide.
You also heard information about, oh, the tumor is in a particular place, that means it's not lung cancer. Well, that's another diversion because we asked the doctor, "Doctor, the location of the tumor in Ms. Koballa's lung was in the right upper" -- "right" — "upper right lobe" — "right upper lobe?
"That's correct.
"Is the location of that tumor significant to you in your determination of its causation?
"No. Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer in all of the lobes of the lung, as most other causes of lung cancer, like asbestos and other causes of
lung cancer."
The location doesn't mean anything.
Next slide.
Now, you saw a list of all Ms. Koballa's so-called exposures. Y'all remember that list. I think they called them insults.
"Is there any medical evidence in Ms. Koballa's case to suggest that air pollution, coke emission, coal dust, coal mining dust, glue solvents, cleaning agents or other causes of either lung cancer or C.O.P.D.?"
His answer is, "No, there isn't."
I'm sony?
MS. THOMASON: You're running out of time.
MR. PANTAZIS: Now, this is Dr. Klein. What did Dr. Klein say about Ms. Koballa's condition?
"Do you have an opinion," this is their expert, "whether Mrs. Koballa's C.O.P.D. was caused by smoking?"
Answer: "I believe it wasn't."
Keep going.
"And would you” — "and how would you describe any" -- "did you notice any emphysema, or did you not look into that?
"I know Dr. Bennett talked about that. I
didn't particularly look into that.
"Okay, that's fine.
"Based on everything that you’ve seen, would Ms. Koballa's respiratory condition be different today had she never smoked?
"Smoking may have contributed to some of it, but basically, inherently, the answer would be not different."
So he disagrees. Why did I bring that up? I want you to see that he disagrees. But he doesn't give you any reason for his disagreeing.
Next.
He was pushed a little bit. "Would you agree with me that cigarette smoking can cause chronic bronchitis; correct?"
What did he say? "Yes, correct.
"And would you agree with me that cigarette smoking can cause emphysema; correct?
"Correct."
That's their doctor.
Next slide.
Let's go to the next slide.
"And, in fact, at your deposition -- you reviewed your deposition before testifying today, didn't you?
"At some point, yes.
"And at your deposition, you testified, I can say to you that cigarette smoking certainly contributed to her development — her development of obstructive airway disease; correct?"
His answer, "I would agree that cigarette smoking contributed to it, but I felt it was not substantial based on the reasons that I" —
So he agrees that it contributed, he disagrees to the amount.
And one other thing. When he said, after this question, "So it was part of the cause, but we just disagree on the degree of the impact it had; correct?"
And his answer was, "We disagree, and that's my professional opinion, I'm a physician."
Well, we heard from a lot of other physicians who disagree with his opinion.
Next slide.
We asked him, "Do you know whether Ms. Koballa had any lung scarring," you remember that, lung scarring caused cancer, "in the nature of granulomas to her lungs?
"Yes, I do. The x-rays showed that.
"And what would that -- and what would that --
how would that contribute to this?"
This is Dr. Klein. He says, "It doesn't."
"How would that contribute to her remodeling?
"It really doesn't play a role into lung remodeling."
That's what Dr. Klein said.
Now, they will talk about other things.
Next slide, please.
And I'm kind of moving through this a little quicker so that we don't run out of time.
We next brought -- Dr. Rubin came, and, of course, they brought Dr. Bennett. These are two pathologists. We think that Dr. Rubin is an exceptional pathologist, published many tobacco and other disease publications.
This man never published anything, he said he didn't have time.
Next.
We asked Dr. Rubin, "What percentage of adenocarcinomas of the lung were caused by cigarette smoking?"
His answer, "The general figure is about 85 percent."
There is no question lung cancer,
Ms. Koballa's lung cancer, adenocarcinoma, was
caused by cigarette smoking.
Next slide.
Okay. "Does it — can a calcified granuloma," again, that was one of the things they said, "cause adenocarcinoma of the lung?"
His answer, "Impossible.
"How about calcified granuloma, can it cause emphysema?
"Out of the question."
These are not things lawyers say, these are the - this is the evidence that came from the witness stand.
Now, this part, Dr. Rubin got up and showed you the slide of the cell he actually looked at in the photograph, and he was pointing to it and he says, "All of these areas we call emphysema, but most of these areas are very irregular, large areas where there is no cords, and that's -- this is characteristic of severe advanced emphysema. I mean, this is, again, a -- for a pathologist, this is not a subtle diagnosis."
He saw emphysema from the slides. He says it's not — he didn't use the term "slam dunk," that's something I would do, but it is absolutely emphysema.
Next slide.
He says again, he's pointing — he was pointing to the slide for you. "Can you see this in the big area here? This is emphysema, this whole area where there is no net there." That's his testimony.
"On the slides you looked at from Mrs. Koballa's surgeiy, did you see any evidence of asthma?
"No." He said, "Asthma would be" —
Now, you've got to remember, that slide was taken in 1996. She had been away from meat packer's asthma since 1975. So in 1996, that's a thing that they confuse. They want you to believe that she had meat packer's asthma in 1996. There is no evidence of that.
She didn't have any exposure and did not have any meat pack — meat wrapper's asthma, even under their theory, after 1975. It's repeated in the medical records because it's part of her history, not that they found she had current meat wrapper's asthma
Next slide.
"Doctor, does asthma cause lung cancer?
"There is no relationship between asthma and
any kind of cancer, including lung cancer.
"Is that equally true for specifically meat wrapper's asthma or occupational asthma?
"No type of asthma has any relationship to cancer. It's mostly just an allergic disease. I mean, there is no other types of asthma, like exercise asthma, some people get asthma from exercise, some people get it from cold air, but in most cases, it's allergic."
Next slide.
"Doctor, do these calcified granulomas that you saw on the slides, did they cause Ms. Koballa's C.O.P.D.?"
His answer, "Impossible.
"Did those calcified granulomas cause Ms. Koballa's lung cancer?
"They did not.
"Is there old tuberculosis on there that — did that cause Mrs. Koballa's C.O.P.D.?
"Never heard of it.
"If there was tuberculosis, did that cause Mrs. Koballa's lung cancer?"
The answer is "No."
By the way, there is no tuberculosis. There is a reference to somebody questioning that, but
there is no tuberculosis.
How about — that's okay, go to the next one.
Another one of the things they said was an irritant, the vinyl chloride. "Has vinyl chloride ever been known to cause any cancer of the lung?”
Answer: "None ever.
"Doctor, occupational exposure, did the occupational exposure cause Ms. Koballa's C.O.P.D.?"
Answer: "Did not."
"On the right side, I want to take you to histoplasmosis, pneumonia, adult onset asthma, viruses, pulmonary inflammation, coal mining dust. Did any of those cause Ms. Koballa's C.O.P.D.?
"They did not. I'm going -- I'm doing that only for brevity. I can give you a lecture on each one of those issues why it had nothing to do with her cancer, but for the sake of brevity, and what the judge wants, I suppose we're going to keep it very short.
"Doctor, do you have any opinion with a reasonable degree of medical probability as to the cause of Ms. Koballa's C.O.P.D. and emphysema?"
And what was his answer? "I do."
"And what is that opinion?
"I believe that lung cancer should be attributed to smoking.
"And as to the C.O.P.D.?
"In my opinion, it was long-term smoking."
I know I'm repeating it over and over, but the record is replete with one professional after another saying the same thing.
This is Dr. Bennett, I'm going to talk a little bit about him. Dr. Bennett looked at some original research we showed him that he had not seen before.
"Would you agree with me that any original research that's out there and talks about air pollution and insults to the lungs talks about it on a dose-related basis?"
And what did he say? "Most everything is dose related."
Why is that important? You only received one fact of a cause that has dose relation here, and that's cigarettes. Everything else is speculation.
THE COURT: Mr. Pantazis, you are over 45 minutes now.
MR. PANTAZIS: Okay, can I continue and --
THE COURT: Sure.
MR. PANTAZIS: — I will reserve whatever time
I have.
Let's go -- next slide.
Thank you, Your Honor.
Let's go ahead further. I don't -- since I am short on time. I talk too much. Big surprise.
Okay.
Dr. Bennett's an interesting guy.
Could you go back to that last one?
Dr. Bennett had previously testified in a case that he didn't believe that cigarette smoke caused any cancer. And that's what that last slide showed. And I think you heard him, he said, well, I've changed my mind now. That was a narrow definition. You might remember this.
"Do you recall testifying in response to a question, 'So you're one of the doctors who doesn't believe that it could be said that cigarettes cause lung cancer, aren't you?'
"And your answer was, 'Using the definition of being the cause of that cancer being the agent that caused those cells to become malignant and take off and grow and produce a malignancy, we see -- that is correct, that is right - is that right?"'
And his answer, "In that narrow definition, probably that's correct."
Today, of course, he says we recognize now it's still one of the highest risk factors.
Previously he indicated that he didn't even think it caused lung cancer. Today, he says that it develops lung cancer in 85 percent, which is consistent with what every other doctor says.
Next slide.
Let's go to the next one, since I'm running out of time.
Let's go to the next one, please. Well, let's leave it — that's fine.
Next slide, please.
The Court asked Dr. Bennett an interesting question, "The degree or macrophages or macrophages could not be tar from smoking?"
And what was his answer? "They could be in part."
In other words, he agreed that the macrophages could be in part, he just didn't know.
Dr. Rubin testified those macrophages, based on 45 - 48-year history of smoking two packs a day were from tar and nicotine and other products that you inhale through cigarettes.
Next.
Now, everybody you have heard so far has been
an expert paid for and brought in by one side or the other. We think the experts we brought you are from the finest facilities and schools and-published researchers. They're not people that just do this without thinking and without having a national reputation. You have to weigh the reputation of all the experts.
But one guy we brought in was a treating physician, that's Dr. Doig. He's the surgeon who removed the upper lobe and saved Ms. Koballa's life. And he diagnosed her with poorly differential — differentiated adenocarcinoma of the right lung and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
What did Dr. Doig say caused that cancer?
"All right, and of those hundred to 150 patients that you performed surgery on their lungs for cancer, what percentage were smokers?"
He said, "Almost all of them."
This is a guy that just came in here to testify because he's treated a patient.
We asked him, "Could you visualize when you were actually in her lung the presence of emphysema?
"Oh, yes."
Next one.
"Did you reach an opinion as to what caused of the cancer that you removed from her lungs?"
And there were some objections.
"And what is your opinion?
"I believe it is related to her smoking habit, if you will. Statistically, we know that in thoracic and vascular," and then there was an objection and it continued, "Well, based on thoracic and vascular experience, these are all the most common factors that lead to the development of lung cancer."
He was asked, "Do you have an opinion as to whether the respiratory bronchitis that was found had anything to do with her lung cancer?"
Answer: "No.
"Have you got an opinion as — it was not cause — not a cause?
"That is correct.
"And what about the calcified granulomas, do you have an opinion whether or not they had any role to play in causing cancer to the lungs?
"Unrelated to it.
"Unrelated to lung cancer?
"That is conect.
"Let me ask you this - about this, let me ask you about the emphysema. Do you have an opinion whether or not the respiratory bronchitis and anything else had to do with causing the emphysema, which is part of the C.O.P.D.?
"They will not be, like, the cause, but they will be part of the whole problem.
"Part of the whole picture?"
Answer: "Yes."
Now, that is an independent guy who just came in here to testify to what he saw, but not the cause, not the primary cause. He blames the primary cause, the substantial cause is cigarette smoking.
"And did I ask you what the primary cause of emphysema was? I asked you about the cancer, maybe I forgot to ask you, do you have an opinion as to what the primary cause?
"Was long-term cigarette smoking.
"Do you have an opinion as to whether the calcified granulomas that you found were cause or causes of emphysema?
"I don't believe so. I think they were a coincidence.
"Do you think they played -- had any role to
play at all?
"None."
This is Dr. Doig.
Let's go to the next one.
"Do you have an opinion" — I skipped over it, out of brevity, but it basically asked, "Do you have an opinion about what caused her lung cancer, what caused her C.O.P.D.?"
And he said, "Yeah, cigarette smoking.
"Do you have an opinion what caused lung cancer?
"The same thing."
I apologize for jumping, but I don't want to run out of time.
Could we go to --
THE COURT: Mr. Pantazis, you have about eight minutes left.
MR. PANTAZIS: Thank you.
One of the things that they -- this is their slide they brought up, and it was the test. And if you'll notice, the important thing is here is after 1996, her test, with the exception of one exception, and this is the pulmonary lung, kind of steadied out. Meaning her emphysema has gotten worse, but not bad.
What has happened since 1996 till today? She had all those other exposures. There is one exposure that was removed.
Next slide.
The one exposure that was removed was cigarette smoking.
We put this timeline, and I think it's an important thing. The coal dust and coke ovens, even though there was no evidence, no evidence of how much exposure, or even that she got exposure, any of that occurred the first seven years of her life.
The meat wrapper's asthma and granulomas, the granulomas were detected in 1963. That's when they were found. So that's when they occurred.
Meat wrapper's asthma, she experienced any kind of occupational asthma from '63 to '75. Everybody has agreed to that. It's that time frame.
She began smoking in 1948. Smoked for 48 years. Now, it's important that in 1975, no more exposures of all these insults they talk about.
What is the only exposure that continued? 21 more years of smoking two packs a day. That's in 1975 to 1996. All of this is in the past, even if you
believe it contributed in any form.
What happened in 1996? This is another telling thing. Once she was scared straight, as Dr. Frazier said, she stopped smoking. Said 14 years later, no cancer. Why? Because there's no smoking. No increase or loss of pulmonary junction based on their test. Why? Because she stopped smoking.
Next slide.
I'm going to sit down now because I'm running out of time and I have talked too much. I'm going to ask you to listen to all of the evidence that you've -- remember all the evidence, the exhibits.
This case is very simple. Ms. Koballa is addicted to cigarettes, there is no question about it. If she's not addicted, try to picture somebody who is. There has been no evidence of any significant cause except for cigarettes. 48 years of smoking one and a half to two packs a day.
That's the only dose related, that's the only evidence.
And as the Court instructed you, you can find that as the sole cause or a contributing cause.
You can find that other things contributed. The question is, for you to answer, and we believe you
will, that Ms. Koballa is addicted, that her addiction to cigarettes caused her C.O.P.D., and have caused her lung disease, cancer.
Thank you, Your Honor.



MR. PANTAZIS: Yes, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
I've been listening to this speech and I heard the word "red herring." You want to hear about a red herring and what is a red herring? Mr. Reid said, well, they could have brought in Dr. Aneja.
Both parties could have brought in Dr. Aneja.
You know why Dr. Aneja didn't come here? Because we didn't need him here. All the records, all the information was in. That kind of statement leaves the impression that something is being hidden.
Ask yourself, if Dr. Aneja had something to say that was important to either side, they could have called him. But they didn't. That's the kind of games that some people play. We haven't played that.
When I --1 ran out of time. But I was going
through every bit of evidence. And I didn't ask you to take my interpretation, I asked you to look at what these witnesses said, and every one of them, every one of them that I pointed to and read that testimony, that Ms. Koballa was addicted, that Ms. Koballa's addiction to cigarettes caused her cancer and is a cause that either contributed significantly with other factors, substantially with other factors, or caused it singularly. And that's the same is true with C.O.P.D. and emphysema.
I didn't just get up here and speak, I showed it to you in the record. You didn't see that from this man.
I tell you something else he said, he said Dr.
Frazier had a bunch of things that Ms. Koballa never testified.
Dr. Frazier and Dr. Thomas both interviewed, and that's part of the evidence, they interviewed Ms. Koballa, they talked to her, they put the record up, and if you remember, I did it, almost bored you, where we walked through the DSM-IV and I had facts and I got Dr. Thompson to say those are the same facts that you saw, and he said yes.
Why did I do that? Because that is evidence.
And he says that's not evidence. That's wrong. That is evidence. All of those facts were testified to or talked to by Ms. Koballa in both of the professional evaluations of whether she was addicted, in both times, and obviously, she clearly was addicted.
You know the other thing, if Ms. Koballa is not addicted, if she is not one of the 80 percent of people that are addicted to cigarettes, and the Court says cigarettes are addictive, then who is? You didn't see them put on any evidence of that.
They talk about Dr. Bums -- and I'm running because I'm running out of time. They talk about Dr. Bums and Dr. Rubin about not having all the records. They had all the records they wanted. They saw — they came and got more records. Just because they don't look at 3,000 pages of records doesn't mean their testimony is not credible.
These doctors looked at the records of highly-professional people. They had every record at their accessibility. And that question was asked, "Did you need a record, did you have any record that wasn't provided?"
"No."
They said that we should have prepared and
been ready for meat wrapper's asthma Well, do you know that Dr. Klein, their witness, because this case has been pending for years, Dr. Klein, their expert on meat wrapper's asthma, got into this case five months ago.
That's just red herring stuff.
When I look at this case, it reminds me of when I go camping with my child, set up a campsite, have a tent, have food, we go away, we come back, and all of sudden, the tent is tom up, the food is ripped open. There is some little birds and squirrels over here, and on this side, there's a bear, and the bear has a sign that says, "Warning,
I tear up campsites."
These guys, red herring, want you to look at the squirrels and the birds and ignore the facts of 48 years -- of 48 years of smoking, and ignore the fact --
If I could see the timelines.
How much time do I have, Your Honor?
THE COURT: About 30 seconds.
MR PANTAZIS: They ignore the fact that the last 21 years before —
MR. CORR: It's not on. It's not on the switch.
MR. PANTAZIS: They ignore the fact that the only exposure she had 21 years before being diagnosed with C.O.P.D. or cancer was cigarettes. All of these others, if they even contribute, they were in the past. The last 21 years beforehand, no exposures. Now, isn't that significant? After she stopped, no more cancer, and a steady level of C.O.P.D.
I'm out of time. Ms. Koballa is addicted to nicotine, cigarettes, and as a result of that addiction, C.O. -- that addiction, that nicotine addiction played a substantial role in causing her C.O.P.D. and her lung cancer, and we ask you to find in her favor. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Your Honor.
