MR. MAGUIRE: May it please the Court, Counsel.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURY PANEL: Good morning.
MR. MAGUIRE: On behalf of myself and Lorillard and everybody here, I would first like to thank for paying such close attention to the evidence, to Ms. Tedder and to me and to all of our colleagues.
I'm going to sum up the evidence for the Defendants and talk a little bit about Lorillard.
And after I'm done, you're going to hear from my colleagues: Jeff Beach, Ann St. Peter-Griffith, and Bob McCarter. The other Defendants have an additional argument. You'll hear about that from Jeff Beach and my other colleagues.
But I want to tell you on behalf of all of the counsel for all of the Defendants we really want to thank you and appreciate your patience and care and attention that you've given to the evidence in this case.
I said in my opening that the most important evidence in this case will be the testimony that you hear from Vivian Kemp and the control that she had over her smoking decisions.
The plaintiff, Mr. LaMotte, had the burden of proving that Ms. Kemp was addicted to cigarettes, and that her addiction was so powerful that it took away her control and her choice, and that Lorillard and the other Defendants took deprived her of her control and her choice over her smoking decisions. That was his burden. So it was no wonder that you had to wait three weeks, almost until the end of the Plaintiff's case, before the Plaintiff finally presented to you the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp.
Because when you saw that testimony and heard that testimony, you heard that Ms. Kemp herself said she had all of the information that she needed to know to make her decisions. She acknowledged knowing about the danger of smoking before she
switched to Kent in the early 1950s. She testified that she didn't need to be told back then that smoking could be difficult to quit. She knew that.
She was able to quit whenever she chose. She did quit. When she chose to quit, she did.
Ms. Kemp enjoyed smoking. She told her friends she enjoyed smoking. She had no desire to quit.
She was not a hopelessly addicted smoker who tries and fails and tries and fails and keeps trying and is unable to quit.
For most of her life, Ms. Kemp didn't choose to try. She chose to smoke. She enjoyed it. She told her friends she enjoyed it. She told her family it was her decision to smoke. She also told them she could quit any time she want to, any time she chose.
The only evidence in this case that is more powerful, more compelling than the words of Ms. Kemp are her actions. One vivid example of the way she made her decisions and the smoking decisions she made throughout her life, knowing that smoking was dangerous and knowing that it could be difficult to quit, was that day when she visited her friends at the beach.
Why do I keep coming back to that day? Well, think about it. Think about the timing. It's in
the 1990s. Ms. Kemp was in her 60s, no teen-ager. It's at least two years or more since she had quit for good in 1994. She makes a decision to visit her friends at the beach. On her way, she buys a pack of cigarettes. She meets them, she opens the pack, and she smokes a couple of cigarettes with her friends at the beach that day.
That wasn't because Lorillard or anyone else misled her. She knew that smoking was bad for her. At that stage, she'd been diagnosed with severe COPD. Why did she choose to smoke? It wasn't because she didn't know that smoking could be tough to quit. She testified she didn't need to be told that back in the 1940s. It certainly wasn't because Ms. Kemp was unable to quit. By the time she went that day to the beach, she'd quit. She'd stopped smoking more than two years before.
Knowing all of the dangers, Ms. Kemp, nonetheless, chose to have a couple cigarettes with her friends that day at the beach. That's what she wanted to do. That was her decision. It wasn't Lorillard's decision. It wasn't the decision of any defendant. It was Ms. Kemp's decision.
Now, her friends were horrified, as you would expect. They thought that if she has a couple
cigarettes, she's just going to keep having the next cigarette and the next cigarette and she's going to be back smoking like she'd never stopped. But that didn't happen.
That is not the case of an addicted smoker. At the end of the day, Ms. Kemp gave the pack of cigarettes and left it with her friends. She was done. She never smoked again. Eighteen years she was quit. Ms. Kemp was in control.
So that's why I keep coming back to that day at the beach. It shows -- it shows you something about Ms. Kemp. It shows that she made her decisions for herself every day of her life. That day shows how Mr. LaMotte could never carry his burden of proof in this case. Than day, like every other day, Ms. Kemp chose to smoke throughout her smoking life. She knew everything she needed to know about the danger, about the addictiveness of smoking. She was in control and she chose to smoke.
Ms. Kemp was always in control. She chose not to smoke in her kids' homes, in her own home, at least in front of Mr. Hardy, in her and Mr. Kemp's home, for the whole three-week trip they took out to California in the RV, for her three-week trip to Europe with her sister, Jane. Sometimes the entire
working day when she worked at Gayfers. Sometimes for five days straight when she was working as an elementary substitute teacher at the school.
So let's take that evidence and walk through it and show how that evidence can help you in filling out the jury verdict form.
The first question that you will have on the jury verdict form is: Was Vivian Kemp addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?
Now, Ms. Kemp said many times during her deposition that she was addicted. If that answered the question, we wouldn't need a jury. We'd all go home. But we do. We need you to judge the evidence, the evidence of whether Ms. Kemp was addicted or whether, in fact, she was in control of her smoking.
One of Ms. Kemp's doctors, Dr. Cleveland, came here to testify. And Plaintiff read the depositions of Drs. Belk and Irvin. But none of her doctors ever diagnosed Ms. Kemp as addicted. All three doctors admitted they're not trained to do that.
And they thought pretty much everyone who smokes is addicted.
Mr. LaMotte has the burden of proof and he has to prove addiction. Mr. LaMotte did not even
attempt to prove addiction under any recognized standards for diagnosing addiction.
On Monday, you heard from Dr. Dosovitz. You heard that he is a board-certified psychiatrist. He treats patients. That's what he does. He uses the DSM-IV, and he described the gold standard for clinical diagnosis of addiction. Dr. Dosovitz is the only expert here who examined Ms. Kemp for addiction.
Dr. Burns never met Ms. Kemp. He testified a lot about people like Ms. Kemp. He even testified about Vivian, but he never met her, never talked to her, not even a phone call.
Dr. Cummings, he testified that Ms. Kemp was too ill to meet with him. That's what he said.
Again, not even a phone call.
Dr. Dosovitz did meet with Ms. Kemp. He examined her. He made the clinical diagnosis, and you heard him testify that she was not addicted.
She was able to quit smoking, quit permanently, and without much difficulty.
Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings don't use the gold standard. They don't use DSM. And why would they? Dr. Burns has a business, for over 30 years, testifying about how smokers are addicted.
Dr. Cummings has testified in about 100 cases and every single time he's found that the smoker is addicted, but even Dr. Cummings had to admit that in all of the cases in which he's testified about, of all of the smokers that he's ever testified about, there isn't a one that even he would admit was less dependent than Ms. Kemp.
Dr. Cummings told you that he has presented the heaviness of smoking index, and the scoring system under that index in every single case that he has testified in, in all of those cases, in Florida and everywhere else in the country, in every single case, on his direct examination, he has come to court and said the smoker is addicted and here is why, it's because of this test, the heaviness of smoking index and here is how the person scores.
Every single jury, every single case, everywhere in the country except one. This jury.
The only jury that he didn't present the index to on his direct examination, the only jury he didn't tell about the scoring system.
Why do you think you were the only jury that he didn't do that for? It's because his test shows that Ms. Kemp was not addicted. She scores pretty much the same as somebody who's never smoked on his
own test.
Do you remember what happened? Dr. Cummings tried to score Ms. Kemp two or three on the first question, which is: How quickly after you wake up do you light up a cigarette? So three meant she had to be smoking within five minutes from getting up, and two meant she had to be smoking within an hour. That's what Dr. Cummings tried to do.
But Dr. Cummings recognized there was a problem with that, and the problem with that was this powerful evidence in the case: Ms. Kemp's testimony. Ms. Kemp testified that throughout her life, from the 1950s on, she would have her first cigarette after breakfast. Dr. Cummings agreed that if Ms. Kemp had her first cigarette after breakfast, then she would get zero on the first question.
We may have a slide.
I asked Dr. Cummings, if the jury concludes that Ms. Kemp smoked her first cigarette an hour or more after waking up, then she would get a zero on this score, and he agreed.
Now, Ms. Kemp's children told you that they remembered their mother smoking at breakfast. They all agreed that while they may have gotten up within only 15 minutes or so, they didn't know exactly when
Ms. Kemp got up. They didn't know how long she'd been up before they awoke or what she'd been doing.
Ms. Kemp told you the facts. She told you when she got up, what she did, and when she had her first cigarette. So why don't we look at the testimony that Ms. Kemp gave where she was asked about each period in her life, in each of the different places that she lived, and what her daily routine was, and, specifically, when she had her first cigarette of the day.
(Whereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms.
Kemp was played.)
Q When you got up in the morning, would you have a cigarette?
A No.
Q No?
A It would be after we ate.
Q After you had breakfast? Yes?
A Yes. As far as I can remember, my routine at home was breakfast. As the children got older, they went to kindergarten and school. When they'd leave, I'd have a cigarette after breakfast and get them off to school at that time. And I even smoked after breakfast, even when they were home.
Q What do you do when you get up then? Or they
wake you up, say, at 6:00 in the morning, what happens next?
A Fix breakfast, get the children.
Q Okay. And then?
A Start my routine.
Q All right. When would you have the cigarette? After breakfast?
A After breakfast.
Q All right. But can you tell me about what your routine was like now that the kids are a little older and a little more independent? You got up, you had breakfast. Is that still the case?
A	Yes.
Q	You still made them breakfast?
A	Yes.
Q	When would you have your cigarette?
A	After they left.
Q	After they left to school?
A	Yes.
Q	What time was that, approximately?
A	They had to be at school probably at 8:00. I
really don't recall the exact time.
Q What time were you typically getting up in 1964?
A 6:30.
Q What was your routine when you were married to Mr. Kemp? So you'd get up, you'd go have breakfast?
A Yes.
Q What would you do next?
A I'd probably have a cigarette, but I never smoked in the house.
Q Okay.
A Out of respect. Because he had quit.
Q Can you tell me when during the day you might have a cigarette?
A When I got up in the morning.
Q After breakfast?
A Right. Probably between now and the time I went to work, which would have been 10:00, I would probably have two.
Q What was your -- what time would you start work as a teacher's aide?
A 8:00.
Q Until?
A 2:30, 3:00.
Q All right. What was your routine? You'd get up in the morning at what time?
A Oh, about 6:30.
Q Is it kind of the same thing we'd talked about, you'd have breakfast and then a cigarette?
A	Yes.
Q	You're not -- say, in a typical day where
you're	not substituting in Episcopal day school, is it
fair to	say you'd get up any time between 6 and 9?
A	Yes.
Q	I don't want you to just agree with me.
A	6 and 9 sound about right. Yes.
Q	Same thing, you'd have breakfast?
A	Yes.
Q	And you may or may not have a cigarette?
A	Right. Probably had one after breakfast.
Q	All right.
(Whereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: If you accept that testimony, then under Dr. Cummings' system, you would score zero for the first question. Ms. Kemp was getting up at 6:30. She was having a cigarette around 8:00.
That would be a zero.
The second question is: How many cigarettes a day do you smoke? Dr. Cummings gave Ms. Kemp a one because he said it was between a half a pack and a pack a day. And if you find that that's right, you'll agree with Dr. Cummings and you give a one here, and a zero and one would be a total of one.
One gets you to your lowest score on this index.
You can't go any lower than that.
Now, you may recall that each of the times on the first day of her deposition where Ms. Kemp was asked about her smoking routine, she talked about breakfast. She was also asked how much she smoked. Every single time she said it was a half a pack per
day.
Every single instance, every occasion in her life, Ms. Kemp was asked about, during the first day of her deposition, first marriage, kids growing up a little bit more, second marriage, after that, it was always half a pack a day. It wasn't until the second day of her deposition that Ms. Kemp came back and said she'd had a realization, and it was one pack, one pack a day. But she couldn't explain that. She couldn't explain where or how that fit into her routine. All of her medical records from the 1990s say a half a pack per day.
If you were to find that Ms. Kemp's testimony, that she smoked a half a pack a day throughout her life is correct, then you would award a zero. So if you accept Dr. Cummings, you might go with one, or if you accept Ms. Kemp's testimony for the first day of her deposition, you would give her a zero.
Either way, it results in either a one or a zero.
Either way you have the same result. You have the very lowest dependence on the scale. That is the same score that you would get if Ms. Kemp had never smoked at all.
Remember I asked Dr. Cummings, what if Ms. Kemp had refused that first cigarette. So she's in the bedroom, her sister's friend is there, and her sister's friend offers her the cigarette. Ms. Kemp said, no, I don't want it. If the rest of her life she had never ever smoked a single cigarette, then how would you score her on this index? You would give her a zero here, give her a zero here, total would be zero and you would end up exactly the same place, the lowest dependence on this index.
That's why Dr. Cummings did not present the heaviness of smoking index to you or the scoring system. Because when you apply that to Ms. Kemp, the result is the same as someone who has never smoked a single cigarette.
I do give Dr. Cummings credit for one thing, and that is admitting that a half a pack a day is generally not enough nicotine to sustain addiction.
You may recall we asked him about that. The level of smoking that Ms. Kemp testified about is just not
enough nicotine in a half a pack. Dr. Cummings admitted that.
Dr. Burns admitted pretty much the same thing. He testified about how critical is the time to first cigarette on waking up. The first question. The whole point is somebody who's really addicted, they really need the nicotine. So when they wake up in the morning after hours of not smoking, they really need a cigarette right away. Dr. Burns admitted that. He said somebody who's dependent, somebody who's really addicted, they will typically seek a dose of nicotine within 30 minutes after waking up because their nicotine levels drop substantially overnight. You might remember what he said, five minutes, 10 minutes, certainly within 30 minutes. I reminded him, five minutes, 10 minutes, certainly within 30 minutes and he agreed.
Dr. Burns also acknowledged that was not Ms. Kemp. He acknowledged that Ms. Kemp was described as having her first cigarette well after 30 minutes.
Now, you can use your common sense here.
Dr. Cummings acknowledged hallmarks of addicted smokers. First step, smoking the first cigarette right after waking up. That's not Ms. Kemp.
Smoking all day, classic chain smoker, that's not Ms. Kemp. She could go for hours, sometimes an entire working day, or even at the elementary school, five days straight without smoking.
Failing to quit, trying, trying again. Talking to friends about the problem. Talking to family. Getting cessation aids. Going for help. Trying everything you can to quit and failing. That wasn't Ms. Kemp. She wasn't trying. When she decided to quit, she did. She could stop smoking for three weeks on the trip to California. When she decided to stop permanently, she did, for 18 years. The whole rest of her life.
Some people are unable to quit even after they've been diagnosed with the disease. That wasn't Ms. Kemp. She put the cigarettes down. She quit cold turkey, and for the rest of her life, for 18 years, she didn't smoke. Dr. Burns admitted she was consistently absent after she decided to quit smoking.
An addicted smoker can relapse. They're off, given up. Then they get cravings, have a cigarette. Have another cigarette. And they're right back doing it again, just like her friends at the beach were afraid would happen with Ms. Kemp. That didn't
happen to Ms. Kemp. When she put the cigarettes down, she was done. She could go have a cigarette at the beach and not relapse. She gave the pack back to her friends, and Dr. Burns admitted she did not relapse. She remained consistently abstinent.
She was in control.
So if you think of what it means to be an addicted smoker, you think of the hallmarks of what we all know and understand about an addicted smoker, it wasn't Ms. Kemp. Ms. Kemp was not that smoker.
As Dr. Dosovitz explained, Ms. Kemp was able to control her smoking and to stop smoking without much difficulty. She didn't meet the DSM-IV criteria because she was able to control her smoking. She chose when she wanted to smoke and she chose when she didn't want to smoke, so the answer to Question 1 is no.
Ms. Kemp was not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. If you answer that question no, then you're done. You don't need to fill out the rest of the form. You sign it, you date it, your duty is done.
If you decide that Ms. Kemp was addicted, then you go on to the next question, which is Question 2.
So let me talk about that. Question 2 is: Was
addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of Vivian Kemp's COPD or death?
This is the why question, or as my colleague,
Jeff Beach, noted the big why question. It's not was I killed by a bus when I crossed the street?
It's why. How did it happen? Did I ignore the oncoming traffic? Did I ignore the lights? Did I ignore the warnings? That's the why question. It cuts to the heart of the case. It cuts to the matter of personal choice.
Now, you will hear the Plaintiff argue about concurrent and contributing cause. You'll be instructed on that. And you will hear that concurrent cause and contributing cause use the same word as for legal cause. An addiction must contribute substantially to producing COPD and death.
The answer to Question 2 is no. To be a legal cause of Ms. Kemp's death, addiction had to directly produce or contribute substantially to producing Ms. Kemp's death, so it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction to cigarettes, the death would not have occurred. The Plaintiff did not bear the burden of proving that. Ms. Kemp didn't smoke because of an addiction. She could have quit at any
time. Ms. Kemp didn't want to quit. She chose to smoke. She wanted to smoke. She enjoyed smoking.
Dr. Burns explained to you what it means when an addiction takes over someone's life and they lose control. You have a compulsive need for the next dose of nicotine. You are jumping out of your skin without a cigarette. You have to bathe those receptors with nicotine, just to feel better.
Dr. Cummings described how a smoker is compulsive drug seeking. He said you lose control.
It was Plaintiff's burden to prove that here.
That's not the Plaintiff's mother-in-law. That wasn't Ms. Kemp. Ms. Kemp could have stopped at any time. She always had the fortitude, the personality, the strength and will to be able to stop any time she chose, just like she said.
Let's review that part of her testimony.
(Whereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q Is it fair to say that whatever fortitude you found when you quit for good, that's certainly something you had in you many years before you quit?
A Yes.
Q I mean, that's part of your character, isn't
it?
A Yes.
Q That's your personality?
A Yes.
(Whereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: For most of her life, Ms. Kemp simply didn't want to quit. In the 1950s, Ms. Kemp testified she didn't want to quit back then. From the 1960s, there's no evidence Ms. Kemp tried to quit, even a single time in the entire decade of the 1960s or the 1970s. Ms. Kemp testified she couldn't even say if she wanted to quit in the 1970s.
This is a free country. Anyone is entitled to engage in any legal conduct, behavior, even risky behavior that they choose to do so, but that is their decision, and with it comes consequences.
Ms. Kemp didn't try to quit because she wanted to smoke. That was her decision.
As her son, Robert Hardy, explained, Ms. Kemp enjoyed smoking. She enjoyed smoking with friends like that day at the beach. She enjoyed smoking, playing cards, and just being social. Her son started to ask her to quit when he was 12 years old. That was in 1970. Remember her response? He said it was pretty much tough-o luck-o. Ms. Kemp told
her son it was her choice to smoke. Ms. Kemp did what she wanted to do. She told him that. She told him it was her choice. She told him she was an adult, and she was going to smoke. That's what Ms. Kemp told her son.
From 1947 or 1948 through her second marriage, for 30 years, there's no evidence that Ms. Kemp tried to stop smoking.
Now, Dr. Cummings tried to help the Plaintiff by saying that Ms. Kemp had a campaign to stop smoking over decades. But he had to admit that Ms. Kemp did not remember trying to quit any time, any time. Not even a single time before she married Mr. Kemp. That's 30 years without trying to quit.
Dr. Cummings claimed that Ms. Kemp tried to quit in 1964, but that's not what Ms. Kemp said.
All she said was she tried to smoke less, not that she tried to stop smoking. And she couldn't even remember if that was her decision or that was the influence of her husband, who was on her back.
Her son told you there was never any indication that she intended to quit. During her second marriage to Mr. Kemp, her sister Jane asked Ms. Kemp to quit. Again, she didn't want to. But she did tell her sister that she could stop smoking whenever
she chose.
And in 1981, just around the time of this conversation when she told her sister, I can quit whenever I choose, she showed that she could. She went on the RV tip with Mr. Kemp. She went out to California. Three weeks without a single cigarette.
Do you remember what Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns said? After two or three days all of the nicotine would have left her body. Ground zero, Dr. Cummings told you, is around three or four days after stopping smoking. So she wouldn't even have made it to Louisiana and she would have hit, if she were an addicted smoker, she would have hit ground zero.
That's when the worst of the withdrawal, the worst of the cravings would have kicked in for an addicted smoker.
But Ms. Kemp didn't complain of any withdrawal, any difficulty. Didn't even complain about cravings.
She was busy. Remember her testimony. She said she was busy. Busy driving. Or even worse, being driven 4,000 miles. Remember, I was kind of kidding around with Dr. Burns? I said driving through Louisiana and New Mexico and Arizona and Texas. He said, well, they're very interesting
places to go to. You see the Grand Canyon, the highway can be very scenic and interesting. But even he acknowledged that driving through Texas could be a little dull and hard to stay busy driving through Texas. But Ms. Kemp didn't have any problems or cravings that whole trip. California and back, 4,000 miles. All those rest stops.
Getting a breath of fresh air. Walking around. Not a single cigarette.
Dr. Cummings said she relapsed when she got back from the trip to California and went on a trip the next day to New Orleans. She traveled this time without Mr. Kemp, and she had a pack on the trip to New Orleans and back.
Dr. Burns acknowledged that an addicted smoker, we're talking about an addicted smoker who's been trying and has succeeded for three weeks in quitting and then has a relapse, that that could be devastating. At least -- he said at least disappointing.
Again, that's not Ms. Kemp. Remember Ms. Kemp's testimony? She actually started to say that she was disappointed that she took up smoking again on the trip to New Orleans and then she corrected herself. She said, no, I don't remember
being disappointed.
The reason Ms. Kemp wasn't disappointed that she went back to smoking again is because that's what she wanted to do. She enjoyed smoking. She chose to go back to smoking.
What about all the other RV trips? Mr. Kemp loved his RV. He lived in his RV. They went to Tennessee. They went out to see his folks in Oklahoma. They went to Texas. Ms. Kemp didn't smoke in the RV. And the cravings apparently were not a problem, even driving to Texas.
Ms. Kemp was able to stop smoking whenever she chose, just like she told her sister, Jane. She told Jane she could stop at any time because she knew it. She could. She knew she was in control of her smoking. She knew she could stop whenever she chose.
Like when she went to Europe with Jane, for three weeks, they went to France and to Italy. That was also three weeks. No cigarette after breakfast, no cigarettes at all, three weeks. And no complaints, no withdrawal, no problems with cravings. Apparently no difficulty to complain about at all.
Did you notice in all her years of smoking
there was never a time when Ms. Kemp asked her family for help in quitting? Because she didn't want help. She didn't want to quit.
None of her daughters suggested to Ms. Kemp that she quit smoking or that she seek assistance to quit. Elizabeth LaMotte is a nurse, who told you that while she was in nursing school in the early 1970s, she witnessed an autopsy which showed the lungs of a smoker and they were covered with a black tar substance. She told all her patients who were smokers about the black tarry lung, but she didn't tell her mother. Elizabeth LaMotte never took her mom to the doctor to seek assistance for quitting and she never asked her husband, a pharmacist,
Mr. LaMotte, to discuss quitting aids with Ms. Kemp.
Not one of Ms. Kemp's children testified that she ever said she wanted to stop smoking. The only testimony you heard was that she told her son she didn't want to stop. She wanted to smoke. It was her choice.
And when Ms. Kemp finally made a different choice and decided to quit, she did. She quit cold turkey. After a day or so of feeling antsy, she was done. She said the antsiness lasted, you may remember, probably a day or two. Why don't we see
if we can pull up that testimony.
(Whereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q At some point in time went you put the cigarettes down and you quit for good -- well, scratch that.
How did you feel when you put the cigarettes down and you quit for good, initially?
A Antsy.
Q Okay.
A Anxiety. Irritable. And in other words, being a bitch. I'm good at that.
Q How long did that last, what you just described?
A Probably a day or two.
(Whereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: It was in 1994 when Ms. Kemp quit for good. She stayed off of cigarettes for 18 years, and that was great, but there was nothing, nothing that prevented her from making that same decision earlier, in the 1980s, the 1970s, 1960s.
Any time she wanted, Ms. Kemp could have made that decision.
You heard the Plaintiff's experts, Dr. Burns
and Dr. Cummings, admit that even an addicted person can make a personal choice to quit or at least to try to quit. Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings both admitted that a smoker is responsible for trying to quit, or at least making an effort.
Remember Dr. Burns talked to you about the three questions in a pamphlet he wrote called "Smart Move"? Dr. Cummings told you that all three questions are about motivation. If you're not motivated, you're not going to quit. If somebody does not try to quit, they're not going to quit.
The individual smoker has to make the decision, has to decide to quit.
As Ms. Kemp said, it has to be within yourself.
It's up to you. For many, many years Ms. Kemp chose not to try. She chose to continue smoking.
While Ms. Kemp continued smoking, millions of smokers were trying to quit. Today, there are more successful quitters, former smokers who quit, than there are current smokers. In fact, 55 to 60 million Americans have quit smoking. According to Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings, virtually all of them were addicted. Yet, they quit. Most of them quit cold turkey. Ms. Kemp was one of those people who quit, and if she had only chosen to try earlier in
her life, we wouldn't be here.
Because Ms. Kemp was able to stop smoking when she wanted to, addiction is not a legal cause. The legal cause was Ms. Kemp's personal choice to keep smoking instead of trying to quit. Even Plaintiff's experts, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns, admitted the benefits of quitting smoking. It's called declining risk. You heard the same from Dr. Cleveland. It means if you stop smoking, you reduce your risk.
The earlier you stop, the more you reduce your risk. Dr. Burns testified that if Ms. Kemp had stopped smoking when she was 50, in 1981, the same time she told her sister Jane I could stop any time I want, she same time she took the RV trip to California, if she had stopped then, she would not have developed
COPD.
Even better, if Ms. Kemp had quit in 1964, when the Surgeon General told her to, and when her first husband quit and told her to quit, or in 1966, when the warnings went on the packs, when she told her sister she could quit at any time, she would have greatly reduced the risk. We wouldn't be here.
No one was stopping Ms. Kemp from quitting.
She testified it was up to her.
Remember when her son, Robert Hardy, told
Mr. Norton that his mother said she was an adult and she could make her own decision and it was her choice to smoke? That was her son's answer to Mr. Norton's question. That is the answer to the big why question. Mr. Norton, the Plaintiff's lawyer, asked his witness, Ms. Kemp's son, the big why question, and Ms. Kemp's son answered the why question. He told you in answer to Mr. Norton that it was her choice to smoke. He confirmed that on cross-examination. Ms. Kemp, his mother, did what she wanted to do with respect to her smoking. That it was her choice. She said she was an adult and she was going to smoke.
So the answer to the why question, the question on legal cause is no. And if you answer that question no, again, you are done. Sign and date the form and your duty is complete.
If you have answered those first two questions yes, then we get to talk about the statute of limitations and that comes up in Question 3.
So let's talk about that. Did Vivian Kemp have COPD before May 5, 1990? The answer to this question is yes.
Ms. Kemp's COPD didn't just happen when she walked into Dr. Cleveland's office in 1996. Every
one of the doctors on all sides who have testified here have acknowledged that COPD is a progressive disease and it takes years to become severe.
Dr. Cleveland left no doubt by 1996 it was severe.
Dr. Andrews showed how it takes at least 10 to 15 years, and usually much more, for COPD to become severe. Since Ms. Kemp had severe COPD in 1996, she certainly had COPD back in the 1980s. Even Dr. Burns admitted that he believed Ms. Kemp probably had COPD in January of 1990. That's in our trial transcript here at Page 4360. I asked Dr. Burns and he said: Is it possible Ms. Kemp had COPD in January of 1990? Yes.
Is it probable? Yes.
He just wouldn't go the extra step of certainty. But is it probable? Even Plaintiff's expert admitted on the stand that it was probable that she had COPD in January of 1990.
Here again, the most important witness is Ms. Kemp. Now, she had a striking lack of memory about her smoking, but just last year she was treated for her pain medication and the pain in her neck. You saw the medical history that she provided to Dr. Barangen. We have that medical record in which Dr. Barangen took her medical history and
recorded -- this was on April 24 of 2012. It's on the top on the second page. We see the medical history that the doctor took down. You heard from all the doctors how important it is for a doctor to get a medical history in treating a patient.
Dr. Barangen took down from Ms. Kemp that she had chronic obstructive lung disease. He specifically put down the date. 1990.
So Ms. Kemp knew she had COPD in 1990. The only question is whether she had COPD before the key date that the Court is going to give you. The critical date is May, May 5 of 1990. For legal reasons, that's the critical date. Did she have COPD before that date, or was it after that date?
Well, the medical records show that it was in January of 1990 that Ms. Kemp was hospitalized. She complained of shortness of breath. They conducted a chest X-ray and a spirometry at the hospital. The spirometry showed that she had an obstructive lung problem.
Dr. Andrews, board-certified pulmonologist, showed you the hallmarks of COPD: Shortness of breath, exposure to smoking for 40 years, spirometry showing an obstructive lung problem. And Ms. Kemp was treated. From January of 1990 she was on an
albuterol inhaler.
Dr. Andrews showed you how Ms. Kemp had all of the hallmarks in January of 1990 when she was hospitalized due to her smoking. That's what the medical record says. Due to her smoking she was put on antibiotics because her doctors recognized that her lungs were vulnerable and they didn't want her getting a bacterial infection, which would only make things worse.
Dr. Burns suggested that maybe Ms. Kemp was in the hospital for platelets or thrombocytopenia, based on the office notes. You may remember how Dr. Burns had changed that story. You may remember how he admitted at his deposition, just two months ago, we had shown him the exact same records and he had dismissed the whole idea that Ms. Kemp was in the hospital at all as a fantasy. But he told you that, if she was in the hospital, it was because of thrombocytopenia. So that was a big change for Dr. Burns.
It doesn't much matter. Frankly, it doesn't really matter why Ms. Kemp went into the hospital, whether it was for shortness of breath or thrombocytopenia. What does matter is when she was in the hospital, they gave her a chest X-ray and
they gave her a spirometry. You don't give a spirometry test for a nosebleed or for low platelets. Spirometry is not a platelet test.
Spirometry is not a thrombocytopenia test. It's not a blood test. Even Dr. Burns admitted spirometry is a breathing test. It's a test for COPD.
Over that weekend in the hospital, Ms. Kemp had a breathing problem. Ms. Kemp remembered that they gave her a spirometry at the hospital and Dr. Irvin's office notes record that the spirometry showed she had an obstructive lung problem in January of 1990. That's why Dr. Burns, even Dr. Burns, admitted that Ms. Kemp probably had COPD in January of 1990.
January of 1990 is months before May of 1990, so the answer to Question 3, did she have COPD before May of 1990, is yes.
If you answer Question 3 is yes, then you go to the next question, which is Question 4. Did Vivian Kemp know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known before May 5, 1990 that she had COPD and that there was a reasonable possibility that such COPD was caused by smoking cigarettes?
Remember in the 1970s, Ms. Kemp had worked in hospitals as a pulmonary technician? Hospitals
including Sacred Heart and West Florida. She worked at each hospital as a pulmonary technician. Those are the folks who do the spirometry tests. She worked with the head of the department. She worked with the head of the pulmonology department at Sacred Heart, and when he moved to West Florida, she followed him and worked for the head of the pulmonology department in West Florida.
Well, while she was in hospital from January 19 to January 21 of 1990, Ms. Kemp was given the spirometry test. She wasn't the pulmonary technician giving the test. She was on the receiving end of the spirometry test.
On January 24, 1990, she met with Dr. Irvin and he gave her the results of the spirometry test.
Dr. Irvin doesn't remember Ms. Kemp from all those years ago, and he doesn't remember what he told her during that visit, but we do know he had to report the results of the spirometry test to his patient and we know that test showed an obstructive lung problem.
On January 24, 1990, Dr. Irvin knew that his patient, Ms. Kemp, was short of breath. He knew she had a long smoking history. He was concerned. He had been concerned enough about her breathing to
have a spirometry test done in the hospital. And he knew the results of the test.
When he was asked during his deposition,
Dr. Irvin couldn't remember what he said to Ms. Kemp in January of 1990. He could only say that, based on his review of the records, just based on his review of the records. But he defers to Ms. Kemp.
He testified, if Ms. Kemp remembered that he was the doctor who first told her about her COPD, he would have no basis to disagree. He testified if Ms. Kemp remembered he told her that based on a breathing test, that that would be consistent with the medical records.
Ms. Kemp did remember that it was Dr. Irvin who first told her she had COPD after giving her a test.
Let's take a look at that testimony.
(Whereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q Who was the first person that told you they thought you had COPD?
A Dr. Irvin was probably instrumental in it.
Q Is he the first doctor you recall telling you that he thought you had COPD?
A He never gave me those words.
Q What did he say?
A I have an -- I can't recall.
Q But somehow when I ask about that, you are thinking about Dr. Irvin?
A Yes.
Q Okay. When do you recall first being treated for shortness of breath?
A I have no idea when it was.
Q Do you have any idea when you first complained to a doctor about experiencing shortness of breath?
A My recollection with Dr. Irvin was I complained about being tired.
Q With Dr. Irvin?
A Right. And that's when he gave me a test. (Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: It was on January 24, 1990, no other date, that Dr. Irvin told Ms. Kemp about the results of the spirometry test. Dr. Irvin testified that he would have talked to Ms. Kemp about her smoking during that visit, and he also gave Ms. Kemp treatment for COPD. He put her on the albuterol bronchodilator, and Ms. Kemp testified that she used that quite often.
Let me show you the medical record from 1993, which confirmed that Ms. Kemp was still -- this was
three years later -- on the same albuterol bronchodilator that Dr. Irvin prescribed in January of 1990. This record is from April of 1993. It shows that Ms. Kemp continued Proventil multi-dose inhaler, two puffs as needed, for shortness of breath.
The Plaintiff denies Ms. Kemp should have known about her COPD until Ms. Kemp saw Dr. Cleveland in 1996. That makes no sense. Her COPD was severe by 1996, so Ms. Kemp must have known years earlier.
And they have offered no explanation for why Ms. Kemp testified that it was Dr. Irvin who informed her she had COPD. He might not have used that word. He might have used the word "emphysema," but it was Dr. Irvin who first told her about her COPD.
If anyone in the world could reasonably be expected to know that a spirometry test is a test of COPD, it was Ms. Kemp, a pulmonary technician. If she had any question about what Dr. Irvin told her about her obstructive lung disease, she could easily have followed up in February, as soon as she got over the flu. Ms. Kemp didn't follow up with Dr. Irvin, just like she didn't follow up with Dr. Cleveland in 1996. She didn't need to. She
knew. In any event, she certainly should have known, and the evidence is that she did, in fact, know in January of 1990 that she had COPD.
We also know that in the early 1990s, Ms. Kemp told her daughter, Elizabeth, who was a practicing nurse that she had been to see her doctor. And at the time, the doctor was Dr. Irvin. She'd had a spirometry, and that her doctor told her she had the beginnings of emphysema. That's what Elizabeth LaMotte testified.
Now, Ms. Kemp didn't share that information with her daughter or anyone the day she walked out of Dr. Irvin's office on January 24, 1990. She kept that information to herself.
You heard Ms. LaMotte tell you that Ms. Kemp didn't want to bother her family. So she didn't tell people about her spirometry at the time. She didn't tell her son, who said she was able to walk a mile in Alaska in July of 1990. Of course, you've heard a person with COPD can walk and actually can even climb stairs. In fact, you heard Ms. Kemp herself testify that as of 2000, when she's in her 70s on oxygen, she was still mowing the grass at home. As her son put it, she was a tough gal.
Her daughter, Elizabeth, told you that Ms. Kemp
didn't want to bother anyone. But as things got worse, people did start to notice. And finally,
Ms. Kemp confided in her daughter, Elizabeth, the very personal private information that she had been to see her doctor and her doctor had given her a test, a breathing test, pulmonary function test, a spirometry test, and that she had the beginnings of emphysema. That's what the doctor had told her.
At trial, Elizabeth LaMotte said her mother told her this in the fall of 1994. You heard that at her deposition she had said it was in the early 1990s. Sometime after, her daughter, Meredith, had been diagnosed in 1991.
The timing doesn't really matter. When Ms. Kemp broke the news to her daughter that she'd been to see Dr. Irvin, and that he told her she had the beginnings of emphysema, whether Ms. Kemp shared that information in 1991 or 1994 or sometime in between isn't really the point.
What matters is that Elizabeth LaMotte admitted what she heard from her mother. Ms. Kemp said she'd been to her doctor. She had a test, a spirometry pulmonary function test, and the doctor had told her she had the beginnings of emphysema. The only doctor to give Ms. Kemp a spirometry test in the
early 1990s, any time before the fall of 1994, was Dr. Irvin on January 24, 1990.
The Plaintiff has argued that Ms. Kemp thought she had asthma, not COPD. And that's what she said when she went to see Dr. Cleveland in 1996, that Dr. Cleveland told you she didn't have asthma. She would have made absolutely crystal clear -remember, I asked him like three times.
He said he would have left -- he wanted her to have asthma. Dr. Cleveland wanted her to have asthma. He wanted to tell her she had asthma, but she didn't. She just didn't.
He told you he would have been crystal clear.
He would have shared with the patient the results of his diagnosis. He would have absolutely ruled out and left Ms. Kemp in no doubt whatsoever that she did not have asthma.
But Dr. Cleveland's records from 1997 and 1998 show that for years afterwards, Ms. Kemp kept telling people that she had asthma. He got faxes from people saying we understand that Ms. Kemp is under your care for asthma. You heard from Dr. Andrews that's fairly common for women of Ms. Kemp's generation, socially, to tell people instead of saying I have emphysema or I have COPD to
say I have asthma.
But Dr. Cleveland left you in no doubt Ms. Kemp absolutely knew and understood she did not have asthma. She had emphysema or COPD. So Ms. Kemp knew she had COPD in 1990, and the only date in 1990 that the evidence points is January of 1990, because that was when she had her hospitalization for shortness of breath and her spirometry. That's when you heard Dr. Irvin's testimony that he would have told her about her obstructive lung problem, and that she needed to stop smoking. And that's consistent with her testimony, that it was Dr. Irvin, when we asked her who first told you that you had COPD.
So the answer to Question 4 is yes.
And if you answer Question 3 and Question 4 yes, then you don't need to answer any other questions. You are done with the form.
Even though I don't believe you'll get to the rest of the questions, I still need to cover the rest of the jury verdict form with you, so the next questions are Questions 5 through 8.
Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by -- and here you'll see a different question for each defendant -- a legal cause of Vivian Kemp's COPD and
death?
The question here is legal cause. It's the big why question.
The answer to all of these questions is no for the same reason. It was Ms. Kemp's decision every day for more than 40 years to smoke and not to try to quit that were the legal cause of her death, and so the answer to each of these questions, if you reach these questions, is no.
Let me, nonetheless, go to the next question on the form, which is Question 9. That's the percentage of fault question. It says: Please state the percentage of any fault, if any, that was a legal cause of Vivian Kemp's death that you charge to, and then it has a series of percentages which all have to add up to 100 percent.
If you get to this question, you should put 100 percent next to Ms. Kemp's name.
The Plaintiff has admitted that Ms. Kemp was a legal cause of her own death. As we've discussed, Ms. Kemp always had the ability to quit. And if she had quit earlier, she would not have gotten COPD. That is why the Plaintiff admits that Ms. Kemp was a legal cause of her own COPD and death.
The Plaintiff wants you to put responsibility
on Lorillard, but again, they're not saying that Lorillard is responsible for Ms. Kemp starting to smoke or for Ms. Kemp becoming addicted. What they're saying is Lorillard and the other Defendants are responsible for Ms. Kemp's failure to quit.
But Ms. Kemp was able to quit. That was always in her control. That was, as Ms. Kemp herself told you, up to her. It was her decision, not Lorillard's, when she chose to smoke or to quit.
That is why the Plaintiff is taking responsibility for her not trying to quit.
Now, you saw Ms. Kemp. While she was telling folks in the grocery store that it was up to you, that it was up to her, and she was taking 100 percent responsibility to the people in the grocery store, and she was asked at her deposition, she wasn't really taking responsibility except for maybe that first cigarette. And if you listen very carefully to Plaintiff's counsel, you'll hear the Plaintiff isn't really taking responsibility for Ms. Kemp's smoking decisions either.
The next question I'm going to get to on the verdict form is Question 10. And under that question, if you were to find for the Plaintiff on that question, then Ms. Kemp's responsibility, none
of it, none of it would count, and the Defendants would be left with exclusive responsibility.
Let me explain that. You look at the percentages. We go back one slide. If you fill out those percentages and you were to say that Ms. Kemp was 99 percent responsible and the Defendants were 1 percent responsible -- let's say you made that decision, 1 percent responsible for the Defendants', and you answer the next question, which we'll get to in a moment, yes, then the Defendants would take not 1 percent of responsibility, they would be stuck with 100 percent.
So when you fill out these percentages, remember these percentages are supposed to reduce any verdict by the amount of responsibility of the smoker. But if you look at your verdict form, you'll see some instructions and those instructions on the third page have a sentence at the end, and that sentence says: There will be no such reduction, no reduction for Ms. Kemp's responsibility, however, if you find for the Plaintiff on the claim based on the agreement to conceal. That's Question 10.
So if you say that Ms. Kemp had almost all of the responsibility and the Defendants had very
little responsibility, and you then go and answer yes to Question 10, then none of Ms. Kemp's responsibility will count against the Plaintiff.
100 percent will be hit on the Defendants.
I'll get to the next question, Question 10, in a moment. That is why it's so important the next question, Question 10, the answer to it is no.
It's important that you put in Question 9, when you fill out these percentages, that Ms. Kemp is 100 percent responsible.
So let me address that next question, Question 10. This is the question on agreement among the Defendants and others to conceal information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, a legal cause of Vivian Kemp's COPD and death.
This is the question on which the Plaintiff spent weeks and weeks of testimony. Now you know why. Because this is the way that they can avoid any responsibility, any responsibility for Ms. Kemp's smoking decisions.
This is also the key to any claim by the Plaintiff for punitive damages. If you don't find for the Plaintiff on this, then there's no punitive damages. And if you don't find for the Plaintiff on
this, then Ms. Kemp's responsibility actually counts.
Question 10 talks about an agreement. This is the conspiracy claim. The Defendants were not a legal cause of Ms. Kemp's smoking, because as Ms. Kemp testified, it was up to you. Her decisions and the decision to quit was up to you, and none of the companies controlled Ms. Kemp's smoking decisions. She smoked, as her son said, because she wanted to.
The record is clear here, Ms. Kemp didn't think that smoking filtered cigarettes were safe. She knew. She knew the danger of smoking and she knew the danger of smoking filtered cigarettes. She knew that were many sources. She knew it from the public health community and the media. She knew it from her first husband who quit and told her to quit when she was smoking filtered cigarettes. Her response, he said, was unprintable. She knew it from her second husband, who wanted her to quit, who quit himself. She knew it from her sister who quit and talked to her about quitting. She knew about the danger from her daughter, Elizabeth, who quit, who was a registered nurse. She knew about the danger from her son, who told her smoking would kill her
from the age of 12. She knew about the danger from her supervisor at the hospital, the head of the pulmonology department. She knew from her friends and her doctors. She knew from the warnings on the packs.
Remember the warnings? 1966 to 1970, 1970 to 1985, and then the rotating warnings that we have from 1985 through today. Every pack of cigarettes that Ms. Kemp bought from 1966 on had the warnings.
Do you remember that public service announcement about warnings we showed you? (Thereupon, the videotape was played to the jury as follows:)
We receive many warnings in our life and sometimes they can save our life. This message is brought to you by the American Cancer Society. (Thereupon, the videotape was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: We have warnings for a reason. Ms. Kemp was warned. If she had any doubt about any of these warnings, she had only to ask the plaintiff, Mr. LaMotte who is a licensed pharmacist.
Ms. Kemp never needed to ask him. He never needed to tell her about the danger. She knew.
Ms. Kemp never told any of her friends or family that she thought filters were safe when her
first husband was on her back to quit smoking because smoking was hazardous. She never said I'm okay smoking filters. Filters are safe.
When she found out that her daughter Elizabeth was smoking, she didn't say, okay, Elizabeth, it's okay for you to smoke as long as you're smoking filtered cigarettes. That's not what she told her.
She told her to quit. She told Elizabeth the sooner the better. Her daughter she said she was ashamed and embarrassed. Ms. Kemp knew the danger of smoking.
You saw a whole lot of ads for various cigarette brands. Many of the ads were for cigarettes that Ms. Kemp never smoked. You heard Ms. Kemp's testimony that she didn't rely on ads when she made the decision to start smoking.
Let's take a look at that testimony.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q During that time period, when you were approximately seven years old to your early teens, do you have any recollection of cigarette ads?
A No.
Q No recollection at all?
A Right now I can't think of any.
Q Okay. I just want to make sure that you said not right now, I can't recall any cigarette ads. At trial I'm not going to hear from you that you now recall ads from that time period; is that correct?
A I wasn't aware.
Q Okay.
A That's the only thing I can give you a right answer. I really can't say that I was aware of them.
Q They didn't have any kind of influence on you as far as you know?
A Not that I remember.
Q Okay.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: Now, you heard testimony that Ms. Kemp switched to Kent because it was a filtered cigarette and had lower tar. You had seen some early Lorillard advertising. You'll remember that Ms. Kemp testified that she switched to Kent after smoking Virginia Slims in the late 1970s. In fact, the Plaintiff showed you ads from the early 1950s with the idea that Ms. Kemp chose to smoke Kents in the 1970s based on ads from the 1950s. Makes absolutely no sense.
By the way, when Lorillard ran those ads in the
early 1950s, Lorillard had every reason to believe that filters were great. In fact, you heard Dr. Burns admit that Reader's Digest reported that Lorillard's Kent cigarettes were the best or among the very best filters on the market. That's Reader's Digest. Reader's Digest ran independent tests, independent, not connected with Lorillard, and reported on that in 1957 and again in 1958.
Let's take a look at 1957 Reader's Digest.
This is what Reader's Digest reported: To meet this need for specific information, Reader's Digest asked a leading testing laboratory to make a scientific determination of the tar and nicotine in the mainstream smoke of cigarette brands.
It goes on to describe how the lab pulled up the cigarettes on the open market and they performed independent testing. Nothing to do with Lorillard.
On the basis of that testing, Reader's Digest reported that the Kent cigarettes were among the most effective in the market.
Here are the results. Kent rates as the lowest in both tar and nicotine. Again, in 1959 Reader's Digest talked about improvements in cigarettes. It talked about the older filtered brands, including Kent, are not the same cigarettes they were a year
ago. There have already been improvements. They are milder, better filtered, lower in tar and nicotine, and if the promise pays off, they may be the, quote, "safer," close quote, but not yet safe cigarettes the public has been asking for.
Reader's Digest made the point. Kent was successful as a result of Reader's Digest's reports.
That had convinced the other companies that the popular trend towards high filtration cigarettes was more than a fad. The companies had a business need, a business need to produce better filters and lower tar cigarettes, lower tar and lower nicotine cigarettes. And they all researched and tried to improve their cigarettes to follow that demand of the public.
Remember Reader's Digest was antismoking? Reader's Digest took no advertising from any cigarette company. It was completely independent, and it found that Lorillard's filter was among the best. That did not make it safe. And Reader's Digest of all people did not ever suggest that a filtered cigarette was safe, but it was less hazardous.
Remember what Ms. Kemp had been smoking? She had been smoking unfiltered cigarettes. Cigarettes
with no filter that let all of the tar and all of the nicotine and all of the smoke through with no filter at all.
Dr. Burns claimed on his direct examination that in the 1950s Lorillard didn't believe what the Reader's Digest said, and we called them on that.
On cross-examination, he admitted, his testimony was supposed to be based on internal company documents, but he didn't have any. In fact, he admitted he couldn't identify a single Lorillard document that said any such thing. In fact, he admitted he hadn't even looked for any such document and he said because I haven't looked, I haven't seen.
Reader's Digest wasn't the only independent voice saying that the filters were less hazardous.
The Public Health Community recommended filters. They said the best thing to do is to quit altogether, stop smoking. But if you're not going to quit, then at least filtered cigarettes are not as bad as the unfiltered cigarettes. Ms. Kemp had been smoking before she made the switch.
Let's take a look at the public service video on bad and worse.
Well, maybe not. Maybe you'll remember from
opening and from Dr. Cummings, we had a video -- oh, we do have it. Sorry. Okay. We don't.
THE COURT: Counsel, this may be an appropriate time.
MR. MAGUIRE: This would be a great time for a break, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. We'll take a break until 10:15. Thank you.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. MAGUIRE: Please the Court.
I think we now have that video for you. (Thereupon, the videotape was played to the jury as follows:)
The cigarette world is divided into the bad and the worse. This is bad. This is worse. This has twice as much tar and nicotine. There's as much tar
and nicotine in one of these as in two of these. That's quite a difference.
As a matter of fact, you can buy as much as 34 milligrams of tar in a cigarette or as little as
2.	As much as 2.1 milligrams of nicotine or as little as 0.12. With 130 different cigarettes on the market, you can certainly find one with a lot less tar and nicotine than the one you're smoking. Not a good cigarette, just one that isn't as bad.
The Public Health Service has a free tar and nicotine list that shows them all. Send for it.
Look them up. If you must smoke, at least bad is better than worse.
(Thereupon, the videotape was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: They were right. The signs showed that filtered and less tar are not safe, but less dangerous than unfiltered cigarettes that let all the dangerous tar through.
The tobacco companies answered the Public Health Community's call and made filters and made other changes to reduce the tar and nicotine in cigarettes. You've seen the chart that shows how the levels of those were reduced fairly dramatically over the years. Everyone agreed there's no such thing as a safe cigarette. Filters were a step in
the right direction.
Everyone agreed that tar -- it was tar in the cigarette smoke that was causing the tumors in those mouse experiments, and unfiltered cigarettes let through all of the tar.
You've heard about the scientists. One of the great scientists was Dr. Dietrich Hoffmann. He was quoted in the Banbury report on the good things that the cigarette companies were doing. He talked about when scientists first started, how filters were such small brands, and how they had grown in the market, how it is now a significant section of the market.
And he said I do think the tobacco industry, voluntarily or not, they may not like it, but they are doing it, adjusts very well to the demands of the logical reasoning of the scientific community, and that we should continue on this path.
The scientists were saying we need less tar.
That's where the danger is. And the cigarette companies had to listen or lose business. And they listened and they worked hard at better filters and lower tar cigarettes, and they responded to the logical reasoning of the science.
The Public Health Community was telling consumers to quit or smoke low tar, and the
companies were responding with better products.
Let's talk a little bit about the science. Do you remember Dr. Wynder? He's the one who did the mouse painting experiments that so famously got shown on Life Magazine and the whole centerfold that showed Dr. Wynder. You may recall some of the testimony about how Lorillard helped Dr. Wynder in his experiments. You may recall you were shown the letter in which Lorillard was sending tens of thousands of cigarettes to Dr. Wynder to help him do that research. Lorillard helped Dr. Wynder with the whole process of extracting tar, the dangerous tar from the tobacco smoke, and tried fractionation, the science of trying to break that tar up into different elements to identify what, if anything, and where and what were the elements within it that could be dangerous and could be extracted. Lorillard helped Dr. Wynder in all of that.
In 1957, Dr. Wynder said, if you reduce the tar in cigarettes, you reduce the danger. That was in the British Medical Journal. He said present work indicates that it is entirely possible to develop a filtered cigarette with a good pressure drop and satisfactory tobacco taste, which will remove about
40 percent of the nicotine and tar in a given cigarette.
Lorillard did that. They met that target, and they beat that target. Two years later, in April 1959, Dr. Wynder, again, and this is in Time Magazine, he recognized that smokers should quit, but they're not all going to quit. So what's a practical thing to do? He despaired of persuading 55 million Americans to quit the habit, but to make is safer, he urged manufacturers, the tobacco companies, to use low tar tobaccos and the most potent filters they could find. Then he had advice for smokers as well.
We go to 1968, the National Cancer Institute. They pointed out an estimate that the person who switched to a filtered cigarette has about 60 percent of the risk of a person in the same exposure who continues to smoke regular or unfiltered cigarettes.
That's not safe. That is not safe. No one was saying it was safe, but it was less dangerous than the unfiltered cigarettes that Ms. Kemp was smoking before she made the switch. That is not any Defendant. That is not Lorillard. That is the National Cancer Institute.
We go to 1970, the Journal of the American Medical Association. Dr. Wynder, he points out that
there are new trends in the scientific study showing
a decrease in relative risk -- that's a term for less risk, less danger -- for patients developing lung cancer 10 years after they have switched to filtered cigarettes, possibly due to the lower tar content in filtered cigarettes smoked by these patients. In other words, less tar means less risk.
1979, the Surgeon General's report use of filtered cigarettes and smoking of cigarettes with lower amounts of tar and nicotine decrease lung cancer mortality rates among smokers.
Again, filters are not safe. No one was saying filtered cigarettes are safe, but they were less dangerous than unfiltered cigarettes where the smoker got all of the dangerous tar.
In fact, continuing on up to the 1990s and later, study after scientific study came out showing that filters and low tar reduced danger. You heard Dr. Burns admit to me and my colleague, Bob McCarter, that there are over 50 epidemiological studies finding that filtered or low tar cigarettes reduce risk. 50 studies by independent scientists. Science that even Dr. Burns accepted as proving
beyond reasonable doubt, his words, that filters reduce risk. Studies involving -- remember him testifying, Mr. McCarter asked him -- hundreds of thousands and even millions of people.
Now, Dr. Burns told you that he's changed his mind. He has a different opinion than that. He now questions whether filters reduce the risk.
What is that based on? The only thing he showed you was a memo from Philip Morris involving nine people. Dr. Burns is so in with the Surgeon General that he has the Surgeon General now questioning this too. But that is a debate about the science. It's about statistics. It's about epidemiology.
Dr. Burns is entitled to his opinions, but so are all of the independent scientists who did all of the studies that even Dr. Burns acknowledged were done right. If were you to do them again today, you would get the same results, which he acknowledged, even he recognized, proved the benefits of filters and low tar, in his words, beyond a reasonable doubt.
You don't have to resolve the scientific debate here. The only point which Dr. Burns admits is that there was independent science, study after study
after study, and that it showed, at the time, he acknowledged, that filters reduced risk. And it was done by independent scientists.
We have a list of some of those scientists here. It's a very impressive list. We've got people from Roswell Park, MIT, the American Cancer Society, the National Cancer Institute, Dr. Wynder,
Dr. Hoffmann himself.
There's a whole stack of studies, these epidemiological studies. We have some of them, the original medical journals on this table here.
They're in evidence. They're available for you if you wish to see them. But even Dr. Burns admitted that this was independent science. Not Lorillard, not any Defendant, independent scientists proving with large studies over decades the benefits of low tar and filters.
Lorillard followed the science. Lorillard did the very research that the Public Health Community asked it to do. Researching nicotine was another attempt by Lorillard to make a less hazardous cigarette. It wasn't Lorillard's idea.
Back in the 1970s, scientists at the National Cancer Institute were asking the cigarette companies, including Lorillard, to research
nicotine, additives, and flavors to make a less hazardous, a less dangerous cigarette.
Here is some meeting minutes from May 5 of 1976 from the National Cancer Institute. It's looking at nicotine and the role of nicotine as a determinant of a smoker's behavior. It's looking at removing quantities of nicotine and adding them back to a sheet of tobacco.
It talked specifically about how nicotine has the greatest pharmacologic activity when it is in the freebase form. You heard a lot of testimony about freebasing. The base form is also the distillable form which readily transfers to cigarette smoke.
This wasn't Lorillard. This wasn't any Defendant. This was the National Cancer Institute. And they were urging people to research nicotine, additives, flavors, as a way to make a less hazardous, low tar cigarette acceptable to consumers.
This idea was picked up by Consumer Reports, 1976. Consumer Reports looks at less tar, less nicotine, is that good? And whether giving smokers nicotine while taking away the tar might be a better way to get a less hazardous cigarette.
They said that that kind of research should begin as soon as possible. The demand from the public health authorities, from the National Cancer Institute, from Consumer Reports, from people in the Public Health Community was that the companies should be researching this. And Lorillard did.
You've seen the 1976 memorandum, around the same time as the Consumer Reports article, in which Lorillard acknowledged internally that recommendations from health-oriented agencies -- so the Public Health Community is forcing Lorillard to do this, and pressure from competitive companies.
This was a competitive endeavor -- research to get a less hazardous cigarette or you will lose your business. Your business depends on keeping up with the demands of the Public Health Community, which is driving consumer demand.
We have Dr. Russel, Dr. M-A-H Russel. And this is from 1980 in the Banbury report, which he points out the problem with the current low tar, low nicotine approach. If you don't give people flavor, if you don't give them appropriate amounts of nicotine that they want, what do you end up with? There comes a point where acceptability, consumer acceptability is so low that a cigarette, though
less hazardous, is useless. Only non-inhalers would be likely to smoke it, and it makes little difference what they smoke.
So coming up with a less hazardous cigarette is useless unless people are actually going to use it, unless they're going to buy it and smoke it. If you give them something they don't like, they're going to go back to the high tar and they're going to smoke the stuff that is more dangerous.
Lorillard looked at the same idea and reached the same conclusion. They hypothesized that, below some very low nicotine level, diminished physiological satisfaction cannot be compensated for by psychological satisfaction. At this point smokers will quit or return to the higher tar and nicotine brands.
So Lorillard followed the Public Health Community. And all of the improvements that Lorillard made over the years, does any involve adding any more nicotine that is already in the natural tobacco level? No. No more nicotine in any of the manufactured cigarettes than is in the plant that Mother Nature creates.
Now, Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns are not against reducing tar. In fact, they recognize that reducing
tar is a good thing. That is a good thing. They criticize filters because they don't work for all smokers. Some smokers compensate. They find a way to smoke more cigarettes or to suck harder to get the same amount of nicotine, and when they do that, they get more tar. But Dr. Cummings and Dr. Burns go way too far when they suggest that compensation is some kind of secret. It was no secret.
Let's go back to Consumer Reports, 1976.
Consumer Reports is reporting on compensation. No secret. Some smokers also increase the size of each puff, thus increasing the nicotine dose per puff.
It goes on to say there are also other ways to compensate. They even use the term "compensation" for a drop in nicotine yield. So if you give a smoker less nicotine, the risk is that they will draw harder by drawing the smoke deeper into the lungs, for example, or by holding it there longer before exhaling. No secret. That was 1976.
And Lorillard certainly wasn't trying to hide something by compensation. In fact, you may remember Lorillard talked about compensation well before 1976 in its submission to the Surgeon General in 1963. Lorillard was helping the Surgeon General and the Surgeon General thanked Lorillard.
But let's get back to Ms. Kemp. The Plaintiff has offered no evidence that Ms. Kemp compensated, that she ever smoked any differently when she switched to Kents.
Now, we're still on this Question 10. The reason I spent so much time on it is because the Plaintiff spent so much time on it. You had weeks and weeks and weeks here of evidence that had nothing to do with Ms. Kemp. But let me come back, before we leave this question, and talk about addictiveness and nicotine.
The Plaintiff suggests that there was some kind of controversy, some dispute about the addictiveness of nicotine. Not true. No way. There was never any debate that smoking could be hard to quit. Couldn't be any debate about that. People knew that from Christopher Columbus. You heard, what, testimony, 500, 600 years ago he had difficulty getting his sailors to trim the sails because of the tobacco. That was tobacco. That was even before cigarettes. The modern cigarette came hundreds of years later. But people back then, even in the time of Christopher Columbus, were well aware that tobacco could be very hard to quit.
Then if we skip forward, we showed you the
Florida Health Notes from 1906, decades before Ms. Kemp was born, which talk openly about the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. No debate. Absolutely no dispute about that. That's 25 years before Ms. Kemp was born.
Remember the -- remember the year Ms. Kemp smoked her first cigarette? 1947. Remember the hit song that came out that year? "Smoke Smoke Smoke," by Tex Williams? That song, remember the lyrics, "Nicotine slaves." So it was well known that smoking could be tough to quit. That wasn't the debate. That was never the debate. There was a debate, but the debate was only about the word, the label you put on it.
Do you use the word "addictive"? Which is a difficult term. Do you use that word when you're talking about smoking? That was the question.
That was a question that was studied by the Surgeon General, and in 1964, he said no. He said no, it's not appropriate to use the word "addictive" when you're talking about smoking. It's definitely a habit. He said no question it's hard to quit. Everybody acknowledges that, but you shouldn't use the word "addictive," because the word "addictive"
involves intoxication. Hard drugs, alcohol, get intoxicated. You don't get intoxicated by smoking. So he said no, it's not technically appropriate.
It's not right to call it addicted.
Now people do. People call it addictive in Tex Williams's song, and in the Florida Health Notes, Christopher Columbus. But he said if you're being precise, it's not right to use the word.
Twenty-four years later, the Surgeon General looked at the whole question again and he switched. He said yes, it is addictive. You should use the word "addictive." You should call smoking addictive.
Now, nothing had changed. Cigarettes didn't become intoxicating over those 24 years. You recognized smoking is not intoxicating.
Nonetheless, he said we're changing the definition. The definition. Nothing changed, just the definition.
Lorillard and the other companies did not agree with the Surgeon General's change of the definition in 1988. They didn't agree until about the year 2000. So in those years, there was a disagreement about the use of the definition.
But that's it. Nobody, no Defendant, no
cigarette company, certainly not Lorillard, was ever saying that smoking isn't difficult to quit. Nobody was saying that.
No matter what you call it, whether you call it addictive, whether you call it habituation, whether you call it a habit, it's the same thing. It's tough to quit. Everybody recognized that. That was known, as I say, since the time of Christopher Columbus.
Now, before we leave this Question 10, I told you this is the key to punitive damages. Plaintiff wants you to award lots of money. Question 10 is the way to punitive damages, and that's why the Plaintiff spent weeks presenting you evidence about things that had nothing to do with Ms. Kemp.
Internal documents from companies from a different time and wrong headed statements, made by a bunch of people from various companies or Tobacco Institute, and videos and statements by people that Ms. Kemp never saw, never heard. What did any of that evidence have to do with Ms. Kemp? What did that have to do with Ms. Kemp? When you finally heard Ms. Kemp's testimony, you heard that all that evidence had nothing, nothing to do with Ms. Kemp.
In fact, this whole question, Question 10, this agreement or conspiracy claim had nothing to do with Ms. Kemp. The Court will instruct you that there is no claim in this case based on anything that any Defendant said or did before December 1953. So there is no claim that any agreement caused Ms. Kemp to start smoking. She started smoking before December of 1953. There is no claim for that. It's not in this case.
Dr. Cummings admitted no agreement or conspiracy caused Ms. Kemp to start smoking. Nor did any agreement cause Ms. Kemp to switch to filtered cigarettes. Ms. Kemp switched, she said 1952 or 1953. Dr. Cummings said 1952. In any event, it was before December of 1953. Any agreement had no effect on Ms. Kemp's decision to switch to Kent. So any agreement had absolutely no impact on Ms. Kemp's decision to start smoking, to switch to filtered cigarettes or to switch to Kent cigarettes.
Ms. Kemp made a point of saying she switched to Kent because of ads that ran before she made the switch in 1952 or 1953, but there's no claim for that. The Court will instruct you, your verdict as to this claim must not be based on action taken by
any Defendant prior to December of 1953. And there is nothing, no evidence that Ms. Kemp claimed impacted her after 1953.
Do you remember the Kent ads in 1952 that you were shown that they say caused Ms. Kemp to switch? There's no claim for that. That's out of the case.
The fraudulent concealment claim has been abandoned. The only question is did an agreement somehow keep Ms. Kemp smoking after 1953, and the answer to that is the same as before. No.
Ms. Kemp made up her own mind. She didn't let anyone make decisions for her. Certainly not her first husband, not even her second husband.
Certainly not her kids, nor her sister, nor the Surgeon General, nor the public health authorities.
And certainly not any agreement among companies, most of which she's never heard of.
Now, the Court will instruct you that the Plaintiff must prove Ms. Kemp relied, relied on statements about smoking. You may decline, however, to infer such reliance. And here I respectfully suggest you should because Ms. Kemp herself showed that she didn't rely on any statements.
In fact, we asked her. We asked her if she had relied on anything. Maybe you can remember her
testimony. When we finally heard -- we asked if
anything, any Defendant or any Tobacco Institute had
anything to do with her.
Let's show that you testimony.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q Have you ever heard of the Tobacco Research -I'm sorry -- the Tobacco Research Industry Committee?
A No, I haven't.
Q Do you have any idea what that refers to?
A Not a clue.
Q Have you ever heard of the Council for Tobacco Research?
A No.
Q Have you ever heard of the initials CTR -A No.
Q -- related in any way to smoking?
A No.
Q Or to cigarettes? No?
A Nothing.
Q Have you ever heard of TI or the Tobacco Institute?
A No, I've never heard of it.
Q Do you have any idea what those refer to, aside from tobacco?
A Research. Research, development.
Q You're getting that just from the name?
A Research and development.
Q You're assuming that from the name?
A Yeah.
Q Okay. But you don't know for sure?
A No. I'm just assuming that.
Q All right. Do you know if you've heard any statements from the Tobacco Industry Research Committee about smoking and health?
A I have no idea.
Q Do you know if you've heard any statements from the Council for Tobacco Research?
A No, I didn't.
Q What about -- do you know whether you've heard any statements from the Tobacco Institute -A Nothing.
Q -- regarding smoking and health?
A I have no idea.
Q Now, my questions to you are the same, except instead of heard statements, have you read any statements from any of these three entities?
A No.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: Ms. Kemp couldn't have relied. You can't find that Ms. Kemp relied on something she never heard of, never saw, never read.
And The Frank Statement. Remember, this agreement was supposed to be all based on The Frank Statement. Ms. Kemp hadn't heard about that either. (Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q Have you ever heard of something called The Frank Statement?
A No.
Q Do you have any idea what that refers to?
A No.
Q Okay.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: So all those days you spent listening to The Frank statement and to things that Ms. Kemp had never heard about, had nothing to do with her.
Plaintiff showed them to you to get punitive damages. In a moment, I'll explain a little bit more about that.
What about the 1994 congressional hearings?
How many times did you see the CEOs of the tobacco
companies stand up and raise their hands and give testimony? That had nothing to do with Ms. Kemp. That was in 1994. There was nothing that anyone said in 1994 that made Ms. Kemp keep smoking. 1994 was the year that she decided to stop smoking.
We've already discussed how Ms. Kemp wasn't misled. She admitted that she already knew the danger before she switched to Kent, back in the early 1950s. And she knew way back then, as far as the late 1940s, she understood that smoking cigarettes could be difficult to quit.
So she couldn't say that there was anything that anyone could have told her that would have made any difference to her. Ms. Kemp knew that smoking was dangerous and that it was hard to quit. She didn't need anyone to tell her that. In fact, even after she brought this lawsuit, Ms. Kemp couldn't say that there was anything anyone could have told her that would have made any difference to her smoking decisions.
Mr. Lewis yesterday asked you to think what if Ms. Kemp had all the information she had in 1994 in 1954? Well, we asked her that question, and you saw her testify about that. She was specifically asked at her deposition last year, 80 or 81 years of age,
with all the information she has today, was there anything that she needed to know that she wasn't told that would have made a difference?
You may remember that testimony.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q Yesterday we went over some of the warnings that were on the cigarette packs. I want to go through that again because we covered it pretty extensively. But was there anything else that you needed to know or that you think should have been on the cigarette pack warnings that you think would have impacted whether you smoked or not?
MS. BRIGGS: Object to the form of the question.
THE WITNESS: I have no answer for that. (Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: Mr. LaMotte could never carry his burden of proof here because Ms. Kemp couldn't say there was anything anyone could have said to her that would have made any difference. She was an adult. It was her choice and she was going to smoke.
That's why she was unable to say that there was
any information that might have made a difference to her smoking decisions. And we can see that. (Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played.)
Q At some point in time, did you come to a belief that had certain information been provided to you about whether smoking is addictive or whether it could be dangerous to your health, that that information would have impacted whether you decided to quit or not?
A I can't answer that. I don't know.
Q Okay.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was concluded.)
MR. MAGUIRE: She couldn't answer that because she knew the danger, and she chose to smoke. She made a free choice. That's why the Plaintiff cannot satisfy his burden of proof here.
Her smoking had nothing to do with any agreement among anyone. So the answer to Question 10 is no, no agreement among any Defendants was a legal cause of Ms. Kemp's death. The legal cause was all those decisions that Ms. Kemp made throughout her life to smoke and to continue smoking and not try to quit.
Let me cover the remaining questions on your
verdict form. Questions 11 through 14 are for damages, compensatory damages. What is the total amount of damages sustained? And it goes for each person.
For loss of parental companionship, instruction and guidance and pain and suffering as a result of Ms. Kemp's COPD and death.
Now, I don't think you'll get to these questions, but it's my job to cover them with you.
Of course, losing a family member, and especially a mother, is difficult and sad and always a tragedy in any family. But Ms. Kemp's children are not children. They're all well into middle age, all grown up. They all have their families and they left Ms. Kemp's home many years ago. They are here asking for money for their mother's smoking, but they knew nothing about her smoking, her quitting or her diagnosis.
Now, you heard their testimony. I know you remember their testimony. And remember, the person maintaining this lawsuit is Ms. Kemp's son-in-law,
Mr. LaMotte. Mr. LaMotte is the Plaintiff, the person responsible for this lawsuit. You didn't hear from Mr. LaMotte during the Plaintiff s case.
Mr. LaMotte did not testify during his own case.
You only heard from Mr. LaMotte during the Defendants' case.
Why was that? Why was it that the Plaintiff in Plaintiff's own lawsuit didn't testify?
MR. NORTON: Your Honor, I'm going to have to object to that.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. NORTON: And move to strike.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. MAGUIRE: Think about what Mr. LaMotte told you when asked whether Ms. Kemp bears responsibility for her injury. Mr. LaMotte told that you Ms. Kemp does bear responsibility. Why? Because he believes everyone is responsible for the choices they make in life.
When you consider the evidence, I submit to you that you should award zero damages. It's my job, of course, to recognize that some of you may disagree.
If you are inclined to award damages, and, again, we believe the evidence suggests that no damages should be awarded, but if you are to award damages I suggest that the facts in this case, a total number closer to $100,000, would be more appropriate than the number you heard yesterday or anything like it.
But as I respectfully submit, when you consider the
totality of the evidence, I submit that you should award zero damages to Elizabeth LaMotte, Francis Williams, Robert Hardy and Susan Barclay.
The next question on the verdict form is punitive damages. These are Questions 15 through 18. Under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted. And then it gives each Defendant.
These are the last questions. I don't think you're going to get to these questions, but it's my job to cover everything with you. What you have to decide here is whether or not you think that Ms. Kemp's children should get an additional award. This would be on top of compensatory damages from the Defendants.
MR. NORTON: Objection, Your Honor. Misstatement of Florida law.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. MAGUIRE: Punitive damages are not automatic. They have to be proved. As you can see from this question, as you'll be instructed by the Court, the burden is much higher for punitive damages than for any other question in this case.
The Plaintiff has to prove punitive damages by
clear and convincing evidence. The Court will instruct you that means evidence that is precise, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation. In fact, if you have doubts, the answer has to be no.
Those findings, they don't apply here. You cannot base an answer to this question on the findings. For this question, the Plaintiff has to prove to you that Lorillard and the other Defendants acted with conscious indifference and with reckless disregard.
Now, Plaintiff talked with you about filtered cigarettes, but there's no conscious indifference because Lorillard was doing exactly what the public health authorities were asking Lorillard to do.
You heard a lot about Dr. Ernst Wynder, that great scientist. Dr. Burns acknowledged he was a giant. Everyone you've heard from in this case agrees that he was a great man, a giant in scientific research, a man of absolute unimpeachable integrity. Dr. Burns told you Dr. Wynder was there, up there at the very top, one of the great guys.
Lorillard worked very closely with that man, with Dr. Wynder, and supported his research. You
heard that Lorillard gave its products to Dr. Wynder for his research, even for his mouse experiments.
But Lorillard's help didn't stop there. Lorillard also collaborated with Dr. Wynder on smoke fractionation to learn what was in tobacco smoke.
Lorillard supported Dr. Wynder's own research. Lorillard helped fund Dr. Wynder's American Health Foundation, his outstanding research lab which was dedicated to smoking and health. And with Lorillard's help, Dr. Wynder and his science transformed the way our modern society thinks about smoking and health. That's not reckless disregard.
Lorillard did exactly what Dr. Wynder and the public health community was asking for. Lorillard worked to improve its filter. Starting in the 1950s Lorillard worked with Dr. Wynder on how to reduce the phenols, you heard that term, in cigarette smoke. Phenols were suspected as a cause of cancer.
Lorillard shared its research on phenols with Dr. Wynder. Lorillard published its research. Lorillard gave its research to the Surgeon General. Lorillard succeeded in finding a way to reduce the phenols from cigarette smoke and got a patent for it. That's not reckless disregard. That's not conscious indifference.
Finally, Plaintiff talked with you about youth marketing and about placing products in movies. All those hours spent on youth marketing had absolutely nothing to do with Ms. Kemp. She testified she never thought about smoking until her first cigarette. Ads had no influence on her before she took that first cigarette. By the time she switched to Kents, she was in her early 20s. She was an adult. She was married. And that part is out of the case. So everything you heard about youth marketing over the last 50 years has nothing to do with Ms. Kemp.
Even Dr. Cummings acknowledged that Lorillard didn't place its products in movies. He agreed that, in fact, Lorillard had a policy of telling movie producers that Lorillard would not do that, that Lorillard absolutely did not want cigarettes in its movies.
That was a voluntary act. These are voluntary acts. When Lorillard wrote back to movie producers and said, thanks, but we don't want our products in your movie, there was no law that required Lorillard to say that. Lorillard did that because that's what Lorillard wanted to do.
When Lorillard cooperated with Dr. Wynder,
there was no law that said Lorillard had to give its products, its cigarettes, its money to Dr. Wynder.
There was no law that said Lorillard had to give him its research on phenols or on tobacco or on fractionation. Lorillard did that voluntarily.
That is not conscious disregard. That is not reckless indifference.
More fundamentally, there is no conduct that was a legal cause of Ms. Kemp's COPD and death. Because Ms. Kemp herself testified that she knew -she already knew that smoking was dangerous, and she knew that it was tough to quit.
And Ms. Kemp was able to quit. She was one of those people who could quit without much difficulty.
If there was one thing that is clear and convincing in this case, it's that Ms. Kemp could quit. She told her sister she could do it. She showed us all she could do it, and she testified that it was always within her, that ability to quit. So the answer to Questions 15 through 18 is no.
So the bottom line, on the verdict form that you're going to get, the answers to Questions 3 and 4, the time-barred questions, the answer to each of those questions is yes.
And the answer to every other question on the
form, including legal cause, the why question, the personal choice question is no. Because this case comes down to Ms. Kemp's control, her control over her smoking decisions, and her responsibility for the decisions that she made, that she wanted to make, and that she told others were her choice.
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to thank you for the attention that you've given to me and to all of my colleagues. When you retire to the jury room, you will have the evidence. And if there's anything that you want to see, or anything that you want to narrow down, those scientific studies or any part of the transcript that shows Ms. Kemp's control of her smoking at work, at home, on the three-week road trip, on the beach with her friends, then please just let us know. Thank you.



MR. BEACH: Thank you, Your Honor.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, we're switching it up a little bit, so since I'm going now
doesn't mean I'll be the last person talking to you.
I'll be followed by counsel for Liggett and counsel for Philip Morris. But there is good news, which is probably by the time I'm done, it will be a good place to have some lunch.
With that, let me begin with a very hearty and heartfelt thank you to each of you for your service in this case. Every day in our lives things happen that are big and small, and being here as you have I know has certainly forced you to endure many inconveniences and difficulties.
And on behalf of myself and on behalf of Reynolds, on behalf of all of the counsel, I'm sure the Court and the Court personnel as well, we thank you for that, and we thank you for your service, your civic service in this case.
Let me also thank Mr. Maguire for his remarks.
I think he's done a very nice job of covering many of the issues. So out of respect for your time and doing my very best not to be repetitive, I'm not going to address issues about Ms. Kemp's addiction, whether the addiction was a legal cause of her COPD, whether she knew that she had COPD in 1990, those questions about statute of limitations, nor the allocation of fault and damages questions. So all
of those things I think he has very well covered.
I'm not going to repeat that.
I would focus my remarks, ladies and gentlemen, on three things, first of all, the Reynolds brand history, just so that that's clear, reviewing what we've talked about in opening and where did the evidence end up.
Number two, Mr. Maguire mentioned that three of the Defendants have an extra argument when it comes to whether or not her smoking was a legal cause of Ms. Kemp's COPD. I'm going to address that extra argument and really doing so on behalf of Philip Morris, Liggett, and Reynolds.
Third, I will talk about that tenth question that Mr. Maguire did spend some time on, was the agreement, the agreement which you have been instructed about, the big why as to why Ms. Kemp smoked and got COPD.
I'm going to try not to repeat what Mr. Maguire said, but bring hopefully a slightly different perspective to how you might want to think about that question, and ultimately suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that for six simple reasons -- I wanted to make it five but I came up with six, so six it is -- six basic and simple reasons the answer
to that question is no. So that's the game plan, and hopefully there's lunch at the end of the rainbow.
Now, as you remember in opening, you saw this chart and I pointed out that the Lucky Strike smoking -- remember there were two brands my client made, Lucky Strike and Pall Mall, you've heard about them throughout.
You saw this chart, and I told you that Ms. Kemp smoked Lucky Strike cigarettes for two to three months, and I told you how you figured that out because you hear her testimony about when she had her first cigarettes and then two to three months later she switched to a different brand, and that in between that was the Lucky Strike.
In fact, this is exactly testimony that was presented in this case from Ms. Kemp. I'm sure you recall that she talked about getting her first cigarette from her sister's best friend. They didn't know what brand that was.
That she specifically said at most the time between that first cigarette and switching to Chesterfields was two to three months. And then she also confirmed that she smoked Lucky Strike before Chesterfield. So that's how we know two to three
months was the maximum for that one brand.
You also heard about Pall Mall, and you heard this testimony from Ms. Kemp on the video. She talked about it being a fly by night. I like that expression. I hadn't heard that before to refer to cigarettes. And she said, well, what does that mean? Well, it was an OP situation. And ultimately, one pack, Pall Mall was one pack.
Now, the Plaintiffs in this case a couple times have tried to suggest, well, maybe she smoked those brands longer than that. They've only ever pointed to these two passages in Ms. Kemp's testimony, but none of this testimony is inconsistent with where else in her deposition she was asked to be specific, right?
She was never asked in the testimony that they emphasized to you, well, actually how long did you smoke Lucky Strike? She is just being asked about when did she do it, not how long did she do it.
That's why there's no conflict there. Nor was she asked how much.
So this testimony at the end of the day, I believe it was used with Dr. Burns and also Ms. Kemp was on the video, doesn't in any way conflict with the note, the conclusion that you should reach,
which is that, Reynolds smoking for, Lucky Strike cigarettes was two to three months and there was one pack of Pall Mall.
Now, with Dr. Burns, remember there was an effort to, again, raise this issue. He says, well, she's old at the time of her deposition. Her memory could have been failing.
But remember that Ms. Kemp's deposition was taken in three installments. So it wasn't like those clarifying questions that I pointed out in the opening that came toward the end of her deposition were asked at the end of an eight- or ten-hour day.
This was three equal installments, number one.
Number two, immediately -- remember, again, the argument was to, oh, she was maybe woozy or couldn't be paying attention later in the deposition. If that were true, then why did the Plaintiff s counsel ask questions immediately after the questions that I cited to you where she says, oh, yeah, two to three months, Pall Mall, one pack.
If Ms. Kemp was woozy and not able to answer questions, don't you think her lawyers would have said, time-out? She's too tired to continue this deposition. We need to continue. But that's not at all what happened. In fact, what she did is gone on
to ask her 50 pages of questions.
Third, Plaintiff s -- so now the Plaintiff s counsel is asking her 50 pages of questions, did she once say, hey, Ms. Kemp, do you remember how you told us two to three months of Lucky Strike max and one pack of Pall Mall? You were wrong about that, weren't you? Not once did she ask a question challenging that testimony, right? She had the power. She was there. It's her witness. Ms. Kemp, that testimony, it was right or wrong? Never asked that question.
And of course, you've also heard about Dr. Dosovitz performing the mental acuity test. Of course, Plaintiffs were critical of the test, but put his test aside, you know that she had her own test done, you've heard that from her own physician, not a party to this case, no interest in this case.
You got the exact same score.
So that's the answer to whether or not Ms. Kemp had memory problems. So let's hear exactly what Ms. Kemp said again.
(Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played:)
Q Do you remember how soon after you smoked your first cigarette that you started smoking Chesterfields?
A Maybe six -- maybe two or three months.
Q Okay.
A I can't really give you the exact time.
Q Could it have been longer than two or three months?
A I don't think so.
Q Okay. I think just a little while ago you said that you'd smoked Pall Mall, but it had been sort of a fly by night?
A Yeah, it was an OP situation.
Q Okay. So you would not have smoked very many Pall Mall cigarettes?
A No.
Q Maybe less than a pack?
A Yes. I would say maybe a whole pack.
Q Maybe a whole pack, not more than that?
A Right.
(Video stopped.)
MR. BEACH: If that testimony doesn't settle
the issue, I don't know what does.
Now, why. Here is the why did she pick Lucky
Strike cigarettes. Let's listen again to Ms. Kemp. (Thereupon, the videotaped testimony of Ms. Kemp was played:)
Q During that time period when you were seven to
your early teens, did you even think about smoking?
A Never.
Q During that same time period when you were approximately seven years old to your early teens, do you have any recollection of cigarette ads?
A No.
Q When you lived with your mother when you were in high school, did you have a television set?
A No.
Q When you lived with your mother when you were in college, did you have a television set?
A No.
Q And do you know why you first tried Lucky Strike cigarettes?
A A friend of mine was smoking them.
Q Okay. So a friend loaned you a Lucky Strike?
A Yes.
Q Any other reason, other than the friend loaning you the Lucky Strike, that you tried Lucky Strike?
A Not that I can recall.
Q Okay. Just a few months ago you were asked some questions about -- in this lawsuit about the Lucky Strikes that you smoked. Do you remember those questions?
A Yes.
Q You mentioned that you had a friend that smoked Lucky Strike. Do you remember what that friend's name is?
A Sally Peth.
Q And is Sally still living?
A Yes.
Q Could you spell Sally's last name for the court reporter.
A P-E-T-H.
Q And it's my understanding that Lucky Strikes were Sally's main brand of cigarettes at that time?
A Yes.
Q Is Sally the person who gave you the Lucky Strike to smoke for the first time?
A In all probable -- I can't give you -- I'm pretty sure.
MR. BEACH: It's 1:20 in the afternoon. You just heard -- the last voice you heard asking questions, by the way, was counsel for the Plaintiffs, going back to that point I made just a minutes ago. The thought that she wasn't able to answer questions why would they have asked her. Questions.
Now, you just heard Ms. Kemp testify that she didn't have a TV. You also heard earlier,
yesterday, her sister testified that they did have a radio. Of course, as Mr. Maguire just mentioned, and let's not forget, the number one song on the radio the year before Ms. Kemp chose to smoke talked about, smoking yourself to death and nicotine slaves, the number one song in the country.
By the way, in Pennsylvania you may recall Dr. Cummings confirmed that the legal age for smoking at this point in time in 1948 was 16.
Now, let's spend a little -- a minute here, digress and spend a minute on the Plaintiff's evidence. Remember the Plaintiff only showed you one thing, one thing done by Reynolds, American Tobacco, or Brown & Williamson, the three companies that I'm here on behalf of, actually done in 1948 when she smoked. All those documents, one thing actually done in that time period, and it was this ad, a TV ad for Camel, a brand she never smoked at a time when they didn't have a TV in their house.
This is illustrative of the disconnect between the evidence that you've been presented over the long course of this trial and Ms. Kemp, one ad, only one ad actually in the year and it's not even for a brand she smokes, and she doesn't even have a TV.
If they were serious about trying to convince
you that the things that we did mattered, they would show you a connection. If they could show you a connection, and obviously that's what they failed to do throughout this case.
Now, remember this? All the dozens and dozens of print ads? What we did was, again, show you how none of them, none of them were actually in any way connected to Ms. Kemp. I'm sure you all recall this. We went through. They were before she was born, after she was smoking Lucky Strike.
We ultimately ended up with one print ad. It was actually the year after she smoked Lucky Strike. And it just went by pretty quickly, but it showed, you -- remember that we did this. We showed it didn't run in magazines that she actually even got in her house. The two magazines that they got in her house was Time and National Geographic. No cigarette ads. A lack of connection is evident in every step of this case.
By the way, to that point, think about the first three public statements that you were shown by the Plaintiff in their closing yesterday. The first one was the congressional testimony from 1994. As Mr. Maguire pointed out to you, isn't that ironic because, A, there's no testimony that she ever saw
that, and, B, she quit smoking that year. No connection.
The second thing he showed you, The Frank Statement, again, no connection. She said, I never heard of The Frank Statement. Third thing he showed you was an article in True Magazine.
So these were the first three things.
Plaintiff s counsel in closing argument was trying to persuade you that we've impacted Ms. Kemp, and not one of them, strike one, strike two, strike three, connected to Ms. Kemp.
And this testimony from Dr. Cummings I found quite extraordinary. I think, ladies and gentlemen, with all respect, it is extremely telling about Plaintiff s case.
Now, remember, I specifically asked them, I said, You brought all of these statements, all those videos, all those press releases everywhere, make your pile as big as you want. Can you identify a single one that Ms. Kemp said she had ever seen?
No. That's answer number one.
Well, what about this. Didn't Plaintiff s counsel -- did Plaintiff s counsel -- she had Ms. Kemp. She had an opportunity to depose her, to ask her questions.
They worked with Dr. Cummings before. They could have easily -- we have this stack of books. Imagine this is their stack of statements. They could have brought those to the deposition.
Ms. Kemp, do you recognize this? Well, how about this? How about this? Not once, not once did they ask her to do that. And you know why.
And of course, Dr. Cummings never said to the Plaintiffs counsel, hey, you know what, I'm going to be testifying for you, I'd like to really be able to draw that connection. Right?
So would you please -- you know the 25 statements I like to use, would you please share them with Ms. Kemp and verify that she's seen them or whether or not, so we can focus on the ones that matter. Again, that never happened.
This was the witness who has occupied more time in this trial with you all than anybody, and right there, three questions, he confirms zero connection, and zero connection. Despite the opportunity to try to make it, he didn't even try. Again, you know why.
Now, yesterday and probably later today and throughout this trial you've seen the technical people popping up slides and quotes out of
documents, little boxes that all get blown up. I submit, ladies and gentlemen, we know this throughout life, common sense, usually sound bites never tell you very much.
Context -- and Plaintiffs counsel agreed yesterday, I remember hearing Mr. Lewis saying, context is critical, that's absolutely true. But the problem with snippets of documents is, snippets never provide context. We're talking about 40 years of history, science, education, these are complex issues.
The invitation to go into those banker boxes of old documents and read a document here, read a document there, that's nothing about context. Never reading a single document never provides context.
Let me give you an example. You remember this demonstrative used by the Plaintiffs I think in opening and with Dr. Cummings. It is, in fact, the same Life Magazine article that Mr. Maguire used. It's talking about Dr. Wynder's mouse skin painting.
And then the Plaintiff called out this little text box here, which I blew it up on the side so you could hopefully read it, and it says, they specifically pointed this out to you, the American Tobacco Company hastened to point out the tests on
mice, so on and so forth.
So if you only read that, you might look at yourself and say, geez, it sounds like they're being the grand doubters. They're trying to cast doubt on the utility of this research.
But I had to ask Dr. Cummings, I said, wait a second. Dr. Wynder's own research paper specifically makes the same exact point. That's right. This is why snippets of documents flashing those little -- never give you context.
There's also something else they never do, which is show you a connection to Ms. Kemp. And by the way, I'm talking here about this document. I want to show you one other one, maybe two. I'm doing it on behalf of -- I'm picking on my own client right now, but I guarantee you Mr. Maguire could do the same thing and Mr. McCarter could do the same thing and counsel for Liggett could do the same thing because all of these documents there's a much greater context.
And I know you can read these passages, and they may look concerning or confusing, they may frustrate you, cause you to wonder why, and very legitimately so, but the problem is this courtroom only permits us to spend so much time focusing on
those things.
And we, as counsel for the defense, have tried to really keep this case focused on the issue of what links up to Ms. Kemp and her decisions, because that, at the end of the day, as you've heard, is the issue that you address on each question of the verdict form.
But we did try. I did try to show you some illustrations of why these snippets don't give you context. Here is another one. Dr. Rodgman memo, 1956. I'm sure you recall Dr. Cummings described him as a great scientist. He was working very hard in the early '50s to figure out, well, what are the chemical compounds in cigarette smoke? You have to figure out what's in there, and you have to try to figure out what to do about them.
And they showed you a snippet in this memo talking about benzo(a)pyrene. There was a big production and a whole bunch of questions about, was that a secret? Did they tell the public? What did they do about it?
Well, you may recall I showed Dr. Cummings, well, you know, it wasn't a secret. The exact same year, in fact, prior to the Rodgman memo, it's talking about benzoapyrene, and this is -- you
recall he said this is a statement attributed to the great -- everyone agrees -- great Dr. Wynder. There was no dispute about that in this case.
Dr. Wynder is making the point that BAP, yes, it's there, A, so it's not a secret, but B, there's not enough of it there to matter. That's one of the complexities of tobacco science. All these constituents in smoke, what are they, number one, and, two, is there enough of it there to matter?
In any event, the whole notion that they can just flash up to you one document, show you a passage about BAP never gives you context. It never gives you context. By the way, also no connection to Ms. Kemp.
This is a document you saw yesterday in Plaintiff's closing. Real quick. So this is Dr. Teague, the sine qua non man, right? Well, the problem is, he was 22 years too late. That was 1950 Reader's Digest.
Plaintiffs made it sound like he was the only person who knew that the habitual use of tobacco is primarily related to the psychological and social drives reinforced and perpetuated by the pharmacological actions of nicotine on the central nervous system. Oops, that's not in Dr. Teague's
memo. That's written in the 1964 Surgeon General's report.
Snippets from documents, ladies and gentlemen, it doesn't matter how many you go through in that box, don't give you context. Again, I'm saying this trying to pick on the Reynolds stuff, but every single one of my co-counsel here could do the exact same thing.
Now, one issue very quickly about nicotine. As you've heard, nicotine is an inherent component in tobacco. And both Dr. Burns and Dr. Cummings agreed that for cigarettes to be acceptable to consumers, normal ordinary cigarettes, there needs to be nicotine in them. When there have been efforts to market cigarettes that don't contain nicotine, those have failed. The products didn't sell.
That was recognized -- the second quote there from Dr. Cummings was, that was recognized all the way back in the '64 Surgeon General's report. So there's no secret about that. So nicotine is an inherent component of tobacco. Consumers want it.
And we have to remember, and as the Court will instruct you -- can you go to the next slide, please? Cigarettes and -- the manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity. Cigarettes
contain nicotine. Manufacture and sale of cigarettes is a lawful activity.
Therefore, I instruct you that the Defendants cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, and advertising cigarettes. That's one of the legal instructions the Court gave you in this case.
Let's go to the prior slide. Now, also just real quickly about ingredients, there's been some discussion about that. People sort of wonder, well, what's -- what are in cigarettes? There's been some discussion about that.
Dr. Cummings, when I was talking to him about this briefly, you will recall, he said, I agree that they seek to make cigarettes taste good. That's what consumers want. That's why we have taste variants from one cigarette brand to a different cigarette brand. No different than the taste variants between types of rice you can get at the store or vodka that you can buy at the liquor store or the flavor that the different grapes give you for wine.
To be absolutely clear, the United States Government for now more than 20 years has been getting annually a list of ingredients used in
cigarettes. They are legally commanded to tell Congress, you've got to get that ingredient out, if they see something on the list they don't like.
Dr. Cummings, the master expert here on the industry, couldn't identify any instance where Congress or -- excuse me, where the United States Government Health and Human Services Department has told Congress to do that. I wanted that to be clear about ingredients.
If we could go back to the slide, I wanted to talk about the first instruction. The warning labels placed on cigarette packs and advertisements by Defendants complied with federal law, and the Defendants had no obligation, the Defendants had no obligation after July 1, 1969 to place any additional warnings on their cigarette packs and advertisements. That's the law, as you've been instructed by the Court.
So if you think, boy, I really think they should have put more information on their packs, like the list of ingredients, the Court has instructed you about the warning labels.
Now, let's go back to Ms. Kemp very quickly, to finish out the Reynolds smoking history. You'll recall -- I'm going to do this very quickly. She
testified she wasn't smoking very much during the time period she was smoking Lucky Strikes and that includes before school and during school. The next slide, please. She maybe smoked sometimes on the way home, not at home at night, she couldn't really recall.
Next, please. Why does all of this matter?
You're going -- as you already heard from Mr. Maguire, there's three questions on the verdict form. There's actually four but I'm going to focus on the three that relate to Liggett, Philip Morris, and Reynolds, whether the smoking of those cigarettes was a legal cause of Ms. Kemp's COPD.
Now, if we can go to the next slide. The three Plaintiff s witnesses -- you can put Dr. Andrews, who confirmed the same thing, to the side. The three Plaintiff s witnesses on this issue were unanimous, unanimous, you have to have multiple pack years before you have any increased risk for COPD.
How many? They varied a little bit.
Dr. Cleveland, 10 years or more. Again, these are pack years, which I know you all understand now is a term. Cummings, 10 pack years, no increased risk.
Dr. Burns, I'm not aware of a study that shows any increased risk at 5 pack years. So that's why I say
here, 5 plus to 10 or more, absolutely minimum for any increased risk for COPD.
And as to Reynolds, Dr. -- and I'm going to let the other companies, Liggett and Philip Morris, address their amount, their brief history. But for Reynolds, Dr. Cummings agreed it wouldn't be anywhere close to even one pack year of smoking in the aggregate, completely agreed with that point.
So let's now turn to the instruction here. And there's a similar instruction that has Philip Morris in it and a similar instruction that has Liggett in it and a similar instruction that has Lorillard.
Smoking cigarettes manufactured by Reynolds, so this is just one but they're parallel in the legal instruction by Reynolds, is a legal cause of COPD and death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such COPD and death so that it can reasonably be said that but for, but for smoking those cigarettes the COPD and death would not have occurred.
If there's no increased risk, it cannot be a direct substantial contribution, and it certainly can't be but for. But for means without, right?
That again applies to Reynolds, Philip Morris, and
Liggett.
Now, you also get an instruction from the Court on what's called concurring cause. I just want to talk about the difference between those just very briefly. Legal cause talks about -- it was the instruction that we've just looked at.
Concurring cause doesn't have all of the same language. It ends up by saying, contributed substantially to produce it. That's the same phrase as is in the main legal cause instruction. The main legal cause instruction obviously explains to you that what that means is so that it can be -reasonably be said that but for.
So that standard, that but for standard applies whether you're talking about a legal cause or a concurring cause. It has shortened up the phraseology there. Okay.
One other instruction you're going to get or you have received from the Court and you'll hear again is that if you find by the greater weight of the evidence the combination of smoking cigarettes made by Reynolds and the other manufacturers -- and again, they're parallel instructions like this for each of the companies -- contributed substantially to causing her death in indeterminate degrees and
amounts, then I instruct you, so forth, that you can find the cause that way.
There's absolutely no basis to say, however, that Ms. Kemp's smoking of Lucky Strike and Pall Mall cigarettes was in any way indeterminate. It could not be more clear from her testimony. No witness said it was indeterminate.
So you know that from your own review of the evidence and also the Plaintiff didn't even try to get a witness to say that. And the same goes for, again, counsel for Philip Morris and for Liggett.
So that's the one question that -- the extra question that Mr. Maguire said I was going to address.
Now, the last question, which is this next question about whether or not the agreement is the big why in this case. The agreement to conceal information from Ms. Kemp, was that the big why, as you just saw the phraseology in that instruction, direct, substantial, continuous, but for, those are the synonyms for which you should think about.
As you recall from my opening, I said we have to focus on three or four aspects of this instruction. If we can go to the first. You learned here that the agreement was formed in 1953.
So that was an -- absolutely confirmed by the evidence in this case.
Now, you've heard that the Plaintiff has abandoned their concealment claim, and you've also been instructed by the Court, Instruction 20, that this claim can't be based on any actions prior to December 20 of 1953. Where does that leave Reynolds and where does that leave Liggett and even Lorillard as to the early Kent ads? That's all gone.
You can't base any finding to this question on anything occurring before December of '53. Well, that was Reynolds' smoking history, that's the Liggett smoking history, and that's those Kent ads from the time period when Ms. Kemp switched.
Now, let's talk about the next thing, because we are -- remember from my opening, I talked about, the agreement is about health effects and addiction.
So the first place to start is, well, what did
Ms. Kemp know about those things even prior to the
agreement?
And you heard her own testimony that she knew smoking was dangerous in 1952 or 1953. You saw her testimony that she was aware of being addicted. Do you remember she says, I didn't need to have anybody tell me that. And that was in 1949.
And then for the legal cause issue, again, that's focused on, were the things that Reynolds and the other companies did a direct, substantial, continuous, but for, why? Are we the big why for why Ms. Kemp smoked and ultimately got COPD?
As I mentioned at the very beginning, so I'm now fortunately close to the end, there are I think six simple reasons why the answer to that question is no. I'm going to go through each of them.
And by the way, I actually think these reasons also apply to, frankly, a lot of other issues that you're looking at in this case. There's a lot of interweaving of issues.
This one goes to I think whether or not addiction was a cause of her continued smoking or some other reason was more important. I think this also -- these things would have potentially applied to how you would judge, to the extent you ever got there, to an allocation of responsibility among the parties.
But most importantly, I think that these establish why the Plaintiff has fundamentally failed to prove reliance in this case, reliance on this agreement and legal cause.
So let's go to the first one, please.
Obviously, Ms. Kemp agreed she wasn't aware of these organizations. She agreed she hadn't heard any statements from them. She agreed she hadn't heard of The Frank Statement. She agreed she had never heard statements by any tobacco manufacturer. And she agreed that she'd never talked to a representative of any tobacco company.
Now, Mr.-- I'm sorry, go back. Mr. Lewis said, well, you know what? And this is a fair argument to you, I thought. Who is going to remember, you know, this statement could come from somebody, how would I know that it comes from TIRC?
Well, ladies and gentlemen, if Ms. Kemp was exposed to a message, maybe she doesn't pay attention to who it came from, but it's going to be the basis for her believing that she doubted that smoking was dangerous? She would have said, I doubt smoking is dangerous.
Never once did they in the opportunities that she had -- and I'll show you this in a second, where people were saying, you need to quit, did she come back and say that. So I would suggest to you that whether she remembered the acronyms is irrelevant because we know from her own interactions with people, she didn't actually hear this message, much
less rely on it or act on it.
You also heard -- and this is a bit redundant, so I do apologize, I'll get through this really quickly -- Ms. Kemp couldn't identify any information that would have affected her decisions, right? She said there's no information that she could think of that would have changed her decision to -- whether to pick up the first cigarette.
You know, she said she can't identify any information that could have been provided to her, or whether it was about the dangerousness to the health and whether that would have impacted her decision to quit. If Ms. Kemp can't identify that -- and by the way, the Plaintiffs in this case haven't identified that, right, where have they ever said, you know, if these folks had only ever told her X or told her Y, the world would be a different place. We wouldn't be here. Not once did they identify that.
And then lastly, you know, she was asked, do you believe that the companies withheld information from you, that affected your smoking decisions? I have no idea. If she doesn't know, ladies and gentlemen, how can it be said that they can say there's something that we could or should have done that would have made a difference?
Next, please. This is the point I was probably pretty inarticulately trying to express about the acronyms, right? We know that in 1964 her husband is encouraging her to quit. We know in 1970 her son is encouraging her to quit. We know during these years that she had information about training as a respiratory technician.
You may recall she was asked, did any of that information surprise you? Right. If Ms. Kemp had heard all these statements that the Plaintiffs have been alleging, she would have said to her ex-husband, why in the world do I want to quit? She would have said the same thing to her son. She would have said the same thing to her teachers. Throughout time, every opportunity, when people confronted her, she never said, why? Why should I quit?
By the way, did she really think her brand was safer? She had three children who smoked. Where is the evidence that Ms. Kemp said to any of her children, well, what brand are you smoking? If you're not smoking the safe one -- I mean, come on. Any mother knowing that their children are engaging in a dangerous acti