MR. GERSON: Okay.
May it please the Court, good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
You may have noticed that since the last time I spoke to you I look a little different. I had a very little medical procedure but it comes with a very big bandage. So it's really nowhere near as bad as it looks.
But I don't want to talk about me. I'm just pointing it out so no one is distracted by it as the elephant in the room.
What we have to talk about this morning is two things: The conduct of the defendant and the effect of the conduct -- of the conduct on my client.
But what is the conduct of the defendant for which they should be punished? The fraud and the conspiracy.
And what is the harm it caused for which you are being asked to punish them? For the disease of cancer of the mouth.
I won't go through all of the damages like I did last Tuesday, when I spoke to you last and discussed the pain and suffering, mental anguish, disability and ability to lead a normal life and disfigurement; but I will sum it all up by telling you that there was a total loss of oral function by Mrs. Larkin and a grotesque disfigurement.
Her life was destroyed by a massive decade-long fraud and conspiracy. This is what you're punishing for.
Now, don't accept the argument that your having measured the damages in your first verdict is enough and that punishment isn't warranted. Because if you did that, you would be -- you would be saying that, well, this was a fair exchange. Here's four-and-a-half-million dollars and we've done enough -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GERSON: -- to trade you for your health -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Grounds.
MR. ISASI: Misstates the standard. Fair
exchange is not part of the jury instruction.
THE COURT: Okay. Again, ladies and gentlemen, I'm overruling. Ladies and gentlemen, I've just read you the law on punitive damages and that is the law that you must follow. You will receive a copy of the instructions that I just read with you in the jury room should you have any question at all about the law. What the attorney is presenting right now is argument.
You may proceed.
MR. GERSON: So if you were to say that the four-and-a-half million dollars is all that the plaintiff should get for pain and suffering, and all that she's suffered, and we should ignore the fraud and the conspiracy, you would be saying that it was an even exchange; they paid what they should pay and it shouldn't go any farther than that and that's what they're urging on you.
My client was not willing to trade her health or her dignity or her independence -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
MR. GERSON: -- and it shouldn't -MR. ISASI: Objection.
THE COURT: Grounds.
MR. ISASI: Again, it's improper argument.
Misstates the standard.
THE COURT: Okay. Sustained.
Please rephrase.
MR. ISASI: I have a motion.
MR. GERSON: The -THE COURT: I'm asking you to rephrase your argument, please.
MR. GERSON: Okay. Okay.
The defendant should not be heard to say that it shouldn't matter that these things were taken by means of fraud, manipulation of the truth and conspiracy.
That is where you come in as jurors acting as the conscience of the community. It is the duty of the jury to make the public safe by giving the maximum punishment allowable in a case like this.
This was egregious conduct that caused devastating harm. This was not merely a momentary lapse in judgment by the act of a few. This was the biggest, longest, worst fraud in the history of the United States.
Let me turn to the jury instructions and talk with you for a few minutes about the charge that was just read to you, a copy of which will go back into the jury room with you.
And I want to highlight the guidance that Florida law gives you for this case.
First thing I want to remind you of is that you're to consider all of the evidence in this case, both in Phase I and in Phase II, as the evidence relates to those two things I just talked about:
What is the -- what was the fraud, what was the conspiracy, what was the wrongdoing, and what was the effect on Mrs. Larkin.
Now, as you go a little farther into the instructions, there are five factors listed under Roman numerals and you're told to consider these five factors.
Before I discuss them, let me just say the jury instructions are a plain statement of the law.
They're the same for all cases. Judges don't change the law for one case or another. The law is the same for everybody.
So the instructions say that you should consider these five enumerated things.
First: Was the wrongful conduct motivated solely by unreasonable financial gain?
Didn't the evidence in this case prove convincingly that the fraud was to counteract the effect the truth would have had on the profits?
That's unreasonable financial gain. We use their words in their secret documents to prove that there was motivation only to make more money.
The second factor, Roman numeral II, is was the unreasonably dangerous nature of the conduct done with a high likelihood of injury resulting actually known by an officer or a person responsible for making policy decisions?
Now, remember that face chart that you were shown several times during the trial? Three generations of R.J. Reynolds presidents lying to the public are represented on that face chart.
When they were in Congress, in fact, they weren't just talking to a reporter on TV; they were under oath. That means that they swore to tell the truth. Everyone in this courtroom took an oath.
The witnesses had to take an oath before they would be allowed to testify. You took an oath in order to become jurors in this case.
Before we can practice law, lawyers take an oath. The judge takes an oath before the judge -or at the time the judge is sworn in to serve as a judge. When the court reporter signs a transcript he has to sign an oath.
These oaths are not meaningless. Oaths are a
foundation for our honesty.
They are assurance to the community that the principles of our country will be followed.
Thousands of big corporations act honestly.
They treat their customers with truth, not fraud.
But at Reynolds, three presidents, 50 years, the corporate culture was compromised by greed.
Yes, the policymakers knew it. Of course. The policymakers were behind it all along.
Now, the next factor, No. 3, is did they have a specific intent to harm Carole Larkin? No. They never singled her out to target her differently than they did other teenagers. But this is part of the jury instructions because in some cases there is a specific intent to harm one person.
This is just a list of the things that you should consider in deciding the amount of the punitive damages, and it's not required that we prove that they singled her out by name or by any other criteria and intentionally harmed her over all others instead of the truth that you and I both know; that she was simply a member of the class of persons, young teenagers growing up in America who they were allowed to addict.
Number Roman numeral IV: Is there any
mitigating evidence showing punishment should be reduced or that it isn't needed? Well, this is what they tried to show in Phase II of the trial.
And let me just make a few comments on what their evidence was.
First, they tell us that the Food and Drug Administration, the FDA now regulates tobacco companies since a law was passed in 2009. And they bring a corporate officer to court who gets on the witness stand and he says we're obeying that law; as if that is a reason to excuse them for the fraud and conspiracy that they perpetrated on the country for 50 years by having someone come to court and say there are all of these sanctions and if we don't obey the law, the government is going to do all of these things to us as of 2009. So that somehow excused what we did for 50 years.
If the tobacco companies had acted responsibly, we wouldn't need that law. We put them under the Federal Trade Commission in the 1970s to regulate their advertising and their labeling.
Now, in 2009, the Food and Drug Administration -- and tobacco is not food. You know what it is. It's a drug the government can regulate. Lots of industries are regulated and this
is not punishment. This is the tobacco police we need because the industry can't be trusted.
The second mitigating factor is they tell us about this master settlement agreement. That's not punishment either. 46 states, including Florida, sued them to collect the money that they spent paying for medical services for uninsured people who were sick from smoking cigarettes.
There were no punitive damages sought or recovered in that case; they are merely paying their debt to the states that they owe as a result of the defect in their product.
That's no reason to excuse them from being punished for what they did that harmed Carole Larkin in this case.
Finally, they say, well, you know, we've been assessed punitive damages in the past. And they said that so far, not what's been asked for or what's been sued for, but they have paid $106 million in punitives. So what does that tell us?
First, it tells us that you would not be the first jury to punish them for harm to one smoker, and we have not asked you to punish them for the harm to any other smoker. And the other juries have not punished them for the harm to Carole Larkin.
So the past payments of $106 million have nothing to do with this case. They have to do with other cases, other smokers, other juries' punishments; and that's no excuse for them to say to you in this courtroom because other juries have punished us for similar conduct that's hurt other people, that you should excuse us from our responsibility to pay punitive damages in this case.
They're asking for a free pass. They're asking for a bailout. And we're asking you to hold them accountable for what they did.
Now, you get to Roman numeral B, which is the -- the next part of the instruction and it says you can consider the financial resources of RJR. And from the evidence it's clear that their financial resources are considerable.
We ask you to award punitive damages of $19.8 million in this case, which is four times the amount of the compensatory damages you already awarded.
This actually will have a minimal impact on a corporate giant like Reynolds. It's like a mosquito bite or maybe a bee sting to this corporation.
We don't ask you to cripple them or put them out of business. So I say, please do not award more than 19.8 million no matter what the evidence leads
you to want to do.
That sum, $19.8 million, bears a reasonable relationship to the amount of compensatory damages and it's the right amount to punish them for the harm done to Carole Larkin.
There's a question on the verdict form, and you should answer that question yes.
You should return a verdict that you can be proud of.
This is how juries can make a difference, by saying what is not allowed and what is allowed. Make the punishment fit the wrong.



MR. PAIGE: May -- you're done?
MR. GERSON: Yeah.
MR. PAIGE: May it please the Court.
Counsel, good morning. I'm going to go over some of the things that Phil just went over with you and probably might be a little redundant and I apologize if it is.
Do I have a clicker somewhere? Or it doesn't matter. Can you get the first one?
So this is the jury instruction that the -- the judge just read to you and I think you've seen it before in our opening statement. So punitive damages, it's very important. Okay? Because this
is not compensation anymore. This is so that this company is punished for what they've done. And punishment, you know, at the beginning Mr. Isasi said -- and I think I said first -- that they would tell you, hey, we've heard this. You know, we heard your verdict in Winston-Salem. And, you know, that's good.
They heard in Winston-Salem, if you hurt somebody with a defective product, you're going to have to award fair compensation and full compensation and they heard that; but now with punishment, they have to also know -- you know, with punishment they have to feel it. And that will make a difference because they -- that's what punitive damages are.
Punitive damages aren't so that they can go back and say, hey, we'll -- we got out of this one pretty good. We escaped our punishment. We had a low punishment. They need to go back to Winston-Salem, these gentlemen and these ladies, and report to them and say, hey, this jury in Miami-Dade County in 2015 heard all the evidence in this case and they heard the law and they decided that it was -- it was proper for us to -- to be punished.
And so this is for them to know what they did
in the past is wrong and they need to know that. They need to know that and that'll be good for them going forward, No. 1.
And, No. 2, to deter others because other corporations, other cigarette companies and other corporations need to know that if you lie, if you steal, if you mislead and you put profits over human lives, there is going to be a penalty to pay.
There's going to be a penalty to pay.
It's not going to be like, hey, we'll pay compensation and we'll get out of it. No. You have to be punished and that's the law and the law is like that for a reason. And so the next one -- so the instruction is you have to determine the extent and degree -- and degree of the misconduct.
And, again, I'll reiterate to you: There is no -- if you can think about it, there cannot be any type of misconduct that could be worse than what they did you -- almost any. And if you think about the -- the extent of it, how widely they carried this out and for how long, you need to consider that in determining the amount of punitive damages.
And so when we talk about punitive damages, when Mr. Gerson asked you for specific amounts, specific reasons, because there are certain limits
of what we can ask for in these cases. And so when he asks you for an amount, there's a reason for that. And we can't ask you for 100 million or a billion or, you know, $42 billion. We can't do that in an individual case; the law wouldn't support that.
But when you consider the extent of their misconduct, you have to consider all along that they had choices, you know. They made this case -- they made this case about the choices that Carole Larkin made. And that was their -- their -- their whole story. And they ignored for 50 years and throughout this trial, they never -- never addressed their own choices, their own choices: How they did it, why they did it, how they -- how that could be okay to do it, how they could, you know, make these choices knowing what's going on every day and every night and keep doing it and doing and doing it and doing it, and that is why the -- the -- there is really nothing worse.
So they come here, and as Phil just told you, they asked -- there is an instruction that says, in determining the amount of punitive damages, you can consider mitigating factors. And so that's -- you know, there are a whole bunch of different
mitigating factors that could have existed that don't exist.
You know, there's a lot of -- you know, the $42 billion that they talked about from the MSA, the $42 billion that they paid over 17 years for healthcare costs. They got off cheap. You heard Dr. Borgerding. That doesn't -- not -- not one penny of it goes to one victim, not one of their victims. You know, how is that a mitigating factor when they come to court against the victims and they say, we haven't been punished yet -- we're not compensating the victims but we worked out a settlement with the states where we have to pay them a fraction of the healthcare costs that we've caused to happen.
So that -- that to me, is -- or to you, you have to decide -- is that really a mitigating factor? Where they were -- they were sued by the states for wrongful conduct, the states and them had a settlement where they recouped a small portion of healthcare costs, and not one victim received any compensation, nor was any amount of that for punishment.
They also talked about, and Phil talked about it, how the FDA now has to police them; that they're
an industry now that has to pay the FDA to police them. And, again, it's not an easy process for the FDA to police them. So the FDA is doing their job and we'll see how that works out in the future. But right now, how is that a mitigating factor to the victims? How does -- the victims who are dead or injured and suffering, that they have nothing -that doesn't affect them at all. They haven't done anything to mitigate the harm to the victims.
And then they talked about there is 5,000 lawsuits pending in Florida, and I think they said there was 150 over the past seven or eight years.
So if you think about that, think about how long -if there's 5,000 cases pending in Florida for victims, of all the people they injured, of all the people that got killed, 5,000 individuals filed lawsuits according to Dr. Borgerding. 150 cases in the past seven or eight years, so 20 cases a year -20 cases a year, people who get their day in court -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. There's no evidence in the record how many cases.
THE COURT: Okay. It's sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Well -- okay.
THE COURT: Unless you want to be heard
sidebar.
MR. PAIGE: I'll rephrase it.
Well, Dr. Borgerding -- I'll just tell you, that Dr. Borgerding testified there has been, over the past seven or eight years, there was 150 trials.
So if you do the math, that's 20 cases a year on average.
So if you use that number going forward, it would take the equivalent of 300 years for each of the 5,000 victims to get their day in court. Okay? That's how long it would take for these 5,000 victims to get their day in court if they live long enough.
And if you -- just to conceptualize that in time, if you go back 300 years, that was before George Washington was our president. So this is -it's not going to happen. The 5,000 cases that he was asking you to mitigate his damages because he's saying there's 5,000 cases pending, what does that mean? It doesn't mean much of anything. It doesn't mean much of anything, unfortunately.
And, you know, he said that they paid 106 million in punitive damages to date. And so like Phil said, so what does that mean? If some jurors awarded punitive damages, but it -- and he also said
a lot of the people who pursued cases in court, you know, those cases are on appeal and they haven't paid those punitive damages yet.
But if, if a thousand trials of the 5,000, if it would happen that a thousand plaintiffs could get their case to trial in the next 50 years, 50 years from now, we got 1,000 victims to trial and every one of them won, every one of them won, and everybody got $20 million, which is what Phil basically said, that would equal $20 billion in punishment to this company, which is half of what they paid to the states to reimburse healthcare costs.
So those numbers, when you hear about the punishment for what they've done, you know, the punishment has to be severe so they feel it so that they know, and it's hard. It's hard to get it -you know, to get a thousand cases to trial, probably won't happen any time soon and, you know, a lot of jurors are going to have to hear a lot of evidence like you all did. And that's the hard work that's going on in Florida right now.
And then we learned from Dr. Borgerding that despite this fraud when you consider the mitigating circumstances, how they've changed, how they've
changed, the only thing that we've learned is, is that in the last month they went out for billions and billions of dollars and bought Lorillard Tobacco Company and now Newport is their leading brand. So that's how they've changed. There's nothing that's changed, respectfully, but the date on the calendar. And that's it with these guys and that's all it's ever been.
So when they have these roads at the beginning and they took you down, they had a choice of two roads, you know: The good road or the bad road.
And they've traveled down that bad road for so long and they've told the same story over and over and over again, and they continue to do the same thing over and over again. And they're going down the same road and it's really just the road to nowhere; that nothing will change unless you guys really step forward and help and do the right thing.
And so for punitive damages... in this question, "What amount do you find for punitive damages?" It's four times compensatory damages. There is -- in Florida there's a certain amount we can ask for. So we could ask for three times compensatories, but we can ask for four times in the law "If' -- you can check those -- if the answer to
the bottom one is yes -- because that does not apply to all punitive damages, that second question.
So some corporations, some conduct is -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. This is an instruction on the law.
THE COURT: It really is and it's really more for me.
MR. PAIGE: I'm sorry?
THE COURT: It's sustained. This is really more an issue for the Court and -MR. PAIGE: Okay.
So this is an important question and, respectfully, if you find "yes" on that question, the verdict will sustain, you know, we would ask you respectfully to award four times the compensatory award.
And that's all I have to say right now. Thank you very much.
MR. ISASI: Your Honor, if we can just have a moment to provide plaintiffs' counsel with our slides we intend to use, have a chance to look at it.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. GERSON: (Perusing document.)
MR. PAIGE: (Perusing document.)
MR. GERSON: Can we take a five-minute break just because I'm only halfway -THE COURT: Sure. We just need to do some legal housekeeping. If you can just leave your pads on your chairs and we're just going to be about five, ten minutes. Okay.
THE COURT DEPUTY: All rise.
(The jury left the courtroom at 9:44 a.m.)
MR. PAIGE: (Perusing documents.)
MR. GERSON: (Perusing documents.)
(Pause.)
THE COURT: Does anyone have -- oh, you're going through it together.
(Pause.)



MR. PAIGE: Your Honor, 25 minutes?
THE COURT: You have about 25 minutes.
MR. PAIGE: Thank you.
Okay. This is my last time to talk to you guys; thank God you'll never hear from me again.
It's a shame, though. We hang out with you guys for two, three weeks and it's kind of weird because we -- we never see you-all again, and we wonder, you know, wonder what goes on in your mind and it's an interesting process.
But like Jose said, you know, we do thank you and we appreciate you.
Look, Jose is, he's a great guy. I like Jose.
I have a lot of respect for him.
MR. ISASI: I hate to object on a compliment for that, but he is personalizing, Your Honor.
MR. PAIGE: Okay.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. PAIGE: I apologize. I don't like Jose.
No, I just want to make one point clear, that he's not R.J. Reynolds. You know, we're asking that you punish R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company for what they've done.
If you can put the first slide in.
So I want to go through -- I could go through all of Jose's slides, most respectfully, and comment on all of them. But I'm not going to have enough time.
But one thing that he asks you and, again, he's speaking on behalf of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company, so when they say that the -- that you should -- see, on one hand he's telling you, hey, we heard you, we heard you loud and clear, we heard you when you gave fair compensation to this one victim. But then on the other hand when he tells you, but don't award punitive damages, you have to think to yourself, have they really heard us? Do they really understand? Do these guys understand what they've done wrong and understand how important it is what they've done to get here? The degree of the misconduct -- you know, if you have in a situation that there's a child who steals candy -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor, Golden Rule.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: In society the child steals candy and he goes home to his parents and his parents catch him and they say, put that back, put that back, that's wrong. And the child says, okay, mommy, daddy, I put it back. They say, okay, but now I'm going to have to punish you because you have to learn what you did was wrong, and you have to know and understand that you can't do this, you can't do this to people if you're going to be a proper member of our society.
And the brothers and sisters in the house have
to also see that because they have to be deterred because they say, hey, what happened to little Johnny? Little Johnny stole and mommy and daddy made him put it back, but then he got punished. And then that serves a good purpose in America, in families and in society.
But what they did, you can't compare it to stealing candy. I mean, they did the worst of the worst. Right? For 50 years, 50 years, 20 million,
30 million, whatever the number, that's how many died, 8.6 million people living with -- with -- with smoke -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. No nexus on -THE COURT: Overruled.
Again, ladies and gentlemen, you will receive jury instructions that explain exactly how it is that you are to analyze the issues here of punitive damages, and those are the laws that you have to follow in this case.
And this is argument being presented by counsel.
You may proceed.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Thank you, Your Honor.
(Pause.)
MR. PAIGE: What's the next slide, Baron? Okay.
And -- so, again, it's the same -- everything Mr. Isasi said basically -- if we can do it, Baron, just quickly.
-- that's the same road that they've led us down, really, I will submit to you honestly, nothing is changing, nothing -- I'm going to go through all the slides -- or not all of them but a lot of them.
The next one that he showed you, that I want to talk about, was where he said, punitive damages cannot be awarded -- I thought this was interesting. Punitive damages cannot be awarded to a public health agency or antismoke clinics or organizations or smoking clinics; they can only be awarded to the victims. Right?
So they -- they are taking that and saying, hey, don't give them the $20 million that we feel is punishment because they -- we don't know what they're going to do with the money, but you know what they're going to do with the money. We know what they're going to do with the money. We heard in 19- -- in 2006 or 2005 the industry spent $13 billion on their marketing. $20 million, do you think that they're going to -- that they're going to
use that money for smoking clinics or they're going to use the money -- who do you think would be a better fit to do something with the money: The victims or the tobacco companies? It's not even a close call. It's not even a close call. Who is more suited, who is better off? Where will society be better?
You know, recently they bought Lorillard Tobacco Company. They say they're a changed company, we're changed. All these regulations, all this stuff. Well, last month they spent billions and billions, 20-something billion dollars to buy Newport cigarettes.
So they come in here and they ask for mercy, and, you know, I submit to you they don't deserve any mercy. They don't deserve it because you cannot, just like a kid who stole candy, you can't let them get away with it. You can't let them think that it's okay. You can't let R.J. Reynolds, back in Winston-Salem know that if they do something like this, that we're going to just turn the other cheek because they're going to come up here with arguments like, oh, well, our victims are going to get the money. That's not a reason not to award punitive damages.
Another thing Mr. Isasi said -What's the next slide? Next slide?
I want to show you this because Mr. Isasi, he said to you that if we can't prove that there was specific intent to harm Mrs. Larkin that we don't get punitive damages. You remember Jose said that to you-all? And this is what the actual instruction looks like and -- oh.
MR. ISASI: I just want to object. That does misstate my argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: Here's what it says. It says, in awarding punitive damages you need to consider the nature, the extent, the degree of the misconduct. That's what we've gone through. There's nothing worse. You need to consider whether it was motivated solely by unreasonable financial gain.
We know that it was. They did it for money. They -- they -- they lied and concealed and conspired, knowing the harm they were causing to people including Carole Larkin just for the money. So you consider that, so there's nothing worse.
And then it says, you can consider whether this conduct was actually known by the managing agent, directors, officers, or other persons responsible
for making these decisions.
This is just things you consider because if the supervisors didn't know about it, maybe you don't award as much of punitive damages; but this was the top of the top. These were the top guys.
And then it says, one of the factors you can consider is whether they specifically intended to harm Carole Larkin.
They didn't know Carole Larkin. They didn't know who she was. But they knew that she was one of millions and millions. 4,000 teenagers start smoking -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. There's no evidence they knew who Mrs. Larkin was. There's no evidence in the record.
THE COURT: Overruled.
Again, ladies and gentlemen, you are the judge of the facts. You are the -- the members of the jury are the actors in this trial who will consider the evidence, weigh the evidence, decide what weight to give it. Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: So they didn't know Mrs. Larkin, but they knew -- or Carole Larkin when she was a teenager, but they knew. They knew. You saw their internal documents. They were targeting teenagers.
They knew exactly what they were doing.
Then it goes on to say you can consider mitigating evidence -- that's what they've been talking about -- and you can also consider whether punitive damages has -- have been assessed in the past. So those are things you can consider.
But it doesn't say if punitive damages have been assessed in the past, you don't award punitive damages again. It doesn't say if they didn't specifically intend to hurt Mrs. Larkin that you can't award punitive damages. That is not what the law says.
So if that wasn't clear by what Mr. Isasi said -- I want to make sure that was crystal clear -- that that is what the law says. And not to interpret it to mean anything other than that.
I guess he was saying -- this next instruction -- do you have it, Baron? -- is important because there are limits on punitive damages and in order to get over three times, to get four times you have to be able to -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. This is -this is not the law for the jury.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Well, this is an important
question I would submit to you. If you do award the -- 19 million 800 and something-thousand dollars and you give four times for punitive damages, you must answer that question yes.
Can you -- okay.
So then the next thing -- this one that Jose put up is that you have to consider whether they have changed. Whether they're a changed company.
And then he put up slide -- or a slide with all the executives and said, look, we're changed. All these people are gone. Don't punish us. They're all gone.
And I would submit to you that -- I submit to you that that's not reason not to punish them.
Think about it. They're saying to you this is the Lorillard of 2015 [sic]. We're not these guys anymore. So don't punish us. They're not -they're not changing. They're not changing.
They brought in Dr. Borgerding and he was actually there in the '80s and '90s. He didn't speak up. He didn't speak up.
And the -- the issue is -- think about it -- if their conspiracy, if their fraud lasts long enough that they can outlive -- the corporation can outlive everybody before they get caught, they want to say,
hey, you should mitigate our damages because our fraud lasted so long, these people are gone and now we have new people there like Dr. Borgerding. Like Dr. Borgerding.
And I asked Dr. Borgerding, have you ever admitted yet -- has your company admitted that you targeted teenagers? Have you admitted that you were in a conspiracy? Have you admitted that you concealed important information? He said -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. May I approach?
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. PAIGE: Between here and here I lost a piece of paper. Believe it or not, it happened.
So anyway, the point I was trying to make or was making was if they don't understand what they did was wrong, if they don't understand what they did wrong, how could they -- how could they say we don't need to be punished? We don't need to be deterred when they don't even understand apparently about the conspiracy; about the targeting children;
about the concealment and the fact that the conspiracy -MR. ISASI: Your Honor, objection.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ISASI: We have a motion, Your Honor.
MR. PAIGE: And the fact that the conspiracy lasted so long, so long that a conspiracy outlived their victims, how is that a mitigating factor that their conspiracy has lasted so long and they are still doing so well that now we should not be punished?
And if you put up the next board, Baron. This one again (indicating).
And so this is a board that he showed you about all the penalties that they paid again and I -- all their boards -- I'd like to talk about every one of them if I had time. But the fact is the master settlement of $42 billion that they paid was for healthcare costs, which is a sliver of the healthcare costs that we incur every year.
And that's not a punishment to them. So they're saying, hey, if other companies -- if other companies see that we're now being regulated, that we're being regulated, that's going to be deterrence.
Think about it. The government regulation is not a punishment. It happens all the time. All -a lot of industries are regulated, but only tobacco would say the fact that we're now regulated, that's a punishment. That's a deterrence.
They should have been -- they should have been governed for decades. So how is that a mitigating factor, the fact that they're now regulated? Like that's some sort of punishment. It took 50 years,
60 years to get them regulated from the FDA.
You remember that document from long ago,
1960s, it said who ain't for more money. And the whole reason was they didn't want government regulation. If you look at that document -- I don't know the number -- but that was the whole purpose.
If you read that document, that talks about we don't want FDA regulation. Well, now we have it and now they want to say, okay, now we're regulated like everybody else. That's a deterrence. It's not a deterrence.
They talk about the lawsuits and the number he gave you. He said, well, don't give anything in punitive damages; but if you give something, you know, you can give -- give tens of thousands, give a hundred thousand, give a million at the most. That
would be enough.
Put that back up, please.
MR. PHILIPSON: Sorry.
MR. PAIGE: So if you think about it mathematically, the 5,000 cases that are pending that would take 300 years to get the verdict that they paid -- and they're not -- again, when you talk about mitigation, they're not coming forward and saying we're going to give the 5,000 victims -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Grounds.
MR. ISASI: Same grounds previously stated, discussing the 5,000 victims.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. Well, they talked about 5,000 cases, but it -- if -- if -- if everybody got the million -- I mean, he talked about all the other cases that were pending. How much punitive damages were paid. It would take hundreds of years to equal, you know, a sliver of what they're paying back in healthcare costs.
I submit to you respectfully that the way to get there, the way to punish them, the way for other companies to be deterred, to listen and say, hey, this is severe if -- for you to give the maximum
amount, which is not the 20 million; it has to be under it. I forget what the number is times four, but 19 million 822,000 or something like. That would be the number.
Um... what is the next slide, Baron?
MR. PHILIPSON: (Inaudible).
MR. PAIGE: Okay. And so the -- and I'm going to end with this. If we can go back to the FDA real quick. And the FDA -- this is one other thing that I think is interesting.
You know, he also said there is no evidence that there's 20 trials a year is what Mr. Isasi just said. If you listened carefully to Dr. Borgerding you'll remember he said there was 150 trials, approximately, over the last seven to eight years.
So we know that's the track record that's been taking -- that's how long it takes for various reasons for victims to get their day in court.
And a lot of those cases -- you know, the amount they paid in punitive damages, that's what they paid so far to date. You heard Dr. Borgerding; not every plaintiff respectfully wins and you heard from Dr. Borgerding that a lot of the cases are on appeal. It's a long process and it takes a long time and they get off -- you know, and they go back
and they report to their clients, hey, it was -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: You know, he said that the government has total control. That's another thing Mr. Isasi said. The government has total control over us because the FDA is now regulating them. And you heard -- you saw all the steps the FDA has to go through to regulate them. It's not an easy process.
They have the right and the -- the opportunity to challenge FDA regulations, as Dr. Borgerding told you, and -- but the FDA regulation like -- like he said -- like Mr. Isasi said in opening, they're having to pay because of their misconduct. They have to pay to have themselves policed.
So how is that a reason not to award victims punitive damages? Hey, our conduct was so bad, so bad that we escaped FDA regulation for 50 years.
Now we're so bad they have to regulate us and because we have to pay for them to regulate us, after we did all the harm to people like Carole Larkin, that should be a deterrent factor not to -to -- to punish us.
And that's why it doesn't make any sense and that's why when you listen to them and you listen