MR. PAIGE: May it please the Court.
Counsel. Good morning.
As the judge told you, this is going to be our opportunity to give you our closing arguments, and, you know, it's been long. It's been about two weeks, right, since you all were subpoenaed for jury duty.
And if you think about it, it's amazing if you think, hey, I got this thing in the mail, I was in the courtroom with all these people, you know, how did I get selected, and you've all been here paying attention and taking notes, and we appreciate it.
We know you guys don't have to be here -- I mean, there are other places where maybe you could be. Everybody here has their own families and friends and work and their own jobs, and to be here for all this time paying attention, listening, you know, it means a lot.
And for me to be here in front of you guys, you know, I'm a lawyer and I know there is a part of Mr. Larkin's cross-examination where it was talked about, hey, you're a lawyer, you represent tobacco victims, which I don't think he does, but
regardless, I'm very proud to be here representing victims of the tobacco industry.
I wasn't always a lawyer. I put myself through law school working as a roofer, in Kettleman [phonetic], on the roof. And to be here today now, battling a case like this against these fine lawyers, you know, it's humbling. So I appreciate your time, you know. Everybody on -- you know, Phil Gerson is the leader, but he appreciates your time, and so does Mr. Larkin and Carole [sic]. We know that you guys have worked hard, and we hope you'll continue to work hard. We know you will. So thank you.
But the -- the issue that we're here for, the real question that we're all here for, you know, it's important. It's important. Because the defendants have talked a lot in this case about corporate acceptability -- not corporate, commercial acceptability. You-all remember that when they talked about their product, you know, they could do other designs, whether it could be commercially acceptable, okay.
But there's also a thing called social responsibility. What's socially acceptable. What is the right thing to do when you're confronted with
what you all have seen? Because hopefully -- and I believe you guys have learned a lot during this trial. Everybody comes here with preconceived notions about tobacco and smokers and things like that, but hopefully hearing from Dr. Proctor and even Dr. Figlar, you guys have learned a lot so that the first big issue, if you think about it, back in 1900, way back when we spoke in opening statements about this, there was 140 cases of lung cancer reported in the world. In the whole world, okay?
And at that time, you know, things were different, a cigarette was different.
When we talk about whether there is the technology to make a safer cigarette, there was a safer cigarette; there was a safer cigarette.
People weren't getting sick, people weren't dying.
That didn't happen.
So think about it. If, if we lived in a world where R.J. Reynolds came forward and said, "I have two products. There's two reasonable designs that we have here. One, we're going to make a cigarette, tobacco rolled in paper but we're going to make it inhalable, inhalable into the lungs so that we can sustain addiction" -- nicotine is a drug, drug addiction -- "so we can sustain addiction and we
will target and market it to all the teenagers because these are people who are most vulnerable."
You see, their -- their business model, if you think about it, is to prey or target the most vulnerable members of our society: Teenagers and people who are addicted and that's their business model. So if they came forward today and said, look, there's 140 cases of lung cancer in the world, we have two products, two choices here. We can either make one, is to make this inhalable, deadly addictive product that we're going to target teenagers, we'll get 50 million smokers and along the way we'll kill 30 million people but we'll make a lot of money; or we can make a noninhalable cigarette or no nicotine cigarette, we won't make as much money but we won't kill that many people.
It's not even a close call. It's not a close call. So how did we get here with all -- they're a powerful industry. You heard about all their -their people, all their money, all their resources, all their lobbying. How did we get here? Do we have to stay here? Do we have to let this continue? Do we have to?
You -- you guys, you know, we talked about that it's a legal product. It's a legal product. All
that means is nobody's going to jail. Okay?
Nobody's going to jail for doing that -MR. ISASI: Your Honor, I object. That is not the meaning of the Court's instruction on legal product.
THE COURT: Okay. Sustained.
MR. PAIGE: Nobody's going to jail for making a cigarette. Nobody would go to jail if they made a cigarette that wasn't addictive and deadly and inhalable either, okay. So just because they say it's legal, you're the jury who gets to determine whether or not that's right or not. Okay? That's your decision. That's what civil juries do.
Y ou know, 2015 is a lot different than what people believed and thought in 1960, 1970, 1980.
And so you-all have the -- the -- the duty, the obligation and the responsibility to let them know just because it's legal -You could do the first board.
-- does that make it right to lie for 50 years, to lie for 50 years? Think about that. These were grown men, grown men who were making a lot of money, who had a lot at stake, and for 50 years, it says 1994, but it goes to 2000, so almost 50 years they lied about their product. They were motivated by
greed, right? What else could have motivated them to do that? You talk about motivations and choices.
They knew this was -- they knew -- because it wasn't a secret to them that people were dying. It wasn't a secret to them that they were targeting teenagers. This was no secret. So legal, just because it's legal, does it make that right?
And just because it's legal, you know, nicotine is a drug. Okay? That's the simple truth. Smoking cigarettes... You know, we talk about drug addiction, you know, nicotine addicts or smokers will say, hey, I like to smoke. I want to smoke. Makes me feel good. That's all part of nicotine addiction. That's all it is.
You know, if you talk to an alcoholic, a cocaine addict or a heroin addict, they'll tell you the same thing. Leave me alone. I like it. It makes me feel good. It's my life.
That's the cornerstone of addiction. And they know that. They know that. That's what they make their money off of. It's crazy, but that's what they do: They sell nicotine addiction.
So just because it's legal doesn't mean that they get to manipulate the nicotine and get the pH levels right in the sweet spot so they can free-base
nicotine and add ammonia and addict people, who are starting as teenagers.
And we know that -- we know, I say it's drug addiction because it is, and we know that most -MR. PHILIPSON: Excuse me for one second.
MR. PAIGE: We know that their business model is based upon replacement smokers, okay. So when Dr. Figlar was here, he was talking about, is it commercially acceptable. If we do what you -- what I was suggesting and we were saying commercial acceptability. You have two client bases. You have one, which are teenagers; and the other which are addicts, right? Right?
And so they go and -- if you think about it, this: 4,000 teenagers who start smoking every day.
4,000.	Every day in our country. That's -without -- 70 to 90 percent, depending on which statistics you take, start as teenagers in our country. Eighteen years old.
You know, Carole Larkin, she met Paul when she was 19. And she was already a regular smoker.
People don't become a regular smoker overnight. We don't know, you know, Paul didn't know her when she was 15, 16, 17. But you -- you've heard about nicotine. It's a poison. When somebody first
smokes they get nauseous, they get vomiting, they get dizzy; and it takes your body a while to build up a tolerance and build up to become a regular smoker.
You know, did she start smoking at 18, 17, 16, 15, 14? We'll never know because she's dead. But all we know is that she did start like a teenager, like everybody else, and that's who they targeted and that's who they wanted and that's what their business model is.
4,000	teenagers start smoking every year; 70 to 90 percent of them by the age of 18. They know that 50 percent of them will die of a smoking-related illness. So they know that. That's not a secret, so they know.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. No nexus, 403.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: 4,000 every day. I said every year.
There's now 50 million smokers -- or 40 million now. Dr. Figlar said the numbers are going down, thank God. But if you have 40 million smokers and 70 to 90 percent of them started as teenagers, that's still 30, 35 million started by the age of
18. And they know that 50 percent of them are going to die, they're going to die from a smoking-related illness, and they don't care. They don't care.
So just because it's legal, they come here and they tell you it's a legal product, it doesn't make these things right what they're doing. They're not doing the right thing. And they need to be -- you know, it's like, we shouldn't have to tell them.
They should figure this out on their own. But it's been 65 years and they haven't figured it out.
You heard Dr. Figlar; he was here the other day. He's the vice president of cigarette design for their company and he's pretending that he doesn't know about the youth marketing documents?
He's pretending that he doesn't know that they knew that smoking caused lung cancer? You know, you have the right to evaluate the believability of witnesses. And, you know, do you think Dr. Figlar was really being frank with you? You know, when he was saying, you know, we don't study teenagers. We don't study teenagers. We couldn't have cooperated with TWIG because we didn't know that smoking caused lung cancer. I mean, why would he say that? Why would he say that when he's under oath? Because they don't care. They don't care.
So here's the -- the -- the executives. And this is really -- I just want to make this clear because in -- at one point it was suggested that maybe this was just a few, you know, misstatements by some few people who did the wrong thing.
This was the top executives [sic] who purposefully misled the American public, they purposefully misled the American public, you know, on purpose, for money, you know; that's why they did it. So these people, you know, why they would do something like that to other human beings? You know, all Dr. Figlar cares about is what's commercially profitable to the company? That's not the test. That's not the test. You know, if the test was how much money could we make, everybody would do that. But people don't do that. People don't do that in life. You don't go out and just try to make money however you can. That's wrong.
And so when they talk about, well, we have 50 million customers that we have to give them something that they'll smoke, you know, they're not helping anybody. They're not helping anybody but themselves.
In fact, with the National Cancer Institute, with the TWIG, they're talking about convincing
Dr. Gori to eliminate smoking clinics. Do you remember that? I'll show you that document again.
But why -- in 1970, when people are dying and there's supposed to be cooperating with the government, why would they be trying to eliminate smoking clinics that could save lives?
You know, these are -- you know, we talk about these numbers. You know, these numbers, you know,
500,000,	20 million, 30 million, but you've got to wrap your mind around these, how much that is, of what they're doing. And they just don't care.
And that's why in this case that we really, really, really want punitive damages because they don't know the difference between right and wrong, they didn't know it, and other companies have to be told that if you do what they did, you -- we're not -- you're not going to get away with it. It's not right.
Here's Dr. Figlar. This was from his video deposition. I'm going to play a little bit.
(Video on.)
*	* * *
Q. The message that you're putting forth, the
tobacco industry can choose to put forth the message to help people, correct?
A. They can put forth their position that they think is appropriate.
Q. They can put forth -- they have an opportunity in press releases to put forth the message to help consumers, can't they? If they wanted to, if they chose to?
A. I would think so.
Q. Dr. Figlar, if the tobacco industry through the Tobacco Institute or otherwise was making false statements or was making misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes as this memo suggests, you would agree that would be wrong, don't you?
A. I would.
Q. And that would be highly improper knowing how deadly cigarettes are and knowing how many youths in our society are smoking, correct?
A. Again, I would say it would be improper.
Q. They should not rely to -- to make profits, correct?
A. They should not.
(Video concluded.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: You know, and it's not just
improper. You know, think about it. It's reprehensible. It's the worst that you can do. You can't think of anything worse, can you? Can you think of anything worse than corporations, executives, making decisions to target teenagers so they could turn them into nicotine addicts, so they can make as much money as they want while lying to them; and internally talking about "Who ain't for more money." "Who ain't for more money."
You think about it. One, it's a conspiracy, okay. If one person, one person, which eventually happened in the '90s, if one person had the courage to come forward and say, this ain't right, this isn't right, we shouldn't be doing this, I'm telling on you, you know, I'm not allowing this to go on.
But nobody had the courage to do that. They all just went along, they all made a lot of money. They made a lot of money, they lived happy lives while other people suffered and lived miserable lives and died. And that's just not right.
And when you think about the epi- -- the proportion, and this is what the FTC report told them in 1967, told them, they knew this. And it says, "Cigarette smoking is without question the single greatest public health problem this nation
has ever faced. The cost to society of cigarette smoking in human terms is staggering."
That's why I say you have to -- these numbers,
I'm rattling off numbers and they just sound like numbers, it's almost numbing the numbers, but if you think about it -- and I'll give you an analogy.
If, by some mechanical defect or pilot error, a plane crashed tomorrow, okay, and everybody died on that plane, right, it would be horrible. And it would be on the news and we would be watching on the news for a week. And everybody would be mourning and we'd be talking about it with our spouses and we'd be talking about how bad this was and oh, my God, I can't believe this happened.
To equal the harm that they caused, you've have to have three 747s -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. Can I approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. PAIGE: I have a certain amount of time, so I have to -- you guys are probably happy to hear
that. So I'm not going to talk forever. I'm going to sit down at some point. He just told me I have 75 slides, and I'm only on No. 7, so he's telling me I've got to speed it up.
But the analogy -- you know, it's hard to make an analogy, you know. I just want you all to realize, 500,000 Americans dying every year, real people, real families, real mothers, real fathers, real brothers, real sisters. If you had some sort of event, whatever it was, some death in America, if a thousand or 1500 people died in one day, that would be newsworthy. People would be moved by it.
That would have to happen every day for a year, every single day for a year, year in, year out, (inaudible). And that's why the cost to society in human terms is staggering, if you think about it.
And there's no excuse for it other than for somebody to put profits over human life, which they promised they would not do.
So we're asking you to hold them accountable for punitive damages. And that's why -- punitive damages, this is what the judge just read to you.
But the -- one of the reasons or the reason why punitive damages are important is if somebody does what they did, if somebody intentionally lies and
harms people and lies about it and they get caught, they need to be punished.
Because if they're not punished, they'll just keep doing it and other people will keep doing it.
If it's excusable, it's acceptable in our society that there's no punishment, then there would be no deterrents. And corporations, other corporations, other cigarette companies, other corporations in America, should know -- shouldn't they? -- that profits are not as important or more important than human lives. Can't be. It can't be. They can't be.
It's just like Mr. Bowling said. There's other ways to make a living. You don't have to do that. You could sell cigarettes. You can grow tobacco. You can grow tobacco, but you don't have to manipulate nicotine and target teenagers. You know, tobacco farmers aren't doing this. It's not tobacco farmers that are doing it.
So you can grow tobacco. You can -MR. ISASI: Objection. Your Honor, counsel's argument is not on a claim for which they are seeking punitive damages. Confusing the issues.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: So punitive damages, you have to
look at was this intentional misconduct -- of course it was -- that caused substantial harm -- of course it was. And so they knew. They had knowledge.
They had actual knowledge that what they were doing was going to have a high probability of hurting people.
That wasn't a secret to them. They had to have known that. They had to have known that. When they were lying, when they were lying, when they were manipulating nicotine, when they were concealing the truth, when they were lying to Congress, when they were lying to the National Cancer Institute, they knew. They knew with people who were addicted to nicotine, they would instill doubt in them. They knew with teenagers, they would entice them. And they knew that people would get hurt and die.
And that's why, in a case like this, there's no other case like this that really calls for punitive damages really like a case like this.
So this is another instruction that the judge read to you. And I think it's important because they say -- this is an instruction under the law.
Think about it. What it says is a corporation has to be treated like a person. Right? Right? That's the law.
But if you want to be treated like a person, you have to act like a person. You have to have compassion like a person. You have to have a conscience like a person. You can't say, "Hey, treat me like a person, but I'm not going to act like a human being."
So there's a book that -- it's called "Everything I Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten," and things that people, kindergartners learned: Be nice to people. Be nice to one another. Don't hurt people. Don't lie to people. Don't -- you know, be a good person. Don't intentionally harm people just to make money.
You don't need to go to college to learn that.
They should know that from going to kindergarten. These are grown men who took basic morals and -- you know, one person said, "Hey, we're a moralistic company. We're a moralistic company." How can they say that with a straight face? How can they say that?
So if they want to be treated like a person, they have to act like a human being should act.
They have to act reasonable and compassionately to other people. You can't just treat people like that.
So we have two claims -- three claims. One is the strict liability and one is for fraud. And fraud has two parts: concealment, did they conceal information they knew; and the other is conspiracy, did they conspire, enter into an agreement with the other tobacco companies to hide the truth.
And so we know in 1953, when the mouse skin-painting study came out and it was in the news, that they were presented with a choice. Right?
They had a choice that they had to make.
And they talk a lot about Carole Larkin's choices, and I'll talk about that, because in these cases there's actually a -- a chance -- I don't know if you guys -- the judge read you the instructions where you could apportion responsibility, you could apportion some responsibility to Carole Larkin and some responsibility to the cigarette company.
But those -- apportionment [sic] of fault only apply to a product defect claim. Because when -the law does not allow, does not provide a defendant to claim that you have to apportion the fault when they're hurting people on purpose. When they do something on purpose, intentionally lie or conceal or hurt people, there is no apportionment of fault.
But we'll talk about Carole Larkin's choices,
because that's a fair question. You know, that's a fair -- a fair question that you all may have, and I'm going to address that.
But they had choices, you know, choices -choice is a two-way street. So in 1953, they had an opportunity to reveal the truth and help people, or conceal the truth, lie to people, and use all their power and resources and go forward for 50 years making money while hurting people.
And so the first question is -- and the judge read to you some of the instructions, and you'll see them -- is whether they entered into an agreement -this is for the fraud claims, for the conspiracy claim. You have to decide did they enter into an agreement with other companies or organizations to intentionally make statements concealing. So did they intentionally come forward and make statements where they would conceal the truth? Did they do that on purpose, about the health effects and addictiveness of a smoker? Did they enter into an agreement?
We know they did. It's not even a close call.
We know in 1953 or -- they all met at the Plaza Hotel in New York, all the top executives. Everybody met together. And for years after that,
they had formed all these committees, the Committee of Counsel and the T- -- CTR and all those other groups.
So they did this. It wasn't one meeting. I mean, they carried on -- you'll see their memos for -- for decades. So this conspiracy was not -was not a -- it's not even a close call. But their conspiracy was really out of greed, knowing that people would die.
So -- and then the next question is -- the next -- Baron, you're going to -- and so we have to think about was this important information that they were concealing -- okay? -- from the American public? Because they're going to show you newspaper articles and say, "Hey, look, everybody knew smoking was harmful."
There's other newspaper articles in evidence.
You'll see there's a stack from the Miami Herald where people were saying it wasn't harmful. And so if we want to go tit for tat with advertisements and articles and do that all day long, we can do that.
But the truth is they knew. They knew back in 1953 that it was important, important that cigarettes cause cancer. They could make -- they were thinking about making a safer cigarette, not to
help people, but to -- what they could do to the competition. And they knew that their product was addictive in 1953. It was not a secret to them.
And they could have revealed what they knew and helped people instead of instilling doubt and confusion and controversy. Because in 1964 -- a lot has been said about Paul Larkin quit smoking in 1964, and because her husband quit, she should have known, and -- and so forth and so on. And, again, that's -- that's a fair point to make.
But -- but -- not everybody's the same. Not every husband does the same thing that their wife does; not every wife does the same thing that her husband does. And in 1960, 1970, remember,
50 percent of doctors were smoking. Astronauts were smoking. Athletes were smoking. Filters weren't on cigarettes.
So if somebody continued smoking and they had some doubt and thought that filters would keep them safe or thought it wouldn't happen to them or thought that, hey -- who would continue smoking if they thought it would happen to them, unless it was addiction creating doubt and confusion, which is what their internal memos say that they should do to take advantage of the situation.
So the next question or next thing that the judge asked for the concealment standard -- the concealment claim is whether they intentionally made a statement where they concealed or failed to disclose material information.
So they know in 1953 their product is addictive. They know that it's hurting people. And they come out with a Frank Statement, which is their first statement of all of them, and they tell the American public that there's no proof -- Ms. Carole Larkin's 19 years old -- there's no proof that...
MR. PHILIPSON: I'm sorry.
MR. PAIGE: Is it off?
So they say, "There's no proof that smoking causes lung cancer. We -- we -- we take -- we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other aspect of our business. We believe the products we make are not injurious to people. We're going to cooperate with the Surgeon General, and we have these scientists who are looking into it."
So that was their first opportunity, when we talk about concealment of information, where they didn't tell the public everything they knew. They didn't tell the public what they knew and what they
believed and what they knew to be the truth.
And they did it for a reason. And there's no other reason they would have done it, to lie about it, unless they wanted people to rely upon and have some doubt going forward, which millions and millions of Americans did.
We showed you a chart from 1964. There were still 25 million smokers in 1964 who didn't believe smoking caused lung cancer. And we had 25 million other smokers who believed it but probably had some doubt or were smoking filters or weren't convinced.
And so this is -- when we think about 1953,
1954, when we talk about how could things have been different, you know, how could they have avoided this whole thing where we're here today, you know, in trial for two weeks showing you all their documents, showing what they've done -- how could this all have been avoided, and it was so easily avoided, because in 1953 you see that the -- the -the -- the cigarette consumption is going down pretty sharply in 1953.
And at that point, like I said, they had every opportunity not only to tell the truth, but they had other reasonable alternative designs that they knew about. They knew in their own documents about
nonnicotine cigarettes and noninhalable cigarettes and not -- not adding sugars to make them inhalable.
And had they done that -- had they done that, history could have been changed. Because now we know that it's finally -- 50 years later, it's going down. It's going down, and lives are being saved. But why? Why did we have to wait 50 years? Why? Because they -- because they had to make a lot of money and because they had strong lobbying forces, so we had to wait for them to get caught before we could have seen a decline.
So we know in the 1950s they started coming up with filters. People started smoking filters. And that's what they wanted people to do. So we used to have 2 percent of the population smoking filters, and then it turned to 90 -- to 99 percent of people smoke filters now.
And when they came forward, they told people, "Look, if there's anything in the cigarettes that's harmful, we'll remove it. We're looking into it.
But you can rest assured the filter will keep you safe."
And here's all their things with filters, and we know that Winston, which is a cigarette that Mrs. Larkin, Carole Larkin -- I call her
Mrs. Larkin, but at the time she was 19 years old or 20 years old at this time. She's a young girl. And she switches to Winston cigarettes just like everybody else.
And that's reliance. When you talk about did she rely on a statement that they concealed from her -- okay? -- in 1953, when she's a teenager, and 1954, when Winston's coming out, why is she and millions of Americans switching to filters? Why are they switching to filters?
They're being told, even -- they're being told the tobacco companies are working with the National Cancer Institute in the '60s and '70s with the Tobacco Working Group.
The government believes them. The government's relying upon them that it's safer. So how come Carole Larkin can't rely upon them and believe them, if the government is?
At that time we know that they were -- they were studying nicotine -- nicotine -- and they were looking into how to deliver nicotine, how to make it addictive, because they knew this wasn't about choice. They're talking about -- they're -- they're in the business of selling nicotine; in designing the cigarette, the dominant specification should be
nicotine delivery.
So when we talk about reasonable, safer alternatives -- because that's another claim for us, product defect -- why, if public health is paramount -- if public health is paramount, why should the -- the -- the design of the cigarette, why should the dominant specification be nicotine delivery, unless they want to just get people to be addicted to nicotine and make more money?
It's a potent drug, and they compare their consumers to rats in a cage. And that's the analogy that they make when they're talking about people who are -- who are smoking, who have families, who are real people, real mothers, real fathers, who are getting sick and dying.
And so now the whole part about youth smoking, because this is what their documents talk about, when you talk about their conspiracy, when you talk about their lies, when you talk about what they've done internally, they're talking about they've deliberately -- and this is concealment, and it's also -- when you look at this document, it's really three things: It's talking about what they're concealing, how they're getting teenagers and youth to smoke, and it's also talking about product
defect.
Because they don't need to do these things.
They don't have to do them. There's reasonable alternative designs. But they're talking about "We've played down the role of nicotine. Hence, the nonsmoker, the teenager, has little or no knowledge of the satisfaction it may offer him. He has no desire to even try it." Okay?
So when they're talking about commercial acceptability, what's commercially acceptable, is that socially acceptable, to entice a teenager to try something that's going to turn him into a drug addict or a nicotine addict for his life in the hopes that he will find irrational reasons to try smoking and then he'll discover nicotine addiction?
And so we know, despite what Dr. -- you know, their case yesterday consisted of really -- they called Dr. Figlar and they put up two documents. They read two documents to you.
One was a document that talked about the laws in Massachusetts which said it was illegal in 1933, the year before Carole Larkin was born, illegal to sell cigarettes to minors, people under 18.
The other thing they showed you was a curriculum, educational curriculum, sent to teachers
in 1933, before Carole Larkin was born, to teach people about smoking and health. And a lot of it had to do with sports and athletics.
But you have to ask yourself, or hopefully Mr. Isasi will answer this question when he does his closing argument, is why -- why, if it was illegal, if it was illegal to sell to anybody under 18, why, if teachers in schools are trying to help kids and teenagers not smoke, why are they doing these things? Why are they marketing and targeting school kids? Why -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. That totally misstates the record. There's -- in that time period -THE COURT: I'm sorry. That's a speaking objection.
MR. ISASI: Counsel is misrepresenting the record.
THE COURT: You can rephrase.
MR. PAIGE: Okay.
Well, 1933, Mr. Isasi's team read to you a -- a statute that it's illegal. Well, in 1927 and 1928 they're talking about lining up the most popular students to get them smoking.
Then, you know, fast-forward to 1965. They're
referring to the youth of America as crops. Crops. These are new crops.
It goes on. You know, they -- this is what Dr. Figlar talked about. You know, he didn't know that "young adults" were supposed to be talking about teenagers. But in their internal documents they're talking about the 14-to-24 age group. And, again, they're talking about inducing the presmokers to smoke.
So if they're really, really so concerned about some law in Massachusetts in 1933 that says don't sell cigarettes to teenagers, if they're really concerned about school teachers trying to help students in the '50s, the '60s, the '30s, why are they doing this? And why are they using cartoons and Flintstones and prom tickets and Santa Claus to advertise their product?
It's their product. They have a responsibility. They -- if you're going to sell a product that's highly addictive and is deadly and is going to kill people, a manufacturer, that's their choice to do that. Okay? If that's their choice, doing this cannot -- cannot be right.
They talk about replacement smokers. They talk about teenagers. Again, we know that these
teenagers are going to get addicted; they're going to grow up; half of them are going to die of horrible diseases. Not just die; they're going to die not only of lung cancer, mouth cancer, throat cancer, pancreatic cancer, stomach cancer, emphysema is horrible, strokes, heart attacks, all these diseases that they know that these teenagers, these replacement smokers, are ultimately probably going to get.
And it was no secret to them. When you talk about what they concealed, you know, in the 1960s they knew that smoking caused lung cancer. It was in all their documents. It wasn't a secret to them.
So they knew it, a lot of them knew it, and they were lying. And they were lying. And it's no secret that they were lying.
So the next question is whether they knew or should have known -- whether they knew or should have known these false statements they were concealing -- whether they knew they should be disclosed, should they have disclosed that to the public.
I mean, I don't think I need to argue that fact, but they knew or should have known these material statements should have been disclosed. And
here's another video from Dr. Figlar.
(On video.)
*	* * *
Q. Would you agree that it would be wrong to use confusion to the advantage of the tobacco industry to the detriment of the smoking public?
A. I would.
Q. And if the tobacco industry is talking about using confusion to their advantage, you agree that would be highly improper?
A. I don't think it would be proper, no.
(Video concluded.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: Okay. So they -- I'm just kind of going through the jury instructions. Some of this is -- seems pretty obvious. But there is a question that you have to ask, is do they know -- should they have known that they should have disclosed this?
And obviously they did, and -- but they did the opposite.
And they talk about -- and these documents are very important, are very important, because when you talk about what they did when they lied, why they lied, why people who -- why people would continue smoking at that time -- you know, then we had
70 million smokers and now I think Dr. Figlar said we're down to 40 million.
But, again, "If this committee had not been formed, we'd be in a deplorable position. We must in the near future provide answers which will give smokers the psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking."
So they wanted -- it's funny, because they wanted Carole Larkin to believe that filters were safer. They wanted Carole Larkin to have doubt and confusion and think it wouldn't happen to her. They didn't want her to understand nicotine addiction. Okay? They wanted to -- they wanted her to do that.
Not just her. There were millions. I mean, think about it. 1970, 30 -- whatever it was -30 percent by 1970, 30 percent of doctors still smoking.
So now to say, "Well, she was a fool for believing us. She shouldn't have believed us, because her husband was smart enough to quit," well, you know what? She did quit. She quit in 1988.
And, you know, they showed documents that said if you quit and you quit for ten years -- remember, there were documents they showed Dr. Proctor on cross-examination. If you quit for ten years,
you're like you never smoked. You're like you never smoked.
Well, you know what? Carole Larkin did quit.
And she quit for ten years. And then she got cancer, which was caused by smoking. There's no secret to that.
But that's what they wanted. They wanted people like Carole Larkin to do that. Because, obviously, the key word is confusion. They want -"Doubt is our product." You know, think about it.
"The most important story is one that casts doubt."
How is that acceptable? How is that, you know, commercially acceptable, socially acceptable, humanly acceptable? In what world is that acceptable?
Here's some opportunities where they had where they could have helped people.
(On video.)
*	* * *
MALE SPEAKER: We want to be the detective just as much as the Surgeon General, as the AMA. We'll cooperate in every way.
MALE SPEAKER: Well, obviously, a filter takes out tar and nicotine. I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad
elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God, luck, we hope we may find them; and if they are found, they will be removed.
MALE SPEAKER: We do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
MALE SPEAKER: Do you believe that cigarettes are safe? Have they been proved to be safe,
Mr. Cullman?
MALE SPEAKER: I believe they have not been proved to be unsafe.
(Video concluded.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: And so, you know, then what they -and Dr. Proctor explained it. It wasn't just that they would lie to the public. You know, they lied to the government. They were supposed to cooperate with the government.
They shouldn't -- the Frank Statement says "Hey, we're going to cooperate with public health
authorities." Well, they shouldn't even need a Frank Statement to say that. They need to cooperate with the government. That's something they're expected to do. Whether they say it or not, they need to cooperate. When you're selling a deadly, addictive product, you need to cooperate with the government and tell them the truth, tell them what you know, and try to make sure that you're doing it the right way and helping people. Right? If you're going to do that, if you're going to sell to 50 million customers and make all that money while 500,000 are dying a year, you can't be concealing things from the government.
And so this is what Dr. Figlar says.
(On video.)
*	* * *
Q. You agree, though, Doctor, that the manufacturer does have a duty to know its product?
A. I do.
Q. Why do you think it's important for a tobacco manufacturer to know more about the components of their product than anyone else?
A. Because we make it.
Q. And if a company that made deadly products was lying about it, why would that be wrong? That's what I
want to know.
Do you know why would that be wrong?
A. Well, because it just is wrong. I mean, it's just not the right thing to do. Period.
(Video off.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: But they did lie about their product. They did do that.
And, you know, in opening statement you were shown this board by the defense, and it seems to -and even Dr. Figlar talked about it and it applies that as these tar levels are going down and as these nicotine levels are going down, that it's a safer cigarette.
And they wanted people to believe that because they wanted -- they wanted people to -- they want the government to believe them because they wanted to look like they're cooperating, and they wanted people to believe that because they wanted people to keep smoking.
So as they put the -- so they put -- this is the Winston cigarette with the lower tar, the lower yield levels that they're saying is going to be
safer. But we know from Dr. Proctor with the compensation that people are going to get the nicotine. If you're a nicotine addict and you need a certain amount of nicotine, you're going to get your nicotine. And they know that because the machine, the machine testing wasn't accurate because it wasn't compensating like a person does. They weren't covering ventilation holes like a person does.
So all these were misleading and they knew that. They knew that internally. And if you look at their, uh -- okay.
So now, the -- one of the questions is -- I'm trying to go through the questions -- whether they failed to disclose a material fact that would induce Carole Larkin. Okay. Is there something they failed to disclose to her that would have induced her to act? And we know this whole thing about the filters was a fraud. It was a fraud that they did on purpose.
You know, this is a -- Mr. Cullman, who was speaking on behalf of the industry, and he said, they don't believe there's any bad elements, but internally they know -- they know that the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more tar
and nicotine than she would have gotten from a regular cigarette. She abandoned the regular cigarette, meaning the nonfilter, on the grounds of reduced health risks.
People were switching to Winstons. People were switching to filters because they believed what the cigarette company was telling them. The government believed it. The government believed it. The National Cancer Institute was -- the illusion of filtration is important -- as anything.
As we know all too often the smoker who switches to a high -- high filtration cigarette winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had.
Carole Larkin, we don't remember what she was smoking, but most people were not -- 98 percent, 99 percent of the people weren't smoking filters before 1954. She was a regular smoker and once she got to the Winstons, she was up to a pack a day, which is 20 cigarettes a day, which is 200 doses of nicotine to the brain every day, 200 inhalations of nicotine to the lungs, to the blood stream.
So they -- we talk about the Tobacco Working Group, that they were cooperating. That was part of Dr. Figlar's testimony, about how cooperative they
were, and how the -- the -- the -- the government was telling people, oh, you should switch to filters. It wasn't them; it was the government.
But if you look at their own documents, this is their people talking about that they -- this is an internal memo -- this is a letter to the national -who is it? What is it?
MR. PHILIPSON: That's a letter from R.J. Reynolds to the National Cancer Institute.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. And so Reynolds is writing to the National Cancer Institute, we don't accept that cigarettes are hazardous, and they call the -it's unfortunate that you've designated a group named to develop a less-hazardous cigarette.
So they're calling the fact that National Cancer Institute is trying to develop a less-hazardous cigarette, they're saying that's unfortunate. Okay? That's what they're telling the government.
And then they're talking about withdrawing from the -- the Tobacco Working Group and internally they're saying they can't do it because, we need as much protection as we can have. So we need to stay with the Tobacco Working Group so we -- they're not sharing their documents, those documents I just
showed you. They're staying there because they're trying to get protection. They're looking like they're cooperating.
And in the meantime as they're cooperating, they're trying to persuade Gori, who is the head, to eliminate proposals, which they call propaganda, like smoking cessation clinics.
So here you have -- they asked, um, Carole Larkin's daughter, did your mother ever go to a smoking clinic? Did your mother do anything like that?
Well, how can they fault her for not doing it when it was their desire, you know, to -- to -- to eliminate that; not even to have that? You know, they didn't have what we have today. They didn't have these medications that were invented, you know, after she quit smoking.
And then finally Gori, the relationship, you know, comes full circle when Gori asks the tobacco industry, for all their power and their lobbying, you know, and to use their influence so that he can get a position, bearing in mind that he's sympathetic to the industry.
So that was their cooperation with the National Cancer Institute. That they were there for
protection, they had a relationship with this guy,
Gori, who was the head. Gori wanted a favor back, and, again, it's talking about the lobbying powers of this powerful industry.
Whether they had -- whether R.J. Reynolds and other tobacco companies had an agreement, had a duty to disclose a material fact, so they had a duty to disclose what they knew.
And here's the reports from the -- the -- the Surgeon General, the National Cancer Institute, the FTC. So these are people they fooled all along about these -- these filters and low-tar cigarettes.
And so did they have a duty to disclose this? If they could fool the government, if they could fool the government with scientists, how can they not fool the ordinary citizen? And that's why they did it.
So now, subsequently, in 2001, the National Cancer Institute is writing... that the advertisements of filtered and low-tar cigarettes were -- were intended to reassure smokers. We know that. We know that that's what their internal documents say.
So people who were worried about the risks, people who might have had a husband who quit; people
who had some concerns and switched to filters. And they were meant -- the reason they invented these filters were meant to prevent people from quitting. They didn't want people to quit. That's why they did it.
And then the FTC in 2008 says that they, you know, the fact that the tobacco companies are still saying in court, that Dr. Figlar is saying that they cooperated. Well, in 2008 the FTC said, that our actions today ensure the tobacco companies may not wrap their misleading -- and that's what this is, they're misleading -- tar and nicotine rating in a cloak of government sponsorship. The FTC will not be a smokescreen for these shameful marketing practices.
So when Dr. Figlar stands up here and tells you, you know, you're not scientists, you're not scientists, you've got to believe him, he's under oath, when he tells you that this is a safer cigarette, that that's what he's devoted his career to, this is what the FTC and the Surgeon General is saying.
And finally the Surgeon General says, in contrast to industry awareness, the various ways that cigarettes were physically modified were not
well understood by parties outside of the tobacco industry.
So it was all fraud. It was all fraud and they knew it and it was based upon their plan of not getting caught, of trying to do it, you know, for as long as they can. You know, they talk about for nearly 20 years, this was 1972, they have employed a single strategy to defend itself in litigation -okay? -- they don't want to get in trouble in courts, they wanted to defend themselves in political arenas, they wanted to use all their lobbying efforts, and they wanted to have public opinion; people thinking that smoking was a free choice. And they call it brilliant. They call it brilliant the way they were able to do it. Okay?
That's -- think about it. Internally, they're saying, now, hey, it's a smoker's choice. That's what they -- all their spokes- -- it's smoker's choice, we don't really know. And inside they're almost laughing about it. Hey, people are believing us. We have people believing us. We have the government believing us. We have the National Cancer Institute -MR. ISASI: Your Honor, there's no evidence in the record on this point at all. Counsel is
misstating.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you are the finders of fact in this case. You are the -- the people who will be weighing the evidence in this case. And the evidence consists of the testimony of the witnesses and all of the documents that have been received into evidence. And what the attorneys say is not evidence. You need to rely on your own recollection.
You may proceed.
MR. PAIGE: Okay.
And so internally they're talking about, hey, this is brilliant the way we did this. It's very brilliant, you know. This is just a whole new strategy; meaning, hey, we're going to do this for as long as we can. We know we're going to get caught at some point in time.
We talked about the CTR, the TIRC. Dr. Figlar talked about all the great research they did, how they sponsored all that research. Internally they're calling it a shield and a front. They were disbanded. Dr. Proctor told you they were disbanded. They talked about how the CTR was the cheapest insurance for the industry and the industry would be dead without them.
And so that's their own words, their own internal documents. But publicly, again, they wouldn't admit any of it because they didn't want people to know what they knew. You know, you know a lot today from just being in this trial about what really is being inhaled, about cyanide and arsenic and pH levels and nicotine manipulation and ammonia and diammonium phosphate. How could smokers have known that? You -- you didn't even know that before you got here.
(On video.)
*	* * *
MALE SPEAKER: I certainly wouldn't be in the business if I thought cigarettes were harmful to people. I think it's important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open.
MALE SPEAKER: Take the controversy about cigarettes. In the Ninety-first Congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. The records shows that many of the companies' most respected doctors openly challenged anticigarette claims.
FEMALE SPEAKER: And I have to disagree with you in that we don't know what causes the ailments
that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
MALE SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer? Yes or no.
MALE SPEAKER: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
MALE SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
MALE SPEAKER: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
FEMALE SPEAKER: The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
MALE SPEAKER: It may not be harmful, we are not convinced.
FEMALE SPEAKER: It may be or it may not be.
We don't know.
MALE SPEAKER: Do cigarettes cause cancer?
MALE SPEAKER: I don't know.
(Video off.)
*	* * *
THE COURT: Do you have an objection?
MR. ISASI: I do.
THE COURT: Okay. Come sidebar.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: Okay. I sustained the last objection.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm just going to instruct you. There was a banner that was at the bottom of that video slide. I'm instructing you to disregard the banner and not take that into consideration.
You may proceed.
MR. PAIGE: And I'll clarify. You know, we know now that a half a million people die every year from smoking-related illnesses. Back in 1988, I think the Surgeon General said that it was about
300,000	a year, and I think the evidence has been
that now we know a lot more about the disease process of how many more diseases are caused from smoking.
But whether it was 300,000 or 500,000, that's not really the point of -- of this -- of these type of videos.
Baron, go ahead.
(On video.)
*	* * *
MALE SPEAKER: I certainly wouldn't be in the business if I thought cigarettes were harmful to people. I think it's important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open.
MALE SPEAKER: Take the controversy about cigarettes. In the Ninety-first Congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. The record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anticigarette claims.
FEMALE SPEAKER: And I have to disagree with you in that we don't know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking.
MALE SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking does not cause cancer? Yes or no.
MALE SPEAKER: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. It has not been causally established.
MALE SPEAKER: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
MALE SPEAKER: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
MALE SPEAKER: The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
MALE SPEAKER: It may not be harmful. We're not convinced.
FEMALE SPEAKER: It may or it may not be. We don't know.
MALE SPEAKER: Do cigarettes cause cancer? How do you know if they do not?
FEMALE SPEAKER: I know (inaudible) is that it does not -MALE SPEAKER: Okay.
They agree that smoking causes lung cancer. Do you agree?
MALE SPEAKER: It may.
MALE SPEAKER: Do you know whether it does?
MALE SPEAKER: I do not. We don't know what causes cancer in general right now so, but I think
that we may found out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
(Video concluded.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: So we show those to you because -there are a couple of reasons, but No. 1, the issue of presentism; that a lot of these videos were 20,
30, 40 years ago. And now if somebody said that on TV, they probably wouldn't get away with it. But back then they were doing it for a purpose. And the purpose was really for addiction, for addicted smokers to be able to have that crutch, that rationale to continue smoking.
But here's the -- the verdict form, the other things I was showing you were the instructions.
So the question that you're going to be asked, was [sic] -- is -- and there's two questions: One is for concealment and one is for conspiracy.
Did R.J. Reynolds make a statement or statements and intentionally conceal or fail to disclose a material fact, an important fact; and if so, was that a legal cause of her, of Carole
Larkin's injury?
And the second one deals with the conspiracy, the agreement with others. Did they enter into an agreement with other tobacco companies and other organizations to make statements intentionally concealing or failing to disclose important information, material fact or facts, and was that a legal cause?
And so we know that they did it, that they wanted people to rely -- all the reasons why they were doing this is they wanted people who were addicted to nicotine to be able to rely upon them so they can continue smoking.
You can go back, play the video.
(On video.)
*	* * *
Q. And they wanted people to be able to believe that or rely upon them; did they not?
A. I believe in general, yes.
Q. And would you agree with me in '88 or '89 or '90, the Tobacco Institute was saying they still didn't know whether smoking caused cancer, correct? That is what they were telling the public, correct?
A. They did not know. They could not make that determination is what they said on the video.
Q. And they wanted the people to believe them, correct?
A. I would say they would, yes.
Q. And if that they were lying about it while people who were smoking, were dying, that would be the wrong thing to do, correct?
A. It would.
(Video concluded.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: And so the next instruction when they talk about they wanted people to rely upon it, the question to you or the instruction from the judge is whether she reasonably relied to her detriment on the concealment of information.
And a material fact is one that would be of such importance that Carole Larkin would not have acted as she did but for the concealment of material information.
So was this important information that they were concealing. And that's why these two boards are important because these are things that -- I think the evidence is pretty clear -- that people were entitled to know. You know, think about, she's
a teenager when she started, she was a mother in the 1960s and the 1970s, she was a young mom. And she's smoking their product and she was smoking their filters. So was she entitled to know the truth of what they knew?
And what they were concealing from her that she never knew, that never came out even until after she quit, until after she died she wouldn't have known, that there was a conspiracy that all these doctors and scientists who were talking about this doubt and confusion and other alternatives were hired by them; that they misled the Surgeon General; that they studied nicotine; they knew all along that it was a highly addictive drug. It didn't come out from the Surgeon General until 1988 that nicotine was as addictive as cocaine and heroin. People didn't know it.
You know, people thought, hey, it's a habit,
I'll quit when I want. It's a habit, I can do, you know -- you know, I like it, I like the taste.
People didn't understand what they're dealing with.
You know, now if you see somebody smoking, you're -you know, if you're at a casino and you see somebody sitting at a blackjack table smoking, you think to yourself now from what you know, boy, does this
person understand -- does he know that he's putting cyanide and arsenic into his lungs? He thinks he likes it. Does he know that he's a drug addict?
Does he knows how addicted he is to this nicotine and why he's smoking one after the other? Does he understand that he's probably -- there's probably a 50 percent chance he's going to die some horrible death and live with a smoke-related illness? Or will he just justify it because he's an addict and he has some doubt and confusion and doesn't really understand or grasp what he's dealing with. Because who would do that if they're not an addict.
You know, you look at people who smoke now and you wonder if they really, really, truly understand.
They'll tell you, hey, I like it. I like it.
What's there like? You see their own documents.
There's nothing to like about it until you build a tolerance to the drug and then you need it.
So did she know that they were studying teenagers and that 50 percent died? Did she know they knew that they were killing 500,000 or 300,000, whatever the number was, because it was increased?
You know, they also concealed part of the -- they were manipulating the nicotine. There's no way she would have known that. You know, we might know that
today, but she couldn't have known anything about ammonia and diammonium phosphate and pH levels and sweet spots, and how it was to maintain and sustain her addiction. She couldn't have known about all the cancer concealing -- cancer-causing agents like arsenic cyanide, polonium 210. How would she have known that? That was their product. That was their product. They could say, oh, you should have known. Read our warning on the cigarettes. That's what we're required to tell you. Smoking is dangerous.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: We're not there yet. Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: You know, that's what they were required. They weren't required to put anything more than that on the label. They were not.
But when they went public and they made their statements, they made all their statements, they could have said more. They should have said more.
They had a duty to say more. And they could have helped people.
And that's really what it's about, that they don't care. They never cared. They don't care.
They know that people are dying. They know that it's harmful and hurting people, and they've not done one thing to help anybody other than conceal.
They knew all along -- all along -- that these filters were nothing but a fraud. They're a big fraud, and they knew it, and they knew that that's what would keep people smoking.
So when you talk about or you think about was there important material information that Carole Larkin was entitled to know about, was she entitled to -THE CLERK: You've used one hour.
MR. PAIGE: I've used one hour. Thank you.
And -- I only have three hours left. That's a joke.
(Laughter.)
MR. PAIGE: That's a joke.
So, anyway, but that's -- that's important information that she was entitled to know, and they should have helped her. And that's the whole thing, is why -- why not? Why not help people? Why not do the right thing? Why not just try to help these people when they could? You know, but it was too profitable for them.
(On video.)
*	* * *
Q. In other words, it was not only American's position but your position that cigarettes aren't
injurious to health. Is that accurate?
A. Through my tenure?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, I think so.
Q. That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. That's a statement that American Tobacco placed great reliance on.
A. We -- we issued that statement, yes. The consumer would believe it.
Q. In spite of your concern, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
A. Yes.
(Video concluded.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: So the fact that she had doubt, the fact that she didn't know all these things that were concealed, the fact that she thought that filters may have kept her safe, you know, was her reliance a legal cause of her injury or death? That's the next question.
And if you go to the next board.
And we know that, during these 50 years, what happened. She's no different -- you know, she's no
different than anybody else. You know, did their reliance -- you know, did they target Carole Larkin specifically and say, "Hey, we're going to get her"?
No. But she was a teenager with all the other teenagers. She was a young person in the '60s and '70s like everybody else. She was smoking the filters like all the other people, thinking they were safe. You saw the polls that 58 percent of the people thought filters were safer in 1970.
And we know, when you talk about the injuries that were caused by their lies, we now know that tobacco use causes more deaths than HIV, AIDS, alcohol, cocaine, heroin, homicides, suicides, car crashes, and fires, all combined. 500,000 people die every year. 20 million have died since 1964. Approximately 8.6 million people are living with smoking-related illnesses that all occurred during -- because of their fraud and their lying.
And she's no different than everybody else.
And this is important, because it -- this is what's called a concurring cause instruction. In order to be considered a legal cause of her death -I mean, of her injury, her injury -- reliance on the concealment need not be the only cause. It can operate in combination with other causes.
So you might say to yourself, "Well, the conspiracy had something to do with it. The concealment, the lying, had something to do with it, the fact that she believed filters were safer." But that wasn't everything. That's okay. Because there are -- could be other causes.
You might say, "Hey, you know what? She should have quit sooner." But, again, comparative fault doesn't apply to the -MR. ISASI: Objection. This is contrary to -can I approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT: First of all, I hear your objection, I think this is probably something that is better presented in rebuttal after you hear how it is that they argue.
MR. PAIGE: Okay.
THE COURT: Because the whole reason why -- and I've been turning this over and over in my head -the concurring cause instruction, I was persuaded, should be given, is because of the way the defense has presented its defense to causation on -- on -on the conspiracy and the concealment.
It's an -- it's an unusual issue. But let me hear your objection.
MR. ISASI: So, Your Honor, Counsel cannot argue in the first instance that we cannot deduce -(inaudible) -- comparative fault is not applicable to the intentional tort and then turn around and argue that they can take into account concurring cause; and that, in fact, then apparently not in a way that allows them to actually reduce or lessen their burden simultaneously (inaudible) for making the argument -THE COURT: The whole reason why, as Ms. Humphries put it, the plaintiff is in a pickle is because what the defense, as I've always understood it, intended to do on a count where they're not entitled to apportionment is to get up and say, you can't -- to use reliance in a way that places them in a situation where there's nothing that they can say.
In other words, it's -- it's her own fault that -- not anything that the tobacco companies did or said; it's purely her own fault, her choice to continue smoking after 1964 when her husband quit, and so nothing -- you can believe everything the plaintiff said. Nothing the tobacco companies did
or didn't do, said or didn't say, has any effect whatsoever on the smoker.
And then the plaintiff is left in a -- where they can say nothing. And -- and that's why under this, you know, somewhat unusual case, the concurring cause instruction, you know, may be applicable.
So what I would suggest is, you know, we see what it is that the -- how it is that the defense uses it -MR. PAIGE: I'll just read it and move on.
THE COURT: -- and it may -- you know, it may -- it may be an appropriate argument.
MR. PAIGE: I'll just read it and move on.
THE COURT: Okay. So I'm going to overrule right now. I'm not taking any action with the jury, and we'll wait and see how the defense argues. Okay?
(The following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury.)
MR. PAIGE: Okay. So I'll just read this and move on. And this is important. You know, it's important that you understand that the reasonable reliance need not be the only cause; it can operate in combination with other causes. Okay? And that's
all I'll say about that for now.
Is that it?
What was the one before that? Oh, the concurring. Okay. I didn't have that in there.
Okay. So this is the verdict form, and we would respectfully submit to you that you check "Yes" to both these boxes under both the conspiracy and the concealment claim. And, again, that is necessary for us to get to the point of punitive damages. You don't get to punitive damages if there's no fraud. If there's no fraud -- that's why these claims, and that's why I started with it, are very important.
So for -- for punitive damages, you have to find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted in this case.
And, again, this is the board that talks about why punitive damages are necessary, to punish people, corporations, for doing what they did; to deter this type of intentional -- this wasn't negligence. This wasn't like they made a mistake. They did this on purpose, and they knew what was going to happen.
Next slide.
And, again, so this is their slides -- I mean,
this is their documents, and that's why I would say to you respectfully that punitive damages are really warranted in this case, because they did this for money. They knew that they were lying all along, and their own internal documents talk about that, that "We're going to be subject to the charge that we're lying sometime in the future to promote the sale of cigarettes."
And, again, they're warranted because they knew all along the harm, you know, that would -- that would happen to people who started young.
You know, we're supposed to, in our society, if you think about it -- it's not even -- you know, we're supposed to protect -- right? -- protect young people, teenagers, youth, people who are growing up. We're supposed to protect them, not addict them. We're supposed to lead them and help them find the way -- sometimes they're going through difficult times -- not mislead them.
So this is why I say they're an industry that preys on vulnerable people in our society. They're preying on youth. They're preying on teens.
They're preying on people who are addicted. They're feeding them doubt. They're feeding them confusion. And they do it for money.
You know, there's no reason you should do it, but you don't do it for money. And that's why I would submit to you respectfully that punitive damages are warranted.
I	want to get to the next issue, which is the product defect claim. And this is going to be a question on the verdict form, and this is different from the fraud. So this question is whether their product, the Winston cigarettes, had a design defect -- okay? -- whether it was -- the design defect was a legal cause of the injury or harm to Carole Larkin. Okay?
The judge has already told you what that means, and I'll go over that again, about the Winstons, how they could have been designed safer, how they did have reasonable, safer alternatives and they chose not to implement them for a purpose.
And that's what civil juries are for, to tell them is that okay, is that okay, to let them make a highly addictive drug and target teenagers and put a filter on it that doesn't work, when they have -they have the ability anytime they want to change that.
You can go back to the video.
And so here's Mr. Bowling again talking about
that if they knew -- if they knew how dangerous it was, they wouldn't do it. So they're saying publicly, "Look, if our product is doing what you say it's doing, we won't do it anymore."
And here's what Mr. -- Baron.
(On video.)
*	* * *
MALE SPEAKER: If you were convinced that cigarettes were killing people, would you stop making cigarettes?
MALE SPEAKER: Oh, I'm personally on record on that for a long time. I'm not in the business of killing people. Obviously I have said all along that simply there are plenty of ways to make a living. And I have to believe in what I'm doing very strongly. I think I'm a fairly reasonable human being and not in any way removed from the other members of society.
(Video interrupted.)
MR. ISASI: Your Honor -(Video resumed.)
MALE SPEAKER: I certainly wouldn't be in the business if I thought cigarettes were -(Video concluded.)
*	* * *
MR. ISASI: -- we object to the use of the document -- of this exhibit, the way it's being -can we explain at sidebar? It's not being used for a proper purpose.
THE COURT: Well, I don't know the basis of the objection, so come sidebar.
(The following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.)
MR. SEIDEN: Your Honor, Mr. Paige just indicated to the jury he's moving on now to the design defect claim. What he's put up now is a video from Philip Morris to show that Philip Morris had a defective product. That's not relevant and can't be used against Reynolds. We're not in a conspiracy claim. We're not in a fraud claim. I don't know what -THE COURT: I'm not sure how it's being used.
MR. PAIGE: I'm just showing a video, and I'll -- listen, I wasn't doing anything improper.
THE COURT: I don't know why it's objectionable. If he makes a bad argument, I'm sure you'll point it out.
MR. SEIDEN: Because this was used in their case in chief as part of the concealment claim.
THE COURT: Right.
MR. SEIDEN: Now he's trying to use that evidence (inaudible) for purposes of the concealment claim to try to prove -THE COURT: Your objection is on relevance?
MR. ISASI: The fact that Philip Morris has a defective product is irrelevant to whether or not Reynolds has a defective product. It has no bearing. It can't be used for that purpose.
THE COURT: That's probably true. They're not the manufacturer.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. So I'll clarify. I thought -- they know who he is. It's not like they don't know.
THE COURT: What's the relevance?
MR. PAIGE: The relevance is, Your Honor, is that -- all I'm trying to say is here's one of the coconspirators. If he said -THE COURT: This is not a conspiracy count.
MR. PAIGE: Okay. But, still, this is not a secret to them. They're aware of these statements, that one manufacturer is saying this. And if they want to, it's just a segue into that they can make safer cigarettes, and they all know it. They all know it.
THE COURT: I'm sustaining the objection.
Maybe you can move to the next slide. You can make whatever argument you want to make, but Philip Morris's vice president talking about how he is not in the business of killing people is thoroughly irrelevant to an argument on defective product.
(The following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury.)
MR. PAIGE: Okay. So we know from their -- I'm sorry. I'm sorry. We know from -MR. ISASI: For the record, the objection is sustained?
THE COURT: The objection is sustained.
MR. PAIGE: We know from their product -- that was Philip Morris. That was a gentleman from Philip Morris. But regardless, whether it's Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds, there's no secret to any of them that they know that this is -- when you see the -this is a harm that's being caused by their product.
So as you're considering is this unreasonably dangerous; are there reasonable, safer alternatives to the cigarettes like there used to be, like there used to be -- you know, in America, it's not -we're not here just so these cigarette companies can make as much money as they want to make. You know, they have to do things the right way. And like any
manufacturer, if there are reasonable, safer alternatives that don't cause death and disease, they need to do that.
And that's what civil juries decide. That's civil law. Okay? That's what civil is. That's what we're talking about, social, what's a social right.
You know, they can talk about consumers again, what -- what do their customers, their addicted smokers, want. Well, their addicted smokers might need nicotine. And, you know, that's for a different day.
But for a cigarette, for a cigarette, if they know that they're starting with those teenagers and they know that this -- that that is the end result, there are reasonable, safer alternative designs that are -- that would be -- I don't care about commercially acceptable to them -- that are socially acceptable to America.
And so this is the -- the definition. A product is defective -- this is what you have to decide -- if the foreseeable risk of harm, the harm that we just showed you, posed by the product could be reduced -- could they be reduced or avoided by the adoption of reasonable alternative designs by
the manufacturer and the omission of the alternative design renders a product not reasonably safe?
So can they make it safer? Can they? Can they make it safer? That's what Dr. Figlar is saying,
"Hey, we can't make it safer. We tried. I devoted my career to it. We can't do it. And the reason we can't do it" -- and he always says this -- "is because it's not commercially acceptable."
"Commercially acceptable" to them means profitable. It's not profitable. There's nothing wrong with a business where you have 1 million or
2	million customers. You don't need 50 million,
40 million customers who started as kids and are now drug addicts.
A product is defective if a technologically feasible and practical alternative design would have reduced or prevented Carole Larkin's harm.
MR. ISASI: Your Honor, we have to approach. I have a motion.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. PAIGE: I apologize for all the
interruptions. It's not my intent to do that. I'm trying to get through this as quickly as I can. I'm doing the best I can.
So, anyway, as I was saying, the strict liability, the question is -- this is the definition of design defect: Was there reasonable, alternative designs available that could have saved lives? And that's a question that you all have to ask yourselves and consider the evidence in this case as to whether there was.
And I would ask you to think about Dr. Proctor's testimony where he talked about the flue curing and the bronchodilators they put into the tobacco to make it more easily inhalable; that the Winston cigarette had two and a half times more of the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; that they put additives in to maintain those sweet spots for addiction, and the flavors, and they used the ammonia to make it more potent.
So those are all the design implementations that they put in effect. Okay? They did that on purpose. And are there reasonable alternative designs?
Well, this is an exhibit that they used to cross-examine Dr. Proctor. It's one of their
exhibits from the defense. When it says AZ 000833, you can look in the exhibits when you go back, in the defense exhibits. One of the defense exhibits talks about, from 1974, in a peer-reviewed journal called Lancet, they were looking at what are the realistic goals for smoking and health back in 1974.
And they talked about -- this is -- kind of goes in line with what Dr. Proctor was saying -only with slower buccal absorption -- I think Dr. Figlar even admitted that. When you're not inhaling it, you don't get as much addiction.
The slower buccal absorption of nicotine from noninhaled pipe and cigar smoke is where the majority of the smoking population stands much chance of avoiding dependence, addiction.
So the addiction is what leads to disease.
Okay? Because even Dr. Proctor -- Dr. Figlar said most smokers, the majority of them, are addicted to nicotine. That's why they're smoking.
Go back.
So he said it should be possible -- the article says -- to gradually -- to phase out dangerous cigarette smoking, which is what we're talking about here. Can we -- is their design defective that they've been profiting from for all these years?
Can we -- you know, and just because they haven't done it yet doesn't mean they can't do it tomorrow. Because they haven't done it yesterday doesn't prevent them from doing it tomorrow. You know, they should have done it in 1953. Well, now it's 2015. Is that an excuse to say, "Hey, we've gotten away with it for 65 years? Who are you seven people to tell us what to do? We've been doing this for 65 years, and we're pretty happy with what we've been doing. We've made a lot of money and we're profitable, and this is commercially acceptable to us."
You know, that's not the test. Just because they did it yesterday doesn't mean that you need to permit it tomorrow. Okay?
And this was from 1974 -MR. ISASI: Your Honor, I object to counsel's argument. Move to strike.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: So this is from 1974 in a peer-reviewed journal that they are saying exactly what Dr. Proctor was saying, that if it's safe to moderate control of noninhaled [sic] smoking of pipes or medium to large sized cigars, well, Proctor was talking about just making tobacco rolled in
paper, not a cigar that's not inhalable. And it says a program -- it's spelled funny, that's how they spelled it, it's not misspelled -- a program aimed at this more realistic goal need no longer be doomed to fail. Okay? It doesn't have to fail.
They're talking about, hey, it's not commercially acceptable. It's what Dr. Figlar said because that's what they want you to believe. They want you to believe that. That it doesn't have to be doomed to fail, if they make a cigarette with no nicotine and one that's not inhalable.
And that is why people start smoking, for these wholly irrational reasons, because they want to emulate, they want to do something with their hands, they want to get nicotine into their -- smoke in their -- whatever, whatever reasons teenagers start smoking.
You're not going to have addiction. People can freely choose to smoke and not smoke, quit and not quit, and you're not going to have death and disease. It doesn't need to be doomed and they know that. They know that.
So... so these are the safer alternative designs and -- one of the instructions was in deciding whether the product was defective, because
of the design defect, you shall consider the state of art of scientific and technical knowledge and other circumstances, other circumstances that existed at the time of the product's manufacture.
So what was known? What was the technical knowledge in 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980? And what are the other circumstances that they didn't implement them? Right? They knew that -- didn't have to be inhalable. They knew. This is from the American Tobacco which is part of that (indicating), their document in 1935. This is from American Tobacco.
"It is quite possible that denicotinized, a cigarette by chemical and thermal methods" -- they know that. The makers of Lucky Strike cigarettes deliberately will refrain from doing this.
So, I mean, come on. Are there reasonable alternative designs, or do we want to just have -give them a free-for-all and say, go ahead, these cigarettes are okay, target teenagers, manipulate the nicotine, put on fake filters and let's go, you know -- let's go have 50 million nicotine-addicted people who are all going to die.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. At this point we have a -- cumulative references.
THE COURT: Okay. Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: And so this was what they designed and this is what they sold to -- to Carole Larkin.
It was engineered to be inhaled deeply into the lungs, to go rapidly to the brain. You get 10 pops per cigarette. And because the effects of nicotine are short-lived, you need somebody who's addicted, they need 200, sometimes more doses of nicotine to the brain each day.
In terms of the manipulating of the nicotine, this is from their internal documents, they talk about happily. You know, you'd think that you'd see one document that says, hey, sadly, sadly, for the industry, people are dying. It's very sad.
They talk about happily, nicotine is both habituating and unique. Nicotine is the sine qua non of tobacco products. The nicotine levels of the Brown & Williamson, which is also R.J. Reynolds, was not obtained by accident. We can regulate fairly precisely the nicotine and sugar levels. The sugar levels is what makes it inhalable, so they can do that. They can regulate the sugar levels and the nicotine to save lives if they want to. They know that.
Any desire -- additional nicotine kick can be easily obtained through pH regulations.
So that really -- is that really, there are no reasonable alternative designs that could save lives that are available?
This is from the Surgeon General. They talk about, you know, the tobacco products contain constituents such as ammonia to increase the conversion of nicotine to the nonionized or free-base state because they know that's more potent. That's what they're selling. They're not selling choice, they're not selling people because people like the taste. They're selling addiction. There's no mistake about it. Nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people persist, and this persistent tobacco use is what contributes to many diseases in the report.
And that's why if you can get rid of nicotine addiction in their product, which they can do like that (indicating), we wouldn't be here and lives, millions and millions and millions of real people's lives would have been saved. Real people.
Without the chemical compound of nicotine, the cigarette market would collapse. We'd all lose our job and consulting fees. That's what they're concerned about. See, they want a market that has 50 million customers. A million, 5 million is not
enough. They're worried about their jobs.
We can never be comfortable selling a product that if customers could stop using, we could go out of business overnight. That's what they don't want. They don't want -- their business -- I forget how many employees they have, but they don't need so many employees. Just don't have so many customers.
Because of addiction, these are the chemical, the carcinogens that people are smoking. Ionide -cyanide, arsenic, formaldehyde, you know, polonium 210, lead, you know, it's crazy. But this is what -- when people are addicted to nicotine, this is what they inhale into their bodies.
A defect in a product is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially in producing the injury so it would be said but for the defect, the injury would not have occurred. But for these defects the nicotine addiction and inhalability we wouldn't be here. Carole Larkin would not have suffered the damage she's suffered.
And so this question was, was there a design defect that was the legal cause? We respectfully submit that the answer must be yes on the verdict form.
Now, this concurrent cause of the product defect, again, says that -- and this is why it's important, and this is something I want to talk to you about because this is a fair question. And in Florida, you know, it doesn't have to be one or the other. Okay? Even though, you know, Paul Larkin said he doesn't believe his wife did anything wrong, she was addicted and, you know, he loved her and obviously he doesn't think she did anything wrong.
But I understand in this type of case that it's very feasible that you-all may say, hey, you know what? Both parties got to share some of the blame here. And I -- accept that, I understand that, and I want to talk about that.
So you'll have to determine, you know, was she negligent? Also, if the product defect was a legal cause, does she bear some of the responsibility?
And if you hold that she does bear some of the responsibility, that's okay, you know; that's your verdict, I understand that. But I want to talk to you about it and make sure that we understand her responsibility compared to -- to theirs. Okay?
Because when we talk about her, you know, again, with the whole presentism thing, you can't look at it like we do today. Remember, she was born
into a world that was completely different; where smoking was acceptable; top athletes smoked, sports figures, you know. It wasn't like it was today.
What's the next thing?
You know, they were spending -- despite all the newspaper articles and the PSAs, you know, we showed you the PSAs and they were out there. But they were spending so much more money promoting the glamour, the sexiness, the acceptability of their product.
Here's some of the ads that you've seen.
(On video.)
*	* * *
MALE SPEAKER: What cigarette do you smoke? You'll be interested to know how the doctors of America answered that question. Doctors in every branch of medicine were asked, what cigarette [unintelligible].
MALE SPEAKER: You'll feel better.
FEMALE SPEAKER: (Inaudible) Philip Morris.
MALE SPEAKER: Yes, you [unintelligible],
FEMALE SPEAKER: And happy smoking. 200 times. Yes, ten packs of those better tasting Luckys.
[MUSIC]
MALE SPEAKER: Winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack.
Winston's got that filtered blend.
[Unintelligible.]
MALE SPEAKER: A whole new reason to quit smoking. Sure wish you could taste it.
FEMALE SPEAKER: I am tasting it, Garnet.
(Video off.)
*	* * *
MR. PAIGE: Okay. So I would submit to you respectfully that if you look at Carole Larkin's life, you have to look at it in parts, okay, because she lived in different decades and things were different.
She was born in 1934, and the first warning that really went on a cigarette was 1970. You know, in 1966 it said, hey, it may be hazardous, and I don't want to rehash but remember there was a poll and people -THE CLERK: Counsel, you have used an hour and 15 minutes.
MR. PAIGE: Fifteen. Okay. Thank you very much. So I'm going to try to wrap up in the next ten minutes.
So -- okay. So in 1966 I think the caution went on said, hey, it may be hazardous. But 1970, the warning went on and said smoking is dangerous,
according to the Surgeon General.
So I submit to you respectfully from 1934 up until 1970, the world that she was born into and lived in with all the glamour and all the acceptability, all the filters that she thought were safer, for that first 36 years of her life, I submit to you respectfully she did nothing wrong.
Thir- -- 50 percent of doctors were smoking in 1960. Thirty percent of doctors were smoking in 1970. I understand that her husband may have quit in 1964, but she's not Paul Larkin, okay? She's Carole Larkin. Everybody is different, genetically, mentally, everybody is different.
So from that -- if Paul Larkin had not quit, do you think they'd be saying, okay, it was okay for her to smoke? It has nothing to do with Carole Larkin.
From 1936 to 1970, I submit respectfully for those 36 years, because of presentism and the world she lived in, she -- she didn't do anything wrong.
From 1970 until 1988, when the -- when she quit, that's when they had the warnings on the cigarettes it was dangerous, that's when they had the warnings on the cigarette that smoking causes cancer went on the cigarettes in 1985, I think, and
for those 18 years, which is, you know, 36 -- is two-thirds, the 18 years for that third, I respectfully submit to you that she cannot be, cannot be 100 percent at fault for those years; that she is less at fault than them because you have to compare the fault of them in not making the safer product when they knew they should have.
What motivated them to not save lives? Why did they do that versus her failure to quit? Because she was addicted. You know, you can't compare the actions of somebody who is addicted to nicotine, who is a victim, who's a victim, who is a disease [sic], addiction is a brain disease. And so if somebody is addicted to nicotine and you compare that -- you know, Paul Larkin said that his wife -- didn't even know that his wife had quit in 19- -- didn't remember. You know, we're asking him about events that occurred 30, 40, 50 years ago. And, you know, she's not here to talk about herself, you know. You know, just because Paul Larkin doesn't remember that she failed to quit or tried to quit, who knows.
But the evidence in this case is 1984, I think she quit for a year; she relapsed, like a lot of smoking addicts do. She tried again, it was a struggle and she quit. So for those 18 years, I
would respectfully submit to you that she bears one-third of the responsibility for that one-third of her life. And I would ask you when you look at what they did -Would you go back, Baron?
When you talk about the last 18 years, about whether she was -- whether -- what fault she bears, this is from the Surgeon General's Report or Surgeon General -- FTC report in 1967. People don't understand that smoking is not a free choice until it becomes a matter of need. 1989, two factors refute the argument that smoking is a free choice. People start as teenagers and then become addicted.
And in their own internal documents in 1980, they say that smoking is more addictive than cocaine and heroin and we can't defend smoking as a free choice if somebody is addicted.
So I would respectfully submit to you that if you were to apportion the fault between her life, which she lived it, because of presentism, it's not today -- and her -- what she got caught up in, that she would be found to be 10 percent at fault and R.J. Reynolds be 90 percent a fault.
I would respectfully submit to you that's fair, considering what they did with their product.
And it always, every day, you know, they say every day she picked up a cigarette that had a warning on it, every day they sold cigarettes knowing that people would die that very day, and that 4,000 more teenagers would start smoking every day, as long as they sold it the way they did.
You know, this is damages. You know -- you know, at the beginning of the case, Mr. Isasi said that Paul Larkin and Carole [sic] Larkin were seeking money damages. Money damages.
And we are seeking money damages. Part of the reason is in the civil justice -- our civil justice system, that's all we have. You know, we can't restore the harm that they've done in the past. You can't restore that. You can't bring back Carole Larkin and give her the last two years of her life with her family to live a happy, healthy life. You know, her last two years -- think about it. You could take the worst criminals in our society and you take their freedom away from them and you put them in jail, and the one thing you cannot do to them is inflict pain or torture. You cannot inflict pain on even the worst criminals.
In the last two years of her life, she had all of her freedom taken away. She was sequestered into
her house into a feeding tube. She was humiliated to go outside. She was in constant pain with all those surgeries that she went through. Mr. Gerson will talk a little bit more about it, but there's nothing worse than pain. There's nothing worse than pain, and there's nothing worse than having your freedom taken away from you. And that's what they did to her for her last two years, when she should have been enjoying her children, her grandchildren, her husband, her daughter, you know. It's just not right.
And that's why, you know, we brought to you one victim today. This just one victim. That's why the numbers when we say "all the victims," they're just numbers but they're not just numbers. They're real people. And I wish -- I wish for what they did to her that I could ask you for $100,000,000 and say, hey, you know what? $100,000,000, that's fair.
This is what they did for 50 years. They -- they -they humiliated this poor lady. They -- they got her as a teenager, and this is what they did to her the last two years. I wish I could ask you for $100,000,000.
In all due respect the law would probably not support a verdict of that amount for this case. The
medical expenses have been stipulated on. They're $455,000, and I would ask you respectfully for their pain and suffering; that you give an additional $9.5 million for Carole Larkin for what they did to her on purpose, knowing this would be the harm- -there's no secret to them, that this would be the end result to this young girl. This young girl who started as a teenager and switched to their filters.
That was not a secret to them. They knew this was going to happen. They know it happens every day.
Respectfully, I'm pretty much done here.
Mr. Gerson is going to say a few words, and then I know Mr. Isasi is going to get up and speak. And I would respectfully ask you to listen carefully when Mr. Isasi speaks and hopefully he will address -- I want you to listen carefully to see what he says about youth smoking, why they did it and why they think it's okay; youth marking, why he thinks it's okay to manipulate nicotine; and why R.J. Reynolds thinks it was okay to lie, create doubt for all those years.
Thank you very much for your time.



MR. GERSON: Good morning, everyone.
May it please the Court.
I just got reminded that at 11:45 we have to take a recess, so that's an outside limit on how long you may be forced to listen to me talk and I'll do my best to make it even less than that.
What I'm here for now is to discuss with you the concepts of damages and how they need to be applied in this case.
Throughout the jury instructions, you'll see many references to what is called loss, injury, or damage. Those are three different things, but we kind of wrap them under one label, as lawyers and judges, and we refer to them as damages.
So my job is to tell you now what the damages are in this case, how you should evaluate them, remind you of the things that were important in the evidence that you heard, and help explain the numbers that Gary just asked for you to return in your verdict.
The damages that we're talking about at this point in the case are the amount of money needed to compensate for what happened to Carole Larkin.
So, first, we have the stipulated amount of the medical bills.
The amount is $455,000. There can be no dispute about that. It will take no discussion or argument between you and your deliberations to judge that number or conclude that that is the number.
But what about the intangible things? The jury instructions command you to determine the amount of money for pain, suffering, mental anguish, disability, inability to lead a normal life, and disfigurement.
These things are much more than the medical expenses. The medical expenses are merely what other people charged for the pain and suffering and anguish and disability and disfigurement that Mrs. Larkin had. What she suffered was far more than that, and I'm going to try and explain that now.
Why do we award money, especially large sums of money, in Florida, for compensatory damages, when someone has suffered loss, injury, or damage?
Florida law recognizes that these elements of
damages describe the human condition. They're how we understand the impact on someone's life of what has happened to them.
We use money to measure the effect of the disease on this one person. We use money to do that because we have no other yardstick or means to -- to determine it.
There's nothing that you can do as jurors to rewrite history, to restore the parties to the position they were in before the loss, injury, or damages occurred.
All that you can do, what you are commanded by the law to do, and what you have agreed to do by taking your oath as jurors, as -- is to award money in an amount which is fair and just in the circumstances.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor, to the misstatement. That's not all of the -- jury instructions -THE COURT: Overruled.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you've received jury instructions from the Court. You will follow the jury instructions; you'll have a copy of them with you.
This is argument by counsel, and you'll have a
copy of the instructions with you in the jury room.
MR. GERSON: No one can dispute that Carole Larkin was grievously and egregiously harmed by Reynolds's product, and her family has pursued this case to trial to 2015 and for doing that they make no apology. They're here to ask you for justice.
So let me help you understand how you can -and I think you should -- do justice in this case.
First, I told you that the elements of damages, pain, suffering -- mental anguish, disability, inability to lead a normal life, disfigurement -these are the things that add up to the human condition. It is a person's humanity. And to understand how this person was affected by the disease caused from smoking Winston cigarettes, we need to look at these specific concepts.
So the first one is pain.
Pain is a universal sensation. Everyone has experienced pain. Pain is the alarm that the body sends to the brain when something wrong is happening to the body.
It's not transmitted to the brain as a thought; it is almost an electrical, unmistakable signal that our brain instantly recognizes that something is wrong and the part of the body that hurts, tells the
brain where the hurt is.
This is a siren of hurt. And it does not stop once the brain knows of it.
The experience of the pain continues until there has been healing of the tissues which have been hurt.
Carole Larkin had five surgeries. By definition, each one of them involved a surgeon's knife cutting into her body, cutting out parts of her body, never to be put back in.
It also involved cutting pieces of tissue from her body that were not injured so that they could be used to fill the holes and the void from the -created by the removal of the injured parts of her body.
Carole Larkin never had a pain-free day after June 15th, 1998.
I'm not going to put up any slides. I'm not going to show you again in my presentation here this morning any of the photographs that I showed during the direct examination of my clients. You saw them. I'm sure you remember them. Just, for example, the photograph that I showed of little Caryn at the beach holding the pack of cigarettes. That was not to tell you anything at all about what the image
showed. I showed that photograph to tell you what was in the mind of the photographer so that you would understand what the thought process was of Carole and her husband at the time they were taking that picture.
Likewise, I'm not going to show you again now those pictures in evidence, one of them being a Polaroid taken in April of 1998, the most recent picture before the first surgery, and another one of Paul and Carole together just a few weeks before or a few weeks after, and you can see the -- what a beautiful, mature woman this was. You could tell by the smile on her face that she was not in pain; that she was suffering [sic]. And the last day that she was in that condition was June the 14th, 1998, and that very next day, her entire world changed.
So the changes began with the first surgery on June the 15th, 1998. And by the time she had recovered from that surgery, she underwent the radiation. The radiation itself was painful and difficult. When that radiation ended, another surgery began.
Multiply this times five, for five surgeries, each time a surgeon's knife being cut into her body. Sure, she was under an anesthetic when the cutting
was being done, but when the anesthetic wears off, the experience is pure hell. It's pain.
This was an enormous amount of pain that was set out in detail in Dr. Tartell's testimony. He was only asked how he did it so that you could comprehend the pain that this lady experienced at the raw, cruel hand of the world's ugliest disease.
The next part of the damages is a different concept. It's called suffering. Suffering is different from pain. This is not a physical feeling. Suffering is how pain affects your function.
Few people have suffered as did Carole Larkin. Her jaw was removed along with a portion of her tongue.
Suffering is lying in your hospital bed after the surgery. Suffering is struggling to get strong enough, to be well enough, to go home and to reconnect with the comfort and the familiarity of your environment.
Suffering is being unable to swallow so that you're unable to eat. She was tethered to a feeding tube for the rest of her life. She had to get her nutrition seven times a day in small quantities.
I'm not asking you to give any consideration at
all to the burden these frequent feedings and constant care created for either Caryn Newborn or her sister, Eileen, or for her husband, Paul, or her son, Paul, Jr. Forget about that burden. The case is not about them. The case is about Carole Larkin and how helpless and dependent to survive she became on private nurses and her daughters.
She could -- suffering is not being able to swallow your own saliva so that you have to carry a towel because you drool.
That, ladies and gentlemen, is just a quick and a brief look at -- at suffering. I could think of hundreds more examples of how she suffered from the disease that was caused by smoking Winstons.
Just a couple more comments.
She never got a good night's sleep. She slept in a reclining chair because if she was fully reclined or prone, she may have aspirated something from her stomach and choked to death.
She couldn't swallow whatever secretions there were in her mouth, so without the power of gravity by being in an inclined chair, she was at risk for aspirating those secretions, too, and choking to death.
Suffering is having what is wrong with you.
And after that first surgery and from then on for the rest of her life, there was so much wrong with Carole Larkin. She could not speak because part of her tongue was cut out and what remained was pulled over to one side.
I asked Dr. Tartell to explain the structure and the function of the mouth because of its complexity and its vitality to our humanity. More perhaps than any other part of the body, the loss of the functions of the mouth caused suffering.
It is, indeed, a horrible thought to consider losing any part of anyone's body. But the other parts can be compensated for, in one way or another, far easier than losing the function in your mouth.
The ability to move your tongue is necessary to speak; it's necessary to -- to swallow; it's necessary for all of the functions of your oral cavity.
The next category -- and I'm doing -- I'm explaining these categories of the human condition to you because I want you to understand that they're all separate and distinct. On the verdict form, so as not to make you labor unnecessarily with an exact computation of the amount of money that should be awarded for the pain as contrasted with the amount
of money that should be awarded for the suffering, we put them all together. But the concepts are separate. Each is different. And that's what I'm trying to do in this presentation to -- is to explain those to you.
So I've talked with you up until now about the pain, and I've talked with you about the suffering. Let me next go on to the mental anguish.
This reserved, quiet wife, mother, and grandmother, never needed psychiatric drugs in her 65 years of life. But she couldn't cope. Mental anguish is not mental illness. It's not emotional disturbance. It is living with the fear: "Will the cancer come back? Did they get it all? Am I really comfortable that I'm out of the cancer woods until at least five years have gone by?"
Now, the cancer didn't come back in Carole.
But she had no guarantee that it would, would not, and she needed to worry every day about whether it would. And the evidence is she did. And that mental anguish was with her 24 hours, seven days a week; no days off for weekends or holidays; constant.
What else did she have to worry about that constituted part of her mental anguish?
"Will I choke to death by aspirating, after all that I've been through?"
Another question she surely asked herself every day is "Will I get better?" Of course, as Caryn said, they were hopeful after the first surgery.
But surgery after surgery after surgery can only teach you that you are not getting better.
The anguish had to be the realization that she was not improving; she was worsening, or more surgeries would not have been done.
Now, as I said about suffering, I could give many more examples. You can think about your own examples when you draw reasonable inferences from the evidence that has been presented, and you can and you should discuss this in your deliberations for all of the elements of damages that I'm only briefly talking about now.
The next element -- is that yours or mine?
Thank you.
The next element of damages which under Florida law helps describe the human condition is disability.
The opposite of disability is ability. And until June the 14th, 1998, Carole Larkin had all the ability that every normal person had, except for
what Winston cigarettes caused growing underneath her tongue, hidden in the floor of her mouth.
She had no job at this point in her life except for loving her grandchildren. She felt needed by her grandson and she cared for him. But after June 15 th, it was Carole who was so disabled she needed help doing the simplest things. She couldn't drive. She couldn't go anywhere and be alone. She couldn't take care of herself. She couldn't feed herself, even through the tube that was in her stomach.
Her doctor, in fact, summed it all up when he used two words and described her as an oral cripple.
Without speech, without swallowing, PEG tube in place, her whole body was disabled. There was really nothing wrong with her arms or her legs, but because of the disabling features of the disease-caused surgeries, everything about her body and its functioning was disabled. She lost all of her ability to do anything.
And this was, before, as you heard in the evidence and it's not been disputed, a completely independent, self-reliant, beautiful, proud woman who was reduced to a disabled weakling, struggling to survive, losing ground with the passage of time
every month.
The next element of damages, which is different from everything I've talked to you about until now, is the inability to lead a normal life. This means she could not live normally. Well, what does that mean?
Just talking, to make herself understood. When your tongue -- and I won't imitate it -- but if your tongue is pulled all the way over to one side of your mouth, if part of your tongue is stuck down to the floor of your mouth, which is what Dr. Tartell tried to improve upon in surgery No. 2, you can't talk, or you can't enunciate in a meaningful, understandable way.
Now, could Carole Larkin communicate her thoughts? Well, I introduced a note in evidence to show you that while she was in the hospital, she certainly couldn't communicate other than by writing notes. But after she got out, even though her tongue was pulled to the side, she could still form words and get them out of her mouth, but only if the listener really wanted to hear them.
And so who were the listeners who really wanted to hear them? Paul, Caryn, her other children, and her grandchildren.
But losing the ability to speak to strangers, to be able to go into a supermarket or a drug store or a doctor's office and to talk to somebody and make yourself understood is a normal part of life.
It's a part of our normal lives that all of us have and all of us take for granted. And Carole Larkin lost it as a result of Winston cigarettes.
Just going to church and saying hello to the priest or to her friends, her parishioners, was lost. She never drove a car again. She couldn't be alone without supervision.
This list could go on endlessly. But you don't want me to go on endlessly, so I'm going to ask you, when you are in the privacy of the jury room, to expand upon the ways that the evidence in this case proved that Carole Larkin could not lead a normal life. Because we're asking you to include full, just, fair compensation for all of those elements of her loss, injury, or damage, what Florida defines as the human condition.
There is still one more I haven't mentioned, and that is disfigurement. The disfigurement in this lady was so extraordinary that we have no pictures to show it. The pictures I showed in opening statement and I showed again during Caryn's
testimony were taken right after the first surgery on June the 15th.
The reason that those pictures were taken were so that there would be a baseline, so that her family could encourage her as time went on, "Look, Mom, see how much better you look now than the way you looked right after the surgery?"
That's why they took and kept those pictures.
But they never got the chance to really show them to Carole and make that statement, because her disfigurement did not improve. It got worse.
It started with surgery No. 2, which was the surgery to try and free up her tongue, which involved cutting open the floor of her mouth again and going back in to try and release the scarred-in, tethered tissue. That created more, not less, disfigurement.
The third surgery was the -- the effort to try and put in the cadaver bone. This was going to be the final step of the reconstruction of her disease.
Remember I distinguished in Dr. Tartell's testimony between curing the cancer, which apparently he did because we know it didn't come back, by removing the cancer and removing so much tissue so that he could be as confident as possible
that he, quote, got it all, as we all say when we speak of this horrible disease.
But the other goal of the surgery was to try and reconstruct her, to make her appearance and her function as normal as possible, to take that piece of her chest (indicating) and cut it out of the skin and pull it up from underneath (indicating) and reconstruct a bottom for her mouth.
Well, that next surgery was then, with the plate in place, to take the cadaver bone and put the cadaver bone -- to bolt the cadaver bone, screw it into the plate, put bone marrow that was taken from her hip (indicating) that was not injured, but from her hip, and put it in that cadaver bone so that, hopefully, it would all grow together, she would heal, and her cosmetic effect would be better. Ultimately there was -- there was a hope that teeth could be put in that cadaver bone after it healed.
But it didn't heal.
What happened was that cosmetically, disfigurement-wise, she got worse. Within a couple of months the skin broke down, and the -- the -- the steel plate, the titanium plate was sticking out.
It was exposed to the atmosphere.
As I said, we took no picture of this to try
and inflame you. No one was thinking about taking pictures to show to a jury 15 years later. And no one wanted any pictures taken, for fear that Carole herself might see them.
What was wanted was for her to be encouraged, for her to get support, for her to get soothing from her family that, "Yes, Mom, yes, my dear wife, you are getting better. You are going to look better."
But that's not what happened. The disfigurement got worse and worse and worse, until the metal prosthesis was exposed to the air.
The next surgery, the fourth surgery, was to try and fix that. And Dr. Tartell went in, caused more pain by cutting it open again to try and push the plate back into place and to anchor it to structures in her mouth.
And then there was more suffering as she recovered from that, and ultimately it failed again. And the fifth surgery was finally undertaken to cut her face open again a fifth time and to remove both the cadaver bone and the plate.
And what she was left with was half a face.
Her lip was there, but from her lip down to her neck, there was nothing.
The way that Dr. Tartell described it
clinically as a surgeon was he said she had no profile. What that means in commonsense, everyday terms is that everything from here (indicating) to here (indicating) was gone.
No one took tape and newspaper and covered the mirrors in Carole Larkin's house. She had to live with this reality for the rest of her life, with this disfigurement that is so grotesque, I can't find any more or better words to describe it.
THE CLERK: Counselor, you have used 30 minutes.
MR. GERSON: Okay.
I've got a few more and then I'm going to sit down.
So this is why I'm telling you that nine and a half million dollars is a reasonable, a fair and a just sum of money for you to award for these losses, harms, damages, and injury.
Now, before I sit down, I just want to talk for a few minutes about you.
You're here as representatives of the community. You come with different backgrounds, but together here for the two and a half weeks you've been with us so far, you are one unified part of our government. Soon you will go back to being the
individuals that you are, engaged in your own lives, but for these three weeks you have a single job to do.
Now, we ask for six people to be on a jury because that gives us six brains with six memories.
It gives us 12 eyes, 12 ears. It gives us a creature of our government that has the sensory -the sensory tools and the cognitive ability to understand and to comprehend everything, because some of you will remember some parts of the case better than others and others of you will remember other parts of the case better than others. But experience has taught us in Florida that having six works.
Now, you must reach a unanimous decision. And I want to tell you that there's no other part of our government that requires a unanimous decision.
Judges disagree with one another all along.
Just during this trial there have been several important decisions made by the United States Supreme Court, the highest court in the land, and some of the judges wanted one outcome and other judges wanted another outcome.
But jurors don't decide different outcomes.
They can only decide one outcome. The same is true
not just of judges, but of legislators and virtually all politicians. And I won't take any more of your time giving more examples of that. Your verdict must be unanimous and all of you must agree to it.
Now, the civil justice system exists to protect the community. This old courthouse was built just for that purpose. It stands here today as a house of justice. The courtroom is open to the public because what happens inside this room affects everyone in the public.
And everyone in the public has a right to see and to hear what happens. That's why we have all those pews out there (indicating.) So that anyone who wants to come and watch the work of the trial and the jury can do it, except for your deliberations which are secret.
So it will be up to you to apply the law that a corporation is not allowed to sell a defective product because that creates a danger to the community. And a jury must protect the community.
Nor may a corporation be allowed to conceal the defects or the danger in its product because if it does, people in the community will be harmed and it's your job to protect -MR. ISASI: Objection.
MR. GERSON: -- the people in the community. MR. ISASI: Objection, argumentative.
THE COURT: Let me see you sidebar.
(The following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT: Just very quickly, because we're going to have people come in soon.
Is this an objection to the people in the community generally? Those are prohibited except in Phase 2 of a damage, punitive damage -MR. GERSON: No, in Phase 1 is the message; the amount is Phase 2.
THE COURT: The amount is how much -MR. GERSON: That's -THE COURT: My understanding -- and I'm not going to pull the case law because I don't have the time -MR. GERSON: I'll phrase it differently.
THE COURT: Thank you.
(The following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury.)
MR. GERSON: Jurors are who we give the power to do something about the dangers to the community.
By your verdict you will tell Reynolds if you think they endangered the community and if they
should pay for the harm caused.
MR. ISASI: Your Honor, again -THE COURT: It's sustained. Please move on to the next part.
MR. GERSON: Only you have the power to decide now whether Reynolds should be punished.
If there is -- if you make that decision, as I suggest you should, then you will reconvene to decide what the punishment should be.
You will only have the conduct that you saw in this trial in this evidence. If you don't do it, you will be saying that it was okay for them to do what they did because you will have let them get away with it. If you -MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor. That's not the standard.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, I've read you the standard instruction regarding the -- the imposition of punitive damages.
Again, you're going to have a copy of it with you in the jury room, and that is the law that you must follow.
This is closing argument. The attorneys are permitted to make argument. What the attorneys say is not evidence, nor is it an instruction on the
law.
You may proceed.
MR. GERSON: Thank you, Your Honor.
If you don't let them get away with it and you do decide that they should have to pay punitive damages, then you will be standing up for what is right. You will be saying on behalf of the community you represent that what they did was wrong.
MR. ISASI: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. GERSON: This is why you are so important in this case.
This is why, for 200 years, our government has relied and the American people have had the benefit of and the right to a jury trial; so that we can bring strangers who we never met, who have no stake in the outcome of the case and say, ladies and gentlemen, here is what happened. These are the facts. And the Court says, "Ladies and gentlemen, here's the law, and it's up to you to take the law and the facts and to put them together and follow your oath and come out with a just and a fair verdict."



MR. PAIGE: Okay, here we go.
Okay. Good afternoon again. This is the hardest part of being a lawyer for two reasons: Number one, you guys have probably had it, right? You've heard this all and there's nothing I'm going to say now probably that you haven't heard. And, number two, I can barely read this, so I'm going to do my best to read my handwriting and address some of points, but if I address -- it's like a point/counterpoint. If I address every point he made, we will be here another two hours; nobody wants that.
So we know that you guys paid attention and you know the evidence. You took notes, everybody has been taking notes, you've been paying attention, so whatever I say now is just a lawyer talking. You guys know what the facts are, but I want to put up, you know, this board because this is -- you know, I want to tell you, you know,
what does this have to do with Mrs. Larkin. It's funny, they still don't understand, they don't understand, even today, what this has to do with Mrs. Larkin.
Mrs. Larkin is one of 8.6 million people who got ' injured in one year. She's somebody who started at a teenager. Okay. She started as a teenager just like they wanted. She got addicted to nicotine just like they knew she would. She switched to filters just like they wanted her to.
And then she quit like she was supposed to and then she got sick. And they don't know what this has to do with Mrs. Larkin? They don't understand? They are talking about how can this make people millionaires, oh, people are going to get rich.
Listen, the only thing that they understand? You know the only thing they understand? I don't have to tell you, the only thing they understand is money. Okay. That's what their business is based on. And when a family comes in here and they ask you -- you said, oh, I didn't explain to you how I came up with this number. You want to know how I came up with the number? There's no exact measure for me to
come up with a number. You can award more or you can award less, it's up to you. I make a suggestion based upon my experience and what I think would be fair and it's up to you to accept it or reject it, to award less if you want or more if you want. That's the law.
But the law -- there's nothing you're going to see in the law that says, oh, we hurt somebody really bad, as bad as we can hurt somebody, you shouldn't compensate them because you're going to make them a millionaire. That's not what this case is about. You know what, God forbid if two victims of the tobacco industry, you know, got fairly compensated for the harm that they did and they would then learn and that's what we are asking for -MR. ISASI: Objection, your Honor.
MR. PAIGE: -- punitive damages.
MR. ISASI: I need to approach.
(The following proceedings were held sidebar:)
THE COURT: I think he misspoke. He said two victims. I understand the jury understands the only victim is Mrs. Larkin, either you can correct it or I can correct it. This is not a
wrongful death case, the jury is not confused, it's been explained throughout; I think he misspoke. He can correct it.
MR. ISASI: I think you should correct it, your Honor.
THE COURT: Do you have any objection to saying this is a case they are coming in in the capacity as personal representatives?
MR. PAIGE: I think it was clear, but you want me to say it again, I'll say it again.
MR. GERSON: We will say it.
THE COURT: I will give that brief cure and you can proceed.
(The following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: The Plaintiffs in this case are Paul Larkin and Caryn Newborn, and they are coming as co-personal representatives of the estate of Carole Larkin and the only victim who is here is Carole Larkin alleging the injuries that she sustained.
So you may proceed.
MR. PAIGE: I apologize if I wasn't clear,
I think that's what I meant.
But, in any event, another thing I
asked -- respectfully, I asked Mr. Isasi, and I wasn't challenging him, I was just asking him, in all due respect, I want to hear what you have to say about youth marketing. I want the jury to hear what you have say about the conspiracy about the lying and I didn't hear him address that at all, but he said -- he said I'm going to address the youth marketing, but he never admitted it.
All he said about it was that I can't prove -- he didn't deny it, all he said was I can't prove that their youth marketing affected my client's mother and wife. And you know what? I can't prove it 100 percent because she's dead, but you can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, you're entitled to do that, okay.
And, so, he says we can't prove it affected her, the marketing affected her. Well, here's what the FTC report says about their marketing. "Cigarette advertising reaching virtually all Americans who either read and understand the spoken word. So pervasive is cigarette advertising, it's virtually impossible to be an American of any age to avoid cigarette advertising." Okay.
So they would have you believe -- they
would have you believe that somehow this lady lived underneath a rock in the middle of the woods and never heard anything. She was just a regular, ordinary teenager in 1950, they targeted youth and he didn't address that, he didn't address one of their documents. All he said is that I can't prove it and I can't tell you 100 percent what ads she saw because she's dead. All I can tell you is that they know, everybody knows, the government knows and their own internal documents know that that was their business model, that they went after teenagers, they went after youth of America because they know they were vulnerable and that's proof beyond any doubt in this case.
Punitive damages, they put up a slide.
I'm not going to re-put up their slides, but they talked about how punitive damages are to punish and deter. Okay. And then he put up, but look at all the research we've done. I mean, are we really going to discuss this again? Am I going to have to go through the 7,000 articles how CTR was a sham and a front and a shield and these organizations have been disbanded?
I mean, they don't get it. He's still sitting here telling you we don't have to be
punished or deterred, look at all this great research we did from the CTR, who has been disbanded, who the CTR did 7,000 articles and their own documents say was a fraud, it was a front, it was a shield. So they don't get it. He does not get it.
And then he says we are not the same company anymore. Put up the website. We don't need to be punished because we've transformed. We have now transformed. We're now -- R.J. Reynolds has changed. We have now changed. Incidentally, there's only 40 million smokers and 500,000 are dying a year, but they are saying that they have changed because they put on a website.
I respectfully submit, you know, probably nobody heard of the website before they got here, but they put on a website and come into court and say look at our website, we have changed. And all their website says is that they know how deadly their product is. They say that people should quit. Okay, people should quit.
And, so, if they understand how deadly it is and they really, really truly, truly want people to quit, what are we talking about? What are we talking about, that they have, oh, it's a
legal product, we are allowed to do it. Oh, we don't have to. You know, this Congress hasn't mandated that we don't have to make the cigarettes the way he's suggesting. You're not Congress. You're a jury of our peers from the community and you can require or you can demand that these cigarettes under this case were not safe for Mrs. Larkin and that would be important because they will hear you, they will hear you.
You know, they said the FDA can control the company. You know, if we get to phase II, hopefully we will, phase II will be short, probably be a day, day and a half at the most, we will address that statement that he made that the FDA can control them and that will be an interesting conversation we would love to have.
So, for punitive damages, just like compensatory damages, he said, you know, this money is going to the Plaintiff if you award punitive damages. If we get to punitive damages, you'll hear more arguments about what is necessary to punish and deter them. You'll make a decision what's fair and reasonable, and you'll follow the law. And the law is, you know, that the money goes to the Plaintiff. That's the law. And we --
that's not a reason not to award punitive damages. You know, that's their big defense now, he's going to stand up here and say, oh, well, if you award punitive damages, the money is going to go to our victim's family, the personal representatives of the estate. Well, that's what happens when you lie and you conceal and you manipulate and you target and you hurt people and juries punish you so that you learn not to do it, so other companies will be deterred. That's what our system of justice, you know, warrants. That's America, that's what we do. That's how -- how companies hear and that's how companies change. If you let them get away with it, if the jury says, hey, we don't care, it's a just little mistake, you couldn't prove that she saw any advertisements, that's what they are looking for.
And they say, you know, they try to say -they are still saying, I guess, that this tar and nicotine -- you know, I don't really -- I think he was saying that that tar and nicotine thing that goes down worked, that they still think that that worked and that would save them, but all you have to do is look at the numbers and we know that as cigarette consumption -- you know, he wants to
talk about 1964, 30 million people quit between 1964 -- do you have that document -- and 1979, he said that that didn't include people who relapsed. He said that's 30 million people who quit never smoked again.
Well, here's what their internal documents say: That number is exaggerated and that number does include people who relapse and quit over and over again. So the 30 million people that they are claiming that Carole Larkin should have been, who she was one of them eventually and she still got sick, includes, as you remember, people who smoked a few cigarettes a day, 100 cigarettes in their life, people who relapse, people who quit, people who get sick, people who die.
And regardless of information that is out there in 1964 and 1953, you always see those little dips and you always see them going back up. And the only number that matters to them is that they can say to you, you know, this case is about Carole Larkin. It is, but I submit to you no matter who the Plaintiff is, no matter who the smoker is, they can always say that the smoker could have quit. They can always say that.
Because the truth is everybody can --
MR. ISASI: Objection, your Honor. This is improper argument based on the cases.
THE COURT: Overruled. It's argument.
MR. PAIGE: Any smoker can quit. Some smokers try two times, some smokers try five times, some smokers have got to try 10 times, that happens, but regardless of whether you're -heroin addicts can quit, cocaine addicts can quit, that doesn't mean that you don't have a disease, that you're not addicted, that you're not rationalizing, that you're not denying.
And even though the number that they want to talk about, and I'll talk about the 30 million all day long, but the number they want to talk about is the 30 million who died. The 30 million who died who 90 percent started as teenagers. That's the number that they will not talk about and the number they won't talk about is the 8.6 million every year who live with these horrible diseases. You want to cure -- people want to cure cancer, right?
THE CLERK: Two minutes.
MR. PAIGE: Two minutes, okay.
You know, we want to cure cancer. You want to cure cancer, stomach cancer, pancreatic
cancer, bladder cancer, throat cancer, mouth cancer, lung cancer, all those cancers caused by smoking. All of them caused by smoking. Make a safer cigarette. Don't make it addictive. Let people have a choice to quit. Don't take their choice from them. Don't target kids. You'll cure cancer.
MR. ISASI: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained, rephrase.
MR. ISASI: Motion.
MR. PAIGE: You'll have a lot less cancer if they make a safer cigarette. Carole Larkin got mouth cancer and that's all we are asking is if they would have made a reasonable, safer design which they had the ability to do, they could have done that at any time and we would have had less cancer.
They played a video again. I would like to play one more video and then I'll sit down.
Thank you.
(Video playing.)
"Do you or do you not agree with the Surgeon General's estimate of over 400,000 smokers dying?
I do not agree.
Okay. Do you know how many die each year?
I do not know.
Okay. They agree that smoking causes lung cancer. Do you agree?
It may.
Do you know whether it does?
I do not.
The medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. Do you agree?
It may.
They agree that smoking causes bladder cancer, stroke and low birth weight. Do you agree?
It may.
Mr. Tisch, I want to move to you for a moment in a deposition last year, you were asked whether cigarette smoking causes cancer. Your answer was 'I don't believe so.' Do you stand by that answer today?
I do, sir.
You're the head of a manufacturer of a product that's been accused by the overwhelming scientific community to cause cancer. You don't know, you don't have an interest in finding out?
I do, sir, yes.
And why do you not pursue that interest?
We have looked at the data, the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death.
Mr. ' Campbell, you were also deposed and you said, 'To my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer.' Will you ever be convinced and what evidence are you waiting for? And let's have the microphone passed over.
Yes, I may be convinced. We don't know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven.
Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first, and I'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believe that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it, just yes or no. Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
Mr. Johnson.
Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no -We will take that as a no. And, again, time is short. If you could just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, we just would like to have this for the record.
I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
I believe nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive."
(Video ended.)
MR. PAIGE: All right. Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you, your Honor.
