MR. ISASI: Thank you, your Honor.
May it please the Court, counsel,
Mr. Larkin, Mrs. Newborn.
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
JURORS: Good afternoon.
MR. ISASI: I'm going to start where Mr.
Paige started. This was the very first slide you saw from Mr. Paige, the first thing what he decided was the most important thing for you all to focus on and he starts with another picture of The Plaza Hotel and a picture of testimony from 1995. This is a -- it's a snapshot of the case by the Plaintiffs. Here's what we know now at the end of the proof.
In 1953, Plaza Hotel, Mrs. Larkin was already smoking. She was already a regular smoker. This meeting had nothing to do with anything that impacted Carole Larkin's life. She had begun smoke before December of 1953 and you saw no evidence anywhere in this case that
anything that happened as a result of that meeting had an impact on Carole Larkin's life. That's where they start.
And here they are finished, 1994, testimony by tobacco industry executives. What do we know about 1994? We know that in 1994, Carole Larkin had been a nonsmoker for six years. Again, that testimony had no impact on the life of Carole Larkin. Those two photos printed up large, designed to draw your eye, are actually trying to take your eye off the ball in this case on what matters, because this is a case about Carole Larkin.
Now, before I continue, let me just say thank you. Thank you on behalf of all of us here in the courtroom for your service. It's been a couple weeks and we have plucked you literally out of your lives. You had no idea when you responded to that jury summons that you would be here sitting in judgment of this case. You've heard the Judge tell you a couple times that jury service is not voluntary, you don't get to stand up, but the rest of us here in this courtroom, the lawyers, parties, even the Judge, we all volunteer to be here. You didn't, you were drafted. So, on
behalf of all of us, we thank you for your service and the time and the attention that you have put into this case.
In a moment, I'm going to go through the jury verdict form with you. That's a form, three pages, you're going to see, we are going to walk through it step by step. That's the form that you all will get along with the instructions that you've gotten when you go back to deliberate. Those are the questions that you're going to work through and we are going to work through them together and we're going to do it in the order in which they are in.
But I want to start with the three key facts we talked about when I first stood up in front of you a couple weeks ago. Now, we can say that these three key facts are entirely undisputed, after all the proof, after all the Plaintiffs' witnesses, there is no dispute about these facts.
The first is that in 1964, with the issuance of the Surgeon General's report and the publicity that surrounded that, Mr. Larkin made a choice and he chose to quit smoking cigarettes and he chose to quit smoking the same cigarettes that
Carole Larkin was smoking, Winstons.
The second key fact, Mrs. Larkin was able to quit cigarette smoking twice. She did it first in 1983, so that by January of 1984, she was a nonsmoker and she didn't smoke again for a year. The second time was in 1988 and you heard the testimony, they took the cigarettes, threw them away. Ashtrays were put away. Lighters, gotten rid of.
The third key fact is that if Mrs. Larkin had quit when her husband quit in response to conversations that her husband had with her, her risk of developing the oral cancer that she was diagnosed with in 1998 would be the same as if she had never smoked, that is that she would not have developed her disease.
Now, let's talk for a moment about the oral cancer diagnosis before we start walking through the Larkin story because I want to make sure that there's no uncertainty about this. Mrs. Larkin was diagnosed with oral cancer in May of 1998. She had successful surgery and radiation treatments that eliminated that cancer. She passed away on February 3rd of 2000, 21 months later, for reasons entirely unrelated to the oral
cancer. No one here is claiming that cigarettes caused Mrs. Larkin's death and that is not one of the issues before you.
So let's talk about the story that you heard now from the witnesses about Carole Larkin because the testimony you've heard, the witnesses, this part is uncontradicted.
You heard about doubt and controversy and confusion from the Plaintiffs, but they never tied it to Carole Larkin. They never tied it to the Larkin household. There was no doubt and there was no controversy. There is no evidence of that for the Larkins. Paul Larkin quit in 1964. We are going to talk about the evidence on that in a little more detail, but no one disputes that and no one disputes that it was because he was concerned about the risk of developing cancer. No one disputes, and you'll see the testimony in a little bit, that he shared his concerns with his wife. Not only his own concerns for his health, but at the same time, talked to her that he was concerned about her health because of her smoking.
We know that the Larkin children knew not to smoke. They were taught not to smoke. Mrs. Newborn herself is a nonsmoker, has never smoked.
And here's the important part. When we go through a lot of the evidence in this case, you're going to be asking yourself a question. What does this have to do with Mrs. Larkin? Because Mrs. Larkin never told anyone that she thought smoking was safe. After all the testimony you heard from people who knew Mrs. Larkin for decades and decades and decades, no one told you that Mrs. Larkin was confused or unsure or had doubt or confusion about the question of whether or not smoking was hazardous to her health. She never said that to anyone.
What we know is that in 1964, the Surgeon General issued his landmark report on smoking and health and the conclusions of that report were, in the words of Dr. Proctor, one of the biggest news stories of the 20th century, not just health stories, one of the biggest news stories of the 20th century. The Miami Herald covers it just like everyone else, and we know that the Larkins subscribed to the Miami Herald and it got prominent news coverage, including Harry Reasoner, CBS.
Harry Reasoner, at that time, was a national news anchor and we know that the Larkins
watched the local news and the national news together. That coverage of that report coupled with a PSA that Mr. Larkin heard about involving William Gargan, the actor, who had had cancer in his throat and had to have his larynx removed, started a conversation in the Larkin household and that conversation was one of the things that led Mr. Larkin to quit.
Mr. Larkin joined millions of other people who began quitting smoking in 1964. Millions of people who Dr. Proctor agrees were quitting because they feared for their lives. This is not some vague, undefined concern, maybe smoking isn't good for me, this is something I can do to try to improve the quality of my life. Dr. Proctor agrees that people were quitting because they feared for their life and you've heard from Mr. Larkin in his own words that his concern was that if he continued smoking, he could develop cancer as well.
And we don't have to guess as to whether or not Carole Larkin knew the risks of smoking.
We know because Mr. Larkin told us. This is his testimony from the stand to you just a couple days ago. He said that he believed that his wife was
aware of the reasons he was quitting and that he shared with her that he cared for her and that based on what he'd read in the Surgeon General's report and the film with Mr. Gargan, he was concerned, not only for his health, but for her health and that's a normal -- that's the kind of conversation you'd expect between a husband and a wife. It makes perfect sense.
How do we know that Mrs. Larkin knew about the risks of smoking? We have that testimony, but that's not it, that's not all. We have all this other direct evidence and that's important. You may recall that when Mr. Paige got up here and started talking to you this morning, he went about an hour before the conversation turned to Carole Larkin. He started with some discussion about punitive damages, which you'll see when we go through the verdict form, you don't even get to until the very end. He wants to start at the end instead of the beginning. This case begins with Carole Larkin.
We have direct evidence that Carole Larkin knew the risks of smoking. We know because we've heard about the conversation she had with her husband. We know that the Larkin children were
taught not to smoke. We know that the warnings from the Surgeon General were discussed in their home. We know that warnings appeared on cigarette packages and advertising. Any time Mrs. Larkin purchased a cigarette, anytime she looked at an ad after 1971, she would have seen a warning.
We talked about William Gargan. That's a PSA that Mr. Larkin told you was something brought by the American Cancer Society, sometimes referred to as the ACS. We will come back to that later.
That's an important point because the fact that he heard this was important to him. He believed what he was hearing, the message he was hearing from William Gargan about the risks of smoking and health.
Let's not forget just two years before Mr. Paul Larkin quit, his father quit smoking.
The story is, and you've heard it from the stand, that Mr. Larkin's father had developed a very bad cough and Mr. Larkin's mother had been on him about that and, finally, she laid down the law and that is going on in the Larkin family. All of these reasons, all of these reasons, that's direct evidence. We don't have to guess, we don't have to speculate, we know this was going on
surrounding Mrs. Larkin.
Mr. Larkin told us that in 1964, he shared his reasons for quitting with his wife. And he said in response to my question, "You're having conversations with her and you would have shared with her back in 1964 what you knew and that you were concerned, not only for your health, but her health as well?
Yes, of course."
Of course it makes sense.
"But your wife didn't quit in 1964.
She did not, no."
I want to be clear about this. I am not suggesting that every wife does what every husband does. Anyone who is married understands and appreciates that's not the case. And Mrs. Larkin was independent and intelligent, she was the leader of that household and, of course, she'd make decisions for herself. I'm not suggesting that just because Mr. Larkin chose to quit smoking, Mrs. Larkin, of course, chose to quit.
I'm not saying that at all.
What I'm saying is that in 1964, she made an informed choice. She knew the risks and she made the choice she was entitled to make in this
country, a choice to continue smoking a product that our society has determined, even though it's unsafe, is an option, is a choice that we get to have here.
Now, we didn't hear a whole lot about the quits during Plaintiffs' closing. I want to make sure that we understand there is no dispute here that in 1983, Mrs. Larkin began a process, she weaned herself off cigarettes over the course of about three months, so by January of 1984, she had stopped smoking entirely.
Now, what's interesting about this is she did this at the prompting of her daughter, who didn't want -- that is Caryn Newborn didn't want her daughter, Caryn's daughter, to breathe in cigarette smoke. So she asked her mother to quit smoking. She didn't smoke for one year, one full year. And she resumed, you heard the story because, unfortunately, Mrs. Larkin's own mother started having health issues and that created stress and she started smoking again.
Now, this has been described this morning to you guys as a relapse, that is that Mrs. Larkin relapsed because she was addicted to smoking and then she started smoking again. Well, you didn't
hear any testimony from anyone on that stand of all the people with degrees, MDs on that stand, no one came and testified that she had ever been diagnosed with an addiction disorder. No one gave her an addiction diagnosis. You never heard any treatment for addiction. That's a word that they are using, but no one else. No doctor has come in and testified to you all based upon their training and experience that Mrs. Larkin was addicted.
This is a woman, you heard the testimony, when she wanted to, she could put cigarettes down. She put them down for hours, she put them down for a year. You've heard that when she was around the kids, at school, when she was painting, when she was in bedrooms, she wouldn't smoke. The picture they are trying to paint for you of an addicted smoker isn't supported by the objective facts, it's just they're saying it.
Now, on this issue of relapse. You may remember Dr. Proctor, he was the one who used this chart, and what he said was that this chart shows smokers have a very low success rate 12 months out in terms of abstaining smoking. That's what he pointed to you all, this low 20 success rate. Do you remember that I had to pull this chart back up
and point out the fact that actually what this chart shows is that most people who don't succeed in quitting smoking, who don't abstain from smoking for a long period of time, usually it's the first three months. That's that big drop-off, goes from 100 percent of people to just above 30 percent of the people in the first three months. So roughly 70 percent of the people who try to quit fail in the first three months. If you make it past the first three months, then the next drop is here to about six months.
So I had asked Dr. Proctor, well, isn't it true that from six months to a year, it's only a couple percent, 2, 3 percent of people who drop off from there, and he had to agree. If you make it six months, the odds are that six months later, at a year out, you won't be smoking anymore.
Mrs. Larkin didn't have a relapse. Mrs.
Larkin, dealing with adversity in her life, dealing with stress in the family, Mrs. Newborn had been going through a divorce, her mother had health issues, chose to smoke again, which she was entitled to do. That's not the sign that she was addicted to cigarettes.
The 1988 quit, you heard the testimony
there. One thing that's important to know about this quit is that it's the first time we heard that Mrs. Larkin was the initiator, that she, of the two quits, '83 and '88, this one, she said I want to stop. She had been having bronchitis issues, she wanted to stop.
What did she do? The cigarettes went away. And you heard from Mrs. Newborn that this was less difficult than the '83 quit had been.
She never smoked again, never smoked another cigarette. She went from a pack a day, that was the testimony about her, she was about a pack a day smoker the entire time that Mr. Larkin knew her, to not smoking any cigarettes in one moment. One moment.
What was different from one moment to the next? It wasn't the cigarettes. It's the same cigarettes. She smoked them on July 3rd, she didn't smoke them on July 4th. There wasn't a new warning that went out that said -- that finally convinced her that cigarette smoking was harmful to her health. What changed was her mind. She made up her mind, she committed to doing it and she did it.
What you didn't hear in any of this
testimony during any of these -- during this entire time period, this is a significant amount of time going all the way back to when Mr. Larkin met Mrs. Larkin back in 1953, all the way through this time period, when they are getting married, when children are being born, when Mr. Larkin is quitting smoking, all the way to the 80s, the 50s, the 60s, the 70s and the 80s, all the way to the time that she quit for good July 4, 1988, you never heard any testimony that she didn't agree that smoking was hazardous. You never heard any testimony that she had trouble understanding the risks of smoking. You never heard any testimony that she wanted more information from somebody to make a decision about whether or not smoking was hazardous.
You know what you never heard? You never heard that she tried to quit any other times. She tried to quit twice, and the first time, she quit for a year. And then the second time, she quit for good.
The other thing you never heard was that she thought Mr. Larkin was wrong in his decision to quit smoking. You never heard anyone say that Mrs. Larkin told Mr. Larkin I don't think you need
to do that, I think the risks of smoking that we are talking about are overblown. You never heard that. No testimony about anything that Mrs.
Larkin thought about the risks of smoking.
We talked about burden of proof. We talked about burden of proof back during voir dire and that is the Plaintiffs' burden. They come into this courtroom to bring you the evidence, to prove their case. They didn't bring it.
Why does this matter in this case, that it took this length of time before Mrs. Larkin made the final decision to quit smoking? It matters because this is a preventable disease. There are major benefits according to the Surgeon General and immediate benefits if you ceased smoking.
But here's what the Surgeon General wrote and this is all the way back in 1990: Surgeon General is looking at the risks of smokers and how the risks of smokers developing cancer decrease over time. And the Surgeon General reports back in 1990 on this large multicenter study conducted by the National Cancer Institute, United States National Cancer Institute, that showed that the risk of oral cancer, which is, of course, the cancer that we are discussing, among former
smokers after 10 years of abstinence was comparable to that of never-smokers.
Mr. Paige made sort of a brief reference to this this morning and he said something about how, you know, well, she stopped smoking for 10 years and she got diagnosed. Let's be clear about what the data showed. The data shows not that prior to 10 years, it's after 10 years.
After 10 years, your risk is the same as a never-smoker.
And the other thing you have to remember is that you may recall that Mr. Seiden was asking questions of Dr. Tartell during his cross examination, he showed a letter, it was a letter from Dr. Mesko. Dr. Mesko reported to Dr. Tartell that Mrs. Larkin had noticed the lesion in her mouth, which turned out to be the oral cancer, months before. That letter was before the diagnosis in April of '98. And it reports that Mrs. Larkin had noticed the lesion in her mouth months to up to a year earlier. So Mrs. Larkin, unfortunately, when she made her decision to quit, didn't make it soon enough. Had she made that decision in 1964 at the same time that her husband made it, her risk of the developing oral cancer
would have been the same as someone who had never smoked. It's more likely than not she would have never developed her disease.
What was the difference between Mr. Larkin and Mrs. Larkin back in 1964? It wasn't the knowledge of the risks; they had discussions about that. It wasn't nicotine; they both were smoking the same cigarettes, same doses of nicotine in them. It wasn't the design of the cigarettes, and we're going to talk about cigarette design in a moment, but they smoked the same cigarettes, same design. What was different was that Mr. Larkin made one choice and she made a different choice.
I promised you we are going to work through the verdict form and this is actually the very first question you get asked. It's not a question about punitive damages or anything like that. We are going to -- we need to begin at the beginning. The first question you'll be asked is did R.J. Reynolds place Winston cigarettes on the market with a design defect which was a legal cause of loss, injury or damage to Carole Larkin.
And you have some guidance, the instructions the Judge gave you and you will be able to review those to understand what the law that you have to
bring to bear when you answer these questions is. One of the instructions can be found on page 10.
And here is the claim with respect to a design defect, defective design. You can see that right here (indicating). And here's what's important: It says that "A product is defective if a technologically feasible and practical alternative design would have reduced or prevented Carole Larkin's harm." That's the standard and that's their burden of proof. They have to show a practical alternative design.
Now, I want to be clear, when Dr. Figlar testified about the different designs of cigarettes that are out there, he testified, for example, about the Next cigarette that had been marketed back in '76 and things like that, and he talked about how these cigarettes weren't accepted by consumers. He didn't say that the reason they came off the market was because Reynolds wasn't making enough money on them; he said that people weren't smoking them and Next was on the market for 20 years, according to him.
The question isn't, as Mr. Paige said, whether or not there's a socially acceptable design. I heard him say that several times and I
wrote it down. You won't see the phrase "socially acceptable" in this instruction or in any instruction. Look high and low. The standard that you're going to be asked, whether or not the Plaintiffs met their burden, is whether or not there was a practical alternative design, and here's the important part on that, that would have reduced or prevented Carole Larkin's harm. So it has to be not just a different design but one that Carole Larkin would have used and it would have prevented her oral cancer.
Now, you've heard a couple times this phrase "legal cause." Remember way back two and a half weeks ago, we talked about the difference between legal cause and medical cause. Just to be clear, Reynolds has never, has never taken the position in this courtroom, we said at the very beginning with you all that cigarettes weren't the medical cause of her disease. We agree. The reason she developed oral cancer was because she smoked cigarettes, no dispute, but that's not the same thing as legal cause. In order for Reynolds to be held liable, it's not enough, as you'll see, that we sold a product that was -- that we knew to be dangerous, that we knew to be hazardous to
health, that's not the standard.
What you will have to determine is whether or not there was a design defect, that is there was a practical alternative design, and that that defect was the legal cause. And legal cause is something that, in a continuous sequence of events, contributes substantially to producing such loss or injury. And we are going to talk about why there is not only not a defect in the cigarettes, but even what they claim is a defect cannot be the legal cause of her injury.
So we tried a couple times to talk about design defect earlier. We finally get a chance to talk to you all about what a design defect is and legal cause. So, in order for a defective design to be the legal cause of an injury, the law requires that it be a direct cause, a continuous cause, and a substantial cause. Now, another way of saying that, and you'll see in the instructions, is that but for the design defect, but for that, she wouldn't have developed oral cancer.
Now, when we walk through what they claim all the issues are, setting aside even for a moment the issue of practical alternative design,
which they have to meet and they are not going to be able to on the evidence in this case, they still have to show you that Carole Larkin would have used the alternative design product. They have to prove that. That's their burden because if Carole -- if we put out a product that Carole Larkin wouldn't have smoked, then the defect isn't the legal cause.
MR. PAIGE: Objection, your Honor. Can we have a sidebar?
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: I'm sustaining the last objection. I'm instructing the jury to disregard the last argument that was made by counsel.
And you may proceed.
MR. ISASI: Thank you, your Honor.
So the Plaintiff has not presented any evidence that Mrs. Larkin would have used an alternative design cigarette. In fact, it's the opposite. You're going to hear later about, as we talk about design defect, all the different types of cigarettes that were out there that Mrs. Larkin never tried. She never once -- there's no evidence, she could have stayed within -- she smoked Winston cigarettes the entire time. She could have stayed within the Winston family of cigarettes. You heard the testimony about Winston Lights, Winston Ultras, they were introduced into
the market in the mid and late 70s. No evidence she tried those.
No evidence she tried any other cigarette.
No evidence that she tried a cigarette that was light, low in tar, low in nicotine. None. So there is no evidence and the Plaintiffs have not brought you any to suggest that the alternative design, even if it existed, was one that Mrs.
Larkin would have used.
Now, at the very beginning, I think this may have been one of the very first questions that I posed to you all during voir dire. It was on the fact that Reynolds manufactures a product that is dangerous. And you've received an instruction on that and the instruction that the Judge gave you is that Reynolds cannot be held liable even if it knew or believed that cigarettes were dangerous and presented a health risk. That alone cannot serve as the basis for liability.
And that's important because when you think about a lot of the arguments that you've heard, both today and from Dr. Proctor when he was on the witness stand, what they boil down to is that cigarettes are dangerous, and there's no dispute about that, but we've made a decision in
this country that cigarettes are legal, adults can use them, and it's not -- in this court, it is not enough to argue that because cigarettes are dangerous, we shouldn't have them. That, at the end of the day, is not the question before you all and, in fact, just the opposite. Even the Judge has instructed you even if we, Reynolds, believed that cigarettes were dangerous and presented a health risk, that's not enough to establish liability. If that's all there were, that and the fact that Mrs. Larkin had oral cancer that was caused by smoking, the medical cause of her cancer, we wouldn't have had a trial. You've been asked to answer different questions.
Here's another instruction that you've been given. The instruction says, in part, that you can draw inferences from the evidence, but you shouldn't guess about things that weren't covered here, and this is important. Sometimes people fill in gaps and one of the things that I mentioned in opening is that the Plaintiffs were going to ask you to fill in gaps. There are things that they should have brought to you in this case to meet their burden of proof and they didn't. They simply didn't. They are hoping that
you will guess. The instruction the Judge has given you is that you cannot. You can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, but you cannot guess about things that were not covered here.
So things about what Mrs. Larkin thought about filters or things like that, there's no evidence of that. There's no proof of that whatsoever. It's a complete failure of proof, actually, for them. And what you've been instructed is if it wasn't covered in this courtroom, we are not allowed to guess.
Now, you heard two different stories in some respects about cigarette design. There were some areas where Dr. Proctor, who was on the stand, you may recall, for about three days, some things he testified to that he and Dr. Figlar actually agreed on and we will identify those, but they did disagree on some things and I think, in that context, it's important to note the different perspectives that they come from.
Let's set aside for just a moment that Dr. Proctor is an expert or gets the overwhelming majority of his income testifying for Plaintiffs in cases like this. That's his real job. That's
where he gets, and you've heard the testimony, $3 million testifying in these cases. The weekend that he was stuck here between Friday when he's was on the stand and Monday when he went back up, he spent the weekend not doing any work in the case but collected almost $10,000. It's a nice job.
Dr. Proctor, however, isn't a cigarette design expert. All he could do is come in and talk to you about documents, what he'd seen in documents. What Reynolds did is it brought you an actual design expert, someone whose job actually involves designing cigarettes and working on cigarettes to make them less hazardous, to make them lower tar, lower nicotine levels, who has been doing that his entire professional career, who has a master's and a Ph.D in chemistry, not history.
Dr. Figlar and Dr. Proctor offered you -some testimony was historical, that is Dr. Proctor told you what he saw in documents, Dr. Figlar told you what he actually lived, but they also offered you opinions. And what's important about opinions, that is when people are drawing on their expertise and telling you things, not that they
saw or heard but what they think, is that you can accept opinion testimony or reject it or give it the weight you think it deserves, and the weight you give, it can depend on how qualified you think the expert was, whether or not they actually had the expertise necessary to give the opinions that they were offering you.
Let's talk about one area where there is no disagreements, which is particularly important in this case. There is no data that any cigarette design has been recognized as safe anywhere in the world. There is no such thing as a safe cigarette. Keep that in mind as you talk about reasonable alternative designs and we walk through some of the things that the Plaintiff has talked about. There's no such thing as a safe cigarette, and that means that any design is going to have hazards to it; you can't design that out.
Here's what Dr. Proctor agreed with: He said that -- he talked about filtered cigarettes, that non-filtered ones are not safe, roll-your-own, that's cigarettes that aren't manufactured. You heard a lot about the modern cigarette and Reynolds and other companies manufacturing modern cigarettes and bringing them
on the market, but before that time, before the more modern cigarette, roll-your-own cigarettes were used. Some people still roll their own cigarettes, they are aren't safe.
Cigarettes that don't contain nicotine aren't safe. You've heard something this morning about how Reynolds could have just made cigarettes that had no nicotine in it. The ability to take nicotine out of cigarettes had been known for some time. Dr. Proctor agreed, that's not a safe cigarette, either. So, when you talk about an alternative design from a defect, what you'll hear is that a no-nicotine cigarettes still burns tobacco, still exposes the smoker to carcinogens, and still results in the risk of oral cancer.
Non-tobacco cigarettes aren't safe, and additive free cigarettes aren't safe. You have the same -- the additives that you heard so much about, those additives, they have been disclosed to the United States government for years and years and years. They have never once, you heard testimony, never once said that they need to be -any one of them shouldn't be in cigarettes.
Additives don't make the cigarette more carcinogenic. There's no testimony. Dr. Proctor
agreed that an additive-free cigarette isn't safe, either. He says the only safe cigarette is the one you don't smoke and that goes back, that's the root of their case. This is not truly an alternative design case, it's simply cigarettes are bad, cigarettes are harmful, and cigarettes shouldn't be made.
Now, here's another area where the experts agreed: In order to be useful, in order for it to be a reasonable alternative design, this cigarette has to be acceptable to consumers. Makes perfect sense. If you design -- and you heard about some of those cigarettes that had been designed over the years, cigarettes that they designed in ways to try to reduce the risks of smoking. And what happened? They'd spend hundreds of millions, billion dollars on a design, they'd roll it out in the market, consumers just wouldn't smoke it. They just wouldn't smoke it. They didn't like the way it tasted, didn't like the way it smelled, all kind of things. Consumers get to make the ultimate decision on that.
And, again, this isn't a question of Reynolds making money on a particular cigarette, that it wasn't making enough profit on a
particular type of cigarette, it's that people wouldn't smoke them. And both Dr. Proctor and Dr. Figlar agreed that if the consumers don't agree, they don't accept this new cigarette, you're not going to get any benefit from it. People have to use it in order for it to make a difference.
The public health community itself, unconnected with the -- this just isn't a tobacco company saying this, this is the public health people whose job is to think about our nation and its health and they have agreed that there is no benefit to making a safer cigarette if no one will use it. So you always have to look, when you're looking at a reasonable alternative design, you have to look at whether or not it would have been used.
Dr. Figlar agreed and he said that there is no evidence of a practical alternative design to the cigarettes that Reynolds and its competitors have been making for years. We just flat out asked that question, and Plaintiffs had an opportunity to follow up and ask questions if they wanted of this design expert, someone who spent time actually designing cigarettes. We asked him whether or not anyone other than
Reynolds or competitors have developed a superior alternative design. His answer not that he was aware of.
I wanted to also talk for a moment about the question of state-of-the-art. Now, state-of-the-art you'll see -- and you can consider state-of-the-art scientific and technical knowledge and other circumstances that existed at the time of the product's manufacture, that is was the technology that was being used the best available at the time or was Reynolds relying on some old, outdated technology that -- you know, that should have been improved on, were we making cigarettes in a way that shouldn't have been -you know, that maybe it's the way they were doing it 50 years ago, but they shouldn't have been doing it now. That's one of the things that you all get to consider.
And because you get to consider it, we asked Dr. Figlar that question. We asked whether or not the cigarettes manufactured and sold by Reynolds during the past 60 years, the entire time period that we are talking about here, almost since '53 when Mrs. Larkin met Paul Larkin, whether or not they were recognized as
state-of-the-art. And Dr. Figlar made it clear R.J. Reynolds actually help set the state-of-the-art, they drive the state-of-the-art, they are on the cutting edge of technology here.
So that is something that you all can consider when this question of reasonable alternative design is being discussed with you all. That, at the end of the day, Reynolds, you heard the evidence, the research that they had been doing, we can talk about some of the things right now, some of the techniques, some of which were actually invented by Reynolds, reconstituted tobacco, processing tobacco stems, expanded tobacco, all of which you heard have effects of helping to lower tar and nicotine levels in cigarettes, and none of which -- we asked Dr.
Figlar is there any science out there to suggest that this increases the addictiveness of cigarettes, the dangers of cigarettes using reconstituted tobacco, processed tobacco stems, expanded tobacco. He said no, no. These are techniques that Reynolds, in some instances, actually invented itself, holds patents on, that were designed to try to reduce exposure of smokers to tar and nicotine, and it worked.
You've seen this chart several times. I finally get a chance to actually walk you through the part that we seemed to be not connecting on, the Plaintiffs and I. No one has disputed that these aren't, in fact, the actual readings of tar and nicotine levels, huge reductions, more than 50 percent reductions in tar and nicotine from the time when Mrs. Larkin first started smoking Winstons to the time she stopped. That's what all the work that was being done by Reynolds over the time did. It dropped dramatically the tar and nicotine yields in these cigarettes.
Now, you heard, again, I think Mr. Paige said that the chart was misleading because of the -- he referred to the FTC. The FTC method, that's when they used the smoking machines and they put the cigarettes in and you heard the description from the witness saying it's kind of like miles per gallon in a car. It's the way that people can compare different cars. It doesn't say that if I drive a car five miles and you drive a car five miles that we are going to use the exact same amount of gas because, of course, we drive differently, people smoke differently. But what this did was it set a standard that people were
then able to then match, they could do the head-to-head comparison and they could see, based on the machine, what the levels of tar and nicotine were.
Reynolds told the FTC in the late 60s that these numbers didn't mean that this is what smokers were getting. They told the FTC. We showed you the report to the committee that they submitted, signed by, among others, the head of Reynolds, saying no two smokers smoke the same and even the same smoker smokes differently at different times. And the FTC agreed.
And when they actually announced this, they said that no two smokers smoke the same and the same smoker can smoke differently. That's not purpose of the chart. The purpose of this chart isn't to say that any individual smoker got that much nicotine, that much tar; it's to show that, over time, based on a standardized method of testing, you can track what happened to the tar and nicotine yields in Winston and compare them.
You heard about one of the design defects apparently of something to do with ammonia. I'm not going to spend a lot of time on that because Dr. Proctor explained that to you. We just asked
him flat out cigarettes made with ammonia, are they any more addicting than cigarettes that are not. And he said no, that adding ammonia doesn't inherently make a cigarette more addictive. So ammonia -- we'll talk about pH in a moment.
The thing is when you hear these things being thrown out, you have to ask yourself the question what does it mean and what does it mean for Carole Larkin? Where is the evidence on Carole Larkin? The most important thing is that their own witness explained to you that if their theory is that Mrs. Larkin was an addicted smoker, that Reynolds' use of ammonia, which, by the way, there's no evidence it occurred back when Mrs. Larkin first started smoking Winstons, it wouldn't have changed the addictiveness of the cigarettes.
Now, here's one that they spent a little bit of time on today, non-inhalability. I think if I remember this precisely correctly, that Reynolds could have made a cigarette that was not inhalable. Maybe they wouldn't have made as much money on it, maybe they would have only had a couple million customers, but they could have done it and they didn't.
We had a lot of discussion about this with
both Dr. Proctor and Dr. Figlar. There were a lot of comparisons made to cigarettes and cigars. Remember, so a cigar is -- has a higher pH level and it's harsher. And, so, Dr. Proctor took the position, hey, if you raise the pH, you make it harsher like a cigar, people won't inhale the smoke. So that's a defect apparently.
Well, first of all, I asked Dr. Proctor some questions on that and then I followed up with Dr. Figlar, and what you heard from Dr. Figlar is, well, first of all, the whole premise of that wasn't correct, that there are people who inhale cigar smoke, that inhaling smoke is a learned behavior and people will do it.
Another point Dr. Figlar made is that a cigar isn't a cigarette. You can't say that the alternative design to, you know, a lawnmower is a bicycle. That's not an alternative design, it's an alternative product. And Dr. Proctor agreed that no one is recommending that cigarette smokers start switching to cigars because it's safer.
So this question of inhalability and that that's an alternative design, look at the actual testimony and you'll see that non-inhalable tobacco is something that has been advanced for
this case, but isn't supported by the historical record. Inhaling tobacco, that's been going on, you've heard the testimony, for hundreds of years. People have been inhaling tobacco smoke for as long as people have been using tobacco products. Inhaling isn't something that R.J. Reynolds or any other tobacco company invented. People were inhaling roll-your-own cigarettes back in the 1800s.
We heard a lot about nicotine in this case, so I'm going to spend a couple moments on that. So I know that sometimes when you hear about additives and different things like that, when it's not laid out the way it should be, you can sometimes start making -- filling in gaps, which is why I asked Dr. Figlar the question flat out so that there wouldn't be any confusion. Does Reynolds add nicotine to its cigarettes. No, we do not. Has Reynolds ever added nicotine to its cigarettes. To commercial cigarettes, no. To the cigarettes it sells, no, it has never added nicotine.
So the question is no-nicotine cigarettes, is the nicotine in cigarettes somehow a design defect? Well, you heard the testimony Reynolds
doesn't put nicotine in cigarettes. The nicotine that's in cigarettes comes from the tobacco plant. It's in the tobacco plant and, actually, with some of the tobacco that's used, like reconstituted tobacco, when it goes through the process, there's actually less nicotine in it when it's finished than when it starts off.
But let's talk about this idea that the Plaintiffs have put out that an alternative design would be a no-nicotine cigarette. Oh, here we go. So the idea is if Reynolds only made a cigarette that had no nicotine in it, that would be safer. Here's the problem with that: There is no science to support it whatsoever. None. Surgeon General has never suggested that there's a level below which you can bring a cigarette that will make it non-addicting and that's -- remember, nicotine, the only problem with nicotine that the Plaintiffs have advanced is that this makes cigarettes addictive. People don't get cancer from the nicotine in cigarettes. That comes from the carcinogens in the smoke when the cigarette gets burned. So the problem, the design defect with respect to nicotine is that it makes people smoke cigarettes.
But there is no level of nicotine that the Surgeon General has ever said if you put it below here, you're not going to addict people. Public health community hasn't come out and said Reynolds should only make denicotinized cigarettes. In fact, the FDA, you're going to hear a little bit about this later, which now regulates Reynolds, is prohibited by law from requiring the removal of all nicotine in cigarettes. There's been a policy decision that that cigarette isn't one that should be marketed.
Now, there was a time when nicotine -very low-nicotine cigarettes, or sometimes was called no-nicotine cigarettes, have been put out on the market and, remember, it has to be a reasonable alternative design. Has to be practical, a practical design, something that people will use. And what has happened, we don't have to guess what would happen, we know what did happen. Dr. Proctor, we had to confront him with his prior deposition testimony under oath, where we asked him the question that he agreed that he said it before, no one so far has been able to make a nicotine-free cigarette that people would buy. So how can no-nicotine cigarettes be a
practical alternative design if no one will use it? Where is the evidence that Carole Larkin would have used it?
Remember, the Plaintiffs have alleged, and I contend they haven't proven to you, that Carole Larkin was addicted. They've said that Mrs.
Larkin smoked cigarettes because she was addicted to nicotine. If that's true and, remember, she was smoking before she ever started smoking Winston cigarettes, there's no dispute about that, but if that's true, why would Mrs. Larkin smoke a no-nicotine cigarette? Why would she? There's no proof on that. No-nicotine cigarettes, which, by the way, would still have carcinogens in it, you smoke a no-nicotine cigarette, you're still inhaling the tobacco. The only thing that a no-nicotine cigarette has is that they take out is the nicotine, you're still inhaling the carcinogens. Why would someone who, according to them, smoked cigarettes because of nicotine ever switch to a no-nicotine cigarette? They never answered that question and they have no evidence of that.
I submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that what they are asking for, a reasonable
alternative design, is essentially the equivalent of requiring, for example, that all beer in this country be non-alcoholic. Now, there's non-alcoholic beer out there, no question, but we don't have just non-alcoholic beer. We know alcohol is in beer and we know that you can sometimes have problems associated with drinking too much, but no one is going to walk into a store because they want a 6-pack of Budweiser and say, you know what, I've changed my mind, I want a Budweiser, I want beer with alcohol in it, but I see this non-alcoholic beer over here, that's really what I want. That's not -- that is not the way the people work. And in this country, we don't -- we are not limiting people to non-alcoholic beers and no-nicotine cigarettes. Adults get to make choices like that.
THE CLERK: You have used one hour.
MR. ISASI: I've used one hour? Thank you very much.
So, on question 1, "Did Reynolds place Winston cigarettes on the market with a design defect which was the legal cause of loss, injury or damage to Carole Larkin?" We submit to you they have failed to meet their burden of proof.
There is no evidence of reasonable alternative design. There's no evidence it's one that Mrs. Larkin would have used. There's no evidence of one that has succeeded in the marketplace, not -again, not because it's not profitable enough, but because the consumers wouldn't accept it.
And the public health community and Dr. Proctor acknowledges that if you put out a product that people won't use, it's not going to help. Because of all of those reasons, the failure of proof, we respectfully request that you find for Reynolds on question 1 and vote no.
Now, the next question on the verdict form is, "Was there negligence on the part of Carole Larkin which was a legal cause of Carole Larkin's loss, injury or damage?" So that's a question that you have been asked to decide. You're going to find later on in the verdict form there are questions if you answer yes to this, you don't go on to something, you know, that kind of thing. If you vote no, go on to here, stop here, that kind of thing.
But the first two questions are questions that you actually have been asked to answer that you have to answer before your job is done. So
one of the things that the Judge has charged you with doing is determining whether negligence on the part of Carole Larkin was a legal cause of her loss, injury or damage.
And the way you do that is you consider whether or not Carole Larkin herself used reasonable care, that is was she acting as a reasonably careful person and was she acting as a reasonably careful person would do under like circumstances. When you answer that question, you're going to answer it on question 3, which is -- gives you to opportunity to assign a percentage, percentage responsibility. You will decide what percentage of responsibility Carole Larkin has for her loss, injury or damage and what percentage Reynolds has.
Now, Mr. Paige put this same thing up there and you saw on there that he accepts that Carole Larkin was 10 percent responsible. You remember that 10 percent number in there? Take a step back. What does that mean? They are saying, they are acknowledging that Mrs. Larkin herself contributed to her injuries. Mrs. Larkin herself was in a position to prevent her injuries. They are saying, they are acknowledging that --
MR. PAIGE: I object. Can I approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
MR. ISASI: All right, we are back.
So, by saying that you can consider Mrs.
Larkin to be, they say, up to 10 percent responsible, they have put to you that Mrs. Larkin had an ability to avoid her injury. Otherwise, she wouldn't be responsible, go back to this, they would have said zero there. By acknowledging that Mrs. Larkin played a role in her own injury, they have told you that she could have quit smoking. I mean, we know she did, but what they are saying is she could have quit smoking at a time that prevented her from getting her illness.
Otherwise, she wouldn't be comparatively at fault, she wouldn't have been responsible for her own injury.
Now, you all will get to make this decision. You all will get to fill this in; not the lawyers, you. So what should you consider?
What is the evidence on this? The evidence is that it was Mrs. Larkin's choices that led to her injury. Mrs. Larkin knew going back at least as early as 1964, quite possibly earlier than that, you saw the records yesterday from the Massachusetts school board that showed, even a decade before she would have reached school, that students were being taught about tobacco, that nicotine was addictive and that cigarettes could cause cancer, even 10 years before that it showed that.
But we also know the story from 1964. We know that there was a discussion in the Larkin household about the risks of smoking and we know that had she made the decision in 1964 not to smoke, she could have avoided her own illness.
And let's be clear about this, the people -- there were people who came to testify to you and people who could have come to testify that could have provided information on this.
Mr. Larkin, Mrs. Newborn did. They did provide information on this, and you've already heard the testimony there. You heard that Mrs. Larkin was able to stop smoking for hours whenever she wanted to and her two quits. You heard the testimony on
that, you get to decide whether or not she could have quit earlier. The one thing we know is she didn't quit because of something that she learned about her health. That moment was in 1964, when Mr. Larkin told her that he was concerned, not only for his own health, but hers. She quit for other reasons.
In the 15 years from when the '64 Surgeon General report came out until 1979, that 15-year time period, 30 million people quit smoking. 30 million. There's nothing preventing those people from giving up cigarettes, and you heard from Dr. Proctor that most of those people would have been considered heavy smokers. That number today is up to 60 million. These are people who quit and they haven't relapsed. This is not people who quit and then started smoking again.
It's a decision, an informed decision to continue smoking in 1964 which is the cause of Mrs. Larkin's injuries. She's responsible. It's a choice she made, and as you heard from Mr. Larkin, it was a choice that Mr. Larkin respected. He gave her the information, he shared his concerns with her, and then he let her make up her own mind. You didn't hear any testimony from
him, he was on the stand, we talked about this, you never heard him say I got on her after that, I tried to get her to change her mind, I rallied the family around her, we hid the cigarettes, you know, we threw away the lighters or anything like that. He respected her choice as an adult, a choice that deserves respect here today in this courtroom. In hindsight, we can all agree it wasn't a good choice for Mrs. Larkin, but it was hers to make.
Mr. Larkin takes responsibility for his quit. He agreed that he was the one who decided to quit smoking, but when we asked him about Mrs. Larkin, does she bear any responsibility, he said no. No. The same house, the same information, Mr. Larkin says, yes, it was my responsibility.
It was her responsibility. He doesn't want to say that now, which is understandable, but that doesn't change the facts.
So, respectfully, going back, when you get to the verdict question 3, we respectfully submit that the number that should be filled in here Carole Larkin is 100 percent for the choices that she made, and for Reynolds, zero percent because Reynolds couldn't make the choice for her on
whether or not to quit smoking.
Now, next question on the verdict form.
We are more than halfway there. "Did Reynolds make a statement or statements that intentionally concealed or failed to disclose a material fact or facts, and if so, was this the legal cause of Carole Larkin's loss, injury or damage?" Now, you have a really important jury instruction -- well, they are all important, I don't want to get in trouble with the Judge -- they are all important, but this one is important with respect to the particular question that you have, and you'll find it on page 19 of your form and it talks about reasonable reliance.
Because, remember, the question you're going to be asked is whether or not Carole Larkin -- whether or not something that was concealed, that is not something we said but something that Reynolds didn't say, was the legal cause of her injuries. And the question that you have to answer includes whether or not Carole Larkin reasonably relied to her detriment on the concealment of a material fact. So it's not just whether or not something was not told to her, but it has to be that the fact that wasn't told to her
was something she relied upon.
Talked about this in opening. That means that the claim is that, because of something that a tobacco company didn't say, Mrs. Larkin developed oral cancer. That's the claim. And that reliance, it has to be reasonable and it has to be a material fact and it has to be that the failure to disclose that was the legal cause, that is the continuous, substantial -MR. PAIGE: Your Honor, I object. It's a misstatement.
MR. ISASI: -- legal cause.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. PAIGE: He said the -THE COURT: Overruled.
Ladies and gentlemen, again, you're going to get the instructions in written form from me. I've already read them to you, but you will have them. They are the instruction on the law and that is the law that you must follow in this case.
You may proceed.
MR. ISASI: Thank you, Judge.
Here's what the jury instruction says.
This isn't me, this is what the instruction says that you're going to get. It says, "Reasonable
reliance on a concealment of a material fact or facts is a legal cause, if it directly and in natural, continuous sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing the loss or injury," and there's a but-for test again, that is but for the fact, but for the fact that Reynolds or another tobacco company didn't say something, Mrs. Larkin wouldn't have developed her oral cancer. That's the loss, injury or damage that they are claiming in this case.
Well, what's the direct, what's continuous, what's substantial in the case of Carole Larkin? It's her choices, the choices she made to smoke. That's what's continuous. That's what's substantial.
Now, this is where you had a lot of documents, a lot of video thrown at you, a lot of statements by different people, a lot of documents thrown up. You saw a lot of them weren't Reynolds documents. A lot of them you might have difficulty even placing where in time they were.
Some of them were statements made before there's any evidence that Carole Larkin was smoking. Some of them were statements made after Carole Larkin quit smoking. Some of them are about companies
that manufactured cigarettes that she never smoked. Some of them were about cigarettes she never smoked. It's a lot of information that was just poured out into this courtroom on that.
One of the things that will be helpful when you go back and you have this whole stack of information is to go back and ask yourself the question what does this have to do with Mrs.
Larkin and the decisions she made about smoking?
I submit to you when you start looking at those documents, what you're going to find is that they don't. There's nothing, there's no evidence to tie any of those documents to a decision that Carole Larkin made. Nothing.
Again, you heard from Mr. Larkin, you heard from Mrs. Newborn, and none of them told you that she relied on anything she heard or she even had heard of some of the entities, the TI, the Tobacco Institute, CTR, things like that. Heard a lot of acronyms thrown at you, but what you didn't hear was what that has to do with Mrs. Larkin.
Now, Mr. Paige, in his opening, he challenged me. He challenged me to discuss what he calls youth marketing. So let's talk about it.
It's their case. They came in and impaneled a
jury to present their claim. Their claim is, apparently, that we marketed to youth. But where is the evidence? Where is any evidence that Mrs. Larkin was marketed to? Where is the evidence that Mrs. Larkin was influenced by marketing?
Mr. Larkin was here, he knew her as a teenager. Did he tell you one thing, did he even talk about the effect of advertising on Mrs. Larkin? Did he ever relay with you any discussions they had about marketing and what she thought or didn't think about advertising, whether or not she believed something that was said by a tobacco industry representative? Did he tell you -- forget even the conversation took place, that alone wouldn't be enough. Where is the evidence that this influenced her in any way? There's none.
Mr. Larkin can't even remember whether or not he was the first person that started smoking Winston cigarettes and then Mrs. Larkin did or vice versa. He's not sure. The decision to start smoking could have just as easily been Mr. Larkin was smoking so Mrs. Larkin started smoking. That's the kind of absence of evidence in a case where they have to prove, they have to prove to you that she relied on the fact that something
wasn't said. They can't even establish that she was receiving these communications, how she thought about them and whether or not they mattered to her.
So what do they do in that situation when they can't bring you proof? Remember that jury instruction about not guessing. This is their response: The Larkins were just average Americans. They were doing what everybody else was doing. You heard that from the stand. That's not the evidence at all. The actual evidence you heard about the Larkins shows they are not average Americans. You heard that I think -- I think Mr. Paige said something about how we -- how Mrs. Larkin was a fool for believing -- we are claiming she was a fool for believing tobacco company statements. Mrs. Larkin was nobody's fool, and that's proven by what you've heard in this case.
She was intelligent, she was independent.
She was awarded a degree from college. She actually was working when Mr. Larkin met her, she had a career as a draftsperson. You heard from Mrs. Newborn her mother was intelligent. They had access to information in the early 50's when you heard that when televisions were first coming into
people's houses, they had one back at a time when not everybody had a television. I know that's hard to imagine now. And the evidence is that back in the early 60s, she had information about the risks of smoking. We don't have to create a hypothetical image in our mind of what Mrs. Larkin was like, we have direct evidence of that.
And here's the other thing: We are going to go -- when we get a little bit later into my discussion, you're going to see there are times when the Plaintiffs want you to believe that Mrs. Larkin would have done something unusual, something different. Like, for example, used a different type of cigarette, you know, a no-nicotine cigarettes or a cigarette that wasn't inhalable when consumers weren't doing that. Most people weren't doing that. So, when it's convenient for them, they want you to believe that Mrs. Larkin was just like any other American, but when it comes to things like that, when it comes to things like listening to a tobacco industry spokesperson, we'll talk about that in a second, that very few, if any, people were doing, then they want you to think that she wasn't average, that she was going to do something different. You
can't have it both ways and you don't need to. We know -- we have information about Mrs. Larkin. That information is that, in the Larkin household, the risks of smoking were known.
Now, Mr. Larkin tried to run away from that in the courtroom. On direct examination, on direct examination, his lawyer asked him the question now, do you remember any conversations that you had with your wife at the time you were quitting smoking. I don't remember. That's what he said. It took me to get the other half of the story out. I had to go to you -- or go to him and ask him the question and put it to him and he acknowledged that he talked to his wife and that she knew the reasons why he quit and he shared with her, not only that he was concerned for his own health but hers, and he agreed, yes, of course, of course.
The story about Carole Larkin has been managed for you all. It's been managed for you all from the very beginning. Years ago when this case was going through discovery, you heard that Mr. Larkin was the -- was managing depositions, he was conducting questioning. Mr. Larkin is a bright man. He's a Harvard-trained lawyer. He's
a Harvard-trained lawyer and, you know, I don't know what all of you all thought about the fact that his firm identifies that one of his practice areas is tobacco litigation. We can accept that he wasn't aware of that when he was put up, but what was the explanation he provided? He said that, oh, I think I know why, because someone in his firm was, in fact, handling tobacco litigation and he had discussions with him.
So Paul Larkin is not simply the husband of Carole Larkin, he's a savvy, experienced trial lawyer at a large law firm who has been involved in this case and the discovery and the development of the facts in this case. And even Paul Larkin couldn't manage the whole message.
You heard about Mrs. Larkin. You heard that she was intelligent, she was smart, she made her own decisions. This is the woman that they want you to believe somehow was waiting for a tobacco company to say something before she would make a decision about whether or not to smoke.
That having a conversation with her husband about the health risks of smoking wasn't enough.
She was a smart person. She was an aware person. She kept up with current events. The
Miami Herald, you saw one of the headlines up there, they subscribed to it. She watched the local and national news. There is no reason to believe that Mrs. Larkin, when the label started going on the packages, would have had any difficulty appreciating what that meant. Caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. 1966. No evidence she quit, she didn't try to quit.
Label changed, 1970. Warning, Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. She didn't quit, she didn't try to quit.
The 1985 rotating warnings came out and here's the interesting thing: She quit, but a year before. She didn't need these warnings.
These warnings came out, even though it said, "Quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health," that's not what changed her mind. These warnings came out after she had made her first quit, after she had stopped smoking for a year. Every pack of cigarettes she bought had this warning label on it. She certainly could have appreciated it.
In that time period, you've learned
between 1964 and 1979, 30 million people quit smoking and these people quit smoking, they were in the same information environment, ads going on and the athletes and the -- you know, the glamorization that they talked about. 30 million people quit smoking. Sponsoring NASCAR, the Winston Cup, things like that, 30 million people quit smoking. And with all the industry standards, they put the videos of those people out talking, 30 million people quit smoking. Their case is that because a tobacco company didn't say something, Mrs. Larkin developed oral cancer. But even in that same informational environment, 30 million Americans quit smoking.
So what do we know about Mrs. Larkin? We know that she never said, anyone who took the stand here and testified before you, that she chose Winstons because of an advertisement. She never said that she chose a filter because it was safer. Keep that in mind. You heard about filters, but no one, no one has testified that Mrs. Larkin started smoking Winstons or kept smoking Winstons because she thought the filter was safer, that she was misled about filters. And they didn't put any ads up there. There were no
Winston ads that they put up there that made any claims about filters being safer. None.
What the Plaintiffs are asking you to do, notwithstanding that jury instruction that we showed you earlier, that you can't guess about things that weren't presented to you in court, what they are asking you to do is to speculate that somehow -- well, I know we had two people who knew her very well, knew her for decades, take the stand and testify to you all, neither of them said that they thought that Winstons were safer -- that she thought Winstons were safer, we still want you to kind of just believe that.
Well, we asked Mr. Larkin the question, there's no reason for us to have to guess. "You have no knowledge as to why your wife chose to smoke Winstons, correct?
Specifically, no."
Then I asked the question, obviously, I guess I was stuttering at the time when I did it, so I'll have to stutter again, "And -- and -- and it would be, so anyone who -- who -- who would think that your wife believed that Winston was safer because of the filter, that would just be speculation, am I correct?
Answer: On my part. I don't know what she believed, right, with respect to Winston."
He doesn't know what she believed with respect to Winstons. If he doesn't know, if he can't bring that proof to you, there is no proof to bring to you.
Now I will leave the world of filters in a moment, but I want to address this issue about what -- why people -- what people knew about filters. Let's be clear, it wasn't the tobacco industry in ads that were saying that filters were safer. There's no Winston ad that says that.
They didn't put one up, it doesn't exist. It was the public health community, American Cancer Society, who for years and years and years had a simple message: We don't want you to smoke, but if you're going to smoke, better to smoke a filtered cigarette.
And don't -- I heard something about how that just -- you know, that was just a tobacco industry statement and that there was no data to support that. Let's be clear, it was a common message from the public health community, Dr. Proctor agreed with that.
(Video playing.)
"Simply can't or won't break the habit.
They published its first guidelines for such persons, a pamphlet called If You Must Smoke. Among other things, it advises choose a cigarette with less tar and nicotine, take fewer puffs, don't smoke the cigarette all the way down, reduce inhaling and smoker fewer cigarettes each day."
(Video ended.)
MR. ISASI: That's the message from the public health community that people were hearing. That's not a tobacco industry spokesperson.
And if you look at the Surgeon General's report, this isn't back in the dawn of time, they are talking about judgment being unchanged going back for more than 20 years. Smokers who are unwilling or as yet unable to quit are well advised to switch.
Now, why are they saying that? Are they saying because the tobacco industry is telling them that? There's actual data that they were looking at that supported that idea, that filters were safer. Here's one of the examples we talked about. This is from the Lancet, that's sort of the British version of the New England Journal of Medicine, very prestigious medical journal. They
are reporting in their publication, "It is unlikely that any single measure has saved more lives or done more to reduce smoking-related disease than the switch from plain to filter-tipped cigarettes which began in the late 1950s and continued throughout the 1960s." That's not a tobacco company saying that. No one is claiming that the tobacco companies influenced that article at all.
The health consequences of smoking from 1975. "Smokers of filtered cigarettes have been shown to have lower risk of developing lung cancer than smokers of non-filtered cigarettes, but the risk remains well above that for a nonsmokers."
So smoking a filtered cigarette isn't safe, but it's better than an unfiltered cigarette. They are not talking about speculation, they're saying, "Has been shown to have a lower risk." That's the data that they were looking at at the time.
That's what it was showing.
1979 Surgeon General's report. "Use of filtered cigarettes and smoking of cigarettes with lower amounts of tar and nicotine decreases lung cancer mortality rates among smokers." That's the Surgeon General in 1979. He's not saying this is
a theory or speculating. The Surgeon General is saying that it decreases lung cancer mortality.
So, stepping away from the question of fraud for a second regarding filters, you have to decide whether or not there was anything that Reynolds or there's this conspiracy claim out there as well, we will talk about that in a moment, something that wasn't said or that tobacco companies got together and said they weren't going to say that caused Mrs. Larkin's lung cancer.
With respect to Reynolds, there is a complete absence of proof that Mrs. Larkin relied on anything that was being said by Reynolds, or in this case, relied on the fact that Reynolds wasn't saying something in her decisions on whether or not to smoke.
So, when you get to question number 4 on the verdict form, we submit that you should vote no. No that Mrs. Larkin has not -- there's been no proof that she reasonably relied on the absence of a statement by Reynolds, and in the face of that, there's no proof of that, the correct verdict on this is no.
The Plaintiffs go a step further and they say, well, wait a second, let's see if we can
expand this. It's not just Reynolds, it's also other tobacco companies. Did they conspire, did they get together and agree, and did that agreement to not say something cause Mrs. Larkin's lung cancer? We get right back to the question of reasonable reliance, that is was Mrs. Larkin looking to the tobacco industry for some information about her health. All right. I mean, it's common sense. Can't harm someone by concealing information from them, for example, that they already know. You can't injure something or injure someone by concealing something that's already known to that person.
And you have to look at what role these tobacco companies were playing in terms of information on smoking and health. You saw this poll earlier. It's a 1968 Roper poll. This is a poll that asked people what the most reliable sources of information were, reliable, reliance.
You have to reasonably rely on the fact that someone wasn't saying something to vote yes on this question, which is why we submit the answer should be no.
What were people saying? 1968, the Roper poll asked, "What's the most reliable sources of
information on smoking and health?" Number one, organizations like the AMA and the American Cancer Society. American Cancer Society, same organization that put out the William Gargan ad that had such an impact on the Larkin household.
All the way down here at 5 percent are the tobacco companies. What they want you to believe -- remember, their claim is that the Larkins were average Americans, except when it doesn't help them. Here, they want you to believe that somehow the Larkins, Harvard-educated lawyer, his intelligent, independent wife, well informed, aware wife, is one of the 5 percent that considers the tobacco companies one of the most reliable sources of information on smoking and health.
What sense does that make?
We know what the reliable sources in the Larkin household were. The American Cancer Society. That's the organization that put out the PSA, the William Gargan PSA that started the conversation along with the Surgeon General's report on the risks of cancer. Dr. Hammond, Dr. Graham, those are the people who -- Dr. Graham did the famous mouse painting studies, those are reliable sources of information. Not the
5 percent tobacco company, not the folks that they put up here.
They can play these videos all day long, ladies and gentlemen, but where is the proof that Mrs. Larkin was listening to these people and waiting for Mr. Cullman or Mr. Horrigan or any of these folks to say something more before making a decision on whether or not to stop smoking? There is no evidence.
And you know who is not even on this chart? The most reliable source of all, someone who would probably rank in Carole Larkin's life at 100 percent. Mr. Larkin. Mr. Larkin. Is there anyone who she would trust and rely upon more in her life than her own husband? And it wasn't like they were just married in '64, had a brief conversation; they were there together for decades. Mr. Larkin not smoking. The Larkin children being raised to not smoke. All this time Mrs. Larkin is making her choices which she's entitled to make.
There is nothing to suggest that somehow the health messages that her own husband delivered to her, not just in '64, but by continuing to live a life where he didn't smoke, that that was
somehow being drowned out by a representative of a tobacco company. The things that they put up here, for example, Mr. Heimann, that's a deposition that wasn't taken until after Mrs.
Larkin's first quit. Mr. Horrigan, you saw that, that's the Ted Koppel Nightline that Mr. Paige played, that was February of 1984. Do you know who wasn't smoking in February of 1984? Mrs. Larkin. And Mr. Horrigan's statements to Ted Koppel didn't cause her to start smoking again.
They played it, they think it's important for you to hear that, but it doesn't make any sense.
If she was really waiting for a tobacco company to say something, Mr. Horrigan comes out and he says his things, she would have started smoking again, but she wasn't and Mr. Horrigan's interview with Ted Koppel didn't make any difference in that.
And these industry documents, they showed a lot of industry documents, the secret documents they keep calling them, 30 million people quit from '64 to '79, they didn't see the industry documents. Mr. Larkin quit, he didn't need to see an industry document. Their theory is that somehow if one of these documents was no longer
secret, Mrs. Larkin would have made a different decision, but there's no evidence of that.
There's no evidence. She was getting messages that smoking was unhealthy, she was getting that from her husband, she was getting that from the warnings on the packs, she was getting that from the public health community.
Now, their claim, you've heard it, their claim is that if Mrs. Larkin had simply heard something about what was in smoke, the constituents in smoke, that would have made a difference. One of the things you don't have to do is check your common sense at the door, so bring it to bear on this question. People make decisions all the time. People make decisions to drink. Some people who drink will drink and will actually drink and injure themselves, whether it's a hangover or cirrhosis of the liver or something like that. You don't need to know the chemical formula for alcohol in that drink. You don't need to know the disease process by which alcohol causes your liver to cirrhose (sic) to know that it's bad for you. That's not what makes the difference.
The messages that we receive on health,
concern the family members have, that's what makes the difference, not whether or not there's a document out there that lists benzo(a)pyrene as a constituent of smoke. If the tobacco company had come forward and said benzo(a)pyrene is a constituent of tobacco smoke, that would have made a difference, that is their claim. And, actually, interestingly enough, they did, they identified the constituents of smoke, and when they did, didn't make a difference to Carole Larkin.
The bottom line is there is simply no evidence that any industry documents or industry statements made a difference to Carole Larkin.
She didn't rely on it, she didn't reasonably rely upon it and, so, they have failed to establish what is their burden of proof.
So when you get to question 5 on the verdict form, which is this conspiracy that extends this issue to beyond Reynolds and all these other entities, the people that fall in the 5 percent over there that no one is listening to, when you get to this question, we respectfully submit that you should vote no.
Now, we are almost at the end.
THE CLERK: You have used 1 hour and
45 minutes.
MR. ISASI: Thank you very much, I appreciate it.
So I skipped a slide.
All right. I want to talk to you for a moment ' about damages, that is Plaintiffs' request that you award just shy of $10 million in this case. I talk to you about this not because I think the evidence supports, not because I think they have met the burden of proof on this, but because it's on the verdict form and you may choose to go there, you may choose to discuss that. And, so, out of respect for that, I want to discuss it with you as well.
The one thing you have to remember, and you'll see this in the jury instructions, about what are called compensatory damages is they have to be reasonable and just and supported by the fact and circumstances. There has to be evidence. And they have asked you for just shy of $10 million. M9 and a half million of that is a number that apparently just came right out of thin air. They didn't even try to explain to you the basis for that number. $9 and a half million.
Now, the law on this is strict and that's
a good thing. In this country, if you want to require a party to pay money in a case like this, we don't allow that to happen without proof or right to it. Unlike some other countries that we are familiar with, you have to play by rules here. Certain rules like meeting your burden of proof.
There's another rule that you'll hear about from the Judge and that has to do with the question of sympathy. Now we talked about sympathy back during voir dire. You may remember, I think I was standing right about there and I asked everyone to raise their hands if they would agree that they could put -- set sympathy aside in reaching a decision in this case. All of you did.
Some people in the room didn't and that was perfectly fine. Some people said that they didn't think they would be able to set aside sympathy, and that's what we wanted; we wanted people to be honest and we appreciated that.
You all raised your hand and you said that, yes, you could set aside sympathy in making a decision in this case. And the reason we ask that in any case is that it is totally natural to feel sympathy for the Larkins. It's totally natural, we should acknowledge and accept that.
This was -- this was horrible. I feel sympathy for them.
MR. GERSON: Objection, your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ISASI: But how you were selected as jurors, you were selected as jurors because you agreed that you could take that perfectly understandable, perfectly normal human sympathy, and when it came time to make a decision in this case, set it aside.
So, when you do, you discuss this issue of compensatory damages in the room, if you set sympathy aside, we submit there is no evidence to support $9 and a half million, almost $10 million of damages in this case. No family should be made multimillionaires because of the decisions, the choices that a adult made and continue to make as an adult with respect to her smoking.
Setting sympathy aside, this is a case, an unfortunate case, but a case involving a woman who went through a series of setbacks and surgeries over the course of about 22 months. They are asking you for an award of more than $5 million a year. And I submit to you that if you have a conversation about this, as you are entitled to,
if you are going to talk about this based on the proofs in this case, that the figures that should be discussed would be in the thousands or the tens of thousands, not in the multimillions.
Now, the last question on the verdict form. This is the question that Mr. Paige wanted to start with. You don't -- you will not get to this question if you find for Reynolds on the preceding questions. If you find for Reynolds, for example, on fraud and conspiracy, you don't have to consider punitive damages. That won't even be part -- the instructions will say do not proceed to question number 7.
And, respectfully, I don't think you should get to this line on the verdict form at all, but I wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't at least discuss this with you because you may choose to consider it and it was only appropriate for us to have that conversation now.
The evidence does not support a finding of punitive damages in this case. Punitive damages need to be -- can only be awarded on the fraud and conspiracy, which means that you have to find that Mrs. Larkin was relying on something that wasn't said and that the fact that something wasn't said
led to her cancer. So there's a failure of proof on that. But when you think about what punitive damages are designed to address, we are going to talk about that for a moment, the proof doesn't support an award of punitive damages, either.
I want to start with this letter. One of the things that you're going to see is that the purpose of punitive damages is punishment and deterrence. Those are together. Punishment and deterrence, that is you determine that a punishment is required and that it's necessary to deter. So you have to look at Reynolds and determine whether or not the conduct that you believe gives rise to punitive damages requires punishment. Whether or not it needs to be deterred any further.
So let's look at what the record is on
that.
MR. PAIGE: Your Honor, I object. Can I approach?
THE COURT: Sure.
(The following proceedings were held sidebar:)
MR. PAIGE: To be clear, he's misstating the law again. What he's saying is that whether
Reynolds is to be punished, this conduct, Reynolds is to be deterred, and the instruction is punishment to Reynolds and deterrence to others.
So others are deterred, not Reynolds. I want to make sure he states it accurately on the law.
MR. ISASI: I wasn't aware that I had misstated, I thought I said punishment and deterrence.
MR. PAIGE: You said punishment and deterrence of this type of activity.
MR. ISASI: Right, which that's correct.
MR. PAIGE: Seemed like you were talking about Reynolds, not others.
MR. ISASI: Okay. I will make sure -- I'm not sure that's wrong, but I'll make -- I don't need to -THE COURT: I don't think you need a ruling okay.
(The following proceedings were held in open court:)
THE COURT: As soon as we finish with Defense's argument, we will take a 10-minute break and then we'll finish up.
MR. ISASI: Punishment and deterrence. We will -- I'll show you the jury instructions, so
this is instruction on page number 24 of your jury instructions. And it says that "Punitive damages are warranted against Reynolds if you find by clear and convincing evidence that Reynolds was guilty of intentional misconduct." You then -- if you find that, you can, in your discretion, decide to award punitive damages.
Let me first talk about what that means.
Clear and convincing evidence. So this is a different -- you may have heard a different standard that's been used to describe the burden of proof in this case. Greater weight of the evidence, that's the burden except on this question. On this question, the Plaintiffs have to meet a higher standard. It's clear and convincing evidence. It's evidence that is more compelling. You have to find the evidence of misconduct that you believe supports punitive damages, you have to find that evidence compelling.
So it's not enough that your persuaded, you have to be compelled, compelled to find punitive damages. That's the standard. It's the highest standard in civil cases. There's no higher burden of proof in a civil case than this
one. And as I said, the purpose of punitive damages is punishment and deterrence, that is to prevent others from engaging in that kind of conduct.
And, of course, you heard about this in voir dire, the punitive damages you award can only be awarded to the Plaintiff. All right. This money doesn't go to the state, doesn't go to a charitable organization. When you get to this point on the verdict form, if you do, you will have already found that the Larkins are entitled to some money. And that that, whatever you decide is full, fair and just compensation for the pain and suffering that Mrs. Larkin went through, this asked for something more. Even after you fully, fairly compensated the Larkins, it's asking for more money on top of that that goes to the Larkins.
So let's look at Reynolds because to determine whether or not there's a punishment that needs to be done, whether or not deterrence needs to be made, we need to look at the entity,
Reynolds, that they are asking you to punish and let's remember some of the proof that we heard in the case.
Let's start with the president of R.J.
Reynolds, who talks about Reynolds' commitment that if there is a safer cigarette, "Let's continue and increase our efforts in this program. Please prepare a plan to carry it out." And this leads to Reynolds' involvement in what you heard the National Cancer Institute's Tobacco Working Group.
Now, the Plaintiffs, apparently this Tobacco Working Group headed by the National Cancer Institute, they want to suggest that somehow the work that was done there wasn't legitimate. You heard the testimony from the stand. There were four different studies released by the Tobacco Working Group all on different cigarette design. There's no suggestion that genuine work wasn't coming out of that and it was all worked designed to come up with a safer cigarette.
If you move forward in time, you'll see that Reynolds scientists have been cited by multiple Surgeon General's reports. Their work is some of the most important work that's ever been done on identifying the constituents of cigarette smoke. It's been relied upon by the Surgeon
General and others. No private organization has funded more work. None. That was Dr. Proctor, their expert, he agreed.
You've heard about the CTR and the TIRC.
Well, they also funded work, work that no one -no one is impeaching. No one is saying it wasn't real. Some of the scientists that they funded went on to win Nobel prizes for their work. Their work was published in the National Cancer Institutes journal, the British Medical Journal, the New England Journal of Medicine, this is work funded by Reynolds.
In addition to their involvement with the Tobacco Working Group and working with the Surgeon General's Office, when the public health community spoke up and said that filters would be a good idea, they rolled out filters. You've heard a lot about filters from Mr. Paige, but the point is 1954, when Winston cigarettes came out, the public health community was clear, they wanted to see filters on cigarettes to try to filter out the tar that was in cigarettes.
They responded by coming up with new types of cigarettes. They tested additives for safety.
And, of course, you heard about Premier, which was
this heat-to-burn technology that Dr. Figlar told you about. Spent a lot of money on it because it heated tobacco instead of burning it, you dramatically reduced the carcinogens in the smoke you're breathing. It didn't work. Consumers didn't like this, said it tasted funny, smelled funny, and didn't buy it, but there was a significant investment made in that product.
Among the things that Reynolds has done, it has -- you heard about these nitrosamines, that's a compound in tobacco that has been linked to cancer. Reynolds actually helped identify what was going -- how that got into tobacco and helped reduce it.
Reduced -- there's benzo(a)pyrene again. Decreased nicotine, decreased tar, including in the Winston cigarettes that Carole Larkin was smoking.
Their products, the tobaccos that they were using have been -- the science has shown had lower risk of tumorigenicity of cancer causing.
And they decreased the pH. This goes back to that point about -- you heard something about freebasing, freebasing nicotinic in this case.
Now, remember, I had that chart out and we
ran down some numbers, 7 was neutral and we were talking with Dr. Proctor about the smoke in Winston cigarettes and he agreed that at the pH levels, the higher the pH, the more free nicotine is out there, easier it is, the bigger hit you get off of it, he agreed that at the levels that Winston cigarettes were, the pH levels they were at, that there was no material amount of free nicotine. That's a result of lowering pH.
Reynolds has taken a different approach to the issue of smoking and health. They are not the same company that you saw in some of the earlier presentations. This is their own website. Here say it literally in black and white, "Cigarette smoking a leading cause of preventable deaths in the United States."
Now, Dr. Proctor didn't agree with me and I had to pull up the website to show him and then he agreed that, in fact, nicotine -- that Reynolds has acknowledged that nicotine in tobacco products is addictive, it's not considered a significant threat to health. And that's right. The nicotine isn't what causes the cancer, it's the tobacco that gets burned. But here is Reynolds saying that the nicotine in tobacco products is
addictive. No dispute, no question.
"Quitting cigarette smoking significantly reduces the risk of serious diseases." Right on the website.
"The best course of action for tobacco consumers concerned about their health is to quit." Reynolds is telling people if you don't want to adversely impact your health, you shouldn't smoke our products, you should quit. That's what the Reynolds of today says.
You'll also see in the record evidence regarding Reynolds' regulation by the FDA. So the FDA now regulates what Reynolds can say about its products and what it can -THE CLERK: You have seven more minutes.
MR. ISASI: Thank you.
What it can say and what it can do with cigarettes. It regulates every ingredient and additive that's in cigarettes.
Respectfully, we submit there is no need to punish Reynolds now. There's no need to deter because the conduct, while they haven't linked it to anything that harmed Mrs. Larkin, the conduct that they are focusing on isn't occurring anymore. And Reynolds is telling people if you're worried
about your health, don't use our products. They couldn't be clearer. So we respectfully submit you should check no.
If you check yes, you heard yesterday in the jury instructions there will be a second phase to the trial. You'll hear additional evidence, there will be additional witnesses, there will be additional argument, another set of instructions, then another set of deliberations. We don't believe that you will get there. We respectfully suggest -- submit, that based on the evidence, you should vote no on this.
So this is my last chance to talk to you.
I'm going to sit down, Mr. Gerson, Mr. Paige will get up and they'll get to talk to you. The only thing I can tell you, because I won't be able to say anything more, is both then and now and later, always ask yourself the question, whatever they are talking about, what does this have to do with Mrs. Larkin, where is the direct evidence that any of it has to do with Mrs. Larkin.
In the end, this case comes down to the choice that Mrs. Larkin made. And you've seen evidence in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that people have recognized for decades, adults get to
make choices about whether or not -(Video playing.)
"In this kind of a country, it comes down to you whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it's good for him, either. The decision is his. The decision and the health that may depend on it.
This is Harry Reasoner. Good night."
(Video ended.)
MR. ISASI: That may as well have been Mr. Larkin talking to Mrs. Larkin in 1964.
Sharing the information, sharing the concerns, and then leaving the decision up to her.
Thank you very much for your attention today and throughout the trial. We respect the process, we will respect your verdict, and we hope that you, at the conclusion of your deliberations, find for R.J. Reynolds on this case.
Thank you.

