         Okay.  Ms. Parker, whenever you are ready. 3595 MS. PARKER:  Thank you.
         May it please the Court, and Mr. Lewis and
    counsel.
         And, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
    I'm so thankful to all of you for your service as
    jurors.  I want to join Mr. Pantazis in thanking
    you for that.  We are beginning our third week,
    and we all know it's been a sacrifice for you.  So
    thank you on behalf of, not just me, but my whole
    team and my client as well.
         Now, I try very hard during the trial to be
    efficient and to be very respectful of your time.
    And I'm going to try to do that again this
    afternoon.  So if you will bear with me.  We have
    a TV here, and I hope this will mean that you can
    watch our -- the slides that we want to put up
    without, you know, having to look the other
    direction at the wall over there.  So I've got
    this set up, and I think -- I hope everybody can
    see it pretty well.
         All right.  I want to go back to when I
    talked to you-all almost two weeks ago in my
    opening statement.  And I told you then that this
    case was only about one smoker.  And what it
    really ultimately comes down to is whether 3596 Mr. Lewis deserves money damages.  That's what we
    are here about.
         So what was the evidence that they put on?
    Well, we heard days and days of testimony that had
    no connection to Mrs. Lewis.  They brought
    witnesses here who are professional witnesses.
    They go around and they talk to all these
    different juries in Florida.  You-all heard
    Dr. Proctor say he was leaving here to go to Tampa
    to talk to another jury there.  They have this
    traveling slide show of ancient documents.  And
    they put those on to all the juries, even though
    it's publicly available.  The government knows
    about those documents.  They are on our website
    now.  But that's their case.
         Dr. Proctor told us he did not even know a
    thing about Mrs. Lewis.  Remember that?  I just
    can't overemphasize enough the canned nature of
    the presentation that they have made.  But it's
    your job as the jurors in this case to look at the
    evidence with respect to Mrs. Lewis.  Okay.  It's
    your job to answer those questions on the verdict
    form.  And you saw all those questions go to
    Mrs. Lewis and whether Mr. Lewis is entitled to
    money, to money damages. 3597 Now, there may be other smokers out there who
    did not know about the health risks of smoking.
    There may be other smokers out there who saw some
    of this information.  There may be other smokers
    out there who really persistently and seriously
    tried to quit smoking but just couldn't do it.
    There may be other smokers out there who hated
    smoking, who were tormented by their smoking, and
    never could quit because of that.  But that's just
    not Mrs. Lewis.  Those people would have a good
    case, but that is not -- those are not the facts
    of Mrs. Lewis.
         They came in here -- Mr. Lewis came in here,
    and he took the stand and you heard him say he
    claims under oath that Mrs. Lewis did not know,
    that she did not know smoking was bad for her
    until 1996.  And that's when she was diagnosed
    with cancer.  And, remember, she was 49 years old
    then.  And she had been smoking for 30 years with
    a warning on every package of cigarettes that she
    bought.
         But that's their position.  That's what
    they're claiming, that she did not know about the
    health risks of smoking.  And they are taking the
    position that she did not have enough information 3598 from the tobacco companies to know that smoking
    was bad for her.  She was waiting on the tobacco
    companies to tell her that cigarettes were bad for
    her.  But what was the evidence on that?  Did
    Reynolds prevent Mrs. Lewis from knowing that
    smoking was dangerous?  Did Reynolds prevent her
    from having the information that she needed to
    know she should quit?
         Well, we know that Mrs. Lewis knew from
    before she ever was smoking a single cigarette
    that smoking was bad for her.  We know her mother
    told her that.  We know her grandmother told her
    that.  And we know that the Surgeon General's
    report was quoted all over the place according to
    Mr. Lewis.
         We know that she never bought cigarettes
    until she became a married adult, and every
    package of cigarettes she bought had a warning on
    it.  And then remember her brother-in-law.  We saw
    his testimony.  Her brother-in-law said, I told
    her.  I told her about the Surgeon General's
    report, and I told her I quit.  And then her own
    brother said -- remember, we saw his videotaped
    testimony.  Her own brother said, Look it says
    right on the pack cigarettes are not good for you. 3599 And then some of the most dramatic evidence.
    She called cigarettes coffin nails and cancer
    sticks.  That's what she called them, coffin nails
    and cancer sticks.  Mrs. Lewis knew that smoking
    was bad for her.  But she wanted to smoke.  And
    that is fine.  We are not criticizing her for
    that.  She had that right.  This is America.  She
    had the right to decide that she knew the health
    risks but she wanted to smoke.
         It's like that testimony that you-all heard
    from Dr. Doughney and then from Dr. Burns.  I
    asked both of them, and both of them agreed, even
    in the context of the medicine, even in the
    context of advice from their -- her own doctor,
    when it came to whether or not she was going to
    have that lung biopsy, both Dr. Burns and
    Dr. Doughney agreed it's up to the person.  It's
    up to the patient to decide what they want to do.
         You don't have to follow advice.  She had the
    right to decide how she wanted to live her life,
    and that's what she did with her smoking.  She
    knew smoking was bad for her, but she wanted to
    smoke.  And here in America we have the freedom to
    do that.  We have the freedom to engage in risky
    behaviors like drinking alcohol or riding a 3600 motorcycle or all sorts of different things.
         Our society allows us to choose to smoke.
    And it's not because our society thinks that
    cigarettes are safe; it's because our society
    believes that everyone has been warned and that
    adults have the right to choose.
         Now, let me go back to Mr. Lewis.  Okay?  So
    again, he's the plaintiff here.  He's the one who
    filed this lawsuit.  And you heard his lawyer say
    that you should consider awarding him $9.2
    million.  He's not asking for damages for
    Mrs. Lewis; he's asking for his own damages.
    Okay.  This is only about him and his own damages
    and what did he do in this case?
         Well, I'm sorry to have to say, Mr. Lewis
    took the stand and 13 different times he said
    something here in this courtroom, and I had to go
    back and show him and show all of you and read to
    him his testimony that he had given previously
    under oath that was different than what he was
    telling you in this courtroom.
         And the matters that he was giving this
    different testimony about were exaggerating
    Mrs. Lewis's smoking situation.  He took the
    stand, and he said that she tried to quit smoking 3601 back in 1969.  And I showed him.  I read him the
    testimony where he had given under oath in his
    deposition where he said she didn't even try to
    start quitting, she didn't make the effort to quit
    until the 1980s.
         And then when Mr. Ogle was asking the
    questions he said to all of you up on the stand
    that she quit smoking sometime for as long as one
    week.  Okay.  It came my time, and I had to show
    him and to read to you-all the testimony that he
    gave previously under oath where he said she never
    quit smoking more than one day.
         And then, remember, he told that big story
    about how, oh, she would wake -- Mrs. Lewis would
    wake up in the middle of the night and she would
    pace around the bedroom because she wanted a
    cigarette.  Do you remember that?  And then I had
    to show him, I had to read him his testimony he
    had given under oath prior to the trial where he
    said he was asleep; he always slept through the
    night; and he didn't know what she did.  Thirteen
    different times I had to do that.
         He said -- he told all of you, when Mr. Ogle
    was asking him questions, that he and Mrs. Lewis
    had a great relationship.  Okay.  Well, let's 3602 see -- and, again, this is not coming from me;
    this is not coming from Reynolds; these are her
    medical records.  This is from 1995, just a year
    before she was diagnosed with cancer.  She told
    her doctor probable divorce proceedings as a
    result of her marriage to an abusive alcoholic.
         And then Mr. Lewis said that he -- that
    Mrs. Lewis had asked him and Gail Martin to take
    care of her son Robert.  But then after Mrs. Lewis
    passed away, what did Mr. Lewis do?  He left
    Robert, and he moved in with Mrs. Lewis's best
    friend.  And he has been living with her for 17 or
    18 years now.
         When Mr. Ogle was asking him questions, he
    told us all this about his children, John, and
    Joseph and Robert.  And when I asked him
    questions, we found out he hadn't seen John in
    over 10 years; he hadn't seen Joseph in over 10
    years; and he hadn't seen Robert for almost five
    years before he brought him down here to sit in
    the courtroom in this trial.
         He told you that Mrs. Lewis was trying to
    quit smoking.  But let's pull up his own
    handwriting.  This is from -- this is a form that
    he filled out in his own handwriting, where he is 3603 telling Philip Morris to send cigarettes to
    Mrs. Lewis.  Okay?  This is at the time that he
    claims that she was desperately trying to quit
    smoking.  She was desperately trying to quit
    smoking, but he is sending for free cigarettes,
    arranging for that to happen.  He bought
    cigarettes for her after they got married.  He
    influenced her brand choices.  That's why she
    smoked Marlboro, because that's what Mr. Lewis
    smoked.  He's the one who got those Winston
    cigarettes that she got from the NASCAR races.  He
    didn't try to quit smoking when Mrs. Lewis was
    trying to quit.
         When he would -- Mrs. Lewis would encourage
    him to smoke.  He said that she said he was a
    better person if he was smoking.  Again, it shows
    that he -- Mrs. Lewis didn't want to quit.  After
    Mrs. Lewis was diagnosed with cancer, he kept
    smoking, and he is still smoking today.  And after
    Mrs. Lewis passed away, he knew there was a
    lawsuit.  He knew that there was a primary issue
    in the lawsuit about the medical -- the medical
    part of the case, and yet he refused for her to
    have an autopsy.  He had her cremated.
         And then you heard -- unbelievable.  You 3604 heard Mr. Lewis say he even went into a lawn care
    business with Mrs. Lewis's stepfather, who was the
    one who had abused her for so long.
         You are going have to ask yourself, under the
    instructions that Judge Craig has read to you, why
    has his story changed?  Judge Craig has given you
    an instruction about credibility of witnesses, you
    know.  No one likes to question the truthfulness
    of anyone, you know.  It's just not in our nature
    to do that.  But that's your job here.  You are
    going to have to evaluate Mr. Lewis's credibility
    under all those circumstances.
         And his own actions, causing her all that
    stress, giving her Marlboro cigarettes and all
    caused her to smoke, but yet he's coming into
    court asking for money for that same thing.
         Now, going back to when I talked to you when
    we first got started in my opening statement to
    you, I said there were five different facts I
    wanted to talk to you about and tell you what I
    thought the evidence was going to show.  I want to
    go over those with you this afternoon.  Those same
    five facts that I talked to you about before, plus
    one more because we now know about the medical
    case.  So that's what I am going to spend my time 3605 with you this afternoon, is going through those
    facts, and then applying those to the verdict form
    questions that you are going to be asked to fill
    out.
         So all of this that you have heard this last
    few weeks, I think it can be boiled down into
    these six facts.  And the first one is that
    Mrs. Lewis knew.  She knew the risks of smoking.
         The second fact is that Mrs. Lewis smoked for
    reasons that had nothing to do with Reynolds.  The
    third one is that Mrs. Lewis did not make a
    serious persistent effort to quit.  Mr. Lewis has
    not proven his medical case.  He cannot establish
    legal cause or reasonable reliance.  That is
    something that's required on the verdict form.
    And then fact No. 6, on top of everything else,
    cigarettes are legal.
         So let's start with the first one, and that's
    Mrs. Lewis knew the risks.  Now, I know you-all
    have heard this, so I'm not going to go into a lot
    of detail about it.  But, again, just to put this
    in context, this Mr. Lewis explaining that
    Mrs. Lewis did not know until 1996.  I want to
    summarize what the evidence has been on that.
         First of all, you know her mother warned her. 3606 Her mother warned her and her siblings when they
    were growing up they shouldn't smoke; it was bad
    for them.
         Her grandmother warned her.  Her grandmother
    had heart problems, and her grandmother told her
    and her siblings that they should not smoke
    because of health reasons.
         Her school prohibited smoking.
         There was something called public service
    announcements, and we showed some of those to you
    during the trial.  Mrs. Lewis testified -- and we
    read her deposition to you.  Mrs. Lewis testified
    that she remembered seeing those.  And then in
    1964 the Surgeon General's historic report came
    out, and it was the front page news everywhere.
    But let me show you the front page newspapers
    where Mrs. Lewis was living.  She was up in Long
    Island at the time.  And you can see that Surgeon
    General's report was the front page news in the
    newspapers there in New York where she was.
         Remember, Mr. Lewis said that this news about
    the Surgeon General's report was all over the
    place.  He thinks Mrs. Lewis heard it too.
         And then remember her brother-in-law.  Okay.
    This is her brother-in-law, Edward.  And I'll show 3607 you.  We will put up the film in just a minute.
         Remember, Edward said that he knew about the
    report.  He told her about it.  He quit smoking
    because of the report, and he told her about it.
         If we could play that clip, please clip.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
    Q.   Why did you quit in the '60s?
    A.   I woke up one morning and turned on the radio
and listened to the Surgeon General's report on
smoking, and said that's it.  That's the end of it.
    Q.   Were the members of your family, William and
Robert and the like, aware that that was the impetus
for your effort to quit?
    A.   Oh, yeah.  Yeah, I made a point of it.
    Q.   Did you ever tell Rosemary that you had
successfully quit smoking (Inaudible) --
    A.   Oh, yeah.  Yeah, I did.
         (Video clip concluded.)
         MS. PARKER:  Now, that Surgeon General's
    report is what led to Congress passing that law
    that required warnings on every package of
    cigarettes.  And that started in 1966.  No one
    disputes that Mrs. Lewis knew the warnings were on
    the packages, but she says she didn't read them. 3608 Let's go over her -- that testimony.
         Here is what she testified to.  And this is
    part of what was read to you-all from her
    deposition that was taken before she passed away.
         "For a period of years before 1996, while you
    were smoking there were warning labels on some of
    those cigarette packages, right?  And did you ever
    read any of those warnings labels?
         "ANSWER:  No.
         "And why not?
         "I don't read anything."
         So why would they -- if they are claiming
    that Mrs. Lewis did not read those warnings that
    were on every package of cigarettes that she
    bought, every one of them, why would you think
    that any earlier information from Reynolds would
    have made a difference to her?
         Let me say that again.  She didn't even read
    the warnings that were on the packages.  That's
    what they are claiming.  If she didn't even read
    the warnings on the packages, how could something
    else from Reynolds have made a difference to her?
         And then her own brother -- and this is
    William.  We brought -- you saw his videotaped
    testimony at trial.  And he's the one who said -- 3609 he pointed out those warnings to his sister.  To
    Mrs. Lewis.  He said, Look, it says right on the
    pack that they are bad, that they are not good for
    you.  And she didn't say, Oh, no, I have never
    heard that before.  Oh, that's wrong.  Oh, you
    can't be right.  She didn't say that.  What did he
    say?  She said, Yeah, I should quit, which is an
    admission by her that she knew cigarettes were bad
    for her.
         If we could play that clip, please.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court follows:)
    Q.   Did you discuss with her the fact that it was
there?
    A.   Yeah.
    Q.   And what was the nature of that conversation?
    A.   Something like, Look, it says right on the
pack that they're not good for you.
    Q.   And you recall her having a response to that?
    A.   Something like, Yeah, I should quit.
         (Video clip concluded.)
         MS. PARKER:  And then this brother, William,
    is also the one who told us that Mrs. Lewis used
    the words coffin nails, and we also know from the
    other testimony she also used cancer sticks.  So 3610 let's play that little clip.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
    Q.   Isn't it true that you told her that she
should quit smoking because it could be harmful to her
health?
    A.   I would say, You should stop that; you should
quit smoking; it's another nail in your coffin.
    Q.   All right.  Do you recall when it was that
you would say these things to her, or was it just
consistent over the years?
    A.   It was fairly consistent.
         (Video clip concluded.)
         MS. PARKER:  Okay.  Every time that she got
    any of these warnings, from the packages, from the
    Surgeon General's report, from her family members,
    from her mother telling her not to smoke, her
    grandmother telling her not to smoke, every time
    she got one of those warnings it was a fork in the
    road for her.  She could have made the decision,
    Look, you know what, I need to quit smoking; I
    need to make a serious persistent effort to try to
    quit.  But she chose the fork in the road knowing
    that cigarettes were health risks, that she wanted
    to smoke. 3611 What did their witness, Dr. Burns, say about
    awareness?  Now, here is something you are going
    to need to think about.  Dr. Burns is the three
    and a half million dollar man.  Remember?  He has
    been paid three and a half million dollars to
    testify in lawsuits like this.  He's retired.
    Almost all of the income now comes from going
    around and testifying -- pardon me -- from
    testifying to juries just like you-all.
         Before he started testifying for the
    plaintiffs, before he started having -- making all
    that money testifying for the plaintiffs, what did
    he say?  This is what I asked him about.
         First of all in 1975, Dr. Burns admitted he
    said that more Americans knew that cigarette
    smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name
    of the president of the United States.  That was
    in 1975, before he started working for tobacco
    companies, for plaintiffs suing tobacco companies.
         And then what did he say in 1981?  In 1981,
    he gave a speech, and he said, 95 percent of
    people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers,
    and 90 percent of them realize that their own
    health could be affected.
         So let's go back to that.  After this just 3612 mountain of information that Mrs. Lewis knew about
    the health risks of smoking, they are still
    claiming that she didn't know and she needed more
    information from Reynolds.
         But Mrs. Lewis, the real Mrs. Lewis that you
    know from the facts of this case, knew, was very
    well aware of the health risks of smoking, and
    there was nothing that Reynolds did that changed
    that information.
         Let me go now to the second fact, and, that
    is, that Mrs. Lewis smoked for reasons that had
    nothing to do with Reynolds.  Now, this is still
    part of this effort they have had to try to
    repackage Mrs. Lewis in a way to try to fit into
    the requirements that they have to show in order
    to get money damages in this case.  And the
    evidence about Mr. Lewis's smoking -- and I just
    want to emphasize again -- is coming from
    Mrs. Lewis, her husband, her family members, her
    medical records.  It's not coming from Reynolds.
    It's not coming from me.  This is the information
    that we have from them, from her family, her
    medical records and all.
         Mr. Lewis is arguing that Reynolds is
    responsible for Mrs. Lewis's smoking.  But we know 3613 from Mrs. Lewis herself why she started to smoke.
    Remember, she said she started to smoke to defy
    her mother and her stepfather.  She told us
    that -- we were reading her deposition that was
    taken before she passed away.  She said that over
    and over.  She said I was defiant.  I was so mad
    at my mother, and my mother was mad at me, this
    whole situation about her becoming pregnant back
    in 1964 when she was a senior in high school and
    having to give up her child.  That's why she
    started smoking.
         She told us about the abuse that she had from
    her stepfather.  We're very -- everyone, I'm sure,
    has sympathy for that situation.  But Reynolds is
    not responsible for that.
         They also talked about peer pressure.  Just
    think about this with Mrs. Lewis.  Mrs. Lewis
    started smoking and told us it was because of her
    family situation.  Her best friend was Gail
    Martin.  Gail Martin was exposed to that same
    thing, that same peer pressure, that same
    everything that Mrs. Lewis was exposed to.  But
    Gail Martin never smoked.  So think about that,
    when they come back and say that Mrs. Lewis
    started smoking for other reasons.  No one forced 3614 Mrs. Lewis to smoke; no one forced her to start
    smoking; no one forced her to continue smoking.
         She didn't even choose the brand of
    cigarettes that she smoked.  Remember, her
    stepfather gave them to her.  We know that from
    her own testimony.
         If we could just show that.
         Remember, she said here my stepfather.  And
    then she filled out a questionnaire for Mr. Ogle's
    law firm.  And we have shown that to you off and
    on during the trial.  It's a questionnaire that
    she filled out for his law firm, at a time when
    she's trying to get money damages in her case.
    She filled that out, and we now have it.  And what
    did she say in that lawyer questionnaire?  Again,
    it says here, Stepfather bought my cigarettes.
    That is from her own handwriting.  That was not
    because of advertising; that was not because of
    anything Reynolds had done.  It's because that's
    what her stepfather gave her.
         And Mrs. Lewis said she liked the taste of
    Salem.  This is very important for you-all to
    remember.  She never bought cigarettes until she
    became a married adult.  Okay?  There's no
    question about that.  And every package of 3615 cigarettes she bought had a warning label.
         Now, I want to stop for a minute and talk to
    you about Mrs. Lewis's deposition, because the
    plaintiffs -- plaintiff has made -- has asked some
    questions during the trial to, perhaps, seem to
    indicate that Mrs. Lewis's deposition was taken at
    a time when she had had chemotherapy and her
    memory was not good.  I'm sure you-all remember
    those questions and all.
         Well, what is the evidence on that?  Her
    deposition was taken on September 4th, September
    4th of 1997.  And we have a medical record from
    Dr. Doughney.  I asked Dr. Doughney about this
    when she was here.  The very next day Dr. Doughney
    said she is doing well.
         And, remember, Mrs. Lewis had vivid memories
    about all this.  She filled out the same
    information on this questionnaire for the lawyer.
    Others corroborated her story.  Her best friend,
    Gail Martin, took the stand and said she
    remembered Mrs. Lewis telling her about the
    stepfather abuse and the situation with her mother
    back at the time it happened.  So there's a lot of
    evidence that corroborates what Mrs. Lewis said in
    her deposition.  So don't be distracted by any 3616 thought that Mrs. Lewis was not correctly
    remembering the situation because she had had
    chemotherapy.
         Now, Mrs. Lewis was smoking for her own
    reasons, because she's told us because of stress,
    because she wanted to relax.  And we know about
    her true feelings of smoking because of the
    smoking and what she did with the Marlboro
    cigarettes.  And you-all have heard a lot about
    that at the trial.
         And, again, Marlboro is made by Philip
    Morris, not my client.  Okay?  That's not
    Reynolds.  We showed you those actual forms that
    Mrs. Lewis filled out in her own handwriting and
    sent to Philip Morris.  Okay?  Those are the
    important company documents in this case, not
    those old documents from way back when that
    Mrs. Lewis never saw.
         The company documents that are important to
    you-all in answering the questions on the verdict
    form here are the company documents for Philip
    Morris that Mr. and Mrs. Lewis filled out in her
    own handwriting.  You saw on those forms where she
    told Philip Morris to send free cigarettes to her
    husband and to her adult son, John.  And that was 3617 back in 1996.
         I'm sorry.  That was back in the 1990s.  That
    was at the same period of time where they now
    claim she was desperately trying to quit, that she
    hated cigarettes, that she wanted to quit, that
    she couldn't quit because she was addicted.  If
    she really wanted to quit smoking, if she really
    felt that she couldn't quit because she was
    addicted, if she really believed that, why would
    she tell Philip Morris to send her cigarettes to
    her son?
         It's because Mrs. Lewis wanted to smoke.  She
    enjoyed smoking, and she thought that adults like
    her adult son, like her husband had the right to
    choose to do that.  We know her true thoughts
    about smoking because of these forms that were
    filled out when there was no lawsuit.  There was
    no lawsuit, no reason for her to say anything
    other than what was the truth.
         You heard that Mrs. Lewis collected those
    Marlboro packages so she could send off, as part
    of that Marlboro Miles program, to get free
    merchandise.  That's why we brought you all of
    that Marlboro merchandise over there to show you,
    the cooler and the backpack and rain gear and the 3618 jacket and all of that.  That's what they admit
    she filled out forms and sent off and got all of
    that.  Okay?  That's not somebody who hates
    smoking; that is not a tortured smoker; that is
    not somebody who is trying desperately to quit.
         Look at this picture of Mr. and Mrs. Lewis.
    She's just happy smoking a cigarette with
    Mr. Lewis.  You heard how Mrs. Lewis would use
    smoking to deal with the stress in her life, the
    stress from having the abusive stepfather, and the
    situation with her mother and with the child put
    up for adoption, her back injury.  Remember, she
    was totally disabled, totally disabled because of
    that back injury.  It had nothing to do with
    smoking, but that was a source of pain, chronic
    pain and stress in her life, and then the stress
    from Mr. Lewis, because he was an abusive
    alcoholic.  He had gotten three DUIs.  And
    Mr. Lewis admitted that he was abusive to her.  He
    said that Mrs. Lewis said, Stop drinking or we're
    through.  He said Mrs. Lewis said, It's either
    your drinking or us.  He impacted her smoking.
    But now he's coming to court asking for money
    because of that.
         Mrs. Lewis would say, Let's go relax and have 3619 a cigarette.  That's what she thought about her
    smoking.  Reynolds is just not responsible for the
    choices that she made.  And they are just trying
    to repackage her now in a way that's different
    from the real Mrs. Lewis that we know of, who
    filled out those forms to Philip Morris to get
    free cigarettes, have free cigarettes sent to her
    family.
         Let's go to the third fact, and that's that
    Mrs. Lewis did not make a serious or persistent
    effort to quit smoking.  Here is a key admission
    from Mr. Lewis about this.  Mr. Lewis said, She
    would say it, but she would never do it.  That is
    so important.  Actions speak louder than words.
    That's important because, in this case, under the
    instructions that you've heard from Judge Craig --
    if we could pull that up.
         These are the instructions that Judge Craig
    read to you, and you-all are going to have this
    back in your jury room with you.  Mr. Lewis has to
    prove to you, not just that Mrs. Lewis was
    addicted, but that her addiction was substantial
    enough -- see the word "substantially" --
    substantial enough that it was a "but for" legal
    cause of her injuries. 3620 So what does that mean?  Did Mrs. Lewis have
    an addiction that was strong enough to justify an
    award of money damages under those standards?  So
    what does evidence show about that?  Did the
    evidence show that Mrs. Lewis was somebody who
    desperately tried to quit smoking, who tried all
    these different types of ways to quit smoking for
    a long period of time, but she had no choice?  She
    became an addict.  She just had to keep on smoking
    until she got cancer.  Or was the evidence that
    Mrs. Lewis could control her smoking?  She could
    control her smoking.  She knew the risks of
    smoking, and she wanted to smoke because she
    enjoyed smoking for her own personal reasons, and
    she could have quit if she had really made an
    effort.
         Now, you are not being asked in this case to
    decide the general issue about whether or not
    cigarettes can be addictive for some people,
    because they can be.  And those other people are
    not in this case.  It's been known for hundreds of
    years that cigarettes can be addictive.  That's
    why we showed you this note.  Mr. Fiorta put this
    up when he was cross-examining Dr. Proctor.  This
    is an official State of Florida Department of 3621 Health publication from 1906 that talks about the
    cigarette is the very worst form of tobacco
    addiction.
         The State of Florida was not waiting on
    Reynolds; the State of Florida already knew it
    back in 1906.  But your job as jurors is to answer
    the questions on the verdict form about whether
    Mr. Lewis deserves and is entitled to money
    damages.
         The fact is that there are over 60 million --
    60 million -- former smokers alive today in the
    United States.  Those are official federal
    government statistics.  3,000 people quit smoking
    every day.
         How does Mrs. Lewis compare to those people?
    Were Mrs. Lewis's cigarettes more addictive than
    the cigarettes that these 60 million people
    smoked?  No.  You didn't hear any evidence of
    that.  She smoked just plain old cigarettes,
    regular old cigarettes like you buy at the store.
    There was nothing about her cigarettes that was
    any different than cigarettes these other people
    smoked.  Was her brain affected in some way
    different than those 60 million people who quit
    smoking?  No, there's no evidence of that. 3622 Did she see different advertising than the
    advertising that was seen by these 60 million
    people who quit smoking?  There is no evidence of
    that.  Did she hear any kind of different
    statements from tobacco companies than the 60
    million people who quit?  No, there is no evidence
    of that.  Did she smoke more or longer than the
    people who quit?  No.
         Was she any different from her family
    members, her own family members, who quit smoking?
    No evidence of that.  The difference is that
    Mrs. Lewis's husband, Mr. Lewis, has come to court
    and is asking you to award money damages.  That is
    the difference.
         Now, I want to stop for a minute and talk
    about that medical record that you've heard about
    that said "tobacco use disorder."  Here is what's
    important for you to know.  There's not a single
    medical report, not a one, that uses the word
    addiction to describe Mrs. Lewis.  And, remember,
    she was seeing a psychiatrist for all those years.
    She was seeing a psychiatrist, and we brought and
    have shown you some of those records from her
    psychiatrist.  There's nothing in her
    psychiatrist's records that she even talked to her 3623 psychiatrist about help to try to quit smoking.
    It's just not in there.
         Mrs. Lewis did not fit the profile of someone
    who was an addict.  She was not somebody who hated
    smoking.  She smoked to relax.  She enjoyed the
    taste.  She smoked because she wanted to get all
    that Marlboro gear over there.  She filled out
    those forms asking for free cigarettes.  You saw
    the photograph of her.  She didn't hate smoking.
    She's not someone who sincerely tried many
    different things to try to quit.
         Remember, she never even tried to quit at
    all.  She started smoking in the 1960s.  She never
    even tried to quit when I cross-examined
    Mr. Lewis, never even tried to quit in the 1980s.
    She's not someone who was unable to quit because
    she was an addict who lost all of her free will
    and had no choice but just to keep on smoking.
    She's not someone who was tormented by her
    smoking.  There's no evidence of that.
         Again, that person might have a good case,
    but that is not Mrs. Lewis.  And smoking does not
    take away personal responsibility of the smoker.
    Even Dr. Burns, when I cross-examined him, even
    Dr. Burns agreed the smoker has control of her own 3624 behavior.  Addiction does not mean that you cannot
    quit.  Addiction does not relieve a smoker of
    responsibility for her own behavior.  It's not our
    job in this case to second guess Mrs. Lewis and to
    second guess the choices she made about how she
    wanted to live her life.
         Now, I want to be real clear about this.  We
    are not blaming, we're not criticizing Mrs. Lewis.
    She absolutely had a right to smoke.  She made the
    choice to smoke.  She absolutely could do that
    here in America.  But Mr. Lewis should not come to
    court and ask for money damages because of that.
    And, again, I just want to remind you-all again
    that both Dr. Burns and Dr. Doughney said -- they
    both agreed -- even when it comes to medical
    issues, the patient, the person, has the right to
    decide for themselves if they want medical
    treatment or not.  They get to decide how they
    want to live their lives.  And that's what
    Mrs. Lewis did here.  It's the responsibility of
    the smoker to make the decision to try to quit.
    You have to want to try to quit for yourself.  It
    never works if it's somebody else.
         Remember, Dr. Burns said -- and I want to
    read this quote to you.  He said, Smokers have to 3625 decide to stop putting cigarettes in their mouth.
         A smoker has to make that decision.
    Mr. Lewis could not make that decision for her.
    Her children couldn't make that decision for her.
    Gail Martin couldn't make that decision for her.
    Her parents couldn't make that decision for her.
    Her doctors couldn't make that decision for her.
    Philip Morris couldn't make that decision for her.
    She had to make -- Reynolds couldn't make that
    decision for her.  She had to make the decision
    for herself.  She was in charge of her decision to
    quit smoking, nobody else was.  It was her
    responsibility.
         Now, you have heard a lot about nicotine
    during the trial, and I just want to summarize
    what the evidence was about that.  Remember,
    nicotine is put into tobacco by Mother Nature.  It
    exists naturally in the tobacco plant growing out
    in the field.  It's not something that's added.
    It's like caffeine is in coffee beans.  Nicotine
    leaves the body after two to three days, and it
    does not permanently change your brain.  Nicotine
    does not prevent smokers from understanding the
    health risks of smoking.  It doesn't prevent
    smokers from quitting.  And even Dr. Burns 3626 admitted any smoker can quit, whether they are
    addicted or not.  The facts show that Mrs. Lewis
    could have quit if she had really made a sincere
    serious persistent effort to do it.
         Now, remember, she didn't even try to quit
    until the 1980s, and that was over 30 years of
    smoking, where she never quit more than one day.
    She never quit more than one day.
         Did Mrs. Lewis seriously intend to quit
    smoking when she never threw away her cigarettes;
    she never threw away her ashtrays; she never went
    to a stop-smoking program; she never tried
    hypnosis, or anything like that; she never asked
    her psychiatrist that she was meeting with because
    of her problems with Mr. Lewis, she never asked
    him for help; she never tried to quit smoking with
    someone else; she never tried to quit smoking with
    Mr. Lewis.
         Mr. Lewis did not help her try to quit
    smoking.  She tried the gum two times.  Remember
    two pieces of gum?  That was in the 1990s.  And
    then she tried the nicotine patch in the 1990s,
    but she kept on smoking when the directions tell
    you not to do that.  And then she encouraged
    Mr. Lewis to smoke.  Remember?  You are a better 3627 person when you're smoking.
         Does that sound like a woman who is serious
    about quitting?  Does that sound like a woman who
    was -- who had been making serious, persistent
    efforts to quit smoking?
         Mrs. Lewis was in control of her smoking.
    Heavily addicted smokers smoke a lot.  Some of
    them smoke more than two packs per day.  We know
    here -- if we could pull up her medical record.
         This is Dr. Doughney's medical record.
    Remember, we showed that to you when Dr. Doughney
    was here?  It said she smoked one half pack per
    day, a history of smoking for 20 years.  And then
    what did she say on that questionnaire she filled
    out for Mr. Ogle when she started her lawsuit?  It
    says here -- it said, Marlboro was one pack a week
    during that period of time, and More was one pack
    every other day.  That's one half pack a day.
         The truth is that Mrs. Lewis would smoke
    varying amounts.  Sometimes she would smoke a half
    a pack a day, sometimes she would smoke a pack a
    day.  Sometimes it would be less than that.  She
    smoked depending on what was going on in her life.
    Remember, it was like when she was at work, she
    would smoke one amount.  When she was not at work, 3628 she could smoke more.
         If she was smoking because of addiction, she
    would smoke the same amount all the time.  She
    would crave nicotine.  She would want to continue
    smoking more and more.  She wouldn't be going back
    and forth between smoking, you know, a little bit
    this week and more the next week and back to a
    little bit.  That's just not the case with
    somebody who is heavily addicted.
         Now, remember she didn't smoke at all when
    she was coaching her son's Little League, so she
    would go for three or four hours at a time and not
    even smoke.  And she didn't smoke at work.  She
    wasn't allowed to.  Remember, in particular, she
    worked at Kolmar Laboratories, and she couldn't
    smoke there.  She was able to work without
    smoking.
         Mr. Lewis is required under Judge Craig's
    instructions to you -- you will see this on the
    verdict form.  Mr. Lewis has to prove that
    Mrs. Lewis was addicted to cigarettes and --
    and -- and that the legal cause of her injuries
    was the addiction.  Now, that's a key phrase that
    you are going to hear about, "legal cause."  And
    that's why you have been hearing all this evidence 3629 about her awareness and her choices to quit and
    all.  All of that goes to this issue of legal
    cause.
         If we could pull up the verdict form.
         This is the first question.  I put these
    three different colors in here so I could try to
    use that to explain it.
         This is the first question on the verdict
    form.  The plaintiff has the burden of proof here.
    The plaintiff has to prove every single part of
    every question.  All right?  So, here, the
    plaintiff has to prove -- it's in red there --
    that she was addicted to smoking cigarettes
    containing nicotine.
         Mr. Lewis also has to prove, if she was
    addicted -- it says "and."  And was her addiction
    a legal cause.  That's something you are going to
    have to decide.  And then the other part of it is
    in green there, that Mrs. Lewis had lung cancer.
         Your answer to those questions should be no.
    And let me just say this:  You don't all have to
    decide for the same reason.  Okay?  So some of you
    may think, well, they didn't prove that she had
    actual lung cancer; others may say, well, they
    didn't prove she was addicted; and others may say, 3630 well, I think she was addicted, but they haven't
    proved that her addiction was a legal cause.  You
    don't have to decide on the reason; you just all
    have to come to the same kind of bottom line
    number -- bottom line answer.  And the answer to
    this question should be no. Mrs. Lewis's choices
    to smoke were the legal cause of her injury.  No.
         Let's go to Fact No. 4.  And this is the
    medical case that we started talking about.  Now,
    the main issue with respect to the medical case is
    burden of proof.  Mr. Lewis has the burden of
    proof, and there are two parts to that:  There's
    burden and then there's proof.  Okay?  Mr. Lewis
    has the burden.  All right?  Reynolds has no
    burden whatsoever.  So if somebody says, Hey,
    Reynolds didn't prove this; Reynolds didn't prove
    that.  No, no.  You need to speak up and say,
    Reynolds doesn't have to prove anything.
         The other -- so that's the burden.  The other
    part is proof.  This is a court of law.  Okay?
    We're in a court of law and Judge Craig has given
    you instructions from the Court.  They have to
    bring you proof that is sufficient in a court of
    law.  So what has the evidence been about the
    medical case?  First of all, Mrs. Lewis never had 3631 a lung biopsy.  Three different doctors -- if we
    could pull that up.
         Three different doctors told her that she
    should have a biopsy of her lung to find out
    whether she had lung cancer.  And she refused all
    three times.  June 20th, that was Dr. Wahba.
    September 17th, Dr. Edmonson.  September 30,
    Dr. Ryals.  All three times, no, no, no; the
    patient refused.
         The only time that her doctors went in and
    took cells from her lung was during that
    bronchoscopy.  Remember, they talked about the
    scope procedure going down, and they took some
    tissue, and they were able to test it.  And that
    came back negative.  Here is that medical record.
    It is really important.  She refused a lung biopsy
    repeatedly and the only time they had any cells
    from her lung came back negative for cancer.
         But they have to prove to you -- they have to
    prove to you that she had cancer that started in
    her lung.  You heard Dr. Burns and Dr. Doughney
    admit that cancer that starts somewhere else in
    the body and spreads to your lung is not lung
    cancer.  To be lung cancer, it -- actually, those
    first cells that become cancerous just have to be 3632 in your lung.  So if you have cancer that starts
    somewhere else and spreads to your lung, it's
    still -- it's prostate cancer or liver cancer,
    wherever it was that started.  They have to prove
    that she had cancer cells that started in her
    lung.
         The only cancer -- the only cancer cells that
    they ever got from Mrs. Lewis came from her lymph
    node, and that is not her lung.
         And then Mr. Lewis, knowing that there was a
    lawsuit pending, said no to an autopsy.  Remember,
    he had Mrs. Lewis cremated.  Now, we're not
    criticizing that; that's their right.  But there's
    no tissue here; there's no proof.  They can't
    bring it to court because Mr. Lewis refused to
    have those biopsies.  Mr. Lewis refused to have
    that autopsy.  That means there's nothing for
    Reynolds to test.  There is no tissue for Reynolds
    to go back and test to see for ourselves and what
    is our position on that.  There was never any
    pathology from her lung that was positive for
    cancer.
         And who did they bring you?  They brought you
    Dr. Burns.  Dr. Burns admitted he was not a
    pathologist.  Dr. Burns admitted he had never 3633 looked at any pathology from Mrs. Lewis.  They
    brought you Dr. Doughney.  Dr. Doughney admitted
    she is not a pathologist.  She never looked at any
    pathology from Mrs. Lewis.  And, in fact, she had
    that record.  Remember, we put this up that said
    Mrs. Lewis had metastatic breast carcinoma, breast
    cancer.
         Mrs. Lewis's pathologist did not rule out
    that her cancer could have started somewhere else
    and spread to her lung.  That is not lung cancer.
    And remember this record.  Mrs. Lewis had a mass
    on her liver, and her doctor said she needed to
    have an ultrasound and have it checked out.  She
    never had the ultrasound, and she never had a
    biopsy of her liver.
         That's not proof.  And, again, they don't
    have anything to bring to court.  And Reynolds has
    not been able -- there is nothing for Reynolds to
    look at or to test or to run tests on.  Remember,
    I asked Dr. Burns and asked Dr. Doughney also.
    They never ran any tests on Mrs. Lewis to see what
    caused her cancer.
         So let's talk about that.  And that's what
    caused her cancer.  There's no medical record that
    says what caused her cancer, not a one.  Her death 3634 certificate also does not say what caused her
    cancer.  Now, we know -- some people, obviously,
    get lung cancer from smoking.  But smoking is not
    the only cause of lung cancer.  Dr. Burns said 10
    to 20 percent of lung cancers are not caused by
    smoking.
         Now, of course, Dr. Burns always comes to
    court, and he always says, whoever it is he's
    testifying about, had lung cancer caused by
    smoking.  Nobody conducted tests here, no DNA
    tests, nothing like that.  Both Dr. Burns and
    Dr. Doughney admitted that Mrs. Lewis was young
    for a lung cancer patient.  Remember, they said
    the average age of a lung cancer patient was age
    70.  When she first presented with symptoms, she
    was age 49.  And then we know from her medical
    records she filled out in her own handwriting that
    she had occupational exposures to chemicals.
         Now, we don't know where she was exposed to
    those chemicals.  Maybe it was the lawn service
    where she worked.  Maybe it was Kolmar
    Laboratories.  We just don't know.  This is all we
    know.  This is what she filled out.  Again, that's
    not Reynolds coming up and saying this; this is
    Mrs. Lewis herself. 3635 But we don't have more information about it
    because we don't have that lung tissue, you know.
    We don't have any lung tissue to go out and test
    to determine what caused it, you know, run tests
    on it.  We don't have that because Mrs. Lewis
    decided not to have the biopsy, and Mr. Lewis
    decided not to have the autopsy.
         So you are going to have to decide under
    those circumstances whether Mr. Lewis has met his
    burden of proof.  We say he has not.  He hasn't
    proven -- he hasn't proven that her lung cancer
    started in her lung.  He doesn't have any tissue
    to support that, because of their own decisions.
    And he hasn't proven what caused that cancer.
    Again, there's no tissue to support it.
         So let's move on to the -- that was the first
    question on the verdict form that asked about lung
    cancer.  And the next question on the verdict form
    asked about the types of lung cancer.  And that
    question is on there because there are different
    types of lung cancer.  And for legal reasons, you
    need to fill out this question to determine what
    type that she had.
         Okay.  I want to go through these one by one.
    And Mr. Pantazis and I agree -- there are four of 3636 them listed.  Mr. Pantazis and I agree about three
    of them.  The first one I want to talk about is
    small cell carcinoma.  Okay.  She was diagnosed by
    her pathologist here as nonsmall cell.
         If we could pull that up.  Nonsmall cell.
    And her death certificate, if we could pull that.
    It also says nonsmall cell.
         Okay.  So the first one should be easy.  She
    did not have small cell.  She had nonsmall cell.
    So mark that out.  Mr. Pantazis agreed with that.
    He spoke to you in his closing remarks.
         So the next one I want to talk about is
    squamous cell.  There's absolutely zero evidence
    in this case that she had squamous cell carcinoma.
    There's nothing in the medical records.  Nobody
    even talked about it.  So we can mark that out.
    And Mr. Pantazis agrees to that, I believe.
         And then the next one I want to talk about is
    large cell carcinoma.  There is one record -- if
    we could pull that up.
         There's one medical record that says,
    Nonsmall cell, possibly large cell carcinoma.  It
    uses the word "possibly."  That's not enough.
    Possibly is not enough to be proof.  And
    Mr. Pantazis even said, when he was speaking to 3637 you with his closing, that she didn't have this
    kind, so we can mark out large cell.  So, really,
    the evidence -- the question is going to be, What
    was the evidence about if she had an
    adenocarcinoma?  And here I'm going to ask you to
    follow the testimony of Dr. Burns, who said
    Mrs. Lewis had nonsmall cell lung cancer that was
    thought to be most likely compatible with
    adenocarcinoma.
         She wasn't diagnosed specifically with
    adenocarcinoma, so this would be a nonsmall cell.
    So even Dr. Burns said, Look, they could not say
    it was an adenocarcinoma.  All they could say is
    that it was a nonsmall cell.  And they stopped
    right there, perhaps because they didn't have
    enough tissue, because she kept refusing to have a
    biopsy and, of course, no tissue from the autopsy.
         So the answer to this question on the verdict
    form should be no, because her lung cancer, if you
    find that she had lung cancer -- this is Question
    2.  Question 1 they have to prove it.  But if you
    go on down to Question 2 and answer it, it should
    be no.
         So now let me talk about Fact No. 5.  So I'm
    going over -- we've got six facts I want to talk 3638 to you about, and we're up to No. 5 and, that is,
    that Mr. Lewis cannot establish legal cause or
    reasonable reliance.
         Now, those are two things that are required
    by the instructions that Judge Craig has read to
    you.  And they are -- you are going to be asked
    specifically on the verdict form about those two
    terms.
         It's not enough for Mr. Lewis to come in and
    show only that Mrs. Lewis got an illness from
    smoking, or that she was addicted, and that's
    because this is not no fault.  Okay?  This is not
    no fault.  The law requires more.  It requires the
    legal cause, and it requires reasonable reliance.
         If we could pull up the verdict form there.
         Okay.  This is Questions 3 and 4.  Reasonably
    rely and then legal cause.  And then Question 4,
    reasonably rely and legal cause.
         So what does that mean?  Well, during the
    trial Mr. Lewis's lawyers spent most of their time
    talking about tobacco companies in general or
    talking about Philip Morris, but don't let that
    throw you off the facts about Mrs. Lewis.  Okay?
    These questions are about Mrs. Lewis.
         Remember, Dr. Proctor said there were 80 3639 million pages of documents from the tobacco
    company.  80 million pages.  And they picked out
    some, and they have come to court and they've
    shown you little snippets here and there.  They
    were taken out of context, truthfully, just to
    rile you up so you will get mad and award money
    damages against Reynolds.  That's what's going on.
         But if you look at that, remember,
    Mr. Pantazis had the list of all the plaintiff's
    exhibits.  Only 20 -- 2-0 -- only 20 documents on
    that list came from Reynolds.  Dr. Proctor is the
    one who talked about this.  Remember, he's the
    $3,000,000 man.  This Dr. Burns is a three and a
    half million man.  Dr. Proctor has only made
    $3,000,000.  This is another professional witness,
    going around talking to one set of jurors to
    another in different courtrooms.
         He has testified in over 70 trials in the
    last few years.  And this was his 18th trial just
    this year.  He said he knew zero about Mrs. Lewis.
         Let's put pull that up.
         I don't know anything about her biography at
    all.  Okay?  He did not come in here and say a
    thing about Mrs. Lewis.  In the end, none of that
    that Dr. Proctor talked about has any connection 3640 to Mrs. Lewis.  But they are trying to have it
    both ways.  Okay?  So on the one hand they are
    saying, I didn't read the warnings on the pack.  I
    don't read anything.
         Can we pull that back up?  It's the same one
    I showed you before.  I'm sorry.  That one, yes.
         This is what Mrs. Lewis said.  I didn't read
    the warnings; I don't read anything.  Okay?
         So when it's something that, you know, we're
    saying she ought to have known, the warnings.
    They're like, No, I didn't read it.
         But now with all this -- with all these old
    documents they are showing, they are trying to get
    you to believe that Mrs. Lewis read all of those,
    that she knew about those.  And it makes no sense.
    Either she read it -- and if she read it, she knew
    the warnings, and she knew about the Surgeon
    General's report.  She knew all of that
    information about the health risks and was bad for
    her.  Either she read it or she didn't.  And if
    she didn't, she didn't see all that stuff that
    they showed you.
         I want to go through some of the documents
    that they have shown you at trial and then this
    morning.  And I'm going to do this real quickly, 3641 but I want to go through some of them just to
    demonstrate to you why you can't just take the
    document on its face as something that is relevant
    to this case.
         I'm going to start with this one that says
    "Open Debate."  Remember, you saw that?  Open
    Debate.  Okay.  That was in 1984.  There was no
    debate whether it came to Mrs. Lewis, because she
    knew from all those sources.  Remember, coffin
    nails, cancer sticks.  There was no debate going
    on in her household, and there is no evidence that
    that open debate ran in Higden [phonetic],
    Florida, which is where she was living in 1984.
    You haven't heard a single fact, indicating that
    Mrs. Lewis saw that.
         Then this FTC report -- okay.  This is one
    that came in through Dr. Burns.  This is something
    that Mr. Pantazis has used several times.  And so
    that was in 1981.  So what was going on in 1981?
    This is before Dr. Burns started becoming a
    professional witness for the plaintiff.  And
    that's when Dr. Burns said 95 percent of the
    people are thoroughly aware about the health
    changes, and 90 percent of them realize it
    affected their health. 3642 Again, this is a canned case that is not
    connected to Mr. Lewis.
         Let's look at this document from Dr. Rodgman.
    Mr. Pantazis talked about it this morning.  This
    is the document that they keep going to saying,
    Reynolds knew back in 1959 that there were
    cancer-causing agents in cigarette smoke.  Okay?
    They keep going back to that.  We talked about it
    this morning, and that it was a secret, that we
    didn't tell anybody.
         That same month -- that same month, November
    of 1959, there was a Reader's Digest article that
    says the exact same thing.  That was not a secret.
    We were not keeping this a secret.  It was well
    known in the public.
         And then that Frank Statement we keep hearing
    about, Mrs. Lewis was age 7.  Can anybody really
    believe that when she was seven years old she was
    reading the newspaper, reading about The Frank
    Statement?  It came out one time, January of 1954.
    No link, no legal cause.
         And then remember -- and Mr. Pantazis talked
    a little bit this morning about, Well, we don't
    know what documents, because some of the documents
    have been destroyed.  And Dr. Proctor talked about 3643 something he called the mouse house.  Do you-all
    remember that?  He said, Oh, they fired all the
    scientists and all.  Every one of those notebooks,
    every one of those scientists' notebooks are on
    our website.  We brought them.  We showed it to
    you that day.  They are right there.  Okay?  Right
    there.
         And when this trial is over -- not now, not
    now.  But when this trial is over and you have
    been completely discharged, finish totally by the
    Judge, you yourself can go look on our website and
    see all of this.
         Then he showed the deposition by a
    Mr. Heimann.  Remember that?  That was the very
    first witness.  Mr. Heimann worked for a company
    that never made cigarettes smoked by Mrs. Lewis.
    Again, no legal cause.
         And then we heard, again, this morning about
    these documents that mentioned youth.  I want to
    talk about those for a minute.  First of all, this
    document that he showed you was from 1927.  That
    was 19 years before Mrs. Lewis was ever born, 19
    years before she was born.  Again, no legal cause.
         They showed you documents about youth at a
    time when Mrs. Lewis was well into adulthood. 3644 Let's show some of those.
         1973, Mrs. Lewis was an adult.  The rest of
    that document says, We should not in any way
    influence nonsmokers to start.
         1980, the purpose of this analysis, etc., is
    not designed to be used as a tool for developing
    marketing strategy.  She was an adult.  None of
    those documents have anything to do with her.
         And then the Philip Morris documents, if we
    could show that.  One after another, after
    another.  If you could just run through these.
    These are all from Philip Morris, Philip Morris,
    Philip Morris, Philip Morris.  Those are not from
    Reynolds.
         I also want to talk about this document from
    Reynolds.  It was from Reynolds, from Dr. Teague
    in 1972.  And this is the document that
    Mr. Pantazis has used over and over that said
    nicotine was the reason for smoking.  Remember
    that sine qua non?
         Okay.  1972, 22 years earlier the same thing
    was in Reader's Digest:  Nicotine is the essential
    ingredient of tobacco; it is what makes tobacco
    tobacco and not just another weed.
         Also, the Surgeon General said -- if you 3645 could pull that up.
         The Surgeon General in 1988 said as early as
    the 1920s and 1930s some investigators were
    concluding that nicotine was responsible for the
    compulsive use of the products.  This was not a
    secret.  This was not something that was just in a
    Reynolds document and no one knew about it.  The
    State of Florida knew it as early as 1906.  We've
    shown you Reader's Digest.  We're now showing you
    the Surgeon General that says as early as the '20s
    and '30s.
         Then another document from Dr. Teague that
    they keep showing you is this 1953.  They knew in
    1953; they kept it a secret.  No.  That document,
    if you look at it and you go back to the jury
    room, there is a bibliography attached.  The
    bibliography is four pages.  It has 78 public
    sources cited.  The information in that Reynolds
    document about smoking, the relationship between
    smoking and cancer, comes from these public
    sources that are cited right there, that anybody
    could look at, not just Reynolds.
         And then they showed you a press release that
    came from Virginia Beach, 1961.  There's no
    evidence that Mrs. Lewis ever has even been in 3646 Virginia Beach, much less lived there, much less
    in 1961.  Again, I'm showing you all of this
    because this means no legal cause.
         And then the Winston Cup.  Remember, we heard
    that from Dr. Proctor.  We were given free
    cigarettes.  Dr. Proctor talked about that.  What
    was the evidence as to Mrs. Lewis?  Remember, she
    was carded.  Remember?  Mr. Lewis admitted they
    went to the races, and she was carded.  They
    wanted to make sure she was an adult.  She had to
    give them a pack of cigarettes to get a free
    carton, because you had to be -- you already had
    to be a smoker to participate.  So you had to give
    them a -- give them a pack of cigarettes.  You
    would get a carton back.  She got a carton of
    Winston cigarettes, and she didn't smoke it.  She
    gave it to Mr. Lewis.  She wasn't influenced by
    getting those free cigarettes from NASCAR.  She
    didn't -- it didn't cause her to smoke.  She
    didn't smoke them.  She gave them to Mr. Lewis.
    Again, no legal cause.
         And then I want to talk about advertising.
    Again, we've heard all about advertising,
    everybody was exposed to advertising.  They showed
    you some cigarette ads and all of that.  And they 3647 were trying to make a big deal out of the fact
    that Reynolds legally advertises, legally
    advertises its products.
         Let me show you the ads that they have in
    evidence.  Remember, all these that you were
    shown?  Santa Claus and all of that, Flintstones
    and all?
         What ads you did see for the cigarettes that
    she smoked, More and Salem?  Not a one.  Not a
    one.  Okay.  And when you-all go back into the
    jury room and you are looking at all of this about
    how we influenced her and this, that and the
    other, look through all that.  There's not a
    single ad for More cigarettes that they have put
    in evidence.  There's not a single ad for Salem
    that they have put in evidence.  There's no
    evidence, none, about that.
         And Mrs. Lewis did not start smoking because
    she saw an ad and ran out and said, Hey, I want to
    smoke that cigarette.  Remember, we've already
    talked about how she started smoking because of
    her family situation.  And she smoked Marlboro
    because that's what Mr. Lewis smoked.  Again,
    those are made by Philip Morris, not us.
         I want to go back to that photo.  Remember 3648 this photo that we've looked at before?  Remember,
    I pulled it out at trial and showed that to
    Mr. Lewis?  This is the cigarette that she smoked.
    This is a More cigarette.  And remember her
    brother-in-law called it a cigarillo.
         More cigarettes, you can see there in the
    photographs are -- they are like cigarillos.  They
    are long, they are round, they are not -- they are
    skinny.  Okay.  They don't look like regular
    cigarettes.  No advertising about that that they
    brought to show.  None.
         Mr. Lewis is trying to rewrite history for
    this trial.
         Think about this too.  Think about this.
    They keep saying, Well, this -- how much money was
    spent on advertising?  Everybody saw the ads.  We
    spent all this money on advertising.
         Just think about this.  Think about all the
    people who have seen cigarette ads and never
    started smoking because of them, including
    Mrs. Lewis's best friend Gail.  Mrs. Lewis's best
    friend grew up with her, saw that same -- exposed
    to those same ads, never started smoking.  Just
    think about that.  Think about all the millions
    and millions of people who have seen those same 3649 cigarette ads and didn't start smoking.
         It's another attempt to repackage Mrs. Lewis
    so that they can try to get money damages.
         So when you think about those documents or
    you think about those videos that they played for
    you, ask yourself, Where is the link to
    Mrs. Lewis?  Where is the legal cause evidence?
    And if there's anything that she actually read,
    she actually saw or she actually heard, that would
    be fair game.  But there's none of that in this
    case.  None, zero, none.
         She claims she didn't read anything.
    There's --
         If we could pull up the next demonstrative
    there.
         Actually there's zero -- Mr. Lewis agreed --
    there's zero evidence.  She never heard, she never
    saw, she never relied on any kind of statements
    from the tobacco company.  I asked him that and he
    agreed.  She never said anything a tobacco company
    did caused her to start smoking.  She said they --
    both Mr. Lewis and she said they never heard of
    TIRC, never heard of CTR, never heard of TI.
    Mr. Lewis testified that Mrs. Lewis never said she
    relied on anything from Reynolds.  And Mrs. Lewis 3650 never said she thought Reynolds had withheld
    information from her.
         Their whole case is based on this
    unbelievable idea that Mrs. Lewis was only
    influenced by these old, ancient documents that
    they have cherry picked from 80 million pages, and
    everything else in her life, her mother telling
    her not to smoke, her grandmother telling her not
    to smoke, her brother calling them cancer sticks,
    her calling them coffin nails, the warnings on
    every package of cigarettes that she bought, that
    all of that just didn't affect her.  She was only
    waiting to hear from the tobacco company; she was
    only relying on those tobacco company documents
    from all those years ago.  That's their case.
         Well, what were people listening to back
    then?  This is why I asked Dr. Burns about this
    Roper poll.
         Remember, I asked Dr. Burns, I put this on
    the screen and I said, Hey, do you remember Roper
    surveys, are like Gallup poll?
         He said yes, it's the same thing.
         This is from 1970.  Sixty-two percent of
    people -- it says most reliable sources of
    information on smoking and health.  Sixty-two 3651 percent of people, American Cancer Society.  Okay.
    Forty-seven percent, AMA.  It goes on down.  Three
    percent to the tobacco companies.  Okay?  So that
    means --
         If we could pull up the next one.
         That means 62 percent of the people were
    listening to Dr. Graham, Dr. Hammond, the American
    Cancer Society, and only three percent of the
    people were listening to all this that they keep
    showing you.
         And Mrs. Lewis knew from her own family, she
    had her own sources, she had her own sources about
    health risks of smoking.  She was not waiting on
    Reynolds to tell her something else.
         The bottom line is there's zero evidence
    Mrs. Lewis ever saw or heard any statements from
    Reynolds.  There's zero evidence that anything
    from Reynolds made any impact on her smoking
    decisions.  They cannot prove legal cause.
         That brings us to fact No. 6, which is the
    last one.  And that is that cigarettes are legal.
    You know, there's nothing that you-all have heard
    in this case that's not already known to the
    government, to the federal government, to the
    Surgeon General, to the State of Florida.  All, 3652 they have all those documents.  They know all
    about it.
         And the statistics that the federal
    government keeps about the number of people who
    are affected by smoking, the number of people who
    pass away from smoking, that's an official federal
    government statistic.  They keep up with it just
    like they would keep up with the number of people
    killed in motorcycle accidents or whatever.
    That's all known to our government.  That's not
    something that you-all are hearing about for the
    first time here in this courtroom.
         But our society, knowing all that, knowing
    all that, our society has decided that cigarettes
    should be a legal product.  And they were legal to
    advertise and sell the entire time that Mrs. Lewis
    smoked.
         Again, all those documents are publicly
    available on the Internet now.
         Mr. Lewis has to prove his case under the
    instructions that Judge Craig gave you.  Reynolds
    cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing,
    selling or advertising cigarettes, because that's
    legal.
         Now that was the sixth fact that we went 3653 over.  Those six facts give you the information
    that you need to know to fill out the verdict
    form.
         I'm going to stop for a minute and talk about
    those findings from that other jury for a minute
    that Mr. Pantazis read to you this morning.
         Okay.  This was that jury down in Miami that
    came up with -- that came -- that made those
    findings.  Okay?
         First of all, Judge Craig has already
    instructed you that those findings don't mean that
    we are liable to anybody.  They don't mean we're
    liable to Mr. Lewis or anyone else.
         MR. FIORTA:  Your Honor, I object.  That's an
    incorrect statement.
         MS. PARKER:  It's in the charge.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, that's an
    incorrect statement.
         THE COURT:  Overruled for now.
         MS. PARKER:  You will have the jury
    instructions that Judge Craig -- Judge Craig told
    you the ones that he gave you, you are going to
    have that back there.  So look it up for yourself
    when you go back to the jury room and see what it
    says back there.  Okay? 3654 Now, those findings don't even come into play
    unless you first find that Mrs. Lewis qualifies,
    that Mr. Lewis's claim here qualifies.  You are
    the only jury to decide anything about Mr. Lewis's
    claim for damages.  You are the only jury hearing
    anything about Mrs. Lewis, about her smoking,
    about her medical issue, anything like that.
    Okay?
         So let's go back to the verdict form then and
    pull up --
         Again, this is that first question.  And I
    want to just emphasize again, there are three
    different requirements here that plaintiff has to
    prove.  And some of you may say they didn't prove
    that she was addicted, some of you may say they
    didn't prove her addiction was the legal cause,
    and some of you may say they didn't prove that she
    had lung cancer that actually started in her
    lungs.  You don't need to agree on the reasons,
    but the answer to this question should be no.
         Remember, Mr. Lewis was the main source of
    stress in his wife's life.  She went to a doctor
    because of that.  Yet now he's coming here asking
    for money damages because of that.
         Let's go to the second question.  And we 3655 talked about this.  It's not an adenocarcinoma,
    because Dr. Burns even said they had not diagnosed
    it as such.  It was not a large cell.  It was not
    a small cell.  It was not a squamous cell.  So the
    answer to this is no.  They didn't prove that.
         They have the burden to prove all of this,
    again.  Questions 1 and 2 and every question, they
    have to prove every bit of it.
         The questions, we talked about legal cause,
    and I want to just stop for a minute and tell you
    about that.  Legal cause is a legal term that
    Judge Craig has told you about.  It's not just
    plain cause the way, you know, we might use it if
    we were talking outside in the hall.  Legal cause
    is something that is defined in these jury
    instructions that Judge Craig has told you about.
    What it means is that there has to be a link,
    there has to be a tie, there has to be a
    connection between whatever it is and Mrs. Lewis.
    Okay?  It can't be guesswork.  It can't be
    speculation.  They have to prove legal cause.
         So that brings us to the next two questions.
    I'm going to start with question 3.  And this is
    where we say legal cause is on there again, but
    this is where the phrase "reasonably rely" comes 3656 in.  Okay.  For this question, Mr. Lewis has to
    prove that Mrs. Lewis reasonably relied.  Okay?
         Here, there's no reliance by Mrs. Lewis.
    Okay?  There's nothing tying any of this to
    Mrs. Lewis.  There's no evidence that Mrs. Lewis
    saw any of it, she read any of it, had any impact
    on her whatsoever.
         But they have to prove more than she just
    relied.  They have to prove that she reasonably
    relied.  They have to prove that Mrs. Lewis lacked
    information that would have made a reasonable
    person take action.  And we know that if there was
    some reliance here -- and there's not -- it would
    not have been reasonable because Mrs. Lewis
    already knew about the health risks of smoking.
    Every package of cigarettes that she bought had a
    warning on it.  She called them cancer sticks and
    coffin nails.
         So the answers to 3 and 4 should be "no."
         And that -- you should stop right there.
    Okay?  That is Reynolds -- that's what I'm
    requesting you to do, just stop.  Just stop as
    soon as you answer question 1, stop right there.
    And if you get to question 2, answer that "no,"
    stop right there.  You shouldn't even get to these 3657 3 and 4.  But if you do, you should answer those
    "no."
         But part of my job is I've got to talk to you
    about all the other parts of the verdict form as
    well, even though I want to make this real clear,
    our position is you shouldn't even get there.
         So the next question is question 5.  And that
    has to do with -- if you can pull that up -- the
    percentage of responsibility.  Mrs. Lewis smoked
    with her eyes wide open about the health risks.
    She was a willing smoker.  Mr. Lewis has admitted
    that Mrs. Lewis bears some fault in her smoking.
    The only person who could avoid, take steps and
    avoid her injury was Mrs. Lewis.  She's the one
    that had to make a decision to quit smoking.
    She's the one that had to make serious persistent
    efforts to quit.  And she didn't do it.
         Mrs. Lewis chose to smoke, and she chose not
    to make a serious effort to quit.  And because of
    that, Mrs. Lewis should be 100 percent responsible
    for the decisions she made about how she wanted to
    live her life.
         We totally respect her choice to smoke and
    her choice not to make a serious effort to quit.
    But with the right to choose to smoke comes the 3658 responsibility that comes with it.  And she had
    responsibility for her life.  She had
    responsibility for those decisions that she made,
    and that means putting 100 percent for Mrs. Lewis.
    That was question 5.
         Let's go to question 6.  And, again, you
    shouldn't even get there.  I do not want to talk
    about this at all, but I have to, because it's
    part of my job.  And that's the issue of damages.
         So question No. 6 is where it asks dollars.
    Okay?  And you heard Mr. Pantazis ask you to
    consider a figure in the range of $9.2 million.
         Well, Mr. Lewis has requested damages only
    for himself.  Let me make sure that's real clear.
    Any and all damages he's asking for go just to
    him.  It doesn't go to his children.  The only
    damages that are in this case are Mr. Lewis's own
    damages, what he is claiming for himself for the
    loss of Mrs. Lewis's companionship.  That $9.2
    million is just pulled out of thin air.  And
    that's not fair, based on the facts of this case.
         This is a lady who called cigarettes cancer
    sticks and coffin nails, and every package of
    cigarettes she bought had a warning label on them.
    This is not a case where the plaintiff deserves 3659 money damages.  It's just not.  There may be cases
    out there where the person didn't know.  There may
    be cases out there where the smoker was just very
    heavily addicted.  There may be cases out there
    where they had pathology from the lung that we're
    able to bring to court and look at and test and
    see really what caused the cancer and where it
    started.  There may be cases where the person
    smoked before warnings went on the packages.
    There may be smokers like that, but that's not --
    those people might have a good case, but that's
    not the situation here.  That's not what you are
    faced with in this case.
         Mr. Lewis does not deserve money damages.  He
    contributed to the very thing he's now here suing
    about.  Remember, his wife reported to her doctor
    about the abuse.  He's living with her best
    friend, and he's been happily with a new companion
    for 17 or 18 years.  And because of all of that,
    we respectfully ask you to return a verdict of no
    damages.
         Now, besides that range of $9.2 million they
    are asking for, they are actually asking for more
    money than that.  And that gets to the next
    question on the verdict form.  What they are 3660 asking is on top of, on top of the compensatory
    damages of $9.2 million, they want something
    called punitive damages.  All right?
         Now, you will hear, you will see when you get
    back to the verdict form from the instructions, so
    the rest of the case the questions are the greater
    weight of the evidence.  That's the standard:
    Greater weight of the evidence.  You will see
    that.  But with punitive damages, it's the highest
    standard in civil cases.  It's something called
    clear and convincing.  They have to prove to you
    that they are entitled to punitive damages under a
    clear and convincing standard.  It has to be clear
    and you have to be convinced.  And, again, Judge
    Craig has instructions for you on that.
         Your answer.  You shouldn't event get to
    this.  Okay?  You shouldn't get to the dollar
    amount.  You shouldn't get to the $9.2 million.
    And just, respectfully, we are asking, you
    shouldn't even get to this question No. 7.  But
    I've got to address it with you.
         The answer to that question should be no as
    well.  There's no tie, there's no connection
    between any of the stuff they talk about and
    Mrs. Lewis.  Mrs. Lewis was not someone who was in 3661 the dark and did not know that smoking was bad for
    her because of something a tobacco company did.
    She did not.  She knew full well the whole time
    she smoked.
         The people in those documents have long since
    gone.  Claude Teague is gone, Jim Johnston is
    gone, TIRC is gone, CTR is gone, TI is gone.  They
    have been gone since 1998.  And Dr. Proctor
    testified, when he was asked questions,
    Dr. Proctor testified that Reynolds is now subject
    to FDA regulation.
         Now, I said this in my opening statement when
    I talked to you a couple weeks ago, And I want to
    say it again, and that is I'm not coming here, I
    haven't come here to say everything Reynolds has
    ever done in its 140 years has been perfect.  That
    would be impossible.  That's not the case.  I'm
    not even saying that.
         But what you have to decide is whether
    there's any legal cause, whether there's any
    connection between all of this stuff that they
    keep showing you that had nothing to do with
    Mrs. Lewis.  They've got to prove a connection to
    her.
         You are the only people, as the jury here, 3662 who gets to decide whether Mr. Lewis deserves
    money damages, when Mrs. Lewis fully and
    completely knew about the risks of smoking.
         And I would like to just respectfully say, it
    would be wrong to award damages, to award money to
    Mr. Lewis when he came in here and deliberately
    tried to change his testimony from what he had
    said under oath before trial.  He drove his wife
    to go seek counseling.  And remember, she was
    thinking about getting a divorce.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, that's just not in
    the evidence, and that -- that record has nothing
    to do with that.  I've sat quiet when she said it
    the first time.  She said it twice now, and it's
    not correct.
         THE COURT:  Come on up.
         (At the bench.)
         MS. PARKER:  The record says alcohol abuse
    and divorce from her husband.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  She said -- I'll tell when
    you're ready, Your Honor.
         She said that this drove Ms. Lewis to go seek
    treatment for that.  She was seeking treatment
    because of a worker comp injury.  Those records
    were part of a worker comp file.  That was a total 3663 mischaracterization of what the evidence is.
         MS. PARKER:  That's not correct, Your Honor.
    The records that I have put up are the ones from
    her psychiatrist's counsel where she want in and
    said alcohol -- all I mean, multiple records, it's
    not just the one about abusive.
         THE COURT:  What was the statement that
    indicated why she went to the counselor in the
    first place?
         MR. PANTAZIS:  It's because of worker comp.
         THE COURT:  But that's not even in evidence.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Yeah, it is.  Those records
    show where they went back to.  You remember, you
    were the one who asked who the people they were
    when we talked about --
         MS. PARKER:  I didn't say where they came
    from.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Yeah.  But it shows that this
    is a total mischaracterization of evidence.
         THE COURT:  Just -- just the part of --
         MS. PARKER:  I didn't say where it came from.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  That he drove her to
    counseling.  That's not accurate.
         MS. PARKER:  She went to the doctor and told
    the doctor about him. 3664 THE COURT:  That's fine.  I'm going to go
    ahead and I'm going to strike what you said, and
    you can rephrase it.  And make sure that you don't
    indicate that he is the one that drove her into
    counseling.
         MS. PARKER:  I'm going to say she had
    counseling because of the problems she had with
    him.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  That's not true.
         THE COURT:  That's not in the evidence
    either, is it?
         MR. PANTAZIS:  No.  That's not true.
         MS. PARKER:  Yes, it is.  We have a record.
         THE COURT:  You have a record of what she
    said to the counselor.
         MS. PARKER:  I will say it that way.  I will
    say it that way.
         THE COURT:  All right.
         (In open court.)
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, may I rephrase that?
         THE COURT:  All right.  Ms. Parker, just
    rephrase it.
         MS. PARKER:  Mr. Lewis went -- I'm sorry.
    Mrs. Lewis went to her counselor and told her
    counselor about the problems that she was having 3665 with her husband.  She told her counselor about
    his alcohol abuse.  She told her counselor that
    she was thinking about getting a divorce.  And
    that was a year, that was within a year of when
    she was diagnosed with cancer.
         That record is in evidence, and you can see
    it for yourself when you go back to the jury room.
         Mrs. Lewis knew before she ever started
    smoking that cigarettes were dangerous.  And
    again, I know this is about the -- seems like this
    is about the tenth time I've said this this
    afternoon, but I just want to say it again.  Every
    pack of cigarettes that she purchased had warnings
    on it.  I just can't tell you how important that
    is.  Remember, Mr. Lewis said about her efforts to
    quit?  She would say it but she would never do it.
    And yet now they're coming to court and saying she
    didn't know anything until 1996 when she was
    diagnosed with lung cancer.  That's not someone
    who deserves money damages.
         In this case -- I just want to summarize now.
    In this case, the facts are our witnesses.  The
    stubborn, hard facts -- because you can't get away
    from them -- are our witnesses in this case.  It
    doesn't matter how many witnesses people brought, 3666 it doesn't matter who called the witness, it
    doesn't matter whether the evidence came in on
    direct versus cross-examination.  You-all, we
    tried to be efficient with your time, and you-all
    have all of the information that you need to know
    about Mr. Lewis to answer -- and Mrs. Lewis's
    smoking to answer the questions on the verdict
    form.
         Now, as you go back, I know Mr. Pantazis will
    talk to you again, so after you listen to the
    evidence, as you go back to the jury room here and
    start deliberating, your verdict has to be
    unanimous.  But I want to ask that each one of you
    respect your own individual judgments, your own
    individual convictions.  And please, please, don't
    just give in and award money here.  This is just
    not a case that deserves it.  It just is not.
         I'm going to leave you with one further
    thought, and then I'm going to sit down.  The
    plaintiff has the burden of proof here.  And it's
    not enough just to put on the slide show of
    documents that go from jury to jury, courtroom to
    courtroom, with no connection to Mrs. Lewis.
    Anybody can be made to look bad.  You can do that.
    What is the issue here is, is there any connection 3667 to Mrs. Lewis?  And there's just not one.
         So I want to ask you, again, just
    respectfully on behalf of Reynolds to consider the
    evidence, look at these facts and return a verdict
    in favor of Reynolds.
         So thank you so much for your time this
    afternoon listening to me, and I appreciate the
    attention that you have given to me this
    afternoon.  We appreciate the attention that you
    have given to Mr. Fiorta and Mr. Fuhrman during
    the trial as well.  So thank you very much.
         Your Honor, that concludes my remarks at this
    time.
