         MR. PANTAZIS:  We are, Your Honor.  May it
    please the Court.
         Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  Almost
    at the end of the journey.  I appreciate and I
    know all the lawyers and the parties appreciate
    your attention and your diligence in helping the
    parties resolve this matter.
         We began -- I guess this is the third week of 3520 our participation with you.  And we know it's been
    tough on you and your families as well.  On behalf
    of all of the parties, thank you for your
    participation.
         I have -- I guess the first board -- I'm
    going to tell you, I'm a little bit old school on
    technology, so you may see me use boards and
    screens.  So if I'm a little clumsy, I apologize.
         But my job today is not to convince you, but
    to kind of go through some of the evidence that we
    have and show you what we think it says and how it
    may help you in your job.
         Now, part of that, there is a lot of
    documents.  We have, I think -- some have been
    removed -- but somewhere between 60 and 64
    documents that we put in, plus R.J. Reynolds
    Tobacco Company has put in documents.  You have
    heard witnesses.
         So I'm going to talking talk a little bit
    this morning about the various claims and
    documents.  And I have put the -- the exhibit
    number -- this is Plaintiff's 29.  "P" stands for
    the plaintiff.  I have even put the page, that if
    you find something throughout my presentation that
    you want to note where it's at so when you go back 3521 into the jury room to look at it, I encourage you
    to do that.
         I'm not trying to pick out one piece here or
    there.  I'm trying to show what the whole picture
    is and give you references so you may go back and
    look.
         Now, there's not going to be a test on this.
    I am going to go through other documents.  And
    when I pull information out, I will reference
    those exhibit numbers and pages, again, for you to
    make note of and go back and review for yourself.
         Ladies and gentlemen, like I said, this has
    been a little bit of a long haul, and I appreciate
    your patience.
         Being the son of an immigrant, one of the
    things that we learn very quickly is that --
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, I have to object.
    We talked about the personal references.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I'm not going through any
    personal references beyond that, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  All right.  No personal
    references.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  We learned very quickly that
    the greatest part about this country is that
    people make the decisions, not some bureaucrat, 3522 not some king, but the people.  And when the
    founders of our judicial system set up this system
    that we call the civil process where two parties
    have a dispute, they created a system where the
    people are the ones who make the finding of the
    fact, which is very unusual.  You won't find it
    anywhere else in the world.  And that people is
    you, the jury.  You are charged with the ultimate
    decision making as to what the facts say in this
    case.
         And they did something else.  They used a
    term called "jury verdict."  Well, "verdict" is
    Latin, which in part means to seek or to find the
    truth.  And that's really what your job is.  To
    look at all these documents, the witnesses, to
    apply them to the law that the judge will give you
    and has given you and will give you in a handout
    back to the jury, and to seek and find what is
    true, comparing it to the law.
         There is a third tool, though, that the judge
    indicated this morning that's very important.  And
    I want to point it out to you.  And that is your
    life experiences or common sense.  Because
    sometimes you're going to have to see, how does
    this relate?  Does it make sense to me?  And 3523 you're free to do so.  You're free to use your
    common sense in evaluating and applying these
    facts to the law as the judge instructed you.
         Now, we're going to -- you're going to have
    seven questions.  I believe it's seven.  If I
    misstate that, I will see it in a minute.  You'll
    have seven questions to answer in the jury room.
    I want to talk and go through those and show you
    what the evidence shows to support our position as
    to how those questions might be answered.  But
    ultimately it is your decision in every one of
    these questions, not mine, not the lawyers for
    Reynolds.
         And in these questions, as the Court
    indicated, we talk about allocation.  One part
    talks about accepting fault and an allocation of
    risk, of fault, and responsibility.  That only
    applies -- excuse me.  That does not apply to
    intentional conduct that's being alleged against
    R.J. Reynolds.
         Josh, will you put up No. 20?
         I'm sorry.  I don't have this on a board, so
    I'm going to have to ask -- but this is the first
    question that you will be getting.
         "Was Rosemary Lewis addicted to smoking 3524 cigarettes containing nicotine that were
    manufactured and sold by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
    Company, and, if so, was her addiction a legal
    cause of lung cancer in Mrs. Lewis?"
         That's the first question you must answer.
    And that's -- you heard the judge talk about --
    there was a question that needed to be answered
    before Mrs. Lewis would be deemed a class member
    in what you heard was the Engle class that the
    Florida Supreme Court created those findings with.
         Well, before those findings apply to
    Mrs. Lewis, you have to answer that question
    affirmatively.  So what evidence do we have that
    helps in answering that question?
         Number 3.
         Well, we know from the testimony that
    Mrs. Lewis smoked Salems in her early years, '61
    to '74, and Mores from '74 to '98.  Both are
    R.J. Reynolds brand cigarettes.
         So one of the questions -- one of the parts
    of the questions was cigarettes manufactured or
    sold by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.  There is
    absolutely no evidence to dispute that.
         Number 4.
         Oh, see, it's not -- the high tech gets 3525 worse.  Which one is it?  Is it this one?
         MR. GALE:  This one.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I will put this one up over
    here, if I could.
         So what evidence is in the record that
    Mrs. Lewis was addicted to nicotine?  Well, she
    smoked every day for 35 years.  She smoked between
    a half a pack to two packs a day.  There is some
    testimony that it got up to one, one and a half.
    But if you average that out at one pack a day,
    that's 255,500 cigarettes during her lifetime.
         She chain smoked -- that was part of the
    testimony -- one right after another.
         She smoked first thing in the morning.  And
    you heard Dr. Burns testify that the reason that's
    important is because the nicotine leaves the body
    at night.  So the addict in the morning craves the
    nicotine so that even before she cooked breakfast,
    took care of the kids, she began smoking.
         She smoked the last thing before going to
    bed.
         She smoked at work.
         Now, they made a big deal she worked at some
    places that she couldn't smoke.  That didn't mean
    she didn't smoke at every break.  Why is that 3526 significant?  He said, that shows how addicted she
    was.  She wasn't getting enough of the nicotine
    from the patch, so her body craved more, so she
    had to accelerate it with a cigarette.
         And she was also diagnosed -- and there has
    been some dispute about this, but there is a
    record --
         Josh, could we have that?
         She was diagnosed with a tobacco use disorder
    by Dr. Wahba Wahba.
         Now, somebody tried to say that was just
    simply a filling in a form for insurance purposes.
    All I know is Dr. Wahba Wahba whose name on the
    medical record shows that he's the one who
    prescribed and identified her as tobacco use
    disorder.
         These are the basic facts in which
    Rosemary Lewis smoked and how addicted she was.
    Most of these -- you know, there is one other
    factor that's not up here.  She started smoking
    between the ages of 16 and 18.  This was one --
    some testimony at 16; there is others at 17; there
    is some 18.  There is no question that she started
    smoking sometime between that period of time.
         And as a young person -- you heard 3527 testimony -- when a young person, particularly an
    adolescent, begins smoking, the addiction grip is
    much stronger.
         I will tell you what I'm going to do.  I will
    put it in front of here.  This is high-tech stuff.
    So --
         One of the things that's important in
    analyzing addiction is when she tried to quit,
    what was her success rate?  She tried
    cold turkey -- you heard that -- right after her
    first child was born.  A few cigarettes, a few
    days, couldn't do it.  She tried weaning off of
    cigarettes one at that time.  Couldn't do it.  She
    had nicotine gum.  Couldn't do it.  She -- they
    prescribed, as we indicated, Habitrol in '92, and
    then Nicoderm in '96.
         Mrs. Lewis was an addicted smoker sometime
    after she became a teenager and a regular smoker,
    and she stayed addicted until the day she died.
    She wanted -- she smoked in the hospital waiting
    rooms.  She wanted a cigarette every day of her
    life, and it was a tremendous, tremendous pull on
    her.
         Seven, please.  I apologize for the bad
    screen. 3528 So you heard from Dr. Burns.  Now, I don't
    want to go through a lot of his credentials, but
    needless to say, Dr. Burns has worked on more
    Surgeon Generals than anybody I know of.  Since
    1974, he's worked either as a writer, an editor,
    or a peer-reviewer for the Surgeon General's
    reports.  And the last one was 2014.
         He's treated patients specifically with
    nicotine addiction.  He has taught classes on
    nicotine addiction and how you diagnose it.  He
    has -- he's written chapters on nicotine addiction
    in textbooks.  That's what the written chapters in
    Harrison's on Nicotine Addiction and Cecil on
    Cigarette Smoking.  He's written over 165 articles
    on cigarettes, their effects, and nicotine
    addiction.
         Does he have a belief that cigarettes are
    bad?  Yes, he does.  You also heard him say that
    he would -- he's never testified in court on
    behalf of tobacco -- excuse me.  He's never
    testified in court that someone wasn't addicted.
    But he also said that's because some of the cases
    never got to court because they weren't addicted
    and he wouldn't testify.
         Dr. Burns does have a bias, but his bias is 3529 because he's so knowledgeable.  He's seen these
    documents; he has seen people be gripped by
    nicotine and the addiction.
         Dr. Burns' testimony is he used an
    established definition, the NIDA definition of
    addiction.  Addiction is defined as a chronic --
    meaning multiple.  It's not one day.  It's every
    day -- relapsing brain disease that is a physical
    change to your brain -- and he showed you the
    receptors of how that plays into it -- that is
    characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use.
    That means chain smoking, first thing in the
    morning, smoking whenever and wherever you can.
    And that you do it because the drug changes the
    brain.
         You remember him testifying that the brain
    receptors get -- this is a term I'm going to use.
    I don't know if he used it.  They get heightened
    in their sensitivity, and they want the nicotine
    in order to satisfy it.
         Now, if you stop smoking, he said, that
    heighten does go away.  But the association that
    that creates with other brain receptors does not,
    and it's always there, and that craving is always
    there. 3530 So what did he say about Mrs. Lewis?  What
    did he say about Rosemary?  What was his testimony
    about whether she was addicted?
         Number 9, please.
         He said Rosemary Lewis was addicted to
    cigarettes containing nicotine.  He was strong,
    unequivocal.  And he had reviewed all of the
    pertinent facts.
         He said Rosemary Lewis died from lung cancer
    that was caused by that addiction to cigarettes.
    And this is something we're going to talk about
    later on.
         He said, Rosemary Lewis's wanting to get a
    second opinion did not change the outcome of her
    death.  Rosemary Lewis already had lung cancer,
    malignant when her tumor was first discovered, and
    a few months delay was not a factor.
         Now, who did the tobacco companies put up?
         Can I put up No. 10?
         Dr. Jack Abramson.  Well, I put some notes
    down on what I think he testified to.  He was
    recruited by the tobacco companies to testify on
    their behalf.
         He was fed research papers by the tobacco
    companies. 3531 After trials, he would -- he testified on
    behalf of the tobacco companies, he would review
    his performance by video with others.
         He's never taught any classes or instructed
    any classes on nicotine addiction, nicotine
    addiction diagnosis.
         He never published anything or wrote anything
    about nicotine or nicotine diagnoses.
         The next one is very telling.
         He's never treated one patient solely for
    nicotine addiction.  And what that means, he may
    have a patient that comes into his office about
    other things and he will also treat them for
    nicotine, but it's not the reason they came to
    him.
         And then he said something very interesting.
    He did agree with us that the Surgeon General's
    report for the one period of time that's closest
    to Rosemary's death stated that 80 percent of all
    smokers are addicted.  Eighty percent of all
    smokers are addicted.
         If Mrs. Lewis is not addicted, I would like
    to see those other 80 percent, because everything
    in her life was about cigarettes, craving them,
    driving her. 3532 Now, I also think that Dr. Abramson ignored
    certain things.
         From the record, he ignored that she began
    before 18.  He just said 18.  There is evidence
    that she began as early as 16.
         He ignored that she tried to stop smoking and
    could not, and when she did try, she couldn't
    sleep.
         He ignored that while she was on the patch,
    she had nightmares because of the addiction.
         He did not consider anything about Rosemary's
    lack of concentration when she tried to crochet
    and tried to quit.  She could not concentrate.  He
    didn't consider any of that.
         He ignored the fact that Rosemary Lewis
    smoked the first thing in the morning and tried to
    smoke the last at night.
         He ignored that she smoked in cars, at work
    breaks, at hospital lobbies.
         He ignored the fact that she was a chain
    smoker.
         And most importantly, he ignored that she
    smoked in her lifetime at least 255,000
    cigarettes.
         So what did R.J. Reynolds know about 3533 cigarettes smoking and nicotine?
         Pull up 10.
         MR. GALE:  Eleven.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Excuse me.  Eleven.
         Well, again -- and if I could, Josh, do you
    have that pointer?  While you look for that, I
    will go ahead.
         The first thing I want to point out to you on
    the record is these are coming from Plaintiff's
    Exhibit 22, page 2.  And this is an RJR
    document -- thank you.
         I don't know which -- which one?  Oh, yeah,
    that's nice.
         Okay.  That's where I said page 22, RJR
    document, 1972.  In a sense, the tobacco industry
    may be thought of as a specialized, highly
    ritualized and stylized segment of the
    pharmaceutical industry.  Tobacco products
    uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potential
    drug with a variety of physiological effects.
         I can't even speak today.
         The second one.  Nicotine is known to be
    habit-forming.
         They knew this in '72.  They actually knew it
    before, but their documents clearly point it out 3534 in '72.
         Number 12.
         Now, did they get upset because they were
    selling a product that was addicting people and
    making them crave it morning, noon, and night?
    No.  Here is what they said.
         "Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine
    is both habituating and unique in its variety of
    physiological actions."
         Now, that's, again, Plaintiff's 22, page 3.
    So they weren't upset.  They're happy about it,
    because that's how they sell cigarettes.  The more
    cigarettes sold, the more profits.
         Here is another quote from that same
    document.  And I'm not going to read the whole
    thing.  You should read Plaintiff's Exhibit 22.
         On page 4 they say:  "And factors which
    induce a presmoker or nonsmoker to become a
    habituated smoker."
         So they want -- let me read the whole thing.
         "Before preceding too far in the direction of
    design of dosage forms for nicotine, it may be
    well to consider another aspect of our business;
    that is, the factors which induce a presmoker or
    nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker." 3535 So they are designing a cigarette to keep
    someone habituated and smoking.
         And again, on page 4, "Habituation becomes
    apparent and needed."
         Now, the interesting thing about this, you
    see where they say some of the reasons that people
    start to smoke is to defy, to be daring.  Did you
    hear any evidence about Mrs. Lewis wanted to defy
    her parents, her mom, angry because she had to put
    her child up for adoption?
         It's ironic R.J. Reynolds knew that was a
    smoker that they wanted to target.  And they did
    target.  And she became addicted and smoked their
    products for all of her life.  Unfortunately, her
    are life ended at age 51 because of their actions.
         Number 13.
         This is that same document.  And this --
    again, how does nicotine and addiction work in
    Mrs. Lewis?  The same thing they knew.  They
    deliberately played down the role of nicotine.
         "Hence, the nonsmoker has little or no
    knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him."
         Now, they played it down, because they knew
    of the public backlash.
         Again, in that same document, they recognize 3536 the key role of nicotine in consumer satisfaction,
    and design and promote our products with that in
    mind.
         So not only do they have a product that is
    addictive that they know about, and they know that
    people that react to defiance, like kids and
    Mrs. Lewis.  They are going to spend the money and
    research to design and promote their products for
    that in mind.
         Number 14.
         This is -- this happens to be Plaintiff's
    Exhibit No. 41, the first quote.  And it is not an
    RJR document.  I think it's a Philip Morris
    document.
         "Studies of psychology of a smoker in search
    of information can increase corporate profits."
         So they knew.  These tobacco companies knew
    exactly why they wanted these smokers hooked on
    nicotine.
         And then this is a Brown & Williamson
    document, Plaintiff's Exhibit 40, which is RJR, as
    the Judge just instructed you.  1978.
         "Very few consumers are aware of the effects
    of nicotine, its addictive nature and that
    nicotine is a poison." 3537 Wouldn't you think that somebody would want
    to know that if they were going to put that in
    their body?  And that's -- that is an RJR
    document, Brown & Williamson RJR.
         The next one is Plaintiff's Exhibit 14.  It
    is a 1982 Reynolds document.  And this is an
    amazing quote out of this one.
         "However, we cannot ever be comfortable
    selling a product which most of our customers
    would stop using if they could.  That is to say,
    if the gate -- exit gate from our market should
    suddenly open, we could be out of business almost
    overnight."
         And then it goes on and says, "If that
    occurs, our options include going out of business
    or finding a way to eliminate the desire of the
    smoker to stop smoking."
         So guess which one they did?  They tried all
    kinds of different techniques to make and find a
    way to eliminate the smoker to want to stop.
         Number 5.
         Now, everything that I have showed you to
    this point has been the secret documents of the
    tobacco companies.  This is what they said
    publicly about that.  I'm not going to read all of 3538 these.
         They call the claims irresponsible to say
    that it's addictive as similar to other drugs.
         They come in here and say, We don't add or
    manipulate nicotine to addiction smokers, which we
    know they do -- or their documents said they did.
         "The implication that we somehow do something
    sinister to addict smokers and keep them hooked,
    we do not."
         These are RJR documents, or these are RJR
    statements.
         "The allegation that smoking cigarettes is
    addictive is part of a growing and disturbing
    trend that has destroyed the meaning of the term
    and characterized virtually enjoyment activity as
    addictive."
         So they're saying, Ah, it's just like
    watching TV, playing video games, drinking coffee,
    eating sweets.  That's what they were telling the
    public about addiction.
         They didn't stop there.  The United States
    Congress called them before the United States
    Congress.  Each of the major CEOs of all the
    tobacco companies had to raise their hand and
    swear to tell the truth, just like witnesses here. 3539 And they took system and they asked them one
    question:  Do you believe cigarettes with nicotine
    are addictive?
         And here is their answer.
         And while that's coming you, R.J. Reynolds'
    CEO, I believe, is either first or second on this
    list.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
         WAXMAN:  If you wold raise your right hand.
    Do you swear that the testimony you're about to
    give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
    but the truth?
         Please consider yourself to be under oath.
         TOBACCO EXECUTIVE:  I believe nicotine is not
    addictive, yes.
         WYDEN:  Mr. Johnston.
         TOBACCO EXECUTIVE:  Congressman, cigarettes
    and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic
    definitions of addiction.  There is no toxic --
         TOBACCO EXECUTIVE:  I don't believe that
    nicotine from our products are addictive.
         TOBACCO EXECUTIVE:  I believe nicotine is not
    addictive.
         TOBACCO EXECUTIVE:  I believe that nicotine 3540 is not addictive.
         TOBACCO EXECUTIVE:  I believe that nicotine
    is not addictive.
         TOBACCO EXECUTIVE:  And I too believe that
    nicotine is not addictive.
         (The video clip concluded.)
         MR. PANTAZIS:  So all that information I
    showed you that you -- in this trial about these
    secret documents of R.J. Reynolds and other
    tobacco companies where they talk glowingly and
    happily their that products are addictive and how
    they're going to design a cigarette to keep them
    addicted, and if they don't they're going to be
    out of business.
         They get up in '94, I believe that conference
    was -- that hearing was.  '94.  Remember,
    Mrs. Lewis was diagnosed with lung cancer in '96
    and died in '98.  They were still denying as late
    as 1994 that their products were addictive, even
    knowing what their records held.
         Well, this didn't escape the Surgeon General.
    And Surgeon General Koop, he took this matter on.
    And this is what he had to say that you heard.
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:) 3541 DAN RATHER:  Surgeon General C. Everett Koop
    has issued two major reports on smoking:  One on
    the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on
    nicotine addiction.  The tobacco industry disputes
    both reports as more political than scientific.
         C. EVERETT KOOP:  We have been told so
    frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking
    is a matter of free choice.  You start when you
    want, and you quit when you want.  But anybody who
    has ever smoked knows that is not true.
         DAN RATHER:  What does the record, the
    long-time record, say is the most dangerous age to
    get hooked on tobacco?
         C. EVERETT KOOP:  Indications are very clear
    that the people who are most heavily addicted to
    nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting
    are those who begin smoking, and they were 14 to
    16.  I think the studies in all over the world in
    every country and every culture, the younger you
    start, the greater the addiction and the more
    difficult it is to quit.
         DAN RATHER:  Now, you said that you
    considered tobacco as addictive as cocaine or
    heroin.  Isn't that an overstatement?
         C. EVERETT KOOP:  No.  I think the evidence 3542 is very clear if you understand what we're talking
    about.  Addiction is a specific physiologic
    problem, and the manner in which you become
    addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in
    which you become addicted to cocaine or heroin.
    And even after you have quit and you think you are
    clean, that there's a tremendous tendency to
    relapse.  There is no such thing as a safe
    cigarette; there's no such thing as a quality
    death.
         (Video clip concluded.)
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I want to go back to the first
    question.
         Josh, will you put that up?
         This is the first question that we were
    talking about that you must answer:  Was
    Rosemary Lewis addicted to smoking cigarettes
    containing nicotine that were manufactured and
    sold by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, and, if so,
    was her addiction a legal cause of the lung cancer
    in Mrs. Lewis?
         The answer overwhelmingly is nicotine is
    addictive.  Mrs. Lewis was addicted.  She bought
    and smoked cigarettes manufactured and sold by
    R.J. Reynolds.  And she developed lung cancer as a 3543 result of that and she died.  The answer to this
    question is yes.  But we're going to go further on
    the lung cancer.
         So in order to -- the second part of that
    question was lung cancer.
         Josh, will you put up 21, the modified 21, if
    you could?
         This is a little illustration to show how
    nicotine addiction links to lung cancer, smoking
    cigarettes, and then death.  It directly produces
    or contributes -- and that's the legal -- that's
    the legal standard.  It directly produces or
    contributes substantially to the loss or to the
    death.
         You don't smoke cigarettes unless you've got
    nicotine and you're addicted.  And when you smoke
    cigarettes over time, as Dr. Burns said, you bathe
    your lungs with that smoke.  You destroy and
    develop tumors -- or cells that become tumors and
    ultimately, as in Mrs. Lewis's case, it causes her
    death.
         Now, what kind of lung cancer did Mrs. Lewis
    have?  Well, you heard -- number 23, please.
         Dr. Doughney was Mrs. Lewis's oncologist.
    And that's some of her qualifications.  She's 3544 board certified.  She treated her until she died
    in '98.  And you've heard -- and quite candidly,
    you've heard the touching description of how
    Ms. Lewis --
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, excuse me.  I'm
    sorry.  We're going to need to approach on this, I
    think.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Come on up.
         (At the bench)
         MS. PARKER:  I apologize.  I didn't catch
    this earlier.  Dr. Doughney did not talk about
    addiction.  Remember we had that motion about the
    Daubert hearing and all of that?  She didn't say a
    thing about addiction, but they've got it on her
    slide that she did.  That's not right.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Let me will take it out.
         THE COURT:  All right.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Can I have half a second?
         THE COURT:  Go ahead.
         MS. PARKER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         (In open court)
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Josh, let me know when you're
    ready.
         MR. GALE:  I'm ready.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Oh, not that one. 3545 Twenty-three, please.
         Okay.  This is Dr. Doughney.  You saw her
    testimony earlier.  I guess she testified last
    week, Friday -- two weeks ago Friday, maybe.  She
    was the treating oncologist.  She was not brought
    here as somebody that was interested in testifying
    in court.  She came because she treated
    Rosemary Lewis.  And she had evidence and facts
    about what she had, what kind of cancer she had,
    how she was treated, and what was the causes of
    that cancer.  And Dr. Doughney testified that
    Rosemary Lewis died from lung cancer caused by --
    died from lung cancer caused by her cigarettes.
         She also testified -- and this is
    important -- just like Dr. Burns, The seeking of a
    second opinion by Rosemary Lewis did not change
    the outcome.  Rosemary Lewis's lung cancer was
    already malignant when she had -- when her tumor
    was first discovered.
         Now, what kind of cancer?
         So let's go back -- let's go back to
    slide 20.
         And I'm going to through these because
    sometimes when you get questions back in the jury
    room, you wonder, how do you answer?  You know, 3546 how do you get from here to there?  And I'm giving
    you what we perceive as the evidence that helps
    you answer those.
         So back to 1, she clearly was addicted and
    her addiction was the legal cause of her lung
    cancer.  So the answer to No. 1 is yes.
         The answer to No. 1 is yes.  And once that
    answer is yes, then she's a member of the class.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Two
    questions on this verdict form.
         THE COURT:  That's right.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Okay.  We'll go further.  I'll
    come back to that part.
         So the second question -- so the first
    question answer is yes.  The next question you
    must answer --
         Josh, will you put up the second, No. 22?
         -- is, Was Rosemary Lewis's lung cancer an
    adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, small cell
    carcinoma, or squamous cell carcinoma?  We think
    the answer to that as well is yes.  It's yes.
         Why?  Well, let's take a look first at
    slide 24.  This is the pathology report that goes
    back to October 4th, 1996, from Halifax Medical
    Center.  And it says, "These findings are 3547 consistent with a metastatic, poorly
    differentiated non-small cell carcinoma.
         Before that, though, it says some of the -- I
    guess it's morphologic features are suggestive of
    a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma.
         So it's consistent with adenocarcinoma as
    well as a non-small cell carcinoma.
         Number 25.
         This is another medical record, and it
    clearly says non-small cell carcinoma as well as.
         Twenty-six.
         Metastatic lung carcinoma.  And then this
    one, of course, they're talking about it had
    spread to the brain.
         Twenty-seven.
         These are all medical records that you will
    have.  And they are part of the last exhibit that
    was marked -- I think it was 64.
         Your Honor, was the last exhibit 64 or 63?
         THE CLERK:  Sixty-three.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Sixty-three.
         These are all part of Exhibit 63 if you want
    to see them.
         Again, small cell lung cancer.
         Twenty-seven. 3548 MR. GALE:  That is 27.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I'm sorry.
         What did her death certificate say, No. 28?
    Metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.
         So she had adenocarcinoma, non-small cell
    adenocarcinoma, lung cancer.
         So what did Dr. Burns testify -- what
    evidence do you have of what is an adenocarcinoma
    and what is non-small cell carcinoma?
         Twenty-nine, please.
         This is clips from the testimony of
    Dr. Burns.  He said there are four major types of
    lung cancer that are all -- that are caused by
    smoking.  They are responsible for the vast
    majority of lung cancers that occur.  They's small
    cell lung cancer.  Then there is three categories
    that are non -- called non-small cell lung cancer.
    And that is large cell, adenocarcinoma, and
    squamous cell carcinoma.
         Adenocarcinoma -- this is the key -- of the
    lung is a non-small cell carcinoma.
         So she had in her medical records either
    adeno or non-small cell.  And Dr. Burns says
    adenocarcinoma is a non-small cell carcinoma of
    the lung. 3549 She had a non-small cell lung cancer that,
    examined under the microscope, appeared to look
    predominantly like an adenocarcinoma.  This is the
    only medical testimony between Dr. Burns and
    Dr. Doughney that you heard at all about the type
    of cancer she had.
         Did I do something else?
         THE COURT:  No.  Somebody's phone was going
    off.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Oh, okay.  I thought I did
    something else.  I apologize.
         There is no doubt -- there should be no doubt
    that Mrs. Rosemary Lewis's lung cancer was an
    adenocarcinoma that is covered under this
    definition.
         Can you put up 22 again?
         So if we go back to the second question, Was
    Rosemary Lewis's lung cancer an adenocarcinoma or
    a large cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, or a
    squamous cell carcinoma, the answer is only one
    question -- one way.  Yes.  And when you answer
    this time -- I think I'm correct.  When you answer
    those questions yes, then the findings of the
    Engle case provided to us through approval of the
    Supreme Court come into play. 3550 Can you go to 18?
         I will tell you what, Josh, let's hold off on
    that.  Before we go there, let's -- 31, please.
         So Mrs. Lewis had adenocarcinoma, non-small
    cell carcinoma, lung cancer.  What did the tobacco
    companies, particularly RJR and others,
    co-conspirators, know about lung cancer?  So we go
    back -- let's look at these documents, these
    documents that didn't become available until 2000,
    two years after Mrs. Lewis's death.  That's when
    all these documents came out.
         First one -- and it's picked because of the
    date.  This is 1953.  This is almost ten years
    before Mrs. Lewis started smoking.  She was six
    years old, seven years old.  And what did they
    know?  "Studies of the clinical data tend to
    confirm the relationship between heavy and
    prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidence of
    cancer of the lung."
         They knew as far as back as 1953 that their
    products caused lung cancer, when she was six
    years old.
         The second one -- by the way, that's
    Plaintiff's Exhibit 27.
         Plaintiff's Exhibit 28, page 1, this is an 3551 RJR document, 1959.  Now we're talking about three
    to four years before she started smoking.  In
    1954, the first reported presence of carcinogenic
    cancer-producing -- and I'm going to skip that --
    since then, approximately 60 similar compounds
    have been isolated from the smoke of cigarettes.
         They knew that 60 similar compounds in 1959
    in their cigarettes produced or caused cancer,
    four years before she smoked her first cigarette.
    This is Plaintiff's 28.
         "Nonetheless, there is a distinct possibility
    that these substances would have carcinogenic
    effect on the human respiratory system."
         Did that cause them to stop selling it or to
    go public?  No.
         Thirty-two.  This is Plaintiff's Exhibit
    No. 5, and it's a Brown & Williamson/RJR document.
    They're talking about the Surgeon General's
    report.  And then they say something that's just
    really hard to believe.  "But cigarettes, we
    assume the Surgeon General to say, despite the
    beneficial effects of nicotine, have certain
    unattractive side effects.  They cause or
    predispose to lung cancer."
         That's amazing. 3552 Now, that is -- that is a 1963 document.
    They knew other things were bad, not only for lung
    cancer.  These documents -- they knew -- and this
    is a Philip Morris document -- in 19 -- this is
    PM 39.  They knew in 1969 that they had studies --
    studied the effect of smoking in pregnancies,
    which support previous conclusions that smoking
    mothers produce smaller babies.
         They then also in that document say, "The
    position of the medical people is that smaller
    babies suffer detrimental effects all through
    their lives."
         Now, you would think that is something you
    would want the public to know about the health
    effects, but they denied it.  Instead of going
    public and saying, Our cigarettes could or do
    cause cancer, they started a different approach.
    They started the campaign of doubt, controversy,
    psychological crutch.  And why?  To keep selling
    cigarettes so that people who are smoking won't
    believe the health warnings, the health effects.
    They spent $250 billion on marketing to keep
    people smoking during that period of time over the
    50 years.
         Next slide. 3553 So what were they telling the public about
    health?  These are just a sample.  I did not --
    look, I did not pull all of them.  I just pulled a
    sample of the documents so you can get a flavor.
    You will have all of the documents back there if
    you want to go look at any of them.
         This is Paul Hahn, who is president of the
    American Tobacco Company -- again, a company that
    RJR today is responsible for -- took issue today
    about what he called loose talk on the subject of
    smoking in relationship to lung cancer.  That's
    1953.
         Well, we already showed you previously what
    they knew in 1953.  But what does he tell the
    public?  It's loose talk, that it's not real.
         1954, here is where they come in and talk
    about other possible causes.  So in order to get
    them off of cigarettes, they said, "Medical
    research in recent years indicates many possible
    lung cancers."  Of course, none of them are
    cigarettes.
         1954, this is a -- the TIRC and CTR.  And you
    remember that was part of that conspiracy and
    enterprise that Dr. Proctor talked about.  "We
    accept an interest in people's health as a basic 3554 responsibility paramount to every other
    consideration in our business."
         This was the Frank Statement that so much
    testimony has been about.  They ran that full page
    saying, we know that people's health is our basic
    responsibility, paramount to any other
    consideration, meaning we're not going to sell
    cigarettes if they're dangerous and we're not
    going to sell it because we can make more profit.
    Well, that's not what they did.  They knew it was
    dangerous.  They continued to sell them because of
    the profits, another total -- I can't use the word
    "lie," so total inaccuracy and an intentional
    inaccuracy.
         So taking it forward, here is another
    document, '54.  None of the evidence is
    conclusive.  Unwarranted conclusion.  Much more
    research is necessary.  Tobacco relatively
    unimportant as far as cancer.  Evidence not
    convincing enough.
         Next slide.
         This is what they -- they papered and did.
    You will see a document that calls that a barrage
    of advertising, of TV, of newspapers and
    everything, to sell that there is doubt, that 3555 there is no reason to believe all this bad stuff.
    There is doubt.  And they did it in the '50s, the
    '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and the '90s.
         This is their consulting group.  You remember
    Hill & Knowlton, 1961.  They called it the health
    scare techniques.  They said, "We must learn to
    distinguish real facts about tobacco from
    unjustified emotional campaigns based on health
    scare techniques."
         They came out with -- this is a TI -- this is
    one of their conspiracy organizations that they
    all joined in and participated in.  It's
    Plaintiff's 15.  "Lung specialists cite 28 reasons
    for doubting cigarette/lung cancer links.
    Cigarette industry insists there is no proof that
    tar or nicotine were hazardous to health.
         "Cigarette smoke stands accused of causing
    lung cancer.  Has cigarette smoke ever produced
    this cancer in animals?  No."
         This is a TI document, which, again, RJR was
    part of.
         "Has anyone ever been able to prove any
    ingredients found in cigarettes cause -- cigarette
    smoke is a cause of lung cancer?  No.
         "Is smoking a health hazard?  That question 3556 is still an open one."
         That's 1968.
         I'm going to stop -- Your Honor, in about
    five minutes, can I take break when we're
    switching over?
         THE COURT:  That will be fine.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I want to go, though, before
    we take a break, and I want to bring these back up
    for you to see the relationship of what has --
    what R.J. Reynolds has done and how it affects
    Mrs. Lewis.
         Would you do 18 for me first?
         I indicated to you previously if you answered
    those first two questions yes, question 1 and
    question 2, then you apply -- excuse me --
         MR. GALE:  Sorry.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  That's technology.
         If you answer these two questions yes, then
    you apply these findings.  Smoking causes lung
    cancer.  Nicotine is a cigarette -- in cigarettes
    is addictive.  The defendants placed these
    cigarettes on the market that were defective and
    unreasonably dangerous.  The defendants concealed,
    omitted material facts not otherwise known or
    available. 3557 Josh?
         MR. GALE:  Sorry.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Let's do it again.
         The defendants concealed or omitted material
    information not otherwise known or available,
    knowing that the material was false or misleading
    and failed to disclose a material fact concerning
    the effects -- health effects or addictive nature
    of smoking cigarettes or both.
         These are findings that you apply.  They're
    not decisions you have to make.  If you answer
    those first two questions yes, as I think you
    clearly do, these findings you apply.
         Is there a second page?
         MR. GALE:  Yeah.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  The defendants agreed to
    conceal or omit information regarding the health
    effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature
    with the intent that smokers and the public would
    rely on this information to their detriment.
         And then the last one is a finding that the
    defendants are or were negligent.  That's a
    finding that the Supreme Court through Engle has
    ratified.  And if you answer those two questions
    yes, which I think you will, you must apply those 3558 findings.
         Your Honor, we would like to take a break.
         THE COURT:  Okay.  All right.  Now, ladies
    and gentlemen, let me remind you about not talking
    about the case yet, even amongst yourselves.
    We're still not at that stage yet.  So be careful
    during the breaks that we take at this point.
    Until you go back to deliberate, you still do not
    talk about the case.  Okay?  All right.
         Let's just take ten minutes and then we'll be
    back.  I have got -- I have got 10:57.  So make it
    11:10.
         (The jury retired from the courtroom at
    10:56 a.m.)
         THE COURT:  All right.  Everybody can be
    seated.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Hour and ten minutes?  I
    didn't start until --
         THE COURT:  All right.  We're in recess until
    11:10.
         (A recess was taken at 10:57 a.m.)
         (Court called to order at 11:10 a.m.)
         THE COURT:  Please be seated.  All right.
    Are we ready?
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Yes, the record was correct, 3559 that I had only spent an hour, not an hour and 15.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Do we have all eight?
         THE BAILIFF:  Yes, sir.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Bring them in.
         (The jury returned to the courtroom at 11:11
    a.m.)
         THE COURT:  All right.  Please be seated.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  May I begin, Your Honor?
         THE COURT:  Whenever you are ready.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Thank you.
         Mr. Gale, put 36 and 40 -- well, 36, first,
    Your Honor.  I have been told by Mr. Gale that I
    am the one who has been pushing these slides
    because of pushing the wrong button.
         THE COURT:  Okay.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  So I apologize.
         This is the third question.  And we're going
    to talk about the third question and fourth
    question together.
         Did Rosemary Lewis reasonably rely to her
    detriment on the concealment or the omission of
    material information not otherwise known or
    available concerning the health risks or addictive
    nature of cigarette smoking or both by R.J.
    Reynolds Tobacco Company.  And if so, was the -- 3560 was such reliance a legal cause of her death?
    Well, we believe the answer to that is yes.
         Now would you put up the next one, slide,
    Josh?
         MR. GALE:  Forty-three.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Forty-three.  We're going to
    talk about 43, and we're going to talk about
    Question 3 and 4 together and show what's the
    difference.
         Question 4, Did Rosemary Lewis reasonably
    rely to her detriment on statements or omissions
    by any party to the agreement made in furtherance
    of the agreement to conceal material information
    about the health risks or addictive nature of
    cigarette smoking, or both, and, if so, was such
    reliance a legal cause of Mrs. Lewis's death?  We
    believe the answer to that is also yes.
         Now, I put this on the back, because it got
    torn down, and I want to make sure that we talk
    about it.
         You remember Dr. Proctor drew this document
    on the board, and so I want to make sure that
    it -- we have it.  And I don't know if it can be
    seen.  I'm going to move it up a little bit.
         Question 3 is about R.J. Reynolds' conduct of 3561 concealing or -- I'm just read it.  It's about --
    on the concealment or omission of material fact.
    Question 3 is about R.J. Reynolds.  And we've
    already showed you many, many exhibits of where
    R.J. Reynolds knew about things and when they went
    public about denying it, the false controversy, a
    psychological crutch.
         This Question 4 -- and that is why that
    question -- the answer is yes, because of the
    pollution of information that they put out there
    to tamp down the health risks.  If somebody -- if
    people knew things were harmful for them, they
    gave them a crutch to say, Well, there's this
    other study; it's an open question; maybe it's not
    as bad.
         Even if they didn't verbalize it, it's in
    their mind, it's in the whole arena of noise.  And
    they -- it was so massive, their whole marketing
    approach for those 40 years or 50 years was $250
    billion.
         The fourth question takes that same type of
    information and moves it to any other party.  And
    this is the conspiracy, if you remember
    Dr. Proctor talking about.  And that's why we put
    TI documents, Hill & Knowlton documents.  PM 3562 was -- Philip Morris was part of this, and so was
    R.J. Reynolds.  And they had -- this is the
    conspiracy that the findings by the Supreme Court
    approved of in Engle that you were to apply if you
    answered the first two questions yes.  This is the
    conspiracy they are talking about.
         So if any one of these people put out
    information they are -- each conspirator is liable
    for it, and that's what the findings say.  And
    that's why this answer to this question is yes,
    because when one of them knew it, the others knew
    it.  When one of them acted, the others acted.
         MS. PARKER:  The objection is legally
    incorrect.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Number 37.
         I'm going to move this back just a little
    bit.
         This is some more doubt.  I showed you many
    of them, but these are different ones.  This is
    where they were trying to -- this is Hill &
    Knowlton.  This is their big ad campaign group
    that I indicated to you is part of that
    conspiracy.
         "To create awareness of doubt and 3563 uncertainties about cigarette charges."  That's
    1959.  That's three, maybe four years before
    Rosemary smoked her first cigarette.
         What would have happened if they were more
    honest?  What would have happened if they -- if
    they had pulled their hazardous cigarettes.
         Plaintiff's 11, they have got to
    reestablish -- this is TI.  You remember TI is
    that public relations -- that's the public
    information group, Tobacco Institute.
         What would happen?  So they said they've got
    to reestablish the cigarette controversy.  There
    are two facets to this:  to set the record
    straight in terms of medical facts and then call
    it the propaganda approach, big brother; meaning,
    don't listen to the government; that's big
    brother, you know.  We don't want to listen to the
    government.  These cigarettes won't harm you.
    That's Plaintiff's Exhibit 11.
         Next slide.
         In '68, this is an interesting one.  This is
    TI, again.  Again, part of R.J. Reynolds is part
    TI, and TI is part of the conspiracy.  "Our basic
    position in the cigarette controversy is subject
    to the charge and may be subject to a finding that 3564 if we are making false" -- "that we are making
    false or misleading statements to promote
    cigarette sales."
         Well, that would be great.  Why didn't they
    tell that to the public?  That's 1968.  They knew
    they were making false statements, and they said
    it in their internal documents.  These documents,
    again, did not become public until 2000.
         This is Brown & Williamson, RJR, 1969:
    "Doubt is our product, since it's the best means
    of competing with the body of facts that exist in
    the minds of the general public."
         So they are out there selling doubt
    everywhere, television, radio, print ads,
    billboards, sporting events.  They debated, and
    they create the question.  Well, it's an open
    question.  It's not really been proven.  Why?
    Because the addicted smoker wants to believe that
    he or she can continue to smoke, and that's what
    Mrs. Lewis did.
         This doubt is -- the creation of what they
    called the psychological crutch.  Look at 1972,
    TI:  "Creating doubt about health charges without
    actually denying them."  That's a technique.
    We're going to say it's not so but not really. 3565 That is somebody -- the only people that would
    believe that is somebody that's addicted.
         Next slide, please.
         This is another Hill & Knowlton:  The most
    important type of story which cast doubt on the
    smoke -- excuse me, casts doubt on the cause and
    effect of -- effect the theory of disease and
    smoking.  So, in other words, they wanted to
    have -- the stories they wanted to promote is
    those that cast doubt.
         Plaintiff's 25 this is another Hill &
    Knowlton, '68:  Thus, the headline should strongly
    call out and point controversy, contradictions,
    other factors, unknowns.  Why?  Why would they say
    that?  They say that so that addicted smoker says,
    Well, you know, maybe not; maybe it's okay, so I'm
    going to continue to smoke.  Or, I'm not going to
    try as hard.
         And what happens when somebody disagreed with
    them?
         Number 40.
         Hill & Knowlton, their consultants, again.
    They have a choice as previously indicated:
    Smearing and belittling them.  That's how they
    approached the health people.  Try to overwhelm 3566 them with mass publications of the opposite
    viewpoints of the other specialties.
         There's not a missing word.  I think that's
    a typesetting problem.
         That's a 1953 document, way before Mrs. Lewis
    started smoking, that they could have prevented.
    What's the mass publication?  $250 billion worth
    of marketing.  Should we deal with the people that
    say cigarettes cause cancer or addicting?  No,
    we're going to smear them and belittle them.
         That is Exhibit 29, page 6.
         Exhibit 30, now, somebody in 1969
    evidently -- and this was an RJR document:  We do
    not foresee of any difficulty, in the event a
    decision is reached, to remove certain reports
    from our research files.  Once it becomes clear
    that such action is necessary for the successful
    defense of our present and future suits, we will
    promptly remove all reports from our files.
         So we don't even know if all the documents we
    have are everything, because we know they had a
    plan to remove them.
         These are not my words; these are not lawyer
    words.  Everything I have tried to show you is
    from their documents or their co-conspirator 3567 documents.
         So what did the government, the Trade
    Commission, who reported back to Congress in 1967,
    how successful this has been?  This is -- the
    Trade Commission studied it, researched, conducted
    interviews, want to know, Why are people
    continuing to smoke if there's health hazards and
    warnings out there?
         The commission believes that the warning
    label on cigarette packages has not succeeded in
    overcoming the prevailing attitude toward
    cigarette smoke created and maintained by the
    cigarette companies through their
    advertisements -- advertisements, particularly the
    barrage of commercials on TV, the television,
    which portray smoking as a harmless, enjoyable,
    social activity, is not habit-forming, and
    involves no hazard to health.
         This is an impartial group who did the
    research that looked at that 250 -- or part of
    that $250 billion marketing, and said, What effect
    did it have?  We have got warnings out there.
    People are saying they are dangerous.  Why are
    these people smoking?  Because they are addicted
    and they have this crutch that they put out, the 3568 psychological crutch of doubt and question it.
         And, you know, the interesting thing is
    people can't even identify where they heard or saw
    anything.  They just know it.  It's in the
    pollution in the environment because it was so
    massive.
         The next one, 42.
         This is the Surgeon General.  And this is
    through Dr. Burns's testimony.  But this is the
    Surgeon General's actual quote in 2014:  The
    tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been
    sustained by the aggressive strategies of the
    tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled
    the public on the risk of smoking cigarettes.
         And that is a study, not just in 2014, but
    that's studying the history, which included
    throughout the history of Mrs. Lewis's life.
         So the answer to 4 and 3 is yes.
         Can we pull up 44?
         I want to skip for a moment and talk about
    Question 7.  Now, you do have a 5 and 6, and I'm
    going to talk about them.  But Question 7 is kind
    of by itself.  It's under the circumstances of
    this case.
         State whether by clear and convincing 3569 evidence punitive damages are warranted against
    RJR, Reynolds Tobacco Company.  We think the
    answer to this question is yes.  You don't award
    punitives in this part of the case.  You simply
    identify whether the punitives are warranted.  But
    in order to award punitives, you have to first
    find compensatory damages.  If you find no
    compensatory damages, you cannot award punitive
    damages.
         Why are punitives warranted?
         Slide 45.
         MR. GALE:  The board.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Last one?
         This is the -- this is what they did to
    create $250 billion worth of marketing to create
    these statements by the Surgeon General and by the
    Federal Trade Commission, that they created this
    doubt.  That is claimed.
         So what else did they do that warrants
    punitives.
         Forty-six.
         They did something that, quite candidly, is
    shocking to most courts anywhere, and that is they
    marketed and solicited and wanted children.  This
    is RJR in 1973.  We must get our share of the 3570 youth market that's Plaintiff's 54.
         Look at page 9:  At 18 one is immortal,
    talking about a child at 18.
         Our company needs to take advantage of the
    opportunity to market to new youth brands of
    cigarettes.
         Next slide.
         Those are RJR documents.  This is where --
    and this is a 1959, again, three, maybe four years
    before Mrs. Lewis started smoking.  They were
    researching and analyzing how many freshmen and
    sophomore in high school actually smoked so they
    could identify and target markets.
         Next slide.  These are -- that's Plaintiff's
    33 if you want to look at it.
         Plaintiff's 34 has a title, Teenage smokers
    14 to 17, new adult market -- new adult smokers
    and quitters.  RJR is continuing to lose share
    among teenage smokers.
         Now, they put a statement in there, that
    we're not really marketing, that we're not doing
    this to market to them.  Well, there's another
    document later on, Plaintiff's Exhibit 35, that
    says the following:  Hopefully, our various
    planned activities will be implemented this fall 3571 and will aid in some way to reducing or correcting
    these trends.  And the trend is the loss of the
    14- to 17-year-old, tobacco.  So in 1980, they are
    still doing this.  And what were they telling the
    public about their marketing and selling and
    researching for youth brands to sell to children?
         Josh, 49.
         This lady was --
         (Whereupon, a video clip was played in open
    court as follows:)
         ANN BROWDER:  The cigarette manufacturers are
    not interested in obtaining new business from
    teenagers in our society.
         JOHN STOSSEL:  But how can you stay in
    business if you can't hook the kids?
         ANN BROWDER:  We've been in business very
    well, thank you, for some time now, without
    attempting to hook kids.  We do everything
    possible to discourage teenage smoking.
         (Video clip concluded.)
         MR. PANTAZIS:  The punitive conduct doesn't
    stop there.
         Fifty.
         They also specifically knew that they could
    generate an additional nicotine kick for the 3572 addicted smoker, a kick that would make the
    nicotine more enjoyable for that addicted smoker.
    And how did they do that?
         MS. PARKER:  Excuse me, I need to object --
    I'm sorry -- and move to strike, Your Honor.
    Cigarette design is not an intentional tort.  It's
    not covered in this part of the case.
         THE COURT:  Did you say "design"?
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I did not.  If I did, I
    withdraw that question.
         THE COURT:  All right.  If "design" was said
    that is stricken.
         MS. PARKER:  This chart is about design.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Well, this chart is about
    their conduct, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Please put it back up.
         What's important about this is they knew that
    the public wanted more nicotine, and they gave
    them more nicotine.  They wanted more nicotine to
    stay addicted and compete, and that Salem was one
    of those cigarettes.  And that's the cigarette
    primarily that Mrs. Lewis smoked throughout her
    life, although later she started smoking More.
         Next question, 51.  I'm not going to go 3573 through all of them.  All these documents are back
    there.  These are all pieces of evidence.  We've
    listed the numbers here if you want to identify
    them.  This is kind of the most crazy thing in the
    world.  They were researching, Mr. Teague from
    RJR, 1953.  Well, let's put some sort of color
    change in the filter so people will think that
    it's catching more.
         In fact, it did nothing.  It has little or no
    effect that -- but it would be a sales advantage,
    are obvious.  This is their words.  This is the
    kind of conduct they were doing.  This is how they
    thought of their customers, as an illusion of
    filtration.  The only ones that use you the word
    "illusion" are magicians, not companies
    responsible -- that say they were responsible for
    the health of their customers.
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, I think that he's
    talking about punitive damages, and I would just
    like to ask that it be clarified that this is
    Philip Morris in the one he put up there.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, I don't --
         THE COURT:  Okay.  If it is --
         MR. PANTAZIS:  The top one is RJR, the bottom
    one, 31, is Philip Morris. 3574 So let's go back, if we could, to 53.  And
    these are questions that you will need to answer,
    you will have to make a determination of assigning
    a percentage of any responsibility for Mrs. Lewis
    and assigning a percentage of responsibility, if
    any, to RJR tobacco company.  Mrs. Lewis, through
    her husband, has admitted that some of the
    responsibility is hers.  She has taken the stand
    and said, Yeah, I have admitted that; she started
    smoking; she tried to quit, she couldn't quit.  So
    she bears some of that responsibility.
         RJR has taken the position they owe no
    responsibility.  So how do you fill this out?
    Well, this is a choice.  This is totally in your
    decision-making.  But based on the evidence,
    Rosemary Lewis is no more liable than 20 percent.
    R.J. Reynolds is liable for 80 percent, based on
    the evidence.  A minimum, 80 percent.  So that's
    the way we would respectfully suggest you look at
    answering that question.
         Question 6 is the most difficult question of
    all to answer.
         Fifty-four.
         What's the total amount, which is 100
    percent, because as the Court said, His Honor will 3575 apply any percentage to this amount and allocate
    it after that.  You are to make a determination of
    the hundred percent of the damages and fill it in
    to this form.
         What is the total amount of any damages
    sustained by James Lewis for the loss of his
    spousal, companionship, protection, his mental
    pain and suffering as a result of Rosemary's
    death?  Well, folks, there's no lawyers anywhere
    that can give you what other jurors have done or
    any kind of -- please leave that up.  Did I do
    that?  Okay.  Okay.  That's fine.  You can leave
    that up.
         There's nothing, no forms, no information
    that lawyers can give you about what other courts
    or other jurors have done.  This is a decision you
    make based on the evidence, based on the law, and
    based on your common sense.
         But James, Bob Lewis, loved his wife very
    much.  He was -- they had a marriage from '66
    until the day she died.  He was by her side
    throughout those periods of time.  Was he a
    perfect husband?  Was he a perfect man?  No.  None
    of us are.  Did he love her?  Absolutely.
         You heard the testimony that he would pick 3576 her up and take her to -- pick her up and wash her
    and clean her during the time.  They shared the
    raising of three children, and one of them had
    serious health events.  That puts a lot of stress
    on the family.  They had their troubles, but they
    stuck it together.
         There was only one wife for Bob Lewis, and
    that's Rosemary, one love.  It's true.  He has
    moved on trying to find other relationships per
    Rosemary to take care of his child and to take
    care of Gale's child.  At the request of Rosemary
    he moved on.  But every day -- his life expectancy
    as of the date of her death was 22 years.  Every
    day he misses her, and he will not have the -- his
    soulmate.  He'll not have his one true love with
    him.
         He's going to try to get by.  And I believe,
    you know, that he's a strong man and he will get
    by.  But how much is it worth to take in these
    days and time somebody you've spent 30-something
    years with, raised three children, had ups and
    downs, and just like that they are gone?  What's
    the value of that?  I can't tell you.  I don't
    know for sure.  I can give you ranges, but that is
    a decision you must make. 3577 One of the things that's -- that was
    compelling, I thought, in the testimony was when
    Rosemary was about to go through chemo and lose
    her hair.  It kind of really did a snapshot of
    their relationship throughout their life.  She
    said, Bob, you will have cut an inch or two of my
    hair every night, so that when I lose my hair it
    won't be so traumatic.  And he did so.  He did so
    with tears and crying.  Every night he would cut a
    little bit more of Rosemary's hair.  Now, if that
    was not tender and loving, if that's not somebody
    who is trying to find a way to get through this
    horror, I don't know.
         So what's 100 percent of the damages?  You
    can put $9,200,000, and some people would say,
    That's not enough.  Some people might say that
    might be too much.  You have to make that
    decision, you know.  As I was sitting here
    thinking and I'm reshuffling papers, it really
    dawned on me that Rosemary Lewis was the perfect
    customer.  Or maybe said another way, the perfect
    victim of R.J. Reynolds.
         Josh, would you put up 57?
         She began smoking age 16 to 18.  What did
    R.J. Reynolds want?  They wanted to get their 3578 share of the youth market.
         She came from a dysfunctional family,
    horrible childhood no person should ever have to
    endure.  But that was the perfect person they
    wanted, to cause the young who wanted to be
    defined, so that was a target.  She was a target
    customer of theirs.  She suffered from stress
    because of all the problems of raising children,
    particularly children with health needs, even the
    stress of marriage and economics.
         So how does that -- how did they -- why is
    that important?  They knew that they could sell
    their cigarettes as an effective -- a drug
    effective in releasing the stress mechanisms.  She
    smoked Salem cigarettes where the pH was
    manipulated to give a higher nicotine kick.  She
    was addicted to cigarettes, so they created a
    doubt that it wasn't really harmful.  Again,
    you've seen that quote:  Doubt is our product.
    She was the perfect customer that they wanted.
    They wanted her to start smoking when she was a
    child and continue smoking throughout her life.
    And, unfortunately, that's exactly what happened,
    except Rosemary's life was cut short at the age of
    51. 3579 Ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to go
    through -- Tammy, will you put that up for me?
         I'm going to go through one more time
    quickly, what we suggest are the answers to these
    forms.  Was Rosemary Lewis addicted to smoking
    cigarettes containing nicotine that were
    manufactured and sold by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
    Company?  And, if so, was her addiction the legal
    cause of her lung cancer in Mrs. Lewis?  The
    answer is yes.
         Was Rosemary Lewis's lung cancer an
    adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, or small
    cell carcinoma, or squamous cell carcinoma?  The
    answer is yes.
         Did Rosemary Lewis reasonably rely to her
    detriment on statements or omissions by the party
    to which -- please pull that down.  I think
    three -- the third one is not on there the top
    one.  Pull it down.  Thank you.
         MS. TODD:  Sorry.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  That's okay, Tammy.
         Did Rosemary Lewis reasonably rely to her
    detriment on the concealment or omission of
    material information not otherwise known or
    available concerning the health risk or addictive 3580 nature of cigarette smoking or both by R.J.
    Reynolds Tobacco Company, and, if so, was such
    reliance a legal cause of Mrs. Lewis's death?  The
    answer is yes.
         Did Rosemary Lewis reasonably rely to her
    detriment on a statement or omissions by any party
    to any agreement made in furtherance of this
    agreement to conceal material information about
    health risks or addictive nature of cigarette
    smoking, or both?  If so, was such reliance a
    legal cause of Mrs. Lewis's death?  The answer is
    yes.
         Please state the percentages of any
    responsibility for Mrs. Lewis's lung cancer and
    death that you -- that you charge to Rosemary
    Lewis.  No more, in our opinion, than 20 percent.
    R.J. Reynolds should be at least 80 percent, for a
    total of 100 percent.
         The next question, No. 6, I am not going to
    write a number in.  I believe that is your
    decision to make, and I am not going to write a
    number on the total damages sustained by James
    Lewis.  I talked to you about it.  But that is a
    decision you must get back there and make that
    decision. 3581 But I will go over No. 7.  Under the
    circumstances of this case, state whether by clear
    and convincing evidence punitive damages are
    warranted against R.J. Reynolds company?  I don't
    know of a case that couldn't be clearer --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection as to the personal
    comments.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I'll strike that, Your Honor.
    I apologize.
         In our opinion, we suggest --
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  -- we suggest that the
    answer -- the answer to No. 7 is yes.
         There are a lot of cases filed in courts.
    None has the conduct been so obvious of what R.J.
    Reynolds has done as they have done in this case.
    What they knew, what they told people, how they've
    spent billions of dollars to tell people and keep
    them smoking all for one reason -- sell more
    cigarettes, make more money.  And they did that
    for the smoking public in America since '53 at
    least.  One of those people was Rosemary Lewis,
    and it cost her her life.  Thank you, ladies and
    gentlemen.
         Your Honor, that's what I have for this 3582 portion.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Ladies and gentlemen,
    what we are going to do is we'll break for an
    early lunch.  And I think I'll have you come back
    at one o'clock.  But the rules still apply.  Do
    not talk about the case.  It is still not that
    time.
         And let me give you just a little bit of a
    heads-up.
         When we come back from lunch at one o'clock,
    we're going to finish the closing arguments and
    then you will get instructions.  Depending upon
    the time, we may or may not get to a midafternoon
    break.
         And the reason I say that is this.  When I
    send you back to deliberate, I make you take all
    your cell phones or any other electronic devices
    and keep them out with the deputy.  Okay?  So that
    you can't take a cell phone or anything else back.
    So once you get back there, you are not going to
    have the opportunity to call anybody to let them
    know where you are at.  So I say that because you
    are going to be at lunch.  If anybody needs to
    know where you are at for the rest of the
    afternoon, lunchtime is the time to tell them, 3583 because you are not going to get -- you may not
    get the opportunity to do that later in the
    afternoon.  Okay?  So I just wanted to let you
    know that.  Or if you wanted to keep any of your
    devices down in your car rather than -- rather
    than having them up here, lunchtime is probably
    the time to do that.  Okay?
         All right.  Just once again, do not talk
    about the case, even amongst yourselves.  It's
    very important.  And I'll see you back here at one
    o'clock.


         MR. PANTAZIS:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
    please the Court.
         Almost done.  Almost done.
         I have to confess to you, I sat here and
    listened to R.J. Reynolds counsel, and I guess
    we're just in two different cases, because the
    facts that Ms. Parker talked about are not the
    facts that this case is about.  This case is not
    about Mrs. Lewis knowing that there were health 3669 effects and health issues with smoking.  She
    testified about those.  And if that was this case,
    this judge would have thrown this case out before
    it got here.
         MS. PARKER:  Okay, Your Honor.  Objection.
    That's improper argument.
         THE COURT:  Just strike the last part.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  That's not what this case is
    about.  This case is about their effort while
    she -- before she started smoking, while she
    started smoking, throughout her entire life to
    create a counter argument to the health issues.
    It's not that she didn't know that they were --
    they gave her this crutch, and it's all throughout
    the documents.
         And, you know, I have to tell you, the
    documents they talk about, we have listed them
    here.  I think Ms. Parker said there were only 21.
    Well, I mean, 19 or 21.  There are 21 RJR
    documents up there, there are 15 from either TI or
    TIRC, which is the conspiracy, and there are only
    four from PM.  That's just part of this game of
    misdirection that R.J. Reynolds is doing.  They
    did it in the past.  And --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor, under 3670 Tullo.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  It's certainly what they did
    and what I heard today.
         Let me tell you, they had -- what I heard is
    two things:  Attack the Lewises and then a group
    of tricks and misdirection plays.
         Let me give you an example.
    Pathology/autopsy.  I don't know how many people
    die every day from diseases.  But unless there is
    a legal reason caused by a murder or a suspicious
    death, you don't do autopsies.  They just throw
    that in there to make it sound like something
    sinister.  People don't commit autopsies on their
    loved ones.  And if the autopsy was so
    important -- this is part of that misdirection
    game they play -- Mrs. Lewis had a lawsuit pending
    at that time against Reynolds.  They could have
    requested the autopsy.  They didn't.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Misdirection.  What else did
    they do on this trick-and-confuse?
         They say all these documents are available on
    the Internet.  We didn't hide anything.  Come and 3671 look at the Internet.  Wait until you get through
    this.
         You know what the problem with that is?  They
    didn't put any of that stuff up until after 2000.
    Why is that important?  Mrs. Lewis was dead by
    1998.
         It's, again, an effort to tell you we don't
    do anything wrong.  It's another shell game.
         And the worst part:  This is not lung cancer?
         Josh, will you put up the medicals, 3.
         I'm not going to go far into this, but this
    is clearly lung cancer.  Adenocarcinoma.  These
    are the medical records.  This is the pathology
    that she's talking about.  Just because the cell
    came from the lymph node does not mean that it's
    not lung cancer.  As a matter of fact, Dr. Burns
    said that's where you are supposed to take it
    from.
         Josh, will you also put up the death
    certificate?
         While that's coming, there is absolutely no
    medical evidence that she died of anything besides
    adenocarcinoma or small cell -- nonsmall cell
    carcinoma.
         This is the death certificate.  This is an 3672 official document.  If they wanted to challenge
    that, they could have.  They didn't.  If they
    wanted to bring in a physician to challenge
    whether or not --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, pretrial ruling.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor, we have -- we can
    talk about witnesses they didn't bring.
         THE COURT:  Rephrase your argument.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  They could have challenged
    this.  There was absolutely no evidence, because
    it's -- there is nothing to challenge.  She died
    from lung cancer.  But this is another one of
    those misdirection games.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor, under
    Tullo.  This is continuing.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Breast cancer.  Do you
    remember that?  She said, there is a medical
    record that says breast cancer.  What she didn't
    say and didn't put up is that Dr. Doughney said
    most of my patients have breast cancer, and I made
    a mistake.  This is what Dr. Doughney said.
         And it's about Mrs. Lewis, and it says -- it
    says up there, Diagnosis, metastatic breast
    carcinoma.  What is that about? 3673 I was wrong.  I misspoke.
         And then she said okay -- the question is
    okay.
         Probably about 40 percent of my practice, and
    she went on to say, was a breast cancer.  It was a
    mis-note.
         And she made a point of that.  She wanted you
    to look at that.  Why?  Why do they not want you
    to look at the facts?  Why do they want to use
    these kinds of tricks?
         That's part of your common sense.  They're
    trying to get you away from the fact that they
    represent a company who knew the death and
    destruction and addictive powers of smoking, kept
    it secret.  They kept it secret.  And then they
    spent $250 billion to put the doubt message out
    there.  That's the other part of the trick.  They
    want you to --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Objection.  I have to object to the continuing use
    of the word "trick."
         THE COURT:  All right.  Don't use "trick"
    anymore.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Misdirection.  They used $250
    billion to put the doubt out in the public. 3674 And why is that doubt important?  If you're
    addicted, as Mrs. Lewis was, then you use whatever
    you can, even if it's not reasonable to believe,
    that it's okay to smoke.
         And that's in their documents.  That's not
    something I manufactured.  That's not Mr. Lewis
    manufactured it.  That's their words.
         And that's why we put these up.  We wanted
    you to go back and look at these documents.
         They keep using words like "repackaging."  I
    have never seen anybody do more repackaging than
    Ms. Parker.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection to the personal
    comment.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Rephrase it.  Don't
    make it personal.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I'm not trying to be personal
    with Ms. Parker.  I have never seen anybody
    repackage a case like R.J. Reynolds.
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, the "I have never
    seen" reference.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  It's just -- and then that's
    the misdirection part of her -- of the argument
    for R.J. Reynolds. 3675 The other part of the argument is the attack
    on the Lewises.  They attacked Bob for now he's
    living with Gail.  You heard the story.  They both
    had children that needed help at some point in
    time.  And yes, they have found each other in
    trying to move forward.  But the common bond
    between them is Rosemary Lewis.  It doesn't mean
    that Bob doesn't love, and to this day, Rosemary
    Lewis.  But they wanted -- she wanted to make that
    something, or Reynolds wanted to make something of
    that, like it's something wrong with that.
         To be attacked on the love of his wife?  You
    know, you can cherry-pick and you can make some
    stuff.  Bob Lewis was an alcoholic.  Bob Lewis had
    problems.  This didn't mean Bob Lewis didn't love
    his wife tremendously.  And it doesn't mean he
    didn't hurt every day he saw her dying piece by
    piece, and it doesn't mean that he doesn't miss
    her every day.
         Josh, will you show -- pull up that --
         This is a record that is in 1997, June 22,
    1997.  Do you see what this says?  Plaintiff's
    husband.  She says he's very supportive.
         Does that sound like -- and this is during
    the hell of lung cancer.  This is during the time 3676 when she is dying.  He's there every day with her.
    But they don't show you that.  That's part of that
    misdirection.
         And then the other -- thank you, Josh.
         Then they say, Well, he abandoned his son
    after Rosemary died.  Robert.  Robert is in a
    full-time relationship with a woman.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  I didn't
    say that.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  There is, Your Honor.  Bob
    testified about that.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  And he even adopted her child.
    This is --
         MS. PARKER:  Same objection.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  He didn't abandon --
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  He didn't abandon Robert.
    Robert is trying to move on with his life.  As a
    matter of fact, early on, he moved right next door
    to him.
         This is just, again, some of this attack.
         Now, where do we get this attack from?
         Josh, will you put up --
         It's not coincidence, I don't think, that you 3677 see this kind of plan.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, under Tullo.  We need
    to approach.
         THE COURT:  Come on up.
         (At the bench)
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, this has gone over
    the line of Tullo.
         THE COURT:  I think based on the defense's
    closing, I'm going to say it's fair comment at
    this point.
         You need to get "I" out of your vocabulary.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I know.
         THE COURT:  The last thing you said was "I
    don't think."
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I'm trying.  I don't mean to
    say that.
         THE COURT:  Keep that out.
         MS. PARKER:  Can we have a continuing
    objection under Tullo?
         THE COURT:  Yes.
         (In open court)
         MR. PANTAZIS:  So this attack, where does it
    come from?  Is it something I have seen before?
         Josh, do you want to put this up?
         Smearing and belittling them.  This is their 3678 consultant on how they were going to attack back
    in '53.
         To me, it's the same thing they're doing
    today.  Different people, different company --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection to the reference.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Strike "to me."
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Sorry.
         This is what they're doing today.  Same
    thing.
         You know, the other thing about this smearing
    and belittling.  You saw all this big merchandise
    they put up here, and they made a big deal that
    she, Rosemary, submitted coupons or requests for
    cigarettes so she could get coupons.  You heard
    the testimony.  She did that so she could get the
    merchandise.  They didn't smoke the cigarettes.
    They wanted the merchandise.
         Now, why did they want the merchandise?  Just
    because some people don't live in ivory towers
    doesn't mean --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  Pretrial
    ruling.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Strike the last
    phrase.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Just because some people, that 3679 merchandise, is a big deal to them, jackets,
    coolers, camping gear, they don't deserve to be
    belittled.  That has nothing to do with this case.
         So why did they bring it?  Ask yourself, why
    did they bring it?  If they didn't do anything
    wrong, why did they bring stuff like that in?
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
    inconsistent with the burden of proof issue.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Sustained as to that
    argument.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Why did they bring it?
         MS. PARKER:  Same objection.
         THE COURT:  All right.  Sustained.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  I will move on.
         You know, the other thing they talked about
    with Mrs. Lewis is addiction.  Eighty percent of
    Americans during her lifetime that smoked were
    addicted.  That's a fact.  That's what -- that is
    what the Surgeon General said.  They want you to
    believe she's in the 20 percent.  It's true, just
    because you're addicted doesn't mean you can't
    quit.  And we didn't say Mrs. Lewis should have no
    responsibility for that.  Mrs. Lewis accepts
    responsibility for her inability to quit.  That's
    why she accepted 20 percent liability. 3680 The "they" who addicted her continued with
    this doubt message out there to the point where
    the barrage says that nobody does anything about
    the warnings or anything else by the FTC because
    of the 250 billion.
         This is what the FTC said.  I showed you this
    before, but it's important.
         The commission believes that the warning
    labels on cigarette packages was not successful --
         Excuse me.
         -- in overcoming the prevalent attitude
    towards smoking created and maintained by the
    cigarette companies through their advertisement,
    and particularly the barrage of commercials on TV.
         They created an atmosphere that said, Okay,
    the health risk is out there, there is a warning
    out there, but you don't need to worry about that.
         I listed a multitude of their doubt messages.
    And --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Preemption.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  And that permeates the entire
    environment.  And if you're addicted, that's what
    you hang on to. 3681 Now, you remember what this man said.  He was
    one of the first ones that we -- that you heard
    his testimony.  Mr. Heimann, 1986.
         He said, We don't believe the warnings are
    justified.  We do not believe our products are
    injurious to health.  The Surgeon General is dead
    wrong in concluding that cigarettes causes lung
    cancer.
         This is what they were telling, '86.
         You know, they want to blame the customer who
    is addicted.  They want to blame the customer who
    they bombarded with $250 billion worth of
    advertising.  They want to blame the customer who
    dies from smoking their products and did what they
    wanted to do.
         There is only one person before this case
    began that ever put money in the issue, and that
    is Reynolds.  Reynolds made these choices.  These
    documents are just replete.  They were making the
    choices of how much information, the doubt, the
    manipulation and the addiction of nicotine to keep
    people addicted.  Why?  To sell cigarettes.  Why?
    To increase profits.  That's not my words.  That's
    theirs.  That's in those documents.  The only
    person who first put money into this equation is 3682 Reynolds.
         And now Mrs. Lewis is dead.  And she had died
    a very painful and horrible death.  And yes --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor, as to her
    damages.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  That Mr. Lewis --
         THE COURT:  All right.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  -- observed.  That's
    Mr. Lewis's damages, is what he had to -- what he
    witnessed of his wife's death and the loss of his
    wife.
         So she dies this death.  They don't want to
    take any responsibility.  They, Lewis, admits that
    there were things that she maybe should have done,
    could have done, but not 100 percent.  That's why
    20 percent is appropriate for her responsibility.
         They want to take the position that the
    customer is always wrong.  But they're the ones
    who made it about the money first.
         They are appalled with the number of $9.2
    million dollars.  Well, ladies and gentlemen, this
    is 22 years of being without your loved one.  This
    is watching her die piece by piece by piece.  That
    is not an easy thing to see.  That's not an easy
    thing to endure. 3683 Let me tell you, the only reason that this
    issue is before you today is not because of what
    Mrs. Lewis did, it's because of what they did.
         Josh, will you pull up the slide of
    Dr. Burns, three percent.
         Mrs. Lewis tried to quit.  But this is
    Dr. Burns' slide, based on the data that the
    Surgeon General has.
         Forty-eight million smokers.  Seventy percent
    want to quit.  Seventeen million try to quit, but
    only three percent are successful each year.
         And that's why the percentages of 80 percent
    addicted versus 20.
         Mrs. Lewis was -- wasn't in that three
    percent.  She was in the 97 percent.  But that
    does not mean that she's not entitled to recover
    or her husband is not entitled to recover.
         440,000 people each year die from cigarette
    diseases.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor.
    Preemption and relevance, State Farm and Williams.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  She brought it up, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Mrs. Lewis was one of them.
         You know, they brought up a youth document 3684 and said, well -- and Reynolds said, well, they
    did not --
         Do you want to turn the ELMO on, Will?
         And they said, We don't -- we really aren't
    doing this to market to youth.
         I didn't want to go into this, but they
    brought it up, so I have got to show it to you.
         This document was within that same month, a
    little later, than that other document.  It's an
    RJR document.  And they talk about the report on
    teenage smoking between 14 and 17 and how they're
    losing shares.  And then at the bottom, if you
    will notice, it says, Hopefully, our various
    planned activities that we will be implementing in
    the fall will aid in some way in reducing or
    correcting these trends.
         If they weren't interested in youth
    cigarettes, youth customers, 14 to 17, then why
    are they concerned about reversing those trends?
         It's one those misdirection times again.  Put
    up a document that says one thing.  They have got
    another document that totally contradicts that
    during that same time period.
         They also talked about substantial cause.
         Do you want to put that one up? 3685 This is the instruction on legal cause.  In
    order to be regarded as a legal cause of
    Mrs. Lewis's lung cancer, addiction need not be
    the only cause.  Addiction may be a legal cause of
    her lung cancer even though it operates in
    combination with the acts of others, some natural
    causes, or some other causes, if the addiction
    contributes substantially to producing
    Mrs. Lewis's lung cancer.
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, I object to that
    being shown without the rest of it.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Your Honor --
         THE COURT:  All right.  Overruled.  Go ahead.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  The point I'm trying to make
    is Mrs. Lewis -- there could be other causes for
    the lung cancer as long as the addiction played a
    substantial role as defined by this and the
    full -- the full instruction, you know.  Just
    because Mrs. Lewis contributed or there may be
    other factors doesn't mean, under the law, that
    addiction did not play a substantial part in the
    legal cause.
         Just please read the instructions, because
    they, lawyers, aren't supposed to be giving you
    instructions.  They only come from the bench.  And 3686 I'm not trying to.  But that issue was raised with
    you by Reynolds, and I wanted to make sure you
    understood.  It doesn't have to be the only cause.
    It just has to be a substantial cause.
         Turn the ELMO on for me.
         Three and 4.  We believe this is not about
    the affirmative information she learned; it's
    about the information, that counter message that
    they put out and changed the environment.  That's
    called the doubt and the psychological crutch.
         That's for No. 3 and No. 4.
         But I also want to let you know this.
    Something that I don't know if I heard it
    correctly, so I'm going to assume that I didn't.
    If you decide that No. 3 -- we think the answer to
    both of those is yes, but if you decide the
    answers to No. 3 and 4 are "no," that does not
    mean that you stop.  You continue going and assess
    the responsibility and the compensatory damages.
    You continue with the -- with the form.  This is
    just for part of the verdict, not the full
    verdict.
         So I want to make sure you're very clear
    that, if for some reason -- we don't think you
    will -- but if for some reason you find No. 3 is a 3687 "no" and No. 4 is a "no," that does not mean that
    you cannot award compensatory damages and assess
    the responsibility as it shows on there.
         That's just a clarification of what -- what
    was on there.
         Ladies and gentlemen, my time is almost up,
    and I know most of you are happy with that.  I
    don't know -- excuse me.  I have been instructed
    by the judge to not use the word "I," because
    that's inappropriate in front of the jury.
         It's very hard listening to Reynolds'
    position in this case.  But when you listen to it,
    it sounds a lot like the politicians we hear
    today.  They won't tell it like it is.  They want
    to blame others.  They want to point to others.
    They even degrade others to avoid responsibility
    for what they have clearly done.  They think they
    can avoid accountability by trying to get the
    focus on others, pointing out things that, quite
    candidly, pale in comparison to what they
    themselves have done for decades, not only to
    Mrs. Lewis, but to everyone else.
         They don't think you will see it that way.
    They don't think you will see what they're doing.
    They think they can do whatever they have done for 3688 so many years before --
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, Your Honor, under
    Tullo.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  -- and hide the truth.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  And hide behind -- and hide
    the truth.  They don't think the voters -- well,
    in this case, the jury in Volusia County -- will
    hold them responsible.
         But I'm asking you to hold them responsible.
    Hold them for Mrs. Lewis damage -- excuse me --
    Mr. Lewis's damages for the death of his wife, the
    loss of companionship, the pain and suffering that
    he has suffered.  Hold them responsible for the
    punitive nature of misconduct, the reprehensible
    conduct of how they marketed their products and
    how they manipulated these deadly products to the
    public, including Mrs. Lewis.  Hold them
    responsible for just their conduct and callousness
    to the health and well-being of their customers as
    has been described.
         MS. PARKER:  Objection, under State Farm and
    Williams.  General comment.
         THE COURT:  All right.  You have to rephrase
    that. 3689 MR. PANTAZIS:  I'm going to sit down.  Don't
    smile too big.  But -- but I do want you to know
    that I do appreciate your time and your effort,
    and I appreciate you listening to me.  And I ask
    for your forgiveness too, because I have stood up
    here and I have cross-examined witnesses and I
    have made objections, and I'm sure I've made some
    people angry.  I didn't -- we don't -- we lawyers
    don't --
         MS. PARKER:  Your Honor, objection.  Improper
    argument.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  We lawyers?
         THE COURT:  Well, wrap it up.
         MR. PANTAZIS:  Okay.  We lawyers don't do
    that to be bad or hurt.  We do it because we
    believe in our cases.
         So thank you for your attention.  Thank you
    for -- on behalf of the Lewis family.  Thank you
    for being here and giving our case your utmost.
