MR. COFER: Thank you, everybody. May it please the Court, counsel, members of the jury, good afternoon.
I told you back in opening statement that we
believe this case comes down to three pretty straightforward questions: Why did Richard Lock before a smoker? Why didn't he quit? And what, if anything, did the Defendants do to cause Mr. Lock to smoke and get sick?
Do you remember what I told you back in opening statement a couple weeks ago? I told you that Mr. Lock began smoking because his dad and brothers smoked. I told you the evidence would be that Mr. Lock always, always had the ability to quit smoking, and I told you the evidence would be that nothing that the companies did or didn't do, said or didn't say caused Mr. Lock to continue smoking.
You may also remember that I started my opening statement by telling you the things that were not in dispute, and I told you that the reason I did that is so we can focus on the issues of the case, so you could focus on what information you needed to decide the case.
And I want to begin my closing argument the same way. I want to walk through the facts that are not in dispute, and let's start with these first three questions.
Why did Richard Lock become a smoker? Well, do you remember what Dr. Cummings and Dr. Kaplan told
you? They both told you that the most important reason that a person starts smoking is whether their friends and family smoke, they both told you that, remember?
And we don't know much about Mr. Lock's friends growing up, but we do know that his dad smoked and his three brothers smoked. Mr. Lock told Mrs. Lock — you may remember this — that when he started smoking, he was just copying his brothers.
Members of the jury, there's not a single shred of evidence that Mr. Lock started smoking because of anything that the tobacco companies did or didn't do. Now, Mr. Acosta showed you a bunch of advertisements and Mr. Whittemore talked about advertising in his closing argument just a few moments ago, but you remember during trial the only advertisement that Mr. Lock talked about was the Marlboro man.
Do you remember that? And he said — I asked him: Well, when did you see it?
And he goes: I don't know.
Well, where did you see it?
I don't know.
Well, did you see it before or after you were already smoking Marlboro?
I don't know.
And the evidence was he wasn't smoking Marlboro until the 1960s, so he was already smoking cigarettes.
So obviously, based on Mr. Lock's own testimony, advertising did not cause him to smoke.
Now, I want you to think about something that Mr. Whittemore told you a few moments ago. He speculated that Mr. Lock's dad started smoking because of advertising. Where was that evidence?
There was no evidence at all about what Mr.
Lock's father smoked, when he started smoking, why he started smoking, or how much. There was no evidence.
The only evidence you heard about Mr. Lock's father's smoking was he was a long-time smoker who died of cancer in 1966. That's the evidence you heard about Mr. Lock's dad.
And you remember I asked Mr. Lock when he was on the stand, I said: Your dad died of cancer; right?
He said, oh, you know, I think it was a stroke.
And you remember I pulled out that record from 1966, his military record, that Mr. Lock filled out himself.
You remember it said father deceased, it was filled out in 1966, and Mr. Lock signed it himself.
So the only thing we know about Mr. Lock's dad's smoking is he was a long time smoker and he died of cancer. And I asked Mr. Lock, I said: Well, what
caused your dad's cancer?
And he said: I don't know.
I said: Well, did you talk to anyone in your family? Did you talk to your brother Howard? Did you talk to your sister Alice?
And he said: No, I didn't.
So when Mr. Whittemore speculates that the reason Mr. Lock smoked was for advertising because his dad must have smoked for advertising, that's all it is, is speculation.
Now, the judge has told you a couple of times that nothing the lawyers say is evidence. Nothing we say is evidence. The evidence comes from the witness stand and it comes from the documents, so I just remind you of that.
Nothing I'm saying today is evidence either. I'm going to summarize what I thought the evidence was. You rely on your collective memories. I'm going to tell you what I think the evidence means, but it really doesn't matter what I think; it's what you think.
So that's question one. So let's go to question two. Why didn't he quit smoking? One of the key issues in the case: Why didn't Richard Lock quit smoking? There's no question he had the ability to
quit. All of the experts agreed — all of them agreed he had the ability to quit.
I don't know if you can remember back when I asked Dr. Cummings the first question, and I said:
Dr. Cummings, true or false? Even addicted smokers can quit.
Now if we'll go to the slide. And you remember, he said: True. It was one of the few succinct answers he gave me. And I asked him true or false, and he said true.
Dr. Cummings also told you that while it may be hard to quit, he believes — Dr. Cummings believes that every smoker has the ability to quit smoking and that includes Richard Lock.
Dr. Cummings admitted that millions of heavily addicted smokers have quit smoking. And you remember I walked you through the different numbers talking about when people quit at various points in time.
I tied it to the Surgeon General's reports and the warnings. And what Dr. Cummings told you is the best number we have today is since 1964 — and what's significant about 1964? The Surgeon General's report. Since 1964, 60 million Americans have quit.
Dr. Cummings told you that he thought most of those 60 million were probably addicted. He said most
of those 60 million had been exposed to the advertising that Mr. Acosta and Mr. Whittemore talked about.
He said most of the 60 million had brain changes that Dr. Cummings talked about, but they quit. And the vast majority quit on their own without any kind of professional help because remember, until the 1980s, there was no nicotine replacement therapy.
When people were quitting, they were quitting by putting the cigarettes down and not smoking. Where is the evidence that Mr. Lock was different than any of those people in terms of his ability to quit?
He had no cognitive impairment, there was nothing about him that stopped him from processing information or being able to make a decision and follow through.
We saw through his life he made all kinds of decisions and followed through.
Really, Horatio Alger, rags to riches, eighth grade education, to an incredible education, Pentagon, really a success story. You talk about boot straps, that's the sort of person that Mr. Lock is.
Throughout his life, he's shown incredible ability to control his smoking.
In 2005 — and we'll talk about this, according to his wife and the medical record, he quit for a
or almost a year. In 2011, he quit somewhere between eight and ten months. He told Cummings ten months. One of the records, I think Mrs. Lock says nine months. He said somewhere in that range.
But bottom line, quit for a long time. So why is that important? Well, because you heard the nicotine is out of the system in just a couple days; right?
You heard that after a few weeks, the withdrawal symptoms go away, and you heard that while nicotine can cause brain to upregulate, grow more nicotine receptors, shortly after you stop smoking, whether it's weeks or a month or so, those go back to normal, too.
Now, make no mistake. Former smokers may want to smoke again just like all of us who have been doing something for a long time, if we stop doing it, we miss it. You've heard the phrase, you know: Bad habits are hard to break. That is absolutely true.
But after a certain period of time, members of the jury, Mr. Lock's decision to go back to smoking was not driven by nicotine because it had been out of his system for a long time. There's also no dispute that Mr. Lock got the very best care that there is to stop smoking.
You heard Dr. Cummings admit, and we kind of
joked about it a little bit: In some respects the treatment and care that Mr. Lock got of the VA was even better than Cummings gave at Roswell Park because he said that Mr. Lock had access to all the medications, and he had the ability to go when he needed to go, and get the care and follow-up and all the different things that the VA can provide in helping people quit smoking.
So he had access to the very best care. And the fact is he did quit, and he quit more than once.
Whenever he would attend those sessions, he would quit. But he would always go back. He would always go back.
And so the key question is why. Why would he always go back? The treatment would take, the nicotine would be out of the system, but he would always pick up a cigarette and go back.
So what does Plaintiff tell you? Plaintiff says:
Well, Mr. Lock went back because he did not have a choice. Their argument is that Mr. Lock was enslaved by nicotine, that he lost his free will, that the choice was out of his hands; that's their argument.
But that's simply not true. We know that from his own smoking. There were many times where he would put it away or just smoke for a day or two, where you
saw three cigarettes a day or five cigarettes a week.
Dr. Avery — and let me first — first let me talk about something that Mr. Whittemore said. He talked — he told you that all the treating physicians said that Mr. Lock was addicted, and he told you they didn't have a dog in the fight or a dog in the hunt or whatever the analogy was.
He specifically talked about Dr. Avery. He said this compassionate, you know, caring physician, and he was a treating physician. Well, I do think he was a compassionate caring physician, but he's also a paid expert. They hired him. They paid him $350 an hour. He hasn't treated him since 1998.
When he treated him, he didn't document anywhere in his records that he was nicotine dependent. They sent him — you remember this, the disk of all the records through 2000, and then they met with him and they took his deposition. And that's fine, that is completely fine. But to suggest that he was a treating physician without a dog in the hunt, is just not accurate.
Another one of their treating doctors, Dr. Sholi, he didn't give an addiction opinion. Check your notes and your memories. He never gave an opinion that Mr. Lock was addicted.
Dr. Aranibar, I want you to remember what his opinion was. He didn't even meet Mr. Lock until recently. He only met him a few months ago when he started treating him for cancer.
And Mr. Acosta asked him: Based on the duration — well, he smoked a pack a day for 50 years, do you think he's addicted? And he said: Yeah, sure, you know, I think if he smoked a pack a day for 50 years, I think he was addicted. There was no discussion.
We'll talk about PTSD. There was no discussion about Mr. Lock's smoking history, about the periods where he quit for months at a time, for weeks at a time, where he only smoked three cigarettes a day or three cigarettes a week. I mean, sure, if you asked the ordinary person or even a doctor and said: Hey, if somebody smokes a pack a day for 50 years, are they addicted? Their answer is going to be yes. But do they talk about what that means? Do they know anything about the person? That's an off-the-cuff response. And that's what Dr. Aranibar said.
Now, let's get back to Dr. Avery. Dr. Avery is the doctor who diagnosed Mr. Lock with COPD in 1995, and he was asked about the smoking history, and he was shown the records that Plaintiff provided him where he
smoked just a few cigarettes a day, and I wrote down Dr. Avery said: Yeah, that's very unusual. You remember that he said — very few people do that.
He said that when people smoke just a few cigarettes a day, it does not sound like nicotine addiction; it sounds like there's something else going on. That's what Dr. Avery said.
Now, what did Dr. Cummings tell you? Dr. Cummings told you that ten — less than ten cigarettes a day is not enough to sustain addiction. You remember I asked him, I said: Dr. Cummings, I showed him some records, you know, less than five cigarettes a day — he goes ten. Less than ten cigarettes a day is not enough to sustain addiction.
Well, obviously during the period of time — and I showed you all the records yesterday with Dr. Kaplan, but during the period of time where Mr. Lock was smoking a few cigarettes a day or a few cigarettes a week, he obviously was not smoking because of an addiction to nicotine because Cummings told you that wouldn't satisfy, that wouldn't satisfy an addiction.
There was no evidence that Mr. Lock was dosing himself with nicotine because he needed the nicotine. Now, it's true — it's certainly true, there are lots
of records that said that Mr. Lock was motivated to quit and was trying to quit.
And Mr. Whittemore suggested that Kaplan said:
Oh, he didn't want to quit. He never suggested that.
He never suggested that. Instead, he told you why he kept smoking, and it's because Mr. Lock suffers from anxiety and because he has untreated posttraumatic stress syndrome.
And I want you to think about how you learned about that. It was not until I cross-examined Dr. Cummings that you learned that Mr. Lock has struggled with PTSD ever since he returned from Vietnam.
Now Dr. Cummings told you on direct examination, you may remember, he was talking about withdrawal symptoms. And he said: Yeah, whenever Mr. Lock would go without the cigarettes he would get really angry, and he would bite his wife's head off. That was the phrase he used. He would bite his wife's head off, and he did that because withdrawal from nicotine.
And so I showed you a record, and I showed you this one. And the first time you saw this was on cross-examination of Dr. Cummings. Here is what the record says:
He reports that his PTSD symptoms of anger is the
one he straggles most with; especially with his wife because she is there. He states that he and his wife have worked out a communication that has been useful for their 38 years of marriage — remember I misread it the first time, I said 18, and Mr. Acosta corrected me — for their 38 years of marriage in which he will just leave if he feels he is too angry and they have agreed to forget about the problem, forget about the problem, and to go on from there.
Members of the jury, the evidence was that Mr. Lock used the nicotine in cigarettes on a situational basis to relieve the anger and anxiety and stress caused by his PTSD.
Dr. Cummings told you that nicotine masked the symptoms of anxiety and depression because nicotine releases dopamine. Cummings told you that. He also told you that nicotine gets to the brain in seven to ten seconds. Whenever the stress would get too bad, whenever the anxiety would get too bad, you fire up a cigarette and it helps mask the symptoms of the stress.
He was using — he was using the nicotine — using the nicotine to self-treat his PTSD. And Mr. Lock told you that cigarettes relieved his stress on a temporary basis. Those were his words. On a
temporary basis.
Mr. Lock did not smoke cigarettes because he was addicted to nicotine; he used cigarettes to deal with the mental disorder that has plagued him since the 1960s when he fought for our nation in Vietnam. He told you that not a day goes by that he's not thinking about ambushes. He has nightmares and flashbacks, and it's true that those symptoms have become more acute in recent years, but this record shows it's gone back 38 years, since he returned from Vietnam.
Mr. Lock did not want to attend counseling sessions with other Veterans because it depressed him.
Now, I want you to think back to Dr. Avery for a second because he said something that I think is the perfect analogy. He was asked about something called palliative care. And what Dr. Avery said is: Well — he was asked, what does that mean?
And he said: Well, that is where we treat the symptoms to make the patient more comfortable, but it is not intended to treat the underlying disease.
That's exactly — that's exactly what Mr. Lock did.
His underlying problem was PTSD, but he didn't want to go to counseling because it depressed him, because the veterans just wanted to talk about the past.
They said they wanted to talk about things he
doesn't want to talk about. They tried to prescribe medication for him. He didn't want the medication because he saw other people who were on the medication and he didn't like the side effects. He went and did his own research on the Internet, and he saw that some of the medications were strong and did have side effects.
And so what did he do instead? He tried to suppress the anxiety and PTSD. He relied on his friends and family and we'll talk about that. He was active in his church, and that was a great source of comfort for him, and he relied on all of those things.
But when it got too much, he smoked a cigarette.
You remember that when Mr. Lock was traveling with his friends, the Blairs and Campbells, he didn't smoke around them. I told you in opening statement and Mr. Lock confirmed it when he testified, remember they got in that van and think about riding in a van with six people for 2,816 miles; just think about that. And he didn't smoke a single cigarette.
You know why? He was happy. He was happy, he wasn't anxious, he wasn't stressed, he was with Peggy, the love of his life, he was with his two best friends and their spouses. They were traveling to Kentucky and Tennessee and reliving the places they grew up.
He didn't need to smoke.
It wasn't that — you know, an addiction to nicotine was saying: Smoke, smoke. I got receptors. Smoke. It was that he wasn't anxious and he wasn't stressed.
And when did Mr. Lock have his most success staying off cigarettes? When he was finally prescribed Xanax, an anti-anxiety medication that alleviates the stress and anxiety caused by PTSD.
You remember those two records, the pharmacy record where he called up and said: I've been off for 17 days, give me some more Xanax. And then he had another one just a couple weeks later, said: I've been off for 26 days, I'm doing great, I would like a little more than the 25 milligrams. If I can have a little more, that would be great, but I'm not smoking,
I'm feeling good, everything is great. It's because he finally got some medication that treated the disease, not the symptoms, but treated the disease.
So bottom line is the evidence is clear.
Mr. Lock was not compelled to smoke by an addiction to nicotine, he chose to smoke and to use nicotine to treat his anxiety and symptoms of PTSD.
So let's talk about our third question. What, if anything, did the Defendants do to cause Mr. Lock to
smoke and get sick? Now, I told you in opening statement that if you look back over the last 60 years at the millions of documents written by the thousands of employees of Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds and some of the other industry organizations, do you remember what I told you?
I said: You would see that they said some really dumb things. I think you all agree now, now that you've seen them, yes, they did. But I want you to think about how Plaintiff showed you those documents.
They literally took snippets out of context from a series of documents written 40 and 50 and 60 years ago and Dr. Cummings read them to you and then he told you what the companies were thinking.
They did not try to tie those documents to the decisions Mr. Lock made, and they did not tell you the whole story. One document I do want to show you, let me get a highlighter. This is a document, the psychological crutch document that Mr. Whittemore showed you.
And he said — he actually said it's written by — what do you do? He said it was written by Cullman, it was actually written by George Weissman to Cullman. You remember Weissman was a senior vice president at Philip Morris. Cullman was a CEO — the
topic was the Surgeon General's report, January 29th,
'64, so clearly this was about the Surgeon General's report.
And then today, Mr. Whittemore highlighted and said this: He said we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. That sounds bad, doesn't it?
And, in fact, here is what Mr. Whittemore said.
He said that says it all. That's disgusting. Well, it doesn't say it all because he got to look at some more of the document to say it all; right?
So psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking. Now, you remember when Dr. Cummings put this document up and I got to cross examine him, and I said: Dr. Cummings, Philip Morris did not make up the term "psychological crutch," did it?
And he said: No.
And I said: In fact, the term "psychological crutch" was in the 1964 Surgeon General's report; right?
And he said: Yes.
And I said: It was under the section that talked about the benefits of smoking?
And he said: Kind of yes.
But basically, that's the way it went.
And then you may remember, I turned to the last paragraph. The take-away, the conclusion. And this is actually Mr. Whittemore was kind enough to loan me the copy so I won't highlight it. But here's what it says. Here's the last sentence: In closing, the main essence of the report and the complicity to me is that it has still left smoking on an individual basis the individual's own choice of the psychological benefit versus the alleged hazard, anything that impinges on the right of the individual to make this choice is contrary to our most basic traditions.
You heard — I asked Dr. Kaplan. I said: Dr.
Kaplan, does smoking cause cancer?
Absolutely.
Does it cause a lot of diseases?
You bet it does.
Can people make a rational decision to use it?
You bet.
Do people make decisions all the time?
Of course they do.
Give us some examples.
We go to Florida, we have beautiful beaches, we go out and roast ourself, we tell our kids not to do it, they do it any way. The food choices we eat and
other choices we make. We all make decisions every day for pleasure.
That's the great thing about being an adult and being an American and living in this country is we get to choose — unless it's against the law, as long as you pay your taxes, you can pretty much choose to do what you want. You can decide to weigh risk, and this is a recognition of that.
I want to show you a couple more documents.
Mr. Whittemore said they can't deny it, they don't deny it. You didn't hear one person deny or contradict what those documents say. Well, that's not really true. And let me give you an example.
You remember when Dr. Cummings showed you the 1961 Philip Morris research memo that included a partial list of carcinogens found in cigarette smoke.
Can you guys see that?
It says partial list of carcinogens. Has benzo[a]pyrene, a bunch of PAHs, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and all that stuff, and he explained what a carcinogen was.
And do you know what he did? He tried to leave you with the impression that Philip Morris had this information and they hid it. That was the purpose of showing it to you.
This was secreted in Philip Morris's files, they knew in '61 that benzo[a]pyrene was in smoke, and they hid it. But it wasn't until cross-examination that you saw this document, May 20th, 1963, Philip Morris submission to the Surgeon General. Do you remember? I put the two documents side by side.
Philip Morris didn't hide that information. They sent it to the Surgeon General. They said here is a list of compounds in smoke, including carcinogens. They also listed ammonia and other things.
And what they said was, they said: Here is a list of the constituents, including carcinogens like benzo[a]pyrene, but we don't think they're present in large enough amounts to cause problems.
Now, you remember I talk with Dr. Cummings about something called dose/response and you remember Cummings told you there are carcinogens in the air we breathe, there's carcinogens in the water we drink, there's carcinogens in the food we eat, but until we ingest them in large enough amounts, it doesn't cause a problem.
And so the issue was, and what the company was pointing out, yes, they're there, but they're in minute amounts, and we don't think they're present in big enough amounts.
Now, we'll talk about going forward, the company's position what they did and where we are, but the point is when Cummings tried to suggest that Philip Morris was hiding the presence of these constituents, it just wasn't true. But they didn't show you the '63 document — you didn't see it until cross-examination.
Here is another example. Both Dr. Avery and Dr. Cummings tried to suggest that Philip Morris and RJ. Reynolds knew that people smoked for nicotine and they tried to keep that information from the public. Well, that just doesn't make sense. You saw the Florida health notes from 1906, 1906, Florida health notes: Today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. This is 1906 Florida health notes talking about cigarettes being addictive.
Cummings then admitted that the 1988 Surgeon General report documented it's been known since the 1920s that smokers smoke for the pharmacological effects of nicotine. Since the '20s it's been published and it was published in the '88 Surgeon General's report that Dr. Cummings worked on.
Let's go to the next one. I showed you a 1942 article by Dr. Lennox Johnston published in Lancet,
which is a very distinguished British medical journal.
This is 1942, Richard Lock is two years old: Smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine just as smoking opium is a meaning of administering morphine. 1942.
Again, Dr. Cummings tried to suggest that Philip Morris and particularly a guy named Bill Dunn was trying to hide nicotine's effect from the public. And I don't know whether you remember this, but let's go to the next one.
I showed you with Dr. Cummings that Bill Dunn gave a speech in 1972, a speech where he told the public, people who attended the speech, that smokers smoke for nicotine. He then gave an interview to the newspaper in 1972. That's his picture. Why do people smoke? Authority says — full answer's still not hidden, but he says: The other two propositions from the group stated that the main ingredient in cigarette smoke which produces the physical response is nicotine, and that the sought-after responses result in psychological efficiency.
So you had a speech, a public speech. You then had an interview in a newspaper, Sunday edition, and show what happened next, the book. Remember I showed you the book? He had a book where he invited a bunch
of people to a conference. I showed you they were from Harvard, they were from Columbia, they were from Johns Hopkins, they were from UCLA, they were a number of people, and they all wrote this book about nicotine and why people smoke for nicotine.
So I guess the bottom line is if Bill Dunn was trying to keep the public from knowing that Philip Morris thought that nicotine was an important reason people smoked, he sure did an odd job of doing that, didn't he?
And incidentally, you can find this book here in the St. Pete library. Dr. Cummings has it in his collection; the Surgeon General of the United States has cited it in the Surgeon General's reports.
But Dr. Cummings didn't even use these documents.
He didn't tell you any of this, did he? Why not?
I'm the one that raised the other side of the story in voir dire. Everybody has taken it and used it throughout the trial except me. But you remember I'm the one that talked about Paul Harvey, and I asked you in opening statement.
I said: Will you please just wait until you hear both sides of the story because it's the fair thing to do. And now you know why. Until you hear both sides of the story, it's hard to get it right. I want to
talk about the Tobacco Institute for a minute.
You saw some statements where the Tobacco Institute said that smoking was not a proven cause of cancer because statistics can't prove causation. They also argued that because of — well, this is true, the majority of smokers don't get lung cancer. And because no one knows what the specific agent is in cigarette smoke that causes lung cancer, then there's no proof that smoking causes it.
Well, we all know — now know that that's wrong.
We know smoking causes cancer. We know that those are technical arguments. We know they're not very credible and candidly, in hindsight they probably should not have been made.
In hindsight, what the companies probably should have done is when the Surgeon General of the United States published his landmark report telling the world that smoking was a proven cause of cancer, should have said either, that's right, or they should have just shut up. But they didn't.
And sitting in this courtroom in 2012 and looking at some of those statements, it's easy to say: What a bunch of nitwits. But you know what? Unless Plaintiff proves that Mr. Lock saw those or heard those and they affected his decisions in some ways, in
some way, those statements have absolutely nothing to do with the case.
Because, as I told you in opening statement, the issue is not whether the companies said or did some dumb things. The issue is whether Mr. Lock saw them and relied on them, and the issue is whether Mr. Lock was fooled by them and whether they caused him to smoke and caused him to get sick.
And the reason why is it's because Mr. Lock who is here asking for money. And under Florida law,
Mr. Lock has the burden of proving that something that companies actually did caused him harm. Plaintiff has to prove that something the Defendants did was a legal cause, and we're going to talk about what that means of Mr. Lock's smoking decisions, and that was why he smoked and that was why he got sick.
And we know for a fact that did not happen, and you know how we know it? From Mr. Lock himself. He said from the witness stand, he did not believe a single thing the tobacco companies said.
He said: I didn't believe the government, I didn't believe the tobacco companies, I thought they were both liars.
And as I asked you in opening statement: If you don't believe something, how can you possibly be
fooled by it?
Dr. Cummings admitted — it was the end of the day, I think he must have been getting tired — it was when Mr. Weaver was cross-examining him — and Mr. Weaver showed him those polls that said: Who do you believe? Do you believe the Surgeon General or do you believe the tobacco companies?
And Cummings admitted that by the 1980s and 1990s, no one believed what the Tobacco Institute was saying because their statements did not have any credibility; that's what Cummings told you.
But more importantly, Mr. Lock himself told you that he never heard of the Tobacco Institute, he never heard of the Tobacco Industry Research Council, he never heard of the Council for Tobacco Research, he never read or heard of the Frank statement.
And members of the jury, you don't need an expert to tell you that if you don't see it and if you don't hear it, it can't influence you. I want to talk for just a moment about filters and low-tar cigarettes. Cummings told you the Defendants deceived the public because, in fact, filtered cigarettes are not safer.
Well, let me make a couple of comments. First, Plaintiff did not show you a single statement where the tobacco companies told the public that filtered
cigarettes or low-tar cigarettes were safer.
It was the public health community and the Surgeon General who told the public that filtered cigarettes and low-tarred cigarettes were safer. You remember, I walked through some of the Surgeon General's reports. And what the Surgeon General and the American Cancer Society and other public health people said was: Smoking is dangerous, smoking causes cancer, there's no such thing as a safe cigarette.
But if you are not going to quit or if you can't quit, then you should smoke filter or low tar.
And you remember, Cummings and I talked about it. And the reason why makes perfect sense, and that is it's the tar that causes the cancer. And, you know, bottom line, when you burn tobacco, it produces tar that causes cancer.
And so the thinking is, if tar is bad, then less tar is better. And so that was what the companies were trying to do. That's what the government was encouraging them to do is bring the tar levels down.
And you remember Cummings talked about different things that were used to try to do that: Filters, pH, reconstituted tobacco, expanded tobacco.
And then Cummings tried to suggest that those were bad things. Those weren't bad things. Those
were made in an effort to reduce the risk. There's absolutely no evidence in the case — none whatsoever — that those features made cigarettes any more dangerous.
In fact, Cummings himself admitted all cigarettes are dangerous, all cigarettes can be addicted. It's the burning tobacco that produces the tar that causes disease. It's the nicotine — and nicotine is naturally present in tobacco that can make cigarettes addictive.
Cummings admitted that additive-free cigarettes are just as dangerous as any other cigarette. And you may not have caught this, but I asked him, I said:
Dr. Cummings, you know, you talked about all these design features, the pH, and all this stuff, but you don't believe that current cigarettes are any more dangerous or addictive than cigarettes from the 1950s, do you?
And he goes: No, they're not anymore dangerous; they're the same.
So what's his solution? Let's outlaw cigarettes.
Or let's make a cigarette so you cannot inhale it. Or let's take all the nicotine out. But here is the problem with that. Smokers won't buy them and smokers won't smoke them because smokers don't want them.
And the bottom line is if you make a product that people don't like and people won't buy, how can it be safer for the smoker? How can it be safer? They won't buy it; they'll just smoke something else. A couple more comments by Dr. Cummings.
You remember on direct examination — and you heard a lot of evidence that nicotine causes receptors to upregulate. And then he said, just like the opiates in cocaine.
And I cross examined him. And I said: Dr. Cummings, nicotine and caffeine, they cause brain receptors to upregulate, but the opiates, cocaine and heroin, they cause them to downregulate; right?
Do you remember what he said? Do you remember what he said? He goes: I'm not an expert on that. I don't know.
And I thought: Well, why in the world are you telling the jury that if you don't know and you're not an expert? You sure sounded like an expert when you were saying it, but when actually called on, he admitted he had no idea. You remember all of the hubbub on direct examination about pH, remember that? And Cummings told you that 5 was neutral, Marlboro has a pH of 6, and, therefore, Philip Morris was manipulating its cigarettes to produce more free
nicotine.
Well, you learned two things on cross-examination. The first thing is, I give him credit, he fessed up, Dr. Cummings apparently flunked high school chemistry because 5 is not neutral, 7 is.
In fact, rather than Marlboro being basic or alkaline, it is actually slightly acidic. Now, not a big point. It's not a big point, but it does make you wonder: Why is Dr. Cummings offering opinions about things he obviously knows so little about.
But the more important point about pH is Mr.
Acosta asked who was studying pH? And Cummings looked at you and said: R.J. Reynolds and Philip Morris.
And, again, he made it sound like a bad thing; right?
And it was not until cross-examination that you learned: Well, the National Cancer Institute was studying it, too. Remember there was something called the Tobacco Working Group, and I showed you those meeting minutes where scientists from Philip Morris and from Reynolds and from some other companies met with people from the National Cancer Institute.
You heard that a guy from Dr. Cummings' own institution, Roswell Park, was on that committee, you heard that Ernst Wynder and Dietrich Hoffman — Wynder that did the mouse skin painting was on that
committee.
They were looking at ways to make cigarettes safer. And what they were looking at is reconstituted tobacco, because, again, the thinking was: If you can take the tar down, but you can get the smoker the nicotine that he or she needs, you're exposing them to less carcinogens and you might make a safer product — not a safe, but a safer product.
So, yes, yes, the companies were looking at pH as was the National Cancer Institute and public health researchers. Two sides to every story.
I'm not going to go through and talk about every document, but those are, I think, fair examples and representative examples of where Dr. Cummings told you some things that may have been true, but he left out the information that made it complete.
And I think in many respects, he left you with really an unfair and a misleading view of what was happening. Okay. Well, enough about that.
Let's change topics to what I think is the most important issue in this lawsuit, and that is: What did Mr. Ixick know about the risks of smoking and when did he know it?
So Mr. Ixick testified that the first time any doctor ever told him that smoking could be harmful was
in 1995 when he was diagnosed with emphysema. He testified that the first time he knew from any source that smoking could pose potential harm to a smoker's health was the same time.
He testified he did not recall reading between 1964 and 1995 from any source that smoking was potentially harmful. He did not remember hearing from anyone between '64 and 1995 that smoking was potentially harmful.
So remember, I asked him, I said: Mr. Lock, you had annual physicals. Remember when you were in Maryland, you had physicals every year and then we talked about some of the various surgeries he had.
And I said: Didn't any of those doctors talk to you about the dangers of smoking? None of them?
And he said: Well, not that I remember.
Well, you remember every doctor that testified in this courtroom, every — whether it was by video or live — including Mr. Lock's treating physicians told you they always talked to their smoking patients about the health risks of smoking and they've done that ever since they've practiced.
But Mr. Lock said that none of his doctors ever until Avery told him — told him until 1995. How can that be? How can it be that until 1995, he never
heard that smoking can be harmful?
Mr. Whittemore told you that beginning in December 1953, RJR documents — and he talked about a Teague document and Philip Morris documents said there was information showing a link between smoking and cancer. Well, that's right.
Here is a Gallup pole from June of 1954 where they took a national sample of the ordinary person, and they said — this is June of 1954 — Mr. Lock is 14 years old:
Have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs? 90 percent said yes. 90 percent said yes. They did not need to look in Philip Morris's files to see that. They did not need to look in R.J. Reynolds's files to see that. 90 percent of the public said yes to that question.
And Dr. Cummings agreed. What Dr. Cummings said was by 1954 virtually everyone — virtually everyone had heard that smoking may cause disease. And here is some of the reasons why. You know, I walked through with Dr. Cummings, some of the articles that were published in Time and Life and Reader's Digest with titles like "Cancer by the Carton," "Nicotine Knockout," "Are You a Man or a Smokestack?" And
"Coffin Nails."
Reader's Digest, "Cancer by the Carton," you heard most popular magazine in the country back in the '50s and '60s. Time Magazine, just like it is today, weekly news magazine. Life Magazine, here is a picture of Grant with the mice and the smoking machine.
These aren't medical journals. These aren't company files. These are magazines that ordinary people read. Mr. Lock admitted, when he was in the military, he heard cigarettes referred to as "cancer sticks." He heard the phrase "coffin nails."
I asked him, I said: What does that mean to you?
And he really didn't answer very clearly, but he did say he heard it. He said he heard the term "nicotine fit."
Then in 1964, the Surgeon General published the '64 Surgeon General's report, and he announced to the world that cigarette smoking is a proven cause of lung cancer.
Now, let me just digress for a second. The Surgeon General — you heard this with Cummings and you also heard it with Dr. Kaplan. In '64, the Surgeon General said that smoking is a habit and not an addiction because it's not intoxicating.
You remember the evidence was that the classic definition of addiction at the time was something had to be intoxicating, and part of that was because it impairs your judgment. There were other factors, too, and nicotine did not meet that definition.
Cummings admitted until 1988, 1988 — 24 years later — was the first time the Surgeon General officially announced that smoking was now addictive because it changed the definition and dropped the requirement of intoxication. And that's okay. That's fine. You can do that, but you can understand why some people might say: Wait a minute. Wait a minute. There's no scientific breakthrough; you just changed the definition.
And Mr. Whittemore said two or three times at the Waxman hearings in 1994 when the CEOs raised their hands and denied that nicotine was addictive, they were lying, they flat-out lied.
Well, do you remember the Waxman hearings when they showed it to you, and so you had Congressman Wyden said, I want to know: If you think cigarettes are addictive, raise your right hand. Had them all raise their hand. You guys have seen a picture of this on newspapers and everywhere else.
And they ask the first guy and he says it's
addictive. And then they get to Mr. Johnston, who is the CEO of Reynolds, and he tried to give an answer to the question.
And he said: Congressman, I don't agree that smoking meets the classic definition of addiction, it's not intoxicating. He did that, and Wyden cut him off and said, you know, we don't have the time, let's just go down the row and agree.
That was political theater. It was political theater. Of course, you know, in retrospect, the companies should have just said: Fine, if you want to change the definition, change the definition, but they didn't and they fought about it.
But it's important to understand the context.
When the companies were saying up until 1988, it's not addictive, the Surgeon General agreed. The Surgeon General's definition was habit until '88. So, again, just for context, but back to the Surgeon General's report.
So Cummings told you this was a big deal. It got a ton of publicity. Remember, there were three television stations back then: NBC, ABC, CBS. It was the leading story on the nightly news. It was on the front page of newspapers, covers of magazines.
You remember I showed you — in fact, Plaintiff
showed you part of it and I showed you the rest.
Let's show CBS News, Special Report with Harry Riesner.
(The video was played in open court and taken down the to best of the court reporter's ability as follows:)
SPEAKER: This is a CBS News Extra on smoking and health, a finding of the Surgeon General's committee. Almost from the moment the cigarettes were produced, they were attacked. But the attacks took a new turn ten years ago, and culminated in today's report by the Surgeon General's committee. This is a summary of what the committee said.
Cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men and data on women smokers much the same way. Cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx, and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. Cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases.
Male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it's not proven that smoking is the cause. On the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it didn't exclude the possibility that (inaudible).
In short, the committee said if you smoke cigarettes, you will increase your chances of dying early. The sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.
The Surgeon General committee presented its report at a news conference in Washington.
SPEAKER: After long and exhaustive deliberations, the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient influence to the United States to warrant remedial action.
This overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence, as well as data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates and a number of disease categories.
More specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and I quote, "In view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributed substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate.
SPEAKER: (Inaudible) it comes down to you whether you like it or not. No one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no
one is going to tell him it's good for him either.
The decision is his, and the decision and the health may depend on it. This is Harry Riesner. Good night.
SPEAKER: This has been a CBS News Extra on smoking and health.
(End of video.)
MR. COFER: Are we doing okay? Anybody need a break? Mrs. Lock remembers she remembers seeing information about this report on television. I asked Mr. Lock about it and he said he has no recollection of the '64 report at all. He doesn't remember anything about it. He doesn't remember seeing it on the news, he doesn't remember reading about it.
Now, I want to comment on something Mr. Whittemore said. He said: Yeah, that PTSD thing sounded pretty good, but let me tell you the problem with it. He started smoking a long time before and he was addicted before he ever went to Vietnam, so the PTSD wasn't what was causing him to smoke. It was — he was addicted. Well, a couple things. The first time that Mr. Lock tried to quit smoking was in 1964, so we had no idea whether he — you know, what his quit attempts was that before then because he said he never tried to quit in 1964.
So for Mr. Whittemore to suggest he was addicted
before then, there was no evidence of that. When he did try to quit in '64, it's because his wife said:
Honey, I don't want you to smoke. And he said it had nothing to do with health, it had nothing to do with health. She just didn't like the way it smelled.
He said he didn't try it for very long, and he said he can't remember a specific time that he tried to quit smoking again in the '60s.
So the argument that he was already addicted and so the PTSD had nothing to do with it, there's just no evidence of that. There's just no evidence of that.
In fact, the evidence is to the contrary. We know nothing of that.
In fact, I want you to think of what Mrs. Lock said, and it was read to you this morning. She was asked: Was there ever a time that your husband really truly wanted to quit?
And she said: Yes.
And the question was when.
And said: When he quit for a year and that was in 2005 and another time when he quit for around nine months.
Mrs. Lock testified that the first time her husband really sincerely wanted to quit was 2005 when he quit for a year, and she said then it was when he
had medication. Okay. So you have the '64 Surgeon General's report is published. We know it got a lot of publicity. We know that Mrs. Lock said she saw it and Mr. Lock said he didn't.
We also know that they were both devout Southern Baptist. You heard the information that they believed the body is the temple, that smoking — you shouldn't smoke because smoking harms the temple. You had Mr. Lock tell you that in many of the churches he attended, you cannot have a leadership position if you were a smoker, and he said he was very upfront, that he went to the pastor and said, if there was a chance to serve: I smoke. Is that a problem?
You heard that there was a scrapbook that Mrs. Lock put together back in '66, this is called Ten Commandments for the 20th Century Husband: Abuse not thy body with excessive food, tobacco, and drink, that thy days may be many and healthful in the presence of thy loved ones.
But still the Locks maintain that they had no idea this meant smoking can be bad for you, and that wasn't why she wanted him to quit. It was just they didn't like the way it smelled. Okay. So that's '64, then two years later, the warning went on the packs.
1966. Caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to
your health. As you've also heard Mr. Lock's dad died of cancer at around the same time.
The next one, 1970, the warning was changed making it stronger. Warning: Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. Mr. Lock was 30 years old.
Next one, specific warnings, these were on from '85 through the current. The two that matter are:
Quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, three of the diseases that Mr. Lock has went on the pack in 1985.
Mr. Lock says: Okay, you know, I saw the warnings, I didn't pay any attention to them. Both Mr. and Mrs. Lock remember seeing Dr. Koop on television at around the same time discussing the warnings, but Mr. and Mrs. Lock also testified that neither of them — neither one of them ever asked a doctor or anyone else whether Mr. Lock's smoking could harm him and they never did anything to find out whether smoking was dangerous.
So they claim it was not until 1995, when Avery first diagnosed him with COPD, that he first heard from any source that smoking could be dangerous. But candidly, members of the jury, there were three lines
of evidence that just suggest that's just not right, and let's talk about them.
In opening statement, I told you about Sue Walker. I told you that Mrs. Walker has been a friend of the Locks since the 1980s when they lived in Maryland. I told you in opening statement that Mrs. Walker and Mrs. Lock used to work together and Mrs. Walker was studying to be a nurse.
I told you that Mrs. Walker testified in her deposition in May of this year, just in May, that Mr. Lock was having breathing problems in the 1980s and that Mr. — Mrs. Lock told her several times in the 1980s when they lived in Maryland that she believed Mr. Lock's problems were caused by smoking.
Mrs. Walker also testified in her deposition that back in the 1980s, Mr. Lock had a cough and that Mrs. Lock said she was concerned about it.
In 1993, the Walkers moved to Hawaii. They lived there for ten years, and Mrs. Walker told you that they did not see the Locks during the ten-year period they lived in Hawaii.
So then Plaintiffs called Mrs. Walker to testify at trial, and Mr. Pinder put her on the stand. You may remember she was one of their very first witnesses. And Mrs. Walker got on the stand and she
tried to take it all back.
The last question Mr. Pinder asked her was: When you were in Maryland, do you recall Richard Lock suffering from any lung disease?
And she said: No.
So then it was Ms. Arnold's turn, and she got to ask some questions. And she said: Mrs. Walker —
And Mrs. Walker said: Hey, I'm confused. I realized I was confused. All of these events and conversations took place in Florida in 2003, and Mrs. Walker told you that the Friday before she testified at trial Mr. Pinder called her on the phone and asked her if she could come and testify.
She told you she and her husband then drove to Sarasota and spent the night with the Locks. She said she talked with Mr. Pinder a couple times over the weekend and then she decided to read her deposition transcript for the first time, and that's when she discovered she made a mistake. She said it was all a misunderstanding.
She said while she testified in her deposition that all this happened in the '80s, it really happened sometime after 2003 when the Walkers moved to Florida.
And you remember Ms. Arnold walked you through her deposition testimony in detail, and said: Here is
what you said.
And Ms. Walker said: It was all a mistake.
Yeah, I was wrong. It all happened after I moved to Florida.
But then Ms. Arnold asked Mrs. Walker about a specific incident that Mrs. Walker admitted happened in Maryland in the 1980s. She admitted it from the stand that this specific incident happened in Maryland in the 1980s.
What happened was Mr. Lock drove Mrs. Walker to the airport. Mrs. Walker said she remembers it was really cold that day, and then she reaffirmed her deposition testimony.
She said: I remember being in the van with Richard. He took me to the airport one time and he was coughing all the way, and that was back, way back in time, but I remember that, his cough. He always coughs. I think the cold weather, too, made it worse for him. I remember it was very cold that day, so it was just irritated.
Members of the jury, it is up to you to decide which version that Mrs. Walker told is the true version. The one she told in her deposition, or the one she told on the witness stand, because they can't both be true.
What else happened in the 1980s? We know that on July 12th, 1983, Mr. Lock had a physical at Andrews Air Force Base. While he was there, he had a lung function test. It was called spirometry. That's where you blow in a tube, they took measurements.
Here is the record of the visit. And you can see — you've seen it a bunch of times that he has a ratio of 66 percent and that ratio was below 70.
You've heard from both Aranibar and Goldman that if the test is valid — if the test is valid — that means Lock already had evidence of an obstructive disease.
In fact, you may remember Dr. Aranibar testify that in his opinion, it is clear evidence that Mr. Lock already had mild to moderate obstructive disease at that time.
Here is the second page. Reduced pulmonary function. No evidence of pulmonary disease. I want you to remember that once I showed you the '95 record where Avery diagnosed Mr. Lock with COPD, I showed you another record from 1995 that says a chest x-ray. No evidence of cardiopulmonary disease.
So we saw that when it was a clear diagnosis in '95, so here we have reduced pulmonary function and we have a spirometry value, that if it's accurate,
according to Dr. Aranibar, is clear evidence of mild obstructive disease.
In '95, his ratio was only 65 percent. Really not much difference between these two tests. I asked Mr. Lock about it. I said: Do you remember this?
No. Did any doctor talk to you about this? No.
Well, they're the records, and there's what they say.
Finally, members of the jury, you remember that Dr. Goldman testified that Mr. Lock tried to quit smoking in the mid-1980s by switching to Camel cigarettes.
Well, I asked Dr. Goldman: Well, if Mr. Lock didn't think smoking was bad for him, why did he try to quit? Goldman didn't have an answer.
So here is the question: Is Sue Walker's deposition testimony that Mr. Lock was having coughs and breathing problems in the '80s, and the July '83 medical record and Dr. Goldman's testimony that he was trying to quit in the mid '80s, and the evidence you heard today from his son Brian Lock that his dad always had a cough, a distinct cough growing up — is it all just a coincidence?
Or was there something else that was going on that put Mr. Lock on notice that he was having some breathing problems from his smoking? So let's talk
about the Avery record, if we can go to that.
So June 28th, 1995 Mr. Lock went to see Dr. Avery for a physical. He was a smoker, he was occasionally short of breath on stairs. Avery orders a spirometry test, and told Mr. Lock to come back in one week: Because of the patient's problems with shortness of breath we'll do spirometry today, we will see the patient back in one week to review the results of all these tests and his comprehensive physical exam.
So they did it, you saw the record of the spirometry. Now, one thing I want to make sure you're not confused about. Mr. Whittemore showed you the second page, which was the spirometry and it had handwritten: Moderate emphysema. Avery testified that he wrote that on the next visit, on July 12th.
Turn to that record, please.
You remember the evidence was he had the test on June 28th, he came back on July 12th and that's when Dr. Avery told him for the first time about the diagnosis and showed him the June 28th spirometry result and wrote: Moderate emphysema.
And then here is what it says. He told him: You got COPD, you need to quit smoking. Smoking cessation was discussed in detail, and he is going to try on his own.
This is page 2 of July 12th. This is the day he's getting the news he has COPD. If he cannot succeed, will try the patch once again which failed in the past.
According to this record, Mr. Lock had used the patch before he was diagnosed with emphysema.
Dr. Cummings told you that back then, prior to 1996, you could only get the patch with a doctor's prescription.
Well, it was pretty clear that somebody had to talk to Mr. Lock, some doctor, about smoking before the 1995 diagnosis or else how would he have gotten a prescription for the patch?
Now, Dr. Avery said he doesn't remember if he was the one who prescribed the patch, but he also said something that was very interesting. Avery said that he compared the '95 chest x-ray.
Mr. Whittemore told you today that they didn't just do spirometry, they took a chest x-ray, too, and Avery said there was a previous x-ray, an older x-ray, and he said the x-rays showed that Mr. Lock had some scarring in his lungs.
And Avery said: You worry about someone who smokes who has something abnormal on their chest x-ray because the scar can be an early cancer. But Avery
was able to look at the two x-rays and compare them, and he saw that the scar hadn't changed, so he wasn't worried about Mr. Lock having cancer.
But think about that. If you have an old x-ray that shows scarring on the lung in a smoker, you have Avery saying if you see something on the lung that looks like scarring in a smoker, it causes you to worry, and you have evidence that somebody prescribed the nicotine patch, don't you think that common sense tells you that some doctor somewhere talked to Mr. Lock about his smoking?
So why is it important? Well, it's important for a lot of reasons, but one reason it's important is the concept of declining risk. We admit — we admit that cigarette smoking is the medical cause of Mr. Lock's COPD and his small cell lung cancer.
If Mr. Lock had not smoked cigarettes as long as he did, he would not have gotten COPD or small cell lung cancer. The evidence is also clear that if Mr. Lock had quit smoking in 1995 when he was diagnosed with COPD, his COPD would not have restricted his life in any material way.
We know that from his own doctors. We know COPD is a progressive disease. If you stop smoking before you get it, you don't get it. If you stop smoking
when it's mild, it doesn't get worse. You heard that a lung is like a tennis court. We have all kinds of extra lung capacity.
Goldman said that until 2000/2003 Mr. Lock only had mild COPD. You heard that he was SCUBA diving, he got certified to SCUBA dive even though he continued to smoke.
So the evidence was clear that he stopped smoking in 1995, his COPD never would have progressed to the point where it would have affected his life. But something else that's important and that is — the evidence is also clear had he quit smoking in 1995, he never would have gotten lung cancer because the evidence also shows that when you stop smoking, your risk of lung cancer goes down. And if you quit early enough and stay quit long enough, your risk basically drops to the point of close to that of a never smoker.
Put that up, please, the next one.
So Mr. Acosta showed you a chart, remember, with Dr. Goldman, the big blow up, so I had Goldman establish that the demonstrative was based on the 2004 Surgeon General's report, but it actually came from this article by Dr. Peto and Dr. Doll.
And what this study says is that for lifelong smokers, if you smoke your whole life, by the age of
75, 16 out of every 100 lifelong smokers will die of lung cancer. If a person stops smoking by age 60, the risk drops to ten out of a hundred.
If he stopped at age 50 — I'm sorry, if he stops at age 60, it's 10. If he stops at age 50, it drops to 6 out of 100. If he stops at age 40, it drops to 3 out of 100. If he stops at age 30, his risk drops to less than 2 in 100.
And the study concludes, and Goldman agreed, that if Mr. Lock had stopped smoking in 1985 when he was 45 years old, he would have avoided 90 percent of his overall risk from smoking.
So that's 1995 — I'm sorry 1985. After all the things I told you were occurring in the mid '80s, you see right here, at age 45, your risk is basically the same.
Even going out eight years later to what would be the 1995 era — ten years later — you see the risk is still very low. And you heard was that if Mr. Lock had quit in '95, his risk would have dropped dramatically. If he quit in the '80s, by age 45, his risk is no different, basically, than a nonsmoker.
So those are the facts. Oh, one more thing.
Dr. Aranibar, you remember Dr. Aranibar, his treating pulmonologist? He testified he tells his
patients that 19 years after quitting, the risk of getting lung cancer has dropped by 96 percent.
19 years after quitting, the risk of lung cancer has dropped by 96 percent. Mr. Lock wasn't diagnosed until 2012. That says by 1993, it drops by 96 percent.
So those are the facts. The question is how do the facts help you decide this case? The first question you'll be asked to decide is whether Mr. Lock is a member of the Engle class.
Everybody doing okay? Does anybody need a break? Everybody okay? You need a time out.
THE COURT: Let's take a quick comfort break.
(Jury out at 4:39 p.m.)
BAILIFF: The jury is outside the hearing of the Court, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Thank you all. Comfort break.
(A break was taken.)
THE COURT: Let's come to order and bring everybody back in.
(Jury in at 4:48 p.m.)
BAILIFF: Your Honor, the jury is returned and is seated in the jury box.
THE COURT: Thank you all. All right.
Mr. Cofer.
MR. COFER: Thank you, Your Honor. So we've gone through the facts. Now we're at the verdict form.
Ixt me tell you, at least from my perspective, how I think these facts help tie into the case.
The first question you're going to be asked is whether Mr. Ixtck was a class member. And there's two questions involved in that. The first is: Was he, in fact, addicted to nicotine in cigarettes.
And second, if he was, if he was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, was his addiction a legal cause of his COPD?
As Mr. Whittemore told you, Plaintiff has to prove both. If they don't, the case is over.
Plaintiffs' burden to prove both. Ixt's first just talk about the word "addiction."
I think I told you in voir dire, you're not going to have a definition of that. That's something you're going to have to decide yourselves, what addiction means and whether Mr. Ixtck was, in fact, addicted.
You did hear different testimony about addiction. You heard the classical definition, no intoxication. You heard the '88 Surgeon General's definition.
You had Cummings talk to you, you had Goldman talk to you, you had Kaplan talk to you. Basically Goldman said: Yeah, I smoked a long time, I think
he's addicted. Let me point out that Goldman is a pulmonologist who's been testifying for Mr. Acosta in tobacco cases for 16, 17 years.
He admitted he's never seen a single Plaintiff who was not addicted. So it's not real surprising that Goldman thinks that Mr. Lock is addicted, too.
Dr. Cummings mentioned some other tests, but basically here is what Cummings told you:
If you smoke every day, if you're a regular smoker, you're addicted. The only issue is how addicted. And he says: If you start in the morning, if you smoke first thing in the morning, then you're even more addicted.
Well, first just think practically how that applies to your life. So for people who are coffee drinkers, if you drink coffee every day, you're addicted. And if you drink it in the morning, you're really addicted. And the more you drink, the more addicted you are under Dr. Cummings' definition of addiction.
And he admits he thinks he's addicted to caffeine, so that's his standard, basically.
You had Dr. Kaplan tell you that psychiatrists, mental health professionals use DSM-IV, and he walked through why under DSM-IV he doesn't think that Mr.
Lock meets the standard.
But let me just kind of cut to the chase. I'm not sure it really matters whether you think that Mr. Lock was addicted because it depends, frankly, on what test you use.
If you use the test that he smoked cigarettes for a long time, then of course he meets it. If you use the test, does it materially affect his life, you know, the other factors, then he doesn't meet it. But here is the important point. The real issue is whether smoking is an addiction — an addiction — was a legal cause of his COPD.
That's really where the rubber meets the road.
Was it a legal cause of his COPD? And let me give you an example of what I mean by that, what you mean by legal cause and we'll show the instruction just like Mr. Whittemore did.
So if I walk out of the courthouse today and I get run over by a truck, what's the cause, in fact, of me getting hurt? I got ran over by a truck; right?
That's pretty straightforward, isn't it? But what's the legal cause? You need to know more.
Why did I get run over by a truck? Was I crossing against the light? Did I ignore the warning? Did I have my earbuds on and, you know, wasn't paying
attention? Was the truck speeding?
So there's a difference between a cause in fact — I got hit by a truck — and a legal cause.
Why did I get hit by the truck? So you need to think about why Mr. Lock smoked, why he continued to smoke.
Let's put up the legal cause instruction.
So what I've highlighted is the definition of legal cause.
The second paragraph says what Mr. Whittemore told you, that legal cause does not have to be the only legal cause. There can be other legal causes.
But an addiction to nicotine has to be a legal cause in order for Plaintiff to be a class member.
Here is what it says: An addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition so that it reasonably can be said but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such disease or medical condition would not have been suffered.
What does that mean? Basically, Plaintiff has to prove for addiction to be a legal cause, that if he was not addicted, he would not have smoked. That an
addiction to nicotine was an important reason he smoked.
Members of the jury, all of the experts agreed that even if he was addicted, addicted smokers can and do quit smoking — they can and do quit all the time. You heard 60 million people have quit smoking. According to Dr. Cummings, the vast majority of those were addicted.
Addiction does not prevent a person from smoking. And there is no evidence that Mr. Lock was any different than those 60 million who have quit, except that he had PTSD.
And the evidence was he didn't smoke because of an addiction to nicotine. He used nicotine and he used the behavior of smoking to treat his PTSD. He used it to treat the symptoms.
The evidence that his smoking wasn't driven by an addiction to nicotine is he went a year without it, he went eight months without it. He would just use three cigarettes a day or five cigarettes a week. His smoking behavior was inconsistent with an addiction to nicotine. He wasn't dosing himself with nicotine, he wasn't trying to feed withdrawal effects. He had urges, whether he was smoking or not, because the urges were tied to his PTSD.
So this is the key issue. Did Plaintiff prove by a preponderance of the evidence that an addiction was a legal cause, that if he was not addicted, he would not have smoked and he would not gotten sick. And the answer to that question is: No, they didn't, because it was not an addiction to nicotine. He used nicotine, he used behavior of smoking to treat his PTSD.
And if you agree with that, if you agree with the evidence that he was using nicotine in the behavior of smoking to treat his anxiety and he was not compelled by an addiction to nicotine to smoke, then they have not met their burden of proving legal cause, you check no on the box and the case is over, because he's not a class member because it wasn't an addiction to nicotine that caused his smoking. Doesn't have to be the only cause, but it has to be a legal cause.
And it's an important factor. It's a very important factor, and that's why you have the instruction. It has to — if it directly and naturally in continual sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition so that reasonably can be said but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such disease or medical condition would not have been
suffered.
I respectfully suggest to you that under the facts of the case, there was one expert and one expert alone who actually had the qualifications and the experience to come in and explain to you why it was — why it was that Mr. Lock always went back to smoking, why it was he would be away from nicotine from months at a time, weeks at a time, he could control his smoking, but why he went back.
And I respectfully suggest to you that expertise was not in a pulmonologist who testifies a lot in trial; it was not the expertise of somebody with a PhD who tells you about documents and about pH and other stuff.
The person who was ideally suited — the only person who was ideally suited to bring to bear all of the training and experience, to really look at Mr.
Lock and why he smoked, was Dr. Eric Kaplan who is a medical doctor, a physician, who is a psychiatrist, who is an expert in behaviors, and in pharmacology, who understands brain effects, who understands why people smoke, who didn't just read two depositions, he read every deposition in the case, every medical record in the case, who spent four hours face to face talking and doing an assessment of Mr. Lock.
And the evidence, I suggest, members of the jury, was overwhelming that addiction — an addiction to nicotine — however you define it, however you define it — take their definition — however you define it, it was not a legal cause because that's not why he smoked. That is not why he smoked.
So Question 1,1 respectfully suggest based on the evidence — and I suggest it's persuasive — the answer to this question is no. And if you agree, you knock on the door and you ask for Deputy Rice and you tell Deputy Rice that you have a verdict.
Now, let's talk about some of the other questions if you don't agree, the negligence standard. These are Questions 4 and 5 and ask whether Philip Morris or Reynolds' negligence was a cause of loss, injury, or damage to Mr. Lock.
I respectfully suggest that the answer is no, and here is why. There was no evidence that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds did anything to make their cigarettes more dangerous or more addictive.
Dr. Cummings told you all cigarettes are dangerous and addictive. All of them are. He said none are safe. He said they're no more dangerous than additive-free cigarettes. If a cigarette had tobacco in it, it can cause disease.
There's been a warning label on every cigarette since 1966. Since 1985 the warning said, specifically said: Smoking causes the very diseases that Mr. Lock has.
If he read the warning, paid attention to the warning, at that point he could have avoided his injuries. There's simply no evidence that Philip Morris or R.J. Reynolds or anything they did, any negligence on their part, caused Mr. Lock to smoke or caused him to get sick. Comparative fault. Okay.
I do want to spend a couple minutes talking about this because this is an important issue. If you get this far, if you decide he's a class member, then you have to answer these questions. If you decide the answers to the other questions are yes, you get to comparative fault.
So let me say one thing so there's no confusion.
You never get to this question, you never get here unless you decide they've proven — they've met their burden of proving that he was a class member. Unless they prove an addiction to nicotine was a legal cause, you never get here.
But if you do get here, now you have the opportunity to say: Okay. How much responsibility does Plaintiff have, how much does Philip Morris have,
and how much does Reynolds have?
Now, we've talked about this in voir dire, we've talked about it in openings, Mr. Whittemore talked about it.
Plaintiff admits, Plaintiff admits that Mr. Lock has some responsibility. That's the position they've taken in this lawsuit.
So I want you to think about what that admission means. What it means is — what it can only mean is: They admit that Mr. Lock understood that smoking was dangerous and they admit that Mr. Lock had the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid his risk because if he didn't know it was dangerous and he couldn't quit in time to avoid his risk, how could he have any fault?
If you didn't know and you couldn't do it, how could you have any fault? The very fact that they admit that he has some fault is an admission that he knew it was bad for him, he had the ability to quit and he had the ability to quit in time to avoid the risk.
And so I respectfully suggest, members of the jury, if you get this far, then you take them at their word and you mark 100 percent for Richard Lock. And I'll tell you why. Because only Richard Lock was in
control of his smoking. Only Richard Lock had the ability to either quit smoking or to continue to smoke.
So my suggestion, if you get that far, statute of limitations. You know what? I have spent some time talking about this already, but let me see if I can wrap this up.
The question is: On or before May 5th, 1990, did Plaintiff have COPD? And if so, did he know or should he, in the exercise of reasonable care, have known both he had COPD and that there was a causal connection between his smoking and his having developed COPD?
Well, you heard the evidence. You have that '83 pulmonary function test and you can decide whether you think it's valid. You know that if it is valid, according to Dr. Aranibar, his pulmonologist, he said that's clear evidence he already had mild to moderate COPD at that time.
If you compare those results, 66 percent in 1983,
65 percent in 1995, both below the 70 percent threshold, if you believe that test is valid, then he had COPD — mild COPD at the time.
Then the next question is: Okay. In the exercise of reasonable care, should he have known.
Well, if you believe Sue Walker that he was coughing and that he was having problems breathing, if you believe his son that he had a distinctive cough his entire life, if you believe Dr. Goldman that he was trying to quit in the mid '80s, and if you also take into account the warning that said: Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, and emphysema, would a reasonable person have asked a doctor?
Would a reasonable person have said: Tell me what the results of this pulmonary function test mean? Check out my lungs. I'm breathing, I'm smoking, I see these warnings, I'm concerned. Would a reasonable person would have done that?
And if you believe Aranibar, that if that test — if that test was a valid test, clear evidence of COPD, and if you believe that a reasonable person should have done that, then you should check the answer to that question yes, and then you see the instructions, the case is over.
Mr. Whittemore is right, the burden is on us.
That's the evidence we have. You've heard it, use your common sense and use your judgment. But I just ask you consider all of that evidence that I've laid out. All of those different lines of evidence to see what a reasonable person would have done, should have
done.
Damages, Question 8. Okay. Let me just kind of try to sum this up. If you get this far, if you determine that Mr. Lock was a class member, if you determine that something that the companies did was a legal cause of his injuries, if you determine that Philip Morris and/or Reynolds are responsible in some measure, then you award damages.
And the first one asks for medical expenses incurred in the past and being incurred in the future. We know he's incurred $347,000 in medical expenses, and if you get this far, you should write $347,000 in, you should award that amount of money because those are his medical expenses, and we concede those are his medical expenses.
The next question asks about pain and suffering, disabilities, some other things. As Mr. Whittemore told you, I think the judge may have even said in her instructions, there's no specific guidance on that.
That's something that you collectively, as a group, will have to decide.
My suggestion for you to think about is if you get that far, if you take 347,000, the medical bills, and you double it, if you just put that for another 347,000 under 8B, you can rest assured that however
long Mr. Lock lives, he'll have sufficient money that he'll never want for anything again. Up to you.
Just, you know, when you think about damages and the purpose of the lawsuit, to compensate, that's just something I suggest you think about. And you total those together.
Number 9 is the loss — Peggy Lock's loss of her comfort and society. You know what? I have nothing to offer on that. No question they've lived together as husband and wife for 48 years, have a great marriage, and there's no question that his small cell lung cancer has changed their lives and their relationship.
And I have nothing to even suggest other than to say if you get this far, then you should award her the amount in loss of consortium that you think is fair based on the evidence you've heard.
Let's go to the fraudulent concealment. Now, this is an important claim, and here is why. And I want to make sure that you caught this when the judge read the jury instructions.
If you determine — if you answer yes to this, then the comparative fault that you make, the allocation of responsibility to Plaintiff doesn't count. He gets 100 percent. If you decided up to
this point he was 95 percent responsible, if you check yes here, that's out the window because comparative fault does not apply to this count.
So I do want to spend just a second — actually more than a second because this — I want to make sure we really think about what they're asking here.
So this question is: Did Richard Lock reasonably rely, on his detriment — reasonably rely on his detriment on the concealment or omission by Defendant Philip Morris or Reynolds of material information not otherwise known or available or their failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking? And if so, was such reliance a legal cause? Remember everything I said about legal cause, of loss, injury, or damage to Plaintiff, Richard.
Three things I want to focus on. I talked about legal cause, I'm not going to go through that again.
Did he reasonably rely on something that wasn't said? Well, given all the information that was available to Mr. Lock, the warnings, the teachings of the church, the information in the public domain, going back to 1954, 90 percent had heard, all the stuff on the news, all the stuff everywhere.
I think the evidence is pretty compelling, that
he had the information that he needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or not smoke.
And remember, the reliance has to be reasonable. Well, Mr. and Mrs. Lock admitted that they never asked a doctor — not once — whether cigarettes were dangerous or whether the warnings were true. They said they never did anything to find out whether cigarettes were dangerous.
Do you think that's reasonable? Do you think that's reasonable for someone to come into court and ask for money that they admit they never did anything to find out for themselves whether the behavior was, in fact, dangerous?
You know, I asked Mr. Lock — and I didn't push him on it, I really didn't. Let me say something.
Mr. Lock is a nice man and he's sick and he's lived a terrific life and he's got three great boys and he's got a 48-year marriage, you know what, most of us envy.
So I'm not bagging on Mr. Lock, but I do have an obligation to represent my client and I have an obligation to ask questions and I tried to ask it in a very nice way.
I asked him, Mr. Lock: What does cancer stick mean to you? Did you see the warnings? What do you
think? Did you ask anybody about the warnings? You never knew anything about the Surgeon General's report? None of your doctors — none of your doctors ever said anything to you? You really didn't read or hear anything between '64 and '95?
And I didn't push him on it, but I had to ask him those questions because it was important for you to hear them so you could answer those questions. And in thinking about it, really kind of the analogy I had was — and Mrs. Lock basically gave the same testimony.
It was almost like — it was almost like they slept through all of the publicity about everything that was going on. It was like they slept through it.
And I thought: You know, it's really easy to wake someone but no amount of noise can wake someone who's pretending to sleep or who does not want to be awake.
So when you consider this question, all I ask you to focus on is were they reasonable? Did they reasonably rely? And we know they can't say that they were confused by something that we said because Mr. Lock said, A, I didn't hear it. And, B, what I did hear, I didn't believe because I thought you guys were a bunch of liars.
So this is an important question, and I wanted to
take a few minutes to talk about it because, again, this is the one I want no confusion. If you check yes, they can talk — oh, Mr. Lock accepts responsibility all day — oh, Mr. Lock thinks it's partly his fault. But if you check yes, none of that matters.
And I think the answer is overwhelming that the answer is no. No, they did not reasonably rely on anything that we didn't tell them or anything we did tell them. And, in fact, the evidence is uncontroverted.
The last question is punitive damages. I think, we don't have punitive damages? Well, you know what,
I do. So let's switch over to the Elmo. And actually Mr. Whittemore has the big chart.
But it basically just asks under the circumstances of this case, state whether punitive damages are warranted by clear and convincing evidence against Philip Morris and Reynolds.
So let me talk for a few minutes about punitive damages and what you're being asked to decide. As Judge Campbell told you, you're not being asked to decide an amount. You're being asked to decide whether — whether under these facts, that you think that punitive damages are warranted based on conduct
that injured Mr. Lock. It has to be based on conduct that injures Mr. Lock. This is no longer a class action. This isn't about —
MR. WHITTEMORE: May we approach, please.
(Bench conference was held within the presence of the jury.)
THE COURT: From a timing perspective, you have about ten minutes.
MR. COFER: I'll be done by then. I'm wrapping
up.
MR. ACOSTA: He made a statement of the law when you said it must be based on damage to him, whether they're warranted or not. That's not the law.
MR. COFER: I said conditional conduct that harmed him, and if I didn't say that.
MR. ACOSTA: That's not true.
MR. COFER: It is absolutely true, it could not be more true.
THE COURT: It's different than what the jury instructions — your statement is different than what the jury instructions read.
MR. COFER: No, the jury instructions say it can be harm to others in terms of the amount, but it's got to be —
MR. ACOSTA: No, no, you have it backwards.
MR. COFER: No, no, actually it goes like this.
It goes like — here is exactly how it goes. The conduct has to harm Plaintiff. If it doesn't harm Plaintiff, it cannot be the basis for punitive damages.
If it harms Plaintiff and other people, too, the fact it harms other people, too, is relevant to show reprehensibility. You can't punish for harm to others, but the jury can conclude that the conduct is particularly reprehensible because it harmed more than one person.
But the law is crystal clear. I'm telling you it is absolutely crystal clear on State Farm and Williams that the conduct for which we're being punished has to have harmed Plaintiff.
Otherwise, someone could bring a lawsuit and say:
Well, yeah, you hurt these people over here. Give me money. It's got to harm Plaintiff. That is absolutely true.
MR. WHITTEMORE: He should not comment on the law other than what the Court's instruction is. He's going in and ad-libbing, and that's not what the instruction that has been approved by the Court.
MR. COFER: Let me get the instruction so I get it right. Reprehensibility — for reprehensibility.
But I'm telling you what, you cannot punish, you cannot punish for harm to others.
MR. ACOSTA: They get another chance in the second phase to give zero if they want to, but you can't — you don't get to Phase 2 unless it harmed Plaintiff.
MR. COFER: I'm obviously not going to persuade you to change the jury instructions, but let me look at this so I get it right. Potential similar harms, see, it's SIM — it's got to be similar harms, it's got to be similar harms, that's what I'm saying.
THE COURT: Well, I'm going to sustain the objection. So you just need to stick with it.
(Bench conference concluded and proceedings continued as follows:)
MR. COFER: This is Richard Lock's case. This is Richard Lock's case. It's not a class action anymore. And so what you have to decide is whether, based on clear and convincing evidence, and that's Instruction,
I believe, it's Number 20 — will describe clear and convincing evidence whether — not the amount — whether punitive damages are appropriate. And here is how clear and convincing evidence is defined. It's in your instructions.
It must be precise, explicit, lacking in
confusion, and of such weight that produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. It's a much higher standard.
You have to be really, really, really sure that the conduct you're punishing hurt Mr. Lock. So you need to think about all of the evidence, about Mr. Lock saying I didn't hear it, I didn't see it, I didn't believe it.
And if there's no nexus, you should consider that in your decision, whether punitive damages are appropriate in this case. And I respectfully suggest that when you think about the evidence, there is no connection between those documents and the advertisements and Mr. Lock. There's no connection for all the reasons we've talked about.
The fact is we sold cigarettes. I think Mr. Acosta asked Dr. Cummings at one point: Did Philip Morris say it was reasonable to smoke in 1992? Let me tell you something, Philip Morris says it's reasonable to smoke in 2012. We absolutely believe it's reasonable to smoke in 2012.
If you want to walk out of this courthouse or if anyone wants to walk out of this courthouse and they're of legal age, they want to walk across the street, they want to pay the four bucks or five bucks
or six bucks or whatever it is to smoke, we think it's reasonable, and frankly we would like you to smoke our product. We sell cigarettes. It's a legal product.
The fact that we sell cigarettes cannot be a basis of liability.
The Engle findings themselves are not a basis of liability. Plaintiff has to tie all this up to Richard Lock, and candidly, members of the jury, they haven't done it. That hasn't been their theme the entire two weeks of this trial.
I didn't get a stopwatch of Mr. Whittemore but he talked something like 45 minutes before he ever mentioned Mr. Lock. This case is not about whether cigarettes should be sold, whether cigarettes should be legal, whether we had guys say dumb stuff, whether you like smoking or any of those issues.
This is a case about Richard Lock and whether we violated legal duties to him that caused him to get sick and whether he's a class member. And if the answer to that is no, there should be no damages, including no punitive damages.
Last thing I want to say is — and I may have mentioned this in voir dire, and I really truly believe it. It's easy to be cynical these days. And we see all the abuses that happen, you know, in
courtrooms. We hear about verdicts and we hear about things, but I got to tell you something.
We have, without question, the finest system of justice the world has ever known. Period. Ordinary men and women can walk in off the street, they're treated the same under the eyes of the law, we have jurors who are willing to give up three weeks of their life to come and dedicate it and to pay attention to help parties resolve disputes.
And on behalf of everyone, on behalf of everyone on behalf of Philip Morris, I think even on behalf of Plaintiffs, I think I can say that we truly, truly appreciate your service. You guys have been prompt, you've been here every day.
And all I asked, from the very beginning, all I asked is a fair shot. I said: Just give me a shot to put my case on; just please don't make up your mind until you listened to all the evidence. And I know you've done that. And on behalf of everyone, thank you very much for your service and thank you very much for listening to my closing argument.



MR. WEAVER: May it please the Court, Counsel, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon — good evening, almost.
I just want to spend a few minutes talking about some issues that I raised first during opening. I discussed with you during opening that this case was about one thing and about one thing only: Richard Lock and the choices he made with respect to his cigarette smoking.
That's why, when you retire into the jury room with all of the evidence and all of the documents I want you to remember this one piece, number 8: What does the evidence that you've heard, what does the testimony that you've heard, what do the documents that you've seen have to do with Richard Lock?
Every question that you'll see on the verdict form is a direct reference to Richard Lock. It's not about some smoker, it's not about the public, it's not about tobacco companies; it's about Richard Lock.
So anytime you have a question, anytime you make reference to your notes. Anytime you ask someone else on the jury a question, it should be in the context of what does this have to do with Richard Lock and the Plaintiffs' burden of proof. Because after all, it is the Plaintiffs' burden of proof. Mr. Lock comes in
here needing to show you, needing to convince you with the greater weight of the evidence that he should prevail on his claims.
Now, I certainly don't intend to go over everything that Mr. Cofer has. He's done an incredible job outlining the case so far.
But since I represent a different company, there are some different issues that I would like to address. Now, one of the things that Mr. Whittemore mentioned during his opening that — was that Mr. Lock was a regular smoker as of about 1950s.
I would submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, there's no evidence of that. What evidence that we do have is that Mr. Lock, as an 8- or 9-year-old boy, and he mentioned that from the stand, he would pick up butts — butts are not cigarettes. They're the remnants of cigarettes. He would pick up butts and smoke those. He indicated when he was testifying, he did not purchase cigarettes until he was 13 or 14 years old.
So to say that he was eight or nine in 1948 and then two years later that he was purchasing cigarettes is not supported by the evidence.
What do we know, though, with respect to the evidence? We know that the Plaintiffs would like you
to believe that there was an overwhelming urge for youths to start smoking.
Remember back when Dr. Cummings first took the stand the first segment of documents that he talked to you about, the first issues after his qualifications that he talked about, had to do with youth smoking, and he showed a number of documents from my client, R.J. Reynolds.
But when you look at those documents, they truly become the snippets, the pieces of evidence that only the Plaintiffs want you to look at; just those snippets.
And I was one of the ones that at the beginning of all this, stole Mr. Cofer's line about Paul Harvey. And you know what? I'm going to do it again because when you look at the full documents, when you look at the full history, you get the rest of the story.
Let's start out with those Camel ads. Remember the old-time Camel ads that you saw from the '30s and '40s — well, the '30s we know Mr. Lock wasn't even bom, and the '40s, he was too young to remember any of them.
He said, in answer to my questions about Lucky Strike and about Pall Mall in particular, I didn't purchase those because of any ads. That was his
testimony. I didn't purchase those cigarettes because of any ads.
And the other Camel ads that you were shown from the late '90s and the early 2000s, the Camel ads of the women, he was 55 years old, and he wasn't smoking Camel at the time. Those didn't have any influence on him. Those didn't impact his decision.
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the documents that you were shown was a Diane Burrows memo called: Younger adult smokers, strategies and opportunities.
Do you remember this one?
Now, when Dr. Cummings first showed you this document, what did he do? He went right to the appendix, he pointed to some statistics that showed a 13-to-17 age range, and he said: Ah-ha, that's proof.
But he had to concede, both on direct and on cross-examination, that those are statistics generated by the United States government, the Department of Health Education and Welfare.
And what he didn't show you, until I cross-examined him on it, was that over 200 times in the main text of this document — over 200 times, it defined young adult smoker as someone between the age of 18 to 24.
Ask yourself: Why would he only give you half of
the story? I hope you also remember Mr. McMahon's January 1990 memo. Let's pull that up. Number 12.
Do you remember this one? It talks here about young adult smokers, January 10th of 1990.
And Dr. Cummings pointed out this sentence to you: These stores can be in close proximity to colleges, high schools, or other areas where there's a large number of young adults who frequent the store.
Turn the coin over. What's the other side of the story that Dr. Cummings didn't tell you? This is perhaps the best example of how Dr. Cummings approaches these lawsuits.
He admitted on cross-examination that he had known for 15 years that there was more to this story because shortly after Mr. McMahon's memo was issued, he was reprimanded and disciplined by R.J. Reynolds.
The implication that we were marketing to high schoolers is in direct conflict with the company's longstanding policy of not marketing or promoting our products to minors. He was — we wanted to compete with Marlboro. We wanted Mr. Cofer's clients, customers.
He was disciplined for this. Why would Dr. Cummings not tell you that when he said this proved what he thought it proved? The important thing
to remember, in all of this, 1990, Mr. Lock is 50 years old.
Let's go back to number 8. What do these documents have to do with Richard Lock? Mr. Lock testified that he started smoking a pack a day of Lucky Strikes approximately in 1958 when he joined the Army.
And Peggy Lock, when she met Mr. Lock in 1963 said the only brands of cigarettes that she remembers him smoking were Marlboro, Doral, and Basic. Not Lucky Strike and not Pall Mall.
So what does that mean? In terms of Mr. Whittemore's chart with the red bars, it means the proportionality of those red bars is subject to some scrutiny, because the evidence shows from Mr. Lock and Mrs. Lock that at best, he smoked Lucky Strikes and Pall Malls from roughly 1958 to 1963, five years. Not the almost same amount. And let's talk about Camel.
You heard Mr. Lock and Dr. Cummings both indicate that the only time he smoked Camels sometime in the '80s was when he wanted to try and quit.
So what he did was he took an unfiltered Camel and he tried to change his smoking pattern, in his words, to try and quit. Dr. Cummings and I went back and forth about whether or not, during his interview
over the telephone, Mr. Lock indicated that he hated them, and I would submit Mr. Lock did hate Camels. Not a very good endorsement for advertising, but that doesn't matter because he never saw any of that advertising.
So you have to ask yourself: Was there any act by Reynolds that caused Mr. Lock to smoke Pall Mall or Lucky Strike from 1958 to 1963? The answer is no.
Dr. Cummings also talked a lot about, in his term, the engineering of cigarettes, and he made you think that that was some secret. But was it really a secret?
What do the changes to cigarettes mean in context, in context of the big picture? The evidence that you heard was that the Surgeon General, Dr. Wynder and the public health community were all advocating that manufacturers do what they can to reduce tar in nicotine.
Remember my discussion with Dr. Cummings about general reduction? Reynolds did that, Philip Morris did that. That wasn't a secret. And remember this chart from the 1979 Surgeon General's report, number 14. Remember this? A plus is good.
When you look at the reduction of biological activity of cigarette smoke, you see the things that Mr. Cofer talked to you about.
You see reconstituted tobacco, expanded tobacco, paper porosity, perforated filters, cellulose acetate filters, and they all have an impact on tar, nicotine, and benzo[a]pyrene, those polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, the things that Dr. Cummings said was bad.
And Dr. Cummings admitted that the companies pursued these methods. But the most important thing that I want to remind you of that Mr. Cofer covered is that Dr. Cummings admitted that nothing that was done by Reynolds, and nothing that was done by Philip Morris made cigarettes, over time, any more dangerous or any more addictive.
Dr. Cummings spent a lot of time talking about TIRC, the Tobacco Industry Research Council — Committee and the Council for Tobacco Research. He disparaged those entities as doing worthless acts.
And you might have thought that there was some truth to that until, on cross-examination, when I asked Dr. Cummings about those two entities, he admitted that they had sponsored research that resulted in over 6,000 scientific publications in the literature, many of which were done by reputable, competent, and highly regarded scientists.
Remember this, Number 9, there were ten TIRC/CTR
grantees who have received the Nobel prize. That doesn't sound like a sham as Mr. Whittemore would like you to believe it was. That doesn't sound like worthless research.
And we talked for a while about Premier and Eclipse. Dr. Cummings wanted you to believe that the tobacco companies, Reynolds and other companies were insensitive to the effort to try and design and produce a safer cigarette.
But when we talked about Premier and Eclipse, Dr. Cummings admitted that Premier, for example, dramatically reduced the PAHs, dramatically by 99 percent. And he called Eclipse the son of Premier. Eclipse is still on the market today.
Richard Lock made an informed choice about his smoking behavior. These documents that we've talked about that Dr. Cummings showed you had nothing to do with Richard Lock. Richard Lock knew that his father was going to beat his butt if he smoked cigarettes.
He had heard the phrase coffin nails in the military.
Mrs. Lock wanted him to quit smoking when they met in '63 and '64, and nothing the Defendants said or did impacted those feelings and those decisions, those choices that he made.
I talked a lot during my opening about Mr. Lock's
intelligence, his success, his drive to succeed. Ask yourself, could a man who was so driven to achieve his goals as to go from the 101st Airborne, the Sky Soldiers of the 173rd Brigade, to Andrews Air Force Base, to the Pentagon, to the United States special operations command in Tampa, could he truly be blind to the hazards of cigarette smoking?
I do have one particular issue that I need to address with you. You may recall that I asked Dr. Goldman a question about whether or not he had counted up the number of pack years for any brand of cigarette. He said that he hadn't.
His position was that every exposure to tobacco contributes. I want to explain to you why I asked him that question. In addition to the certain brands that were made by Reynolds and Philip Morris, Mr. Lock smoked Kent. The evidence indicates that he smoked Kent, made by some other manufacturer, he smoked roll your own tobacco, he smoked pipe tobacco, and he smoked cigars.
And he admitted when he was here with us in court that he smoked a number of other brands that he can't even remember. Specifically as to Reynolds we've talked about the 1958 to 1963 period, those five years, we talked about Camel on occasion when he was
trying to quit, and we talked about Doral from 2005 forward. But even if you look at Doral, in terms of how much he smoked, he said he was somewhere between three and five cigarettes — all the medical records talked about three to five, maybe six or seven, cigarettes a day.
Remember Dr. Kaplan and Dr. Cummings both indicated that under ten cigarettes a day is not sufficient to sustain any type of addiction. Now, the Reynolds brands are important because the Plaintiff has the burden to prove to you that Mr. Lock's use of Lucky Strikes, Pall Mall, Camel, and Doral, the Reynolds brands, as well as a Philip Morris brand, were substantial contributing factors in his disease.
They have to show you with evidence that but for smoking Reynolds brands and but for smoking Philip Morris he would not have gotten the diseases and injuries that he has.
The concept of all cigarettes contribute just doesn't make sense because I asked Dr. Cummings — 23, please — all commercial — I'm sorry, Mr. Cofer asked him, "All commercial cigarettes you can buy can cause cancer?" His answer was, "As long as you smoke enough of them." And enough of them is a concept called "threshold." There has to be an appropriate amount of
cigarettes smoked before you get to a period or a place where it can result in disease.
The law that you'll be given to make your decision in this case recognizes that. Let's look at number 20. Instruction number six is the definition of legal cause. Mr. Cofer went over this a little bit with you, and I have highlighted a few phrases here.
The smoking of Defendants' cigarettes is a legal cause if it, directly in a natural continuous sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing. Well, that's the Plaintiffs burden. They have to show out of all of the tobacco products that Mr. Lock smoked that but for Reynolds and but for Philip Morris he would not have gotten his disease. And have they done that?
Where is the evidence that anyone other than Dr. Goldman addressed any type of product identification? Where is the evidence that establishes that there was a sufficient quantity, a sufficient threshold, with respect to our two companies, the two Defendants in this courtroom today that makes us responsible for those? When you consider his full smoking history, you have to ask yourself: Have they proven to you that a threshold exists?
I also want to mention about the findings iust
for a brief second. Mr. Whittemore showed you all the boards, and if you get past question number one, those findings do apply. If you find Mr. Lock to be a class member, then you can consider those findings and treat them as if they are the law of the case.
But just because those findings, if you get past question number one, mean that you're going to consider them and follow them, that doesn't take things out of your hands because it's you the jury that still has the responsibility to determine whether or not smoking cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by Reynolds and Philip Morris was a legal cause of Mr. Lock's injury.
Finally, I want to speak very briefly to the fraudulent concealment claim. I think there are three important questions that will help you during your deliberations, if you get this far. Can we see number 21? What information was hidden? That's the burden of the Plaintiffs.
They have to show you what information was hidden, and they have to show that the information, number two, was not available, was not otherwise available. So if there's information in the public domain and there's information that the tobacco companies have, that information is otherwise
available.
Finally, three, would the information have made a difference? Would it have made Mr. Lock stop smoking in time to prevent his COPD? So those are the three questions that I think will help you when you look at this, if you get to that question.
Was it hidden? Was the information available from any other source? And would it have made a difference?
Like Mr. Cofer, I appreciate — and Mr. Whittemore and all the counsel in this room, I appreciate the time that you've given to this case.
You've been incredibly intentive, even during the video depositions. You've taken copious notes. I think you're prepared to deliberate, and I would respectfully submit that there's a disconnect in terms of the Plaintiffs burden.
There's a disconnect between what they have to show you and what they've shown you, and that disconnect is best found in the definition of legal cause. I would respectfully submit that, number one, you don't find that Mr. Lock was a member of the class for the reasons that Mr. Cofer mentioned, but, number two, even if you do, you should answer no to all the other questions, particularly the fraudulent
concealment question because there's been no connection. There's been no if I had only known this,
I wouldn't have done that. There's no this.
They haven't shown you what the specific information was that Mr. Lock didn't have. As a result, a Defense verdict is warranted. Thank you very much.
