MS. HENNINGER: Counsel. Mr. and Mr. Mack.
Good morning.
JURORS: Good morning.
MS. HENNINGER: It's been a long couple of weeks, and I know you guys are probably just as glad as I am that today is Friday and today is the last day, and I've got even better news, not only is it the last day, this is the last time that I'll have an opportunity to stand here and talk to you.
But just like Mr. Bigger said, I don't think it would be right to start talking about what I think this case is about without thanking each and every one of you for being here.
You took two weeks out of your lives to listen to the evidence in this case, and you were a great jury, you came in on time, you paid attention, and you took notes, and I appreciate that, Mr. Persons appreciates that, Mr. Bayuk appreciates that, my client does, and I know Mr. Bigger and Mr. Smith and the Macks appreciate that.
We can't thank you enough. It's not hard to be here for two weeks, and it's definitely not hard to be here in December for two weeks, so thank you. And I also thank you in advance for your attention while I present my last time that I'll be able to talk with you today. Now -- well, period in this case I guess.
So let me start off by showing you this picture. I think this picture pretty much summarizes up plaintiff’s evidence in this case. Plaintiffs are trying to fit a square peg in a round hole.
They presented you evidence, they presented statistics, generalizations, 90 to 95 percent of laryngeal cancers are caused by smoking. 80 plus COPD -- 80 percent or more COPD's are caused by smoking. Every smoker who smokes is addicted.
But those are generalizations. Those are statistics. And this is Mr. Mack's case. And you have to look at the evidence specific to Mr. Mack. You can't -- they cannot meet their burden of proof by just showing you numbers and evidence that's based on people other than Mr. Mack.
Now, you heard a lot about wallpaper and the environment. But there is only one smoker at issue in this case, and that is Mr. Mack. And this is a lawsuit, and lawsuits are brought by people, not brought by environments and wallpapers and things like that. And in this case, Mr. Mack's estate is bringing this lawsuit, and they are represented by Mr. Mack's sons.
Now, you heard a lot about the industry,
tobacco companies. It's true R.J. Reynolds is a tobacco company, and it's part of the tobacco industry, just as American used to be a tobacco company and part of the industry.
But you heard a lot about the industry in general, what the industry's advertising was and what they did, but R.J. Reynolds is the only defendant in this case. This is Mr. Mack's case against R.J. Reynolds.
Now, plaintiffs in their closing, I believe Mr. Smith even talked about the fact that Mr. Mack filed this lawsuit before he died. And you heard from Dr. Cummings and Dr. Werner that we may not have had all the facts, because unfortunately,
Mr. Mack is no longer with us, so we can't ask him because he's not here.
But ask yourself, does that really make sense to you? Does that make sense when Mr. Mack decided to file the lawsuit before he died?
According to Mr. Mack -- well, Peter Mack,
Mr. Mack's son, his dad decided to sue in 2005.
And Peter Mack researched for his father the Engle case. He researched these types of lawsuits for his father. And he even chose his father's law firm, and, in fact, he talked about him and his
father having ten in-person conversations about this lawsuit. Ten conversations.
He helped his father complete a fact questionnaire. And Mr. Mack filed the lawsuit in December of 2007. He filed the lawsuit, he knew what his claims were. Unfortunately, he passed away, but he didn't pass away until August of 2008. And Mrs. Mack passed away in 2010.
And during those five years from 2005 to 2010, and over those ten conversations, the Macks never talked about any of the issues that you've heard about in this trial.
So if we're talking about missing evidence, where is the evidence?
In five years and ten conversations, the Macks never talked about the first cigarette that Mr. Mack tried, why he tried it, or which brand it was. Never talked about it. They never talked about whether Mr. Mack saw ads, was he confused by ads, or whether he made smoking choices based on ads. Never talked about it.
They never talked about whether or not Mr. Mack was addicted, whether he considered himself addicted, whether and how he ever tried to quit before he quit for good by throwing his
cigarettes out the window. Never talked about it.
They never talked about whether Mr. Mack saw or heard any tobacco company statements or statements by Reynolds and whether that affected any of the choices he made about smoking, choices to start, choices to continue, choices not to quit. Never talked about it.
In fact, they never talked about anything that Mr. Mack believed that R.J. Reynolds, my client, did wrong. They didn't talk about it. They didn't talk about anything we did wrong or anything that entitles them to the millions of dollars that they're asking for here today.
So when you hear where is the evidence, that's the question, they didn't talk about it.
Now, the judge instructed you this morning and you heard that if you believe that Mr. Mack is a member of the Engle class, then there are findings that apply. And two of those findings that are applicable here are that my client, R.J. Reynolds, was negligent, and that their products were defective. Those are the findings that if you find him a class member, they're binding.
Well, why did you hear so much evidence in this case re-proving those very findings? Why did
Dr. Cummings come in here and have to re-prove negligence and defective product and spend so much of your time listening to things that you have to already accept if he's a class member?
And the reason why is because they are trying to cloud the issues and fit that square peg into the round hole. This is Mr. Mack's case, but we've heard a lot about things that didn't have anything to do with him.
And the numbers show for themselves. Stanley Mack was on direct in the plaintiffs case for 42 minutes. Peter Mack, Jr., for 57 minutes. Mildred Mack was presented by deposition for 70 minutes.
And Dr. Cummings, who came in here and talked about industry and Reynolds conduct and nicotine addiction, was on the stand for 257 minutes.
Now, I think that Dr. Cummings perhaps summarized and packaged the point I'm trying to make best when he came in here and looked you in the eyes and said, "The story doesn't change."
"The story doesn't change." That's what he told you. He goes from courtroom to courtroom with the same story. He takes the square peg in this case and he's trying to shove it in the round hole because his story doesn't change, and neither does
the evidence.
Now, Dr. Cummings, plaintiff says that he's one of the most qualified people because of all his work in public health. Well, if the story doesn't change, then what is plaintiff paying for? He goes from trial to trial, 17 years of testifying against my client and other tobacco companies in more than 50 cases, making $10,000 per case.
Now, there is no doubt that all of the experts on both sides, experts that I brought in here and experts that plaintiffs, they're all being paid and we understand that. There is a lot of materials that they've reviewed in this case. The experts we brought you reviewed thousands and thousands of pages of materials.
But if the story doesn't change, what are they paying for? Every smoker is addicted, that's his testimony. It doesn't matter what the facts are.
But you know Dr. Cummings is wrong, because this is Mr. Mack's story. Mr. Mack enjoyed smoking knowing it was dangerous. Mr. Mack was not confused by cigarette advertising or tobacco company statements.
Mr. Mack switched to Winston cigarettes, the filtered cigarette, 16 years after it was
introduced, and he did so because of a Surgeon General warnings, not because of marketing. No cigarette design feature prevented Mr. Mack from quitting. And the first and only time he ever threw his cigarettes away, Mr. Mack quit, and he stayed quit for 30 years.
This is Mr. Mack's story.
Now, one of the central issues in this case is plaintiffs claim that Mr. Mack was addicted, but in the words of his own son, Mr. Mack quit about as cold turkey as you can get.
Now, the judge has instructed you this morning and you've heard about the Engle case. And you heard that there is another jury that's decided some issues. But the Engle jury did not decide Mr. Mack's case, the case that you're here to decide.
And the Engle jury -- well, first, these are the issues you must decide. First, is Mr. Mack a member of the Engle class? Second, were the actions of R.J. Reynolds a legal cause of Mr. Mack's laryngeal cancer and/or COPD?
And then finally, is Mr. Mack's estate entitled to money because Mr. Mack knowingly smoked a dangerous product, quit the very first time he
tried to quit and threw his cigarettes away, and developed health problems unrelated to smoking decades later?
Now, the Engle findings, and the judge instructed you on this this morning, the Engle findings do not answer the issues you are here to decide. The Engle jury did not hear any evidence about Mr. Mack. And the findings do not establish that Mr. Mack was a class member.
The Engle findings do not prove that addiction to nicotine legally caused Mr. Mack to develop laryngeal cancer and/or COPD. And the Engle findings do not establish that anything R.J. Reynolds said or did legally caused Mr. Mack to develop laryngeal cancer and/or COPD.
Those are the issues you have to examine.
You -- the Engle jury did not look at this.
So if you remember back in opening statements, I talked a little bit about the three things plaintiff must prove to be a member of the Engle class, and we didn't have any of the demonstratives or the slide shows in openings, but there is three hurdles.
And the first hurdle is medical causation.
And that means that plaintiff must prove to you
that Mr. Mack developed a disease, in this case laryngeal cancer or COPD, caused by smoking. And if he can get over that hurdle, which I'm going to explain why I believe he does not, then the second hurdle is addiction. And plaintiff must prove that Mr. Mack was addicted to nicotine.
And then finally, if he gets over those two hurdles, the final hurdle is addiction causation. Plaintiff must prove that addiction was a legal cause of Mr. Mack's smoking-related disease.
So this time let me do them in order. And I'm going to start with medical causation. As I said, plaintiff must prove that Mr. Mack developed a disease caused by smoking. And you heard a lot of evidence about that in this case.
Now, there was a lot of evidence brought to you, and plaintiff brought to you what I predicted -- predicted in openings that they would bring to you, statistics and numbers.
Plaintiff did not prove that smoking caused Mr. Mack's laryngeal cancer, and plaintiff did not prove that Mr. Mack had COPD that was caused by smoking.
And I'm going to tell you now why. We've talked about the concepts of declining risk. And I
think the most important thing for me to point out here is that at no time when Mr. Mack was smoking for those 40, 45 years, whatever evidence you believe, did he have a disease caused by smoking.
Now, we know that the evidence is a little bit iffy as to whether he quit in '78, '81. If the story coming home from the funeral is accurate, that's in 1981. But sometime between those time frames, he quit smoking.
And then 15 to 18 years after he quit smoking, at the age of 74, Mr. Mack developed laryngeal cancer, in 1996. In the year 2000, when he was 78 years old, he was diagnosed with COPD, and that was 19 to 22 years after he had quit smoking.
Now, Mr. Mack quitting smoking reduced his risks. I'm not going to cover these points because they were covered on the last slide, but I'm going to talk about how every expert agreed about the concept of declining risk.
Quitting smoking greatly reduces the risk of smoking-related disease. Every smoking and health report issued by the United States Surgeon General has told smokers that if they quit, they can reduce their risks of getting a disease caused by smoking.
Every doctor, every health care provider tells
their patients to quit smoking. Why? Because the risk goes down. And the longer a smoker remains smoke free, the less likely it is that he or she will develop a smoking-related disease.
Now, there is long-term benefits and there is short-term benefits. And you'll recall, I talked to some of the -- to Dr. Villa about some of these, but, you know, there is benefits as quick as 20 minutes after quitting. And then 12 hours after quitting, there is benefits.
And then two weeks to three months after quitting, your circulation improves and your lung function increases. In one to nine months after quitting, coughing and shortness of breath decrease. Immediate benefits of quitting. And that's not 19 to 22 years or 15 to 18; that's immediate.
And as recently as two years ago, Surgeon General stated that when smokers quit, the risks of cancer of the mouth, the throat, and the esophagus are cut in half in five years.
Now, the Surgeon General also has made some statements with regard to declining risk as it applies in laryngeal cancer. In 1979, the Surgeon General stated that after approximately ten years,
the risk approached that of nonsmokers.
In other words, if you quit smoking, in ten years, your risk of developing laryngeal cancer because of your smoking is the same as someone who never smoked.
Now, a couple of years later, in 1982, they published this chart, and I'm sure you can't see it from the jury box, but those two little boxes down at the end show that if someone has quit for 11 plus years, their risk is the same as someone who had never smoked. That's from the Surgeon General.
But you don't have to just look at Surgeon General's Reports, because you heard evidence in this courtroom about it. In fact, Dr. Villa, one of plaintiff’s experts, provided perhaps one of the best summaries of declining risk, because he talked about that when you quit, your body starts to detoxify.
He said the human body has amazing repair mechanisms. And the body can repair and prevent further damage and progression of damage caused by the carcinogens in smoking once you quit. And when you quit there's some immediate changes, like the cilia start coming back in your airways, those little hairs that help you breathe.
And then he said no doubt that if a person quits, his risk for disease will go down significantly.
And then Dr. Villa said this. After 11 to 15 years, the risk for developing laryngeal cancer approaches the same as that of a never smoker.
That wasn't one of our experts, that was plaintiff's expert.
Now, before I leave, and I'm not completely leaving declining risk yet, but before I do, I want to point out this attributable risk and this thing about, well, it doesn't matter if your risk declines, because once you get the disease, it's a hundred percent that you've got it.
Well, yeah, that's kind of common sense. Once you have the disease, it is a hundred percent. But that doesn't matter if you're a smoker or nonsmoker, if you've got the disease, you've got the disease, and you have a hundred percent risk.
It applies to both smokers and nonsmokers.
So let's move on to disease causation. And again, diseases that we're talking about in this case are laryngeal cancer and COPD.
Now, I'm going to start with laryngeal cancer, because that was the first disease that Mr. Mack
was diagnosed with in 1996 that he's claiming in this case.
Now, there is no dispute that 90 to 95 percent of laryngeal cancers are caused by smoking. What is disputed is whether or not Mr. Mack's laryngeal cancer, a cancer that developed 15 to 18 years after he quit smoking, whether that cancer is caused by his smoking.
Now, the plaintiffs I said brought you statistics, numbers, generalizations, not evidence specific to Mr. Mack. 90 to 95 percent is what they said.
Well, that doesn't tell you anything about Mr. Mack. There is no test that you saw that proves smoking caused Mr. Mack's laryngeal cancer. There is no medical record or even a doctor from Gainesville who treated him who came in here and said that Mr. Mack's laryngeal cancer was caused by smoking.
Plaintiff's proof consists of population studies, not evidence specific to Mr. Mack. And every expert agreed that statistics do not prove causation in any individual.
Now, when addressing this topic, you heard two experts try to make analogies on this issue and
talked about statistics, and one was Dr. Civantos, the otolaryngologist that plaintiffs brought from Miami.
And he said that airplane crashes are rare, but when they do happen, you do not dispute them as the cause of death just because they do not happen frequently.
And then Dr. Fee came in here, the otolaryngologist we brought from Stanford, and he was trying to explain to you this concept of statistics and how you can't use statistics to prove causation in an individual, and you remember what he said, "95 percent of the people here in Gainesville may be Gator fans, but I'm sure there are one or two people walking around who are not Gator fans."
It's pretty easy to understand when you think about it in those concepts. Mr. Mack's experts had the airplane crash, a little harder to understand, or you can look at the people in Gainesville and the statistics applying to them.
So let's talk about family history. Now,
Dr. Fee, who is one of the most well credentialed otolaryngologists in the entire United States, came in here and talked about Mr. Mack's family history
and how he had the most significant family history Dr. Fee has seen in 42 years of practice, and how Mr. Mack would have gotten a cancer even if he had no other exposures. And by that he means smoking or the other exposures that we discussed, asbestos and fumes.
That's the evidence with regard to Mr. Mack's family history. Remember, six people in Mr. Mack's immediate family had cancer, his mother had several -- two forms, his brothers and sisters, and while his brothers and sisters were smokers, only one of them had a smoking-related cancer. Family history of cancer.
Now, in addition to the extensive family history of cancer and how that played a role, we also brought you evidence with regard to the almost 40 years of workplace exposure to cancer-causing materials that Mr. Mack had.
38 years he worked as an airplane mechanic in the Air Force and an auto mechanic when he was discharged from the service. And during those 38 years, he was exposed to a number of things.
And Dr. Hogan came in here and told you about what he did and what he looked at, pulled the airplane manuals and other things, and saw that he
was exposed to asbestos, fuel and solvents, exhaust, and then all of those things are causes or increased risks for laryngeal cancer and COPD.
Now, Dr. Fee examined those things as well, and he examined asbestos, exhaust, diesel and gas fumes, machinery fluids, solvents and PAH's and then he told you that every carcinogen that Mr. Mack was exposed to was an independent cause of laryngeal cancer, independent of smoking. So he told you all of these may have played a role.
Now, Mr. Bigger told you that our experts didn't come in here and say that any of these things did cause his cancer. Well, we don't have to. We don't have the burden of proof. Our experts don't have any duty to come in here and tell you that smoking did not cause it. We don't have a burden to prove that it did not cause it.
Nor do we have a burden to prove that any of these other things caused it.
Despite that, Dr. Fee told you that in his opinion as an otolaryngologist for over 40 years, that smoking is not a cause or a substantial contributing cause to Mr. Mack's laryngeal cancer.
Now, briefly on asbestos. Every expert who came in that was asked about asbestos said that
asbestos causes laryngeal cancer. Dr. Fee said there is no question. Dr. Hogan said it's been clearly confirmed, human carcinogen for laryngeal cancer, and even Dr. Villa agreed that the International Agency For the Research of Cancer has stated that "It is clearly established that laryngeal cancer can be caused by asbestos." Everybody agrees on that.
And proof specific to Mr. Mack was provided to you. We brought you Dr. Cole. And Dr. Cole showed you numerous views of the radiology in this case.
He stood here, and he showed you not only the chest films, but the CAT scans, and all sorts of things, and he went through in detail and explained that he saw markers or pleural plaques, which all the experts agree, are signs of asbestos exposure.
And the one I have circled up here is one pleural plaque, but if you'll recall, Dr. Cole went through numerous views, the slices of bread as he called them, numerous views and showed you that not only was that pleural plaque, there was pleural plaques on the other side, so that they were bilateral. And he showed you different -- at a later CT where he also saw pleural plaques in other locations.
And Dr. Sider came in here and just said I don't see them.
Now, plaintiff said that Dr. Sider's a NIOSH certified B-reader, but I didn't hear him tell you that. He described what a B-reader was, but he didn't say he was one. He comes in here, and he says I just don't see them. Dr. Cole did and he took time and explained to you why he saw them.
And Dr. Villa, plaintiff's expert, said that the classical asbestos-related disease, in fact, the sine qua non, if you see it, you know it, is pleural plaques.
Objective evidence specific to Mr. Mack, not statistics, not numbers, not generalizations.
Again, we don't have the burden to prove anything, but we brought you specific evidence.
Now, I want to turn to COPD. And plaintiff failed to prove that Mr. Mack had COPD or if he did, that that COPD was caused by smoking.
Now, you'll recall Dr. Andrews came in here and talked about the four elements that are required for a clinical diagnosis of COPD: Symptoms, clinical presentation, exposure history, PFT results.
And Mr. Bigger went through on
cross-examination with Dr. Andrews this chart. And we talked about the symptoms. Well, Mr. Mack did have shortness of breath. That's true. It's in his records. You saw them. But, as Dr. Andrews explained, Mr. Mack's symptoms are explained by the many, many medical problems he had unrelated to smoking that impacted negatively his ability to breathe.
Now, the second item on here, clinical presentation, isn't one that Mr. Bigger asked him about. And perhaps the reason is because clinical presentation is in 2000, when he shows up and gets the first diagnosis of COPD, it had been 19 to 22 years since he smoked a cigarette.
Now, exposure history. Clearly Mr. Mack was a smoker. That's an exposure. But there was also evidence of other exposures: Asbestos, fumes, solvents.
And finally the pulmonary function results.
Now, you heard Dr. Ryerson, he is the one at the VA, never met Mr. Mack, never treated Mr. Mack, doesn't know if he ever even saw Mr. Mack, he spent 10 to 15 minutes interpreting a pulmonary function test that somebody else performed.
So he came in here and he was defending his
interpretation of that pulmonary function test.
And Dr. Andrews came in and gave you a different interpretation of that pulmonary function test, one that took into account all the other health problems that Mr. Mack had.
And Mr. Bigger tried to say, well, you didn't use this textbook, you didn't use the guidelines out of a textbook to diagnose this. You didn't -if you used the textbook guidelines, you would have found he had COPD. And Dr. Andrews said you can't use textbooks to diagnose patients.
And you heard him explain why, especially with older patients. If you apply the strict criteria, then all older patients have COPD. It lends to an overdiagnosis of COPD.
Doctors don't use textbooks to treat patients and make diagnosis. They use their judgment, their experience. Textbooks.
Now, the first available records we have in this case are dated in 1996, you heard all the doctors pretty much agree with that. And Mr. Mack's first PFT is in July 2000, and that's when Dr. Ryerson reads it as having an obstructive defect, a significant -- or a defect that is consistent with COPD, in his opinion.
Now, from the very first record we have until the time that Dr. Ryerson reads that PFT, Mr. Mack has been to doctors here in Gainesville 46 times.
46 times. And nobody mentions COPD. And he does go in complaining of shortness of breath on occasion.
He goes in and says I have shortness of breath on one occasion, and a doctor reviews his symptoms and he says, you know what, I think you need to lose weight and you have sleep apnea. And he loses weight and he gets better breathing. On another occasion, he's complaining of some shortness of breath, and the doctors find that he has some cardiac issues.
So all of these doctors that are seeing him and treating him, and even hearing and knowing that he's an ex-smoker, don't consider COPD, they have other diagnoses, other explanations for his breathing difficulties. That is, until Dr. Ryerson reads this pulmonary function test.
Now, after that pulmonary function test that Dr. Ryerson read from 2000 on, there is no doubt, no dispute that Mr. Mack was being treated at the VA for COPD. It's in his medical records. It's there. Because after that pulmonary function test,
it carried through and people treated him based on that interpretation.
But you remember Dr. Ryerson, up on the stand, told us about a doctor at the VA, Dr. Schofield, who he respects tremendously, and Dr. Schofield actually sees Mr. Mack, unlike Dr. Ryerson, he treats him while he's hospitalized for some cardiac problems in 2007, and he looks at him and he documents not only with the patient, "Confirmed with patient," but with another doctor that "Mr. Mack has multiple medical problems, including atrial fibrillation, obstructive sleep apnea, Pickwickian syndrome, obesity, and renal insufficiently" -- "insufficiency."
Now, this is the doctor that Ryerson said he would totally rely on whatever he says. In 2007, this doctor spends time with Mr. Mack, he gives him all of these diagnoses, but what's not there?
What's missing? COPD.
Now, Dr. Andrews also spent time with you discussing the multiple medical problems that Mr. Mack had and developed over the years that we have records available and how a lot of those problems affected his ability to breathe.
He had a number of medical problems that
didn't impact his ability to breathe, but that impacted his daily functions of living.
And I'm not going to go through this list with you because you just saw a lot of them on Dr. Schofield's records. But we all know that there was heart diseases that Mr. Mack was being treated for.
Remember the records all the way back to 1996 show that he had to have multiple cardioversions, where they actually have to shock his heart to get it to work the right way. And after those cardioversions, that's when he started experiencing the shortness of breath.
Pulmonary hypertension, cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, all of these things factor into Mr. Mack's inabilities or difficulties breathing, especially as he got older.
Now, I'm not picking on Mr. Mack for being overweight. Mr. Mack, however, was not just overweight, he was morbidly obese. And that's not a word that I made up in my office trying to be mean to somebody. That's a word that's in Mr. Mack's medical records.
And the only reason for pointing it out repeatedly during this trial is not to disparage or
make fun of, it's because it severely impacted his ability to breathe.
And the best way to show you and explain to you what morbid obesity is is to let you look at this chart. Because this is from the Surgeon General. And what they do is you calculate your BMI or body mass index. Hopefully none of you are doing that right now with the chart up there.
But essentially, you look at your height and you look at your weight, and then you go down to the columns, and you can see what your BMI is, your body mass index, and you can see if it's a healthy one or not.
Now, over the years, we have Mr. Mack's height and weight, never did he even fit on this chart.
That's what morbid obesity is. It's not being a little bit overweight. Morbid obesity is what causes the difficulties breathing, and that's what everybody agrees.
Everybody on both sides agree that he's morbidly obese, and everybody agrees that morbidly obese people have difficulty breathing, and everybody agrees that there is some impact from Mr. Mack's morbid obesity on his ability to breathe.
Now, again, some subjective -- objective proof, proof in this case that his weight is affecting his ability to breathe, comes from one of the very first records that we have regarding Mr. Mack, and that's in 1996 when he goes to see Dr. Rogers and he complains of worsening morbid obesity and shortness of breath.
And Dr. Rogers reviews his systems, and he finds it's positive for sleep apnea, and he says you know what, this is a really pleasant man, nobody is disputing this is a pleasant man, but this is a pleasant man who has worsening morbid obesity with sleep apnea, and I think he would benefit from weight loss, and he puts him on diet medication, and Mr. Mack loses weight.
He loses weight and he goes back to Dr. Rogers and says I feel a lot better, my shortness of breath has decreased. And he loses more weight, and he goes back again and says I have less difficulty breathing. Well, that is proof specific to Mr. Mack, proof that weight impacted his ability to breathe. Not statistics, not numbers, proof specific to Mr. Mack.
Now, I'm at the second hurdle. Hopefully y'all aren't counting down too much. But this
hurdle is the addiction. Plaintiff must prove that Mr. Mack was addicted to nicotine.
Now, addiction is a medical condition that is properly diagnosed using the DSM. And you've heard only two psychiatrists came in here and told you about the DSM. And those are the only two doctors who are qualified to make the medical diagnosis of addiction. And that's Dr. Werner, the plaintiffs expert, and again, she didn't come live, she was -her deposition was read, I believe a week ago today, and Dr. Tucker, who was just here yesterday.
And they explained that the DSM is the gold standard. But they did it a little bit differently. Dr. Werner told you about the DSM, said, you know, this is what we use in our practice, but she didn't tell you what the tools were in the DSM.
All she did was say this is what I used, and by using this, I find that he's addicted. She didn't lay out the seven factors or the seven criterion. She didn't say, hey, you know, he met this one or didn't meet this one, or this is why, in my opinion, I think he's addicted. She didn't do any of that. All she said was DSM, addicted.
And that's a pretty important point, because
this is plaintiffs case. They filed this lawsuit.
They filed this lawsuit claiming that he was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. And then they bring Dr. Werner, who says, yeah, he's addicted, but doesn't tell you why she finds that.
But we did, we brought you Dr. Tucker. And not only did Dr. Tucker sit here and show you what the seven criteria were under the DSM, he explained to you why, in his opinion, Mr. Mack didn't qualify as addicted, because you have to meet three of the seven, and he didn't.
He said that he never complained about his smoking. He enjoyed smoking. Mr. Mack was able to control his smoking. He never expressed any regrets about his smoking. He did not attempt to quit smoking for more than 40 years. He quit cold turkey once he decided to quit. And he chose to smoke, and then he chose to quit, and he was never diagnosed as addicted.
That's the testimony that Dr. Tucker brought you. And he explained the reasons why he made -came to the opinion he did. Based on the DSM, based on his criteria, which he explained to you in detail, Mr. Mack was not addicted. And we brought this to you even though we don't have the burden of
proving anything.
Now, nobody that knew Mr. Mack believed he was addicted until this trial. And if you're looking for evidence of -- from Mr. Mack as to whether or not he was addicted, remember the testimony of Mr. Klaas, where Mr. Mack said I enjoy smoking, it relaxes me.
Never told his son he was addicted. Never told his wife. And as Mr. Bigger said, you know, they were best friends, married for 63 years, never said I can't quit, I'm addicted.
So that brings us to -- back to the square peg in the round hole. Let's talk a little bit about Mr. Mack versus a possible Engle class member. A possible Engle class member is somebody who tries to quit 10, 20, 30 times, has multiple relapses, hates smoking, hates themselves.
MR. SMITH: May we approach, Your Honor?
THE COURT: Yeah.
Can you please take that down.
MS. HENNINGER: Um-hum (affirmative).
[#DELETED SIDEBAR#]
THE COURT: All right, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the objection is sustained, you are to disregard the last slide.
MS. HENNINGER: Now, let's talk about the evidence.
And just keep it there for right now, Ryan, so I don't accidentally go back.
But let's talk about Mr. Mack's evidence, because I don't want to fail to point out that Mr. Mack never tried to quit for 40 years. He quit the first time he wanted to. He enjoyed smoking.
He never complained about his smoking.
He never complained about his smoking, he never had cravings to smoke, and he was in control of his smoking. He could work without smoking, stay around the airplanes, choose when he wanted to smoke. He smoked because he wanted to, never told anybody he was addicted, and never told anybody he wanted to quit before he did. Never said quitting was difficult when he finally did quit.
So that brings me to the third hurdle, addiction causation. And plaintiff must prove that addiction was a legal cause of a disease caused by smoking. Again, in this case, that's laryngeal cancer or COPD.
And I want to talk a little bit about this cycle addiction that Mr. Bigger says that Mr. Mack was trapped in. Well, Mr. Mack was not trapped in any cycle of addiction with no way out.
Nicotine addiction does not permanently change brain receptors. Nicotine addiction does not interfere with a smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking. And nicotine addiction does not interfere with a smoker's ability to make an informed choice to quit or to continue to quit.
And nicotine addiction does not prevent
smokers from quitting, and every expert, even
Dr. Cummings came in here and said every smoker can
quit.
Now, there has been testimony and argument today that there was this ten-year period of struggle with addiction when Mr. Mack was trying to quit. Well, the evidence on that came from Mrs. Mack. And she's testified that her and her husband talked about how they should quit smoking.
She also testified that they talked about cutting back, but they never did. And she said when she asked him to quit or others asked him to quit, his response was: "I will. I will. I will."
Now, Dr. Cummings said himself that actions speak louder than words, most smokers say that they want to quit, they'll say that, and it's up to the individual smoker to make the actual decision to quit.
Now, what is an actual quit attempt, what does it mean to actually quit smoking? It means that you stop smoking for at least 24 hours, that's the criteria that the Surgeon General uses.
Now, I want to go back real quick, because I forgot to mention that when Mr. Mack said he will
quit smoking, he will, he never said, "Hey, you know what, Mildred, I can't. I can't quit smoking.
I'm in this cycle of addiction and I can't get
out."
Now, what are some of the factors that indicate a motivation to quit? Now, Dr. Tucker showed you this slide.
And some of the things that you look at to see whether or not somebody is really trying to quit or wants to quit, and these are just some of them, you formulate a plan, you set a quit date, you stop smoking for at least 24 hours, throw away your matches and lighters and cigarette -- and ashtrays, and you throw away your cigarettes. Exactly what Mr. Mack eventually did. He threw his cigarettes out the car window.
Now, Dr. Cummings had an interesting assessment of whether or not Mr. Mack was motivated to quit smoking, because he talked to you about the fact that Mr. Mack tried to quit because he switched to filtered cigarettes.
And that's an interesting theory, because Dr. Cummings doesn't tell his patients in his practice or in his smoking clinic that you heard about, he doesn't say, "Hey, switch to filtered
cigarettes."
He tells them, he asks, "Do you want to stop smoking? Because you need to want to stop smoking. Are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? Because you're going to need to do that.
And are you willing to put up with a little -- some uneasy moments?"
That's what Dr. Cummings asks people when they go to his clinic. He doesn't suggest that they switch to filtered cigarettes. Switching to filtered cigarettes isn't a quit attempt. Would any of us believe an alcoholic if they said, "Hey, you know what, I tried quitting because I stopped smoking" -- I mean, "stopped drinking regular beer and I started drinking light beer." That's not a quit attempt. It doesn't make sense.
So ten years of quitting, trying to quit using filters. Plaintiff doesn't have any evidence within that ten years of when Mr. Mack tried, if he tried, when he tried to quit smoking, how many times he tried to quit smoking, what he may have done to try to quit smoking. Did he throw his ashtrays out?
We know the one time that he was successful, he threw his cigarettes out, but we didn't hear
about that another single time. We didn't hear about quitting for even one day.
And this, again, let me reemphasize, this is important evidence and evidence that in all of the conversations that Mr. Mack had with his father about this lawsuit, we don't have the answers to. And they want millions of dollars for this ten-year struggle, but they can't tell you anything about it.
Now, trapped in the cycle, no way out, it doesn't make sense. Mr. Mack threw his cigarettes out the window and he never looked back.
Now, you've heard about this ride home from Tuscaloosa, Alabama, the funeral. And I think today it was called rock bottom. Coughing, gagging, couldn't breathe. The flu is rock bottom. The flu is not a smoking-related disease.
That might make sense if you are talking about somebody who, you know, when they first get diagnosed with lung cancer says, "You know what, geez, I need to quit." That's not what happened here.
Mr. Mack is 54 years old, he's had the flu before, but on this occasion, he has the flu, it makes him sick. And I'm sure that smoking wasn't
very pleasant for somebody who has the flu. But for whatever reason, that time when he had the flu, he decided to put the cigarettes down, he threw them out the window, and he never looked back and he never had another one.
That's not rock bottom. That's his decision.
He was motivated, he made the decision. So on the way home, he gets the flu, he says, "You know what, these things, I'm done with them," opens the window, throws them out, and then tells Mrs. Mack to do the same.
And when you ask Mrs. Mack about that, she says he was determined to quit.
"He was determined to quit when he threw his cigarettes out the window?"
And Mrs. Mack says, "Yes."
And at this point you don't have Mr. Mack saying, "You know what, Mildred, I will, I will, I will quit." He said, "I am." And he chucked them out the window and he did. He quit. Never smoked another cigarette the rest of his life.
So Mr. Mack controlled when he quit and how he quit. On the car ride home, he asked Mildred not to smoke, and he didn't stop and buy cigarettes on the ride home. I can only guess, I haven't driven
between Tuscaloosa and Gainesville, but I can only guess it's a pretty lengthy ride. He never stopped and bought cigarettes.
Once he was home and he was feeling better, he asked Mrs. Mack not to smoke in the house, and he asked her to quit smoking, and she did quit smoking, but yet she kept cigarettes in her pantry for over a month. Mr. Mack never went in there and said, "You know, I'm going to sneak a cigarette, I miss them." He never did it.
And when he went back to work after the flu, he went to work at a place where they sold cigarettes, and he didn't buy any and smoke. Once that they were out the window, they were gone forever.
And remember Miss Levine, Mildred's older sister, Mrs. Mack's older sister, she came in here and testified and she was asked questions about that, and she said that she had seen other people stop smoking, but not necessarily so fast and so thorough as Mr. Mack. She was impressed by it. And she told you that.
So I want to talk about the verdict form. And it goes back to those three hurdles that I kind of talked about in the beginning, or sort of the
beginning. You have medical causation, addiction, and addiction causation. Those three things a plaintiff must prove to be a member of the Engle class.
Now, R.J. Reynolds submits that they can't get over any of those hurdles, and, therefore, you should answer both of those questions no.
They can't prove for number 1, they cannot prove that his laryngeal cancer was caused by smoking. Statistics do not prove causation in an individual. They can't prove that he was addicted or that his addiction caused his laryngeal cancer, and that's why you answer number 1 no.
Number 2 is a little bit different only because first you have to find that he had COPD. Well, everyone agrees that he had laryngeal cancer. We don't agree that he had COPD. So first you have to find that he had COPD, and then you have to get over the hurdles of causation, addiction, and addiction causation. They can't do that, and that's why that's no.
And the third question on the verdict form, you get to, as Mr. Bigger explained, in certain circumstances, but "If you answer" -- "If your answer to question number 2 is yes, did Peter Mack,
Sr.'s COPD first manifest on or before November 21st, 1996?"
Okay. So what's the evidence on that? Well, we only have medical records from 1996 forward. And we know that Mr. Mack wasn't diagnosed with COPD until the year 2000. In fact, if I recall correctly, Mr. Bigger said in opening statements that Mr. Mack had COPD from 2000 to 2008.
So the first diagnosis came from Dr. Ryerson, it's in the year 2000, and then what's really important is because if you think that Dr. Ryerson's correct in making the diagnosis of COPD, then remember what Dr. Ryerson said on that stand, because I asked him, okay, I understand you believe he has COPD, but can you tell this jury how long that COPD was there, if at all, before the year 2000? And he said no, I can't do that. I cannot do that.
So there is no evidence that it manifested before the year 2000 if you believe he had COPD. That's what their own expert says.
Now, I want to turn to the two claims in this case. There is only two claims in this case, and that is negligence and product defect. And plaintiff failed to prove the actions by R.J.
Reynolds were a legal cause of injury to Mr. Mack.
Now, there is no evidence that Mr. Mack was confused about the dangers of smoking, and Dr. Cummings admits that hundreds of years ago, people recognized that smoking was hard to quit.
He told you that.
And he told you that the public health community has provided information about the dangers of smoking for more than 60 years. And he also told you that by 1954, virtually everyone in society knew that smoking could cause disease.
Now, where were they getting this information if it was before the cigarette pack warnings were on there? Where were they getting it? Well, they were getting it from all variety of places: Newspapers, magazines, TV, radio, doctors, friends, family members.
From 1924, the Reader's Digest is publishing that "Smoking is injurious to the human body. Its use sometimes causes cancer." 1924.
1952, "Cancer by the carton" in the Reader's Digest.
And then there is other magazines. There was lots of coverage on the health effects of smoking. You had the mouse skin painting studies that you
heard about from Ernst Wynder and Graham. And once those happened, then the press picked up on it and it was in magazines and newspapers.
And in 1957, the Surgeon General of the United States, Leroy Burney, said, "Our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, the radio, and the TV."
They thought -- he said that everybody knew.
And then John Heller, who is the director of the NCI, which is the National Cancer Institute, said the same thing. And this isn't today. This isn't 2012. This is in 1957. And he says,
"Newspapers, radio, TV and other media have done an excellent job," excellent job, "covering this problem and a very objective job. This is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." 1957.
And in 1964, we know that the United States Surgeon General came out with the first report on smoking and health. And in that report, they found that lung cancer -- that smoking was causally related to lung cancer in men.
And they also made findings with regard to laryngeal cancer. They said that "The evaluation of the evidence leads to the judgment that
cigarette smoking is a significant factor in the causation of laryngeal cancer in the male." That's 1964.
And this was big news. It was covered in -all in the United States, on the TVs, in the newspapers, it was everywhere. But you know what, the Macks were in Japan, but it was such big news, it reached Japan.
Mr. Klaas told you and talked to you about the fact that when they were in the service in Japan, there were movies and discussions about the Surgeon General's Report. All the way in Japan, the 1964 Surgeon General's Report is hitting home, it's important in big news.
And it's in the military newspapers, 1964, "Surgeon General calls smoking health peril." Air Force Times. And we know that Mr. Mack read that.
And in 1966, first cigarette warning label goes on and it says, "Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
Now, not only were these warnings out there in, you know, magazines, newspapers, and on the packs of cigarettes, but Mr. Mack also had some personalized warnings, and he got those from places like his friends, in his workplace, and one of
those was Brasington Cadillac.
And, you know -MR. BIGGER: Your Honor, sorry, we need to approach on this.
(The following is at the bench.)
THE COURT: Yes.
MR. BIGGER: They never read Charles Locklear's deposition. There is no evidence about anything having to do with Brasington Cadillac in the case.
MS. HENNINGER: Dr. Werner discussed what Charles Locklear said in great detail during her testimony, as did Dr. Tucker. They both talked about what Mr. Locklear did and said and the warnings that were received by Mr. Mack, both of the experts, plaintiff and defense.
THE COURT: Say it again.
MS. HENNINGER: Okay. Plaintiffs expert,
Dr. Werner, -THE COURT: Yeah.
MS. HENNINGER: -- took the stand and discussed the warnings that Mr. Mack received at Brasington Cadillac.
THE COURT: Okay.
MS. HENNINGER: She talked about how he was
told that smoking was bad. Dr. Tucker also talked about the same thing. Both of the experts told the jury about Brasington Cadillac.
THE COURT: Okay.
MS. HENNINGER: And what information was received by his employers there.
THE COURT: Okay.
MR. BIGGER: Experts are not a conduit for hearsay. He actually -- yeah, the experts were talking about evidence that was supposed to be in the case, but they didn't have time to read it, so they can't now put on the evidence as if it came in at trial.
Just because the expert talked about the basis of their opinion doesn't make that evidence in the case.
THE COURT: I'm going to overrule the objection because it was something -MR. BIGGER: Okay.
THE COURT: It was part of the transcript. Go ahead.
(The following is in open court.)
MS. HENNINGER: But in addition to the magazines and the TV and the radio and the things that you hear and the warnings on the side of the
cigarettes which Mr. Mack smoked, he also received some personalized warnings, and one of the places he got those is at his employer, his employer here in Gainesville at Brasington Cadillac.
Mr. Brasington was very much against smoking. Mr. Brasington warned his employees that smoking was dangerous to their health. And his supervisor, Mr. Locklear, addressed the dangers of smoking in monthly meetings.
So you have the general warnings that everybody was getting on the packs and in the newspapers, but you also have personalized warnings too from his employer, friends, and family.
Now, was Mr. Mack confused? Did the tobacco companies confuse him? Did Reynolds confuse him with anything that Dr. Cummings showed him -showed you?
There is no evidence that Mr. Mack saw or heard the Frank Statement. Mr. Bigger showed you that in his closing argument. No evidence he saw that. No evidence he saw or heard of CTR or Tobacco Institute or any of these tobacco industry interviews or statements, the TV clip that you saw.
No evidence that tobacco companies statements about smoking and health, no evidence he saw
tobacco company statements about smoking and addiction.
And keep in mind, I'm not suggesting that people just sit around and say, "You know, honey, how was your day at work? Did you see the Frank Statement?" Or "Let's talk about cigarette advertising tonight." That's not what I'm suggesting.
But remember, Mr. Mack filed this lawsuit, and this lawsuit was pending before he died. And there was never any discussion in all of those ten discussions about any of these things. And yet they're asking for million of dollars. When they had these discussions, they never discussed what my client, R.J. Reynolds, did wrong.
Now, Dr. Cummings talked to you a little bit about the wallpaper of advertising. And what does that have to do with Mr. Mack? Because the evidence in this case shows it doesn't have anything to do with Mr. Mack.
Ms. Levine told you she thought Mr. Mack was a very independent person and thought for himself and didn't think that he was swayed by too many outside comments.
You haven't heard anything, any advertisement
that Mr. Mack saw or heard or relied on, nothing, nothing about what Mr. Mack may have heard or seen. In fact, I think the only evidence or the only ad that anybody mentioned that Mr. Mack may have seen was the Marlboro ad, and there is no evidence that Mr. Mack smoked Marlboro. Flintstones, all of this stuff showed to you with Dr. Cummings, no evidence Mr. Mack saw it.
Now, Dr. Cummings also tells you that the most important factor is whether a person smokes -is -- sorry. The most important factor in whether a person smokes is whether his friends or family smoke.
We know that Mr. Mack had one parent that was a smoker and all of his brothers and sisters smoked. He didn't start smoking because of advertising. There is no evidence of it. And you know that from Dr. Cummings, that the most important factor is whether your friends and family smoke, and we know that that's true in Mr. Mack's case.
Now, talk about filtered cigarettes just briefly. There is no evidence that any kind of advertising influenced Mr. Mack to switch to filtered cigarettes. Winstons, the brand that he
smoked, has always been a filtered cigarette, and it's always been advertised as a filtered cigarette.
As a matter of fact, since 1954, when it was introduced, 16 years before Mr. Mack ever switched to it, it was introduced as a filtered cigarette with advertising about the filter.
And even though he switched to Winstons, the filtered cigarettes, he continued to occasionally smoke the nonfiltered brands that he -- that the fact witnesses told you about. So he smoked them both. There is no evidence that advertising had anything to do with it.
Now, we talked a little bit about how people get their information, and one of the ways that they get it and one of the types of information they were getting were from the public health community, and that was about filters.
And the public health community, including the Surgeon General, the American Cancer Society and other public health authorities and doctors, all told people to quit -- I mean, to quit, they tell them to quit clearly, but they also told them too if they couldn't quit, to go to a filtered cigarette.
And Mr. Mack switched to filtered cigarettes not because of any advertising, no advertising was ever brought to you that said Mr. Mack saw this filter ad, thought it would be safer for him, and that's why he changed to a filtered cigarette.
That wasn't presented to you.
Dr. Cummings says that people were -- believed that they were safer, but he never said Mr. Mack did. In fact, the only evidence that we have is that Mr. Mack changed to filtered cigarettes because of the warnings on the packs. The warnings were what caused Mr. Mack to change to filtered cigarettes. It didn't have anything to do with advertising. And that comes from his wife Mildred.
And importantly, when you asked her why they switched or why -- because they both switched, but why he switched from nonfiltered to filtered, she says, "I don't know."
Now, Dr. Cummings admits despite all the evidence about filters and the fact that Mr. Mack switched to filters, Dr. Cummings admits that there is no evidence that smokers of filtered cigarettes have a harder time quitting than smokers of nonfiltered cigarettes.
And why is this important? Because you heard
all of this evidence about filters, and Dr. Cummings talked about them, but the fact of the matter is that Mr. Mack quit smoking while he was smoking a filtered product. It didn't make it any harder for him to quit. He quit.
Now, there has been a lot of company documents shown to you, both throughout this case with Dr. Cummings and in Mr. Bigger's closing, and a lot of things are said about nicotine and what the companies do or do not do with nicotine.
But cigarettes are not engineered to be more addictive. Nicotine occurs naturally in the tobacco plant. And from the standpoint of health risks or addictiveness one cigarette is the same as all other cigarettes, including those hand rolled raw tobaccos in a piece of newspaper.
And the public health community recommended that tobacco companies control nicotine delivery to make cigarettes safer. Talk about manipulation of nicotine. And there has just been so much talk about it.
And a lot of Mr. Bigger's closing focused on the fact that nicotine is in the plant -- I mean the tobacco product, that it's highly engineered to deliver just the right amount of nicotine, and that
somehow R.J. Reynolds is at fault for that.
But then Dr. Werner comes in here and tells you that low- or no-nicotine cigarettes are still addictive. So if she says that no-nicotine or low-nicotine cigarettes are still addictive, then why are we hearing and seeing all of these documents that relate to addiction and engineering and design on addiction and talk about manipulation and adding back in and all of this when it doesn't matter because you can be addicted to a non-nicotine cigarette. That's their own expert.
So nicotine is just another square peg.
Now, Dr. Cook, plaintiffs played Dr. Cook in their case, but he's one of our employees. He's actually a scientist for RJR. And he provided evidence of what RJR has been doing, the millions of dollars that they spent trying to develop safer cigarettes.
And one of the ways that they do that is reducing the tar and the nicotine. And he talked about things like expanded tobacco, reconstituted tobacco, burn accelerants and paper porosity and filters and ventilation, and he told you why they do all that.
And what's really, really interesting is he
explained all that, and then Dr. Cummings, who has never designed a cigarette, tried to explain some of it and did it in a way that made it sound like there was something wrong with it.
But Reynolds was trying to figure it out and make it safer. And that's the way they were doing it. Dr. Cummings hasn't come up with anything safer.
So when you get to the -Thank you.
So when you get -- you look at the instructions and you are going to be asked whether or not anything that Reynolds did caused Mr. Mack's injuries, whether our negligence caused his injuries or the defective product caused his injuries.
And so let's talk briefly about what legal cause is. And what they must prove is that there is a defect or negligence that directly or in a continuous sequence contributes substantially to his laryngeal cancer and COPD.
And so what does that mean? And so there is two claims, design defect and negligence, and when you think about it, think about it as a chain. The plaintiff must prove that the conduct caused
Mr. Mack's injuries.
But rather than provide you with the middle link, they chose instead to come in here with generic evidence. And that's because they cannot prove that RJR's conduct directly caused Mr. Mack's injuries. They cannot provide the missing link.
So when you get to the questions 4 and 5 on the verdict form, and I submit you shouldn't even get there, because after question 1, when you answer question 1 no, everybody goes home, you shouldn't get to 4 and 5, but if you do, you answer that no, please.
Now, legal causation, comparative fault is the next topic, and Mr. Mack admits that his own actions were a legal cause of his injuries. He admits that. So when you think of the chain in the cause, Mr. Mack is right there because he admits fault, he admits his own fault. And why is he doing that? Because as his son explains, all Mr. Mack had to do was just quit smoking.
Now, experts on both sides agree that Mr. Mack could understand the warnings, that he was responsible for his choices, that he was 100 percent in control of his choice to begin smoking and 100 percent in control of his choice to try to
quit smoking, and while I don't think anybody is to blame, but I didn't -- but our side didn't bring this, we -- I believe because of these reasons that he was 100 percent in control and 100 percent in control of his choice to quit and choice to begin, you should put 100 percent on Peter Mack, again, if you get there.
Now, I want to briefly talk about damages.
And as the Court instructed you this morning, there is no numerical thing for this, but the Court instructed you that any damages awarded must be fair and just in light of the evidence. So keep that instruction in mind as you consider the evidence in this case.
And the evidence is that Mr. Mack beat laryngeal cancer. He was 74 years old when he was diagnosed. He hadn't smoked a cigarette in a long time. Fortunately for him, his cancer was caught early, it was treated with radiation, and it was cured, and he lived another 12 years without recurrence.
Now, nobody is standing up here and saying, you know what, that's no big deal, radiation is no big deal. But what we did do is we looked at the medical records, and we looked, Mr. Mack did have
raspy voice, he complained of the voice, but then he also, the doctors looked in his throat and didn't notice any abnormalities. And while this lawsuit was filed, he was still going to the doctor and still looking at it.
And you heard things about these notes, these notepads, somehow that after his laryngeal cancer, all they could do is write each other notes, pads and stacks, as Mr. Mack, Jr., explained to you. Stacks and stacks of these pads. And Mr. Mack dies. This lawsuit is pending. Where are those stacks? Where are they?
Now, nobody, and I'm almost a little bit -- I just want to make sure, nobody is suggesting, and I hope that nobody gave the impression that just because Mr. Mack lived to be 86 years old or almost 86 years old, that his life wasn't worth as much because he was old. Nobody is suggesting that. Nobody is suggesting that.
But what we did show you is that as he got older, just like everybody else who gets older, he in particular had a number of medical problems that impacted his ability to enjoy his life, medical problems unrelated to smoking. Put aside the laryngeal cancer, put aside the COPD. There were
other issues that Mr. Mack had problems with. One of the reasons he needed the scooter, in fact, was because he had arthritis and severe leg pain.
So there is other things as we get older, but Mr. Mack was doing pretty good. He was following his doctor's advice, riding his bike, walking, working, shopping and cooking, and caring for his dear wife Mildred, because she had a number of serious medical problems herself.
Now, those are the things that you need to consider in whether -- when you are assessing damages in fair and just manner. And remember, as Mr. Smith said, the cutoff is February 8, 2008. No damages after that point.
Now, the fact that they're asking for $4 million for Mr. Mack's pain and suffering for laryngeal cancer and COPD, it defies common sense. There is no lost wages or medical bills. You can't consider any health problem other than laryngeal cancer and COPD. It's not about punishing R.J. Reynolds or for Mr. Mack's death. This is a case about Mr. Mack's pain and suffering.
Now, plaintiffs are attempting to inflate their damage claim by asking for a huge amount without any basis for it. And you just heard the
number 4 million, but there is no quantification of it.
And the Macks should not become millionaires because their father chose to smoke cigarettes for 40 years knowing it was dangerous, quit smoking cold turkey the first time he ever tried, decades before ever being diagnosed with a smoking-related disease, if he even had one.
The injuries they claim in this case happened decades after he quit smoking. So you need to use your reason and your common sense like the instructions tell you when you get -- if you get this far.
Now, before I sit down -- I don't get to come up here and talk to you again. I know you guys were probably secretly saying, "Yea, she doesn't get back up here." But the plaintiffs have the burden of proof, so they do get to get back up here.
And I can only ask that you remember some of the things that we showed you in our case, just like in the beginning of the case, we asked you to keep an open mind, wait until you have heard all the evidence, I am asking you to wait until you have heard all the evidence, you have heard it now,
think about it.
Nobody is a blank slate when they walk into court as a juror. Clearly, you have had your own personal experiences and life experiences. But when we sat down and asked you to be a juror and asked you if you could set those aside, you agreed that you would base your verdict on the evidence in this case, and that's the evidence of Mr. Mack.
Again, I'm going to end the way I started by thanking you, thanking everybody who is kind enough to be on my team and help me do all this, and thank you so much for your attention.
