                   CLOSING ARGUMENT
         MR. OLIVER:  Good morning, ladies and gentlemen
    of the jury.
         At this point, you've seen the evidence and you
    know what Reynolds and Philip Morris did.
         We presented evidence to you that their actions
    were, frankly, atrocious.  We presented evidence to
    you that they lied and conspired for 45 years.  And
    you know that those lies helped cause more than
    400,000 deaths a year.      And you determine -- you determine, not me, not
    any of the other attorneys that one of those deaths
    was Sal Marchese's death.  So the only remaining
    question is this:  What amount of punitive damages,
    if any, is sufficient to punish Reynolds and Philip
    Morris for that conduct?  The conduct that is at
    issue in this case.  That's the only question.
         Now, before addressing the amount of money that
    I think is appropriate -- and let me be clear, it's
    up to you.  I've said that all along.  I said that
    from the beginning.  I believed it then, and I
    believe it now, and I'll make a suggestion.
         But before I get there, I want to talk to you
    about the evidence that you heard yesterday from the
    defendants.  That evidence that the defendants put
    on had one purpose:  It was to avoid punishment in
    this case.  They want to make the sting as low as
    possible.  They want to make the punishment
    ineffective.
         And, remember, the instructions tell you that
    there are two things that the award of punitive
    damages should do:  First, it has to punish them for
    that conduct that happened during Sal Marchese's
    lifetime.
         And, second, it should deter them and others. Remember that.  We're talking about other companies
    that might be tempted to do the same thing.
         So what did the evidence that they brought to
    you yesterday have to do with those two primary
    goals of this phase?
         And the answer is simple.  It's not much.  So
    we talked about three or four different things, and
    I'm going to walk through each of those types of
    evidence and talk to you about what I think it
    means.
         Let's start with the Food and Drug
    Administration.  The FDA gained control of the
    tobacco companies in 2009.  Their witnesses admitted
    that.  That was five years too late for Sal
    Marchese.
         So what does it have to do with what they did
    during his lifetime?
         Nothing.
         FDA has not punished Reynolds or Philip Morris
    for what they did to Sal Marchese.  They haven't
    punished them, period.
         And here's why:  Regulation by a federal agency
    is not punishment.  Federal agencies can punish you
    for things, but just because they have a set of
    rules, doesn't make it punishment.      Now, I was thinking about this in my hotel room
    last night.  And I was, like, how can I explain
    this?  What can I say that really gets this point
    home?
         And here's what I thought of.  I have two small
    children.  My oldest child is five years old, and he
    just started kindergarten.  I want you to imagine a
    child who comes home to his mom and said, "Mom, mom.
    I got punished at school today."
         She says, "What happened?  What happened?  Did
    you get in trouble?
         "Well, I had to be in class on time."
         The mom kind of looks at the kid and says,
    "Well, son, being in class on time is just a rule.
    Everybody has to follow the rule.  That's not
    punishment."  And she says, "Well, what else
    happened?
         And he says, "Well, mom, I had to be quiet at
    storytime."
         She says, "Son, that's not punishment.  That's
    just a rule.  Everybody has to follow the rules."
         FDA regulation is just a set of rules that they
    have to follow that, frankly, they avoided for
    decades.  That's not punishment.  Punishment is
    getting sent to the principal's office.      So what FDA does is just a set of rules that
    tobacco companies now have to follow.
         And you heard testimony that for years they
    knew their product was an addictive, drug delivery
    device.  And one of the ways they avoided FDA
    regulation was they didn't tell anybody that it was
    an addictive drug, just like an opioid, just like a
    prescription drug.
         If that information had come out, if they
    hadn't concealed that information, I bet the FDA
    would have been regulating them a lot sooner, but
    the bottom line is this:  FDA doesn't have anything
    to do with the goals of punishment in Phase II of
    this trial.
         And even if it did, I don't think they deserve
    much credit for something that they intentionally
    avoided for decades.  I mean, they don't get to say,
    "Hey, you caught me.  So I get special credit for
    that."
         So FDA, not really a big deal in this case, not
    important to your decision today.
         What about the Master Settlement Agreement?
    Does that have anything to do with Sal Marchese?
         It does not.  The Master Settlement Agreement
    was a settlement between the state attorneys general for Medicaid expenses.  Sal Marchese was not on
    Medicaid expenses.
         And you have to look back and remember what
    Dr. Proctor said in Phase I, but he was asked some
    questions about that.  And I asked him, I said,
    "What does the Master Settlement Agreement have to
    do with Mr. Marchese?"
         He said, "Nothing.  That money doesn't go to
    individuals.  That money was not for the conduct
    that harmed Sal Marchese.  It was for something
    entirely different."
         The MSA, the Master Settlement Agreement, does
    tell us one thing, though, and it's very important.
         It tells us that when parties go to litigation,
    and the tobacco companies have to do something as a
    result of that litigation, when they have to accept
    punishment, that that works.  That they do change
    some of their actions based on those things.
         So the one thing you can take away from that is
    that what you do in this Phase II, whatever it is,
    is something that will mean something to them.  This
    process has power.
         Well, you might also be asked -- and this was
    certainly what they wanted you to believe -- aren't
    these companies changed companies?  And I don't think it shows that at all.
         I mean, there are some things that they have to
    do.  They are more regulated and more controlled,
    and I'm not going to tell you that's not the case.
    That is the case.
         But does it really mean that they've changed
    anything about the way that they do business and the
    way they want to do business?  And I think it
    doesn't.  And here's why.
         I want to start with -- I want to go back --
    now, they have argued some corporate representatives
    in Phase II, but remember we brought you some
    corporate representatives in Phase I.  These are
    people that still work there.
         Remember Mr. Jupe?  Okay.  Mr. Jupe was a
    corporate representative of Philip Morris.  He was
    deposed in 2011.  Okay.  And he was asked did the
    company ever tell anybody to quit smoking.
         "We do tell people the best thing to do for
    your health is to quit.
         "When did you start?
         "Well, 1999.
         Okay.  So they started late, and they say they
    admit this.  And they have their witnesses admit
    this in court. But then remember what else Mr. Jupe said?
         "Does Philip Morris today acknowledge the
    proposition that nicotine causes disease?
         "I don't think we acknowledge that."
         See, they don't want to acknowledge, even
    today, that addiction to nicotine causes disease,
    that addiction to these products is a problem.
         So I don't think that they've changed much at
    all in that respect.  And you have the testimony of
    Mr. Jupe to prove that.  That was 2011 when he said
    that.
         So what did Dr. Lipowicz say?
         Yesterday Dr. Lipowicz came in, and he talked a
    lot about what Philip Morris says on its Web site.
    But if you were listening, there were many things he
    didn't acknowledge.
         My colleague Mr. Pendell asked him if they
    thought the company marketed to teens.  And he
    denied it.  He said, "I never" -- he said, "I don't
    agree with that."  And he's been there since 1988.
    And he said, "I've never gotten that feeling."
         And that struck me, and I thought about it.
    And I was, like, wait a minute.  Folks, we showed
    you the documents.  We showed the evidence that said
    they did it.  He never got that feeling.  He doesn't have to have a feeling about it.
         He could if he wanted to simply go and look at
    the evidence and say, "Oh, this is what the company
    was doing," but he didn't do that.  He had an
    opportunity to do that, but they won't admit that
    even today.
         So that was Philip Morris.  What about
    Reynolds?
         Well, we also brought you in Phase I the
    testimony of a Reynolds employee, Mr. Gentry.
         And I -- you know, I can't remember if
    Mr. Gentry is a doctor or not a doctor, but I'm
    calling him Mr. Gentry because I mess that up all
    the time.
         So Jeff Gentry's testimony:  "You have
    concluded from that (inaudible) -- that nicotine
    addiction does not cause disease?
         "Yes, I conclude that.  If people are addicted
    to nicotine patches or things that are safe, the
    nicotine addiction is not a risk for disease."
         2011 this man is deposed from the Reynolds
    Tobacco Company.  He still works there.  And he's
    still saying the same thing.
         They still don't want to admit that cigarettes
    and nicotine products are a twofold problem. There's a cancer problem.  There's a COPD problem,
    but there's an addiction problem.
         There is no other product that I'm aware of --
    and maybe you all can think of it -- in the United
    States for which the only purpose and the only
    business model that it exists is addiction.
         You know, you may think of a painkiller is a
    good example.  Painkiller has a purpose, and the
    purpose is that you take the drug to relieve pain
    and it helps people, and they warn you.  Addiction
    is a serious side effect of this.
         But addiction is not a side effect of
    cigarettes.  It is the reason they exist.
         The reason the ZONNIC and the VUSEs and all
    those things exist is to get people addicted.  And
    the reason they want people to be addicted is so
    they can sell more of those products.
         And then you heard from Dr. Figlar.  That was
    Reynolds's witness that they brought in yesterday to
    lessen the sting of the punishment.  And I thought
    that Dr. Figlar said two things that were really
    important.
         First, he claimed -- and I don't know if you
    remember this -- but my colleague Mr. Pendell asked
    him about Reynolds's position now.  And he talked about what was on their Web site.  And then
    Mr. Pendell said:
         "Well, have you gone back and looked at their
    documents?"
         And he -- he sort of -- "Yeah, I've looked at
    some of those documents from the '20, '40s, '50s,
    '60s, and '70s."
         And Mr. Pendell said, "When did you guys start
    acknowledging that these things caused cancer and he
    tried to say they didn't agree with the word "cause"
    in the '80s and '90s, but that they still believed
    that is the impression he got.
         But I want you to remember something:  That's
    what Dr. Figlar said on the stand under oath, but
    what did we show you right before he got on the
    stand?  He showed you a letter to the teacher or the
    principal at a school.  The fifth graders in 1990
    wrote Reynolds a letter and what did Reynolds say
    about the disease?  They said despite all the
    research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact
    is that scientists do not know the cause or causes
    of the chronic diseases reported to be associated
    with smoking.
         Okay.  Let me be clear:  That was their
    position in the '80s and '90s.  I've got another example.
         Regardless of what Dr. Figlar said, we have the
    documented proof.  Remember this one?  This is from
    the R.J. Reynolds Company and this was in -- I
    believe this was a 1988 document.  Can we have an
    open debate about smoking?  This is what they were
    saying in the '80s and '90s.
         I want to be clear:  I'm not trying to rehash
    what we did in Phase I.  I wasn't even planning on
    doing that at all or touching on it, but what's
    problematic to me is that these witnesses --
    Dr. Lipowicz and Dr. Figlar -- come in and they say
    things under oath that directly contradict what the
    documented evidence in the record says.  And all I'm
    trying to do is put their testimony in the context
    of why they're here.
         They are here to send one message and if you
    try to get them off that message and get them to
    tell you about what happened when Sal Marchese was
    alive, you can't get a straight answer from them.
         Now, the second thing that Dr. Figlar said that
    I thought was very important was this, and he said
    this in response to one of your questions.  Somebody
    asked, does VUSE cause addiction?  And I thought
    that was probably one of the times when Dr. Figlar wasn't very honest.  He said VUSE has nicotine in it
    and it's just like a cigarette and it does cause
    addiction.
         And that is how at the end of the day that you
    know neither Philip Morris nor Reynolds has changed
    because their business model is still about getting
    people on the product, getting them to stay on the
    product, and having to be addicted to nicotine.
         We showed you a document.  It was called the
    Smoker Psychology Review.  And I think I have a copy
    of it here.  Okay.  So this was from the late '70s.
    This is a Philip Morris document.  And it says the
    undertaking that they're looking at to study the
    psychology here is:  "Study the psychology of the
    smoker in search of information that can increase
    corporate profits."
         So that was their mission then; to make money.
    We know that's still their mission now.  That's what
    all businesses do and they were trying to figure out
    how to do it.
         And they said -- you've seen this before.  They
    said, "Our task is to understand the reinforcing
    mechanism of process whereby the habit is
    established and maintained, such is our model."
         Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, based on the testimony that you heard yesterday, based on the
    documents that you've seen, based on the products
    that they're still selling, I think you understand
    that addiction is still their model.  That's what
    they want.  That's how they sell products.  That's
    how they make money.
         Now, interestingly, one of the executives from
    Philip Morris during the testimony in Phase I, you
    heard he made this promise.  And the promise was:
    If we find out that our cigarettes are harming
    people, we'll go out of business tomorrow.  And we
    know, of course, that they didn't do that.
         But I want you to think about something because
    Reynolds -- Reynolds got up and they paraded these
    products around, VUSE, Snus, Eclipse and my
    colleague said, look, 80 percent of your money still
    comes from the most deadly product that you make.
    But if they have these alternative products that are
    so much less risky, why don't they just sell that?
    If it's less risky and I don't think we --
         MR. ISASI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  What's the objection?
         MR. ISASI:  Argumentative.  We should not be
    selling cigarettes is a preempted argument.
         THE COURT:  It's argument, Counsel.  Overruled. Proceed.
         MR. OLIVER:  Why don't they just sell those
    things because those things don't cause cancer, at
    least they don't think they do, right?  They say
    they're better, but they're still selling the most
    deadly product they make and they're still making 80
    percent of their income off of that product.  So
    they haven't changed.
         So at the end of the day, this is what I think
    those witnesses were here to do.  I told you they
    were here to lessen the sting.  I don't think that
    they were very credible.
         You heard that at least one of the witnesses,
    Dr. Figlar, before he testified in court he spent a
    whole year getting trained -- I think he said he
    spent a couple of hours a week meeting with lawyers
    for an entire year.  The job when you're a witness
    is to come in, raise your right hand and tell the
    truth.  It doesn't take you a year's worth of
    training to learn how to tell the truth.
         He was learning how to send a message and it's
    the same message.  And if you try to get him off
    track, what you saw was that he couldn't answer a
    question with a straight answer about what happened
    during Sal Marchese's lifetime.      Now, the one last piece of evidence that I want
    to talk about, you know, they talked about the
    employees who were there a long time ago.  And they
    said, oh, these people aren't here anymore.  Well,
    that's irrelevant.
         They also said those people never got punished.
    Those people were never pushed out of the company.
    Oh, you've done a bad thing; we're going to fire
    you.  You see that in the news.  You see a company
    gets in trouble, they find out who was responsible
    for the trouble and they get them out, right?
    They're gone.
         That never happened to these people.  They
    never kicked these people out.  They never punished
    these people.  Not one minute did they think about
    doing it.  These people lived long lives in the
    company and they profited from the lies that they
    told and that's a fact.
         So the fact that it happened a long time ago
    and these people are gone?  Well, that happened when
    Sal Marchese was alive.  What these people were
    doing during their lifetimes at the company was
    affecting Sal Marchese.
         And here is the most important point about what
    you heard yesterday and we talked about these things happening a long time ago.  The harm that these
    defendants' products are causing and that their lies
    caused, we're just now realizing that now.
         If you remember, Dr. Proctor put a
    demonstrative slide up and the slide showed the rise
    of the consumption of cigarettes.  And he said,
    well, there's a lag.  There was another line and the
    other line went right behind it and he said there
    was a 20-year lag.
         So in order to understand what the harms that
    their products are causing, their lies are causing,
    right now you've got to look back 20 years ago.
    Those lies they were telling in 1994 in front of
    Congress, those lies they were tell in the mid-'90s,
    we're experiencing the lung cancer and the COPD and
    all of those things now.  That was 20 years ago, but
    it takes a long time for cigarettes to cause
    disease, so that is the tale of what happened so
    we're in it right now.
         And so they can talk about declining smoking
    rates and I agree; that's a good thing.
         But what you saw during Dr. Proctor's
    testimony -- and this is just for demonstrative
    purposes, guys -- this is not in evidence that I
    recall.  This is just for demonstrative purposes. That's 2010.
         So you see that the cigarettes smoked since
    have gone down.  You see a peak in the '70s and the
    '80s of cigarette smoke per capita, you know, you
    get billions smoked and they start to go down.
         But look at the lung cancer deaths.  Okay?
    They haven't gone down substantially yet and that's
    because of that tale.  That's because what they were
    doing 20 years ago, we feel the effects of it now.
         So at the end of the day, when you think about
    the evidence that they put on yesterday, I want you
    to remember one thing:  I want you to remember that
    big slide that Reynolds's lawyer put up and he held
    up and he said, what does this have to do with Sal
    Marchese?  Every piece of evidence they put on
    yesterday, ask yourself, what does this have to do
    with what they did to Sal Marchese?
         And the answer that I humbly submit is not much
    at all.
         So the question is, you know, what their
    conduct is, what amount of money is appropriate for
    them under the circumstances.
         Now, I can't give you any kind of formulaic
    response here.  You saw Dr. Raffa's report.  You saw
    what RJR makes on a regular basis.  Okay?  On a daily average you heard testimony that they're
    making $3.5 million a day.  Every day that we're in
    this courtroom they're making approximately $3.5
    million a day for selling cigarettes for Reynolds.
         It was quite a bit more.  Okay?  They're making
    $11.9 million a day for every day that we're in this
    courtroom.  And they have net worth in the billions.
         So how do you punish a company that makes that
    much money?  Well, it's tough.  I mean, you don't
    want to give an amount that's ridiculous and I'm not
    asking you for that.  This is not about $40 million.
    This is not about $30 million.  It's not about $20
    million.
         I think you have to pick an amount of money
    that is sufficient for them to say they don't think
    they got off easy.  Okay?  It doesn't have to be so
    large to be ridiculous, but it has to be enough
    money for them to know and feel the sting and get
    the message that what you did to Sal Marchese
    deserves punishment.
         And what I think it is, is $5 million per
    company.  $10 million total.  The way I divide that
    is this:  They were in a conspiracy.  Reynolds got
    him started.  Philip Morris kept him smoking.  And
    both their cigarettes contributed to their death -- excuse me, to his death.
         So I think that's the way to divide it.  That's
    what I would do.  But it's not my decision; it's
    your decision.  But I'll tell you, you know,
    $500,000 per company?  That's not enough.  A million
    dollars per company?  That's not enough.  They will
    think if that's what you do that they got off.
         And if you want to divide it some other way, if
    you want to have some other amount, it is up to you.
    It's absolutely your decision to make; it's not mine
    and I trust you -- that's part of the system.
         Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I thank you
    for your time and I want to end this up the way that
    I began in voir dire.  I've never asked you to
    punish them for being cigarette companies.  I've
    asked you to punish them for what they did.  And
    when you do it, I'm asking you to do it in an amount
    that is fair, that is just punishment for what they
    did.
         This is the time.  This phase is where they
    accept responsibility for what they did to Sal
    Marchese.  And taking responsibility, just like I
    tell my son and my daughter, is about accepting the
    consequences and accepting the punishment for what
    you did.      Thank you.


                   CLOSING ARGUMENT
         MR. OLIVER:  Ladies and gentlemen of the jury,
    Mr. Isasi for the Reynolds Tobacco Company got up
    and talked about a lot of things that have happened
    long after Sal Marchese passed away.  And he put
    this thought up.  He says, you may punish a
    defendant only for the conduct that caused
    Mr. Marchese's death, and that's what the law says.
         So you've got to ask yourself, why was he
    spending so much time talking about things that
    don't have anything to do with Mr. Marchese?
         Well, that is Sal Marchese.  And the defendants
    want you to believe that they changed; that they're
    different.  That they got up -- and I found this
    offensive.  They got up and they compared the loss
    of 11 years of Sal Marchese's life to Trudy Marchese to a lottery ticket.  That is what PM's lawyer said.
         And then you heard Reynolds's lawyer talk about
    what they're doing with their products now.  And how
    did they describe it?  And I think this is telling.
    They described it as a migration strategy.
         And remember those documents from Philip Morris
    where they're comparing people to rats?  People
    don't migrate.  Animals migrate.  They still look at
    people's lives like animals, and they still look at
    them like dollars and cents.
         So let's walk through a couple of points.  I'm
    not going to belabor this.
         The first thing.  Mr. Cofer started talking
    about a legal product.  I don't want cigarettes to
    be illegal.  I'm not saying that the federal
    government should pass a law that should make
    cigarettes illegal.
         But what I'm saying is this:  If two
    businessmen got together and one businessman said to
    another businessmen, "Let's sell this addictive
    product.  It kills me."
         And the guy says, "Why would we ever do that?"
         And the other guy says, "Well, it's addictive,
    and they will never quit.  We'll make a whole bunch
    of money."      And the other guy says, "Wait.  Wait.  You
    know, is this legal?"
         And the guy who is trying to convince him to do
    it says, "Oh, absolutely it's illegal."
         Would it be okay if that businessman says,
    "Well, if since it's illegal, I guess that's a good
    idea"?  Absolutely not.
         They have alternative products that at least
    they claim are less risky.  Why aren't they just
    selling those products?
         That was my point.  Not that the federal
    government should make it illegal, but that is the
    nature of the decision they made.  Just because it's
    legal doesn't make it right.  Okay?
         You heard Mr. Isasi talk a lot about things
    they admitted and they didn't admit.  And I just
    wanted to remind you that this is Mr. Gentry.
         Mr. Isasi said:  "Well, Mr. Oliver said we
    don't admit that cigarettes cause disease."
         That is not what I said.  I said they don't
    admit that addiction causes disease.
         And Mr. Gentry, under oath in this courtroom
    said:  "Yes.  I conclude that nicotine addiction
    does not cause disease.  Yes.  I don't think it
    causes disease." So that is what the testimony from Reynolds's
    representative, sworn under oath -- remember that's
    the evidence.  The instructions say what I say, it's
    not the evidence.  What Mr. Isasi says is not the
    evidence.  What that guy said, that's evidence.
         Mr. Isasi talked a lot about deterrence and the
    need for deterrence.  And I want you to remember
    that part of the instruction that says deterrence to
    others.  All you have to do is read the newspaper.
    Takata airbags, Volkswagen, VP, they are the --
         MR. ISASI:  Objection, Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.
         MR. OLIVER:  At the end of the day, we don't
    want businesses that are highly regulated and highly
    restrained.  That is not a good thing.  We want
    businesses that do the right thing in the first
    instances.  We want businesses that are good, that
    are honest, that produce things for us that help us,
    that serve a purpose, not that addict and destroy
    for no reason whatsoever.
         So all of this has been about one thing for the
    defendants in Phase II.  It's been about a free
    pass.  They called it a lottery.  A lottery ticket
    costs two or three bucks.  Okay.  It doesn't cost
    11 years of a person's life.  No person on earth would accept that.  Oh, I'll take a lottery ticket
    for 11 years of my husband's life.  That's
    ridiculous, and it's offensive.
         This is not about where the money goes.  That
    was Phase I.  Phase I was about Mrs. Marchese's
    loss.  That was very clear from the instructions.
         This is different.  This is not about whether
    it goes.  It's about whether it comes from.  And
    that is what they desperately want to avoid.
         Now, they've talked about a lot of other
    lawsuits.  They talk about -- I think there were
    numbers thrown out, 5,000 and 3200.
         It took Mrs. Marchese 11 years from the time of
    her husband's death to get there.  If we're trying
    these cases, we're going to be trying them for
    300 years, if we get to try all those cases.  You
    can do the math.  A lot of those people will never
    see their day in court.
         So don't be fooled about those discussions.
    Those people are not all going to get the
    opportunity that Trudy Marchese got because it takes
    so long to get here.
         Folks, absolution from sins of the past
    requires acceptance of punishment in the present.
    They're simply, once again, trying not to take responsibility for what happened to Sal Marchese.
         And your message should be one that you have to
    take responsibility, not because of any of these
    policy things that we're talking about, but because
    that's what the law says.
         You know, Mr. Isasi from the Reynolds company
    said something.  He said money talks.  And it does.
         That's the language they understand.  And he
    said this Phase II of this trial is the business end
    of it.  And I thought that was great because that's
    what my dad used to tell me when I was about to get
    punished.  The business end of it.  That's the phase
    we're in right now.  It's business end of it.
         So I'm asking you simply -- I'm not asking you
    to award a lottery ticket.  I'm asking you to make
    them take responsibility -- when you talk about a
    reasonable relationship to the value that you award,
    you fully compensated Mrs. Marchese with $1 million.
         $5 million for each company is a reasonable
    relationship to that, and it also has a reasonable
    relationship to the kind of punishment they're going
    to feel.
         Thank you for your service.
         All I'm asking you to do in this phase is
    exercise your duty and make them take responsibility for the things they did to Sal Marchese.
         Thank you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury.
