                   CLOSING ARGUMENT
         MR. COFER:  Thank you, Your Honor.  May it
    please the Court.
         Counsel, Mrs. Marchese, members of the jury,
    good morning.
         During the first phase of this trial you
    determined that Mrs. Marchese was entitled to
    receive compensatory damages and you arrived at an
    amount that you thought was fair to compensate her
    for her loss.  Now, this is Phase II and you have a
    different job.  The question before you now is
    whether punitive damages should be awarded today in
    2015, to punish Philip Morris and Reynolds for
    things they did in the past that they don't do now
    and they can't do again.
         I want you to look at the jury instructions
    when you get a chance and at the bottom of Page 4 the instructions tell you, you should impose
    punitive damages only if you conclude that monetary
    liability beyond the amount of compensatory damage
    is necessary to accomplish punishment and
    deterrence.
         You should not award punitive damages if you
    conclude that those purposes will be satisfied by a
    defendant's compensatory liability.
         That's actually the -- in the middle of Page 4.
    And then if you turn to Page 5, it tells you,
    finally, any amount of punitive damages must bear a
    reasonable relationship to the amount of
    compensatory damages which you have awarded to the
    plaintiff.  So that's the law.
         So yesterday you met my client, Pete Lipowicz.
    And Pete is the head scientist at Altria Client
    Services for research and development and
    engineering.  And he talked with you about the
    Philip Morris of today, in 2015, and how it conducts
    itself today.
         What Pete told you is that Philip Morris is
    committed to ensuring that the public hear a single
    uniform message on smoking and addiction.  Even if
    Philip Morris doesn't agree with everything that the
    Surgeon General or public health says, Philip Morris does not voice that agreement.
         Why?  Because they want the public to hear one
    message on the risks of smoking.  And they want them
    to hear it from public health.
         Members of the jury, that's different than what
    you heard in Phase I.  That's different than what
    happened in the past.  And respectfully, I suggest
    that's significant.
         You know, during Phase I you heard a lot about
    the Tobacco Institute, the Tobacco Industry Research
    Committee, and the Council for Tobacco Research.
         What you now know is they're gone.  They
    haven't existed in 17 years.  You've heard that for
    the last 15 years Philip Morris has had a Web site
    where it says unequivocally "smoking caused cancer
    and other diseases, smoking is addictive, and there
    is no such thing as a safe cigarette."
         Philip Morris has put it on the public Web site
    for the world to see.  And it's a very clear and
    unequivocal message about what Philip Morris today
    believes and the message that it tells the public
    any time they want to look to see what Philip
    Morris's position is.
         Dr. Lipowicz told you about legislation that
    Philip Morris supported in 2009.  Philip Morris urged Congress to pass it.  Philip Morris urged
    President Obama to pass it.
         And you've heard what the FDA has done.  You've
    heard about how the regulations affect Philip Morris
    and the other companies in various, significant
    ways.
         Today, Philip Morris is a highly regulated
    company.  And what's important, as you think about
    your task today, is to remember Philip Morris
    affirmatively supported the law that gave
    Congress -- that gave the FDA the power it now has
    to regulate Philip Morris and the other companies.
    So why did Philip Morris do it?
         Pete Lipowicz told you that Philip Morris wants
    a seat at the table.  They want an opportunity to
    communicate with public health, and they want an
    opportunity to express their views, help address
    some of the very challenging issues that we have
    with cigarettes.  They want an opportunity to work
    with public health to try to come up with safer
    products.
         You know, the fact is that cigarettes are a
    legal product and they're a dangerous product.  We
    have -- as a society, we've decided that cigarettes
    are legal. Now, Mr. Oliver argues basically cigarettes
    shouldn't be legal.  He said take them off the
    market and sell those other products.  Dr. Proctor
    feels the same way.  But that's not what we have
    decided as a society.
         Philip Morris wants to work with the public
    health community and the government to have
    consistent standards.  They want to work with them
    to come up with verifiable standards to make safer
    products.
         Members of the jury, the bottom line is that
    today, in 2015, Philip Morris conducts itself much
    differently than the Philip Morris you heard about
    in Phase I.  It conducts itself much differently
    than it did 40 or 50 or 60 years ago.
         Why?  Because it's a different company with
    different people and different management.  The
    people the plaintiff argued that were part of the
    conspiracy, they're gone.  They've been gone for a
    very long time.  They're not with the company
    anymore.  In fact, you heard from Dr. Lipowicz that
    most of them aren't even alive.
         But there's another reason why Philip Morris is
    a changed company, and that is, today, in 2015, they
    are a highly regulated company.  It conducts itself in a much different environment, a more transparent
    environment, a more controlled environment.
         So why is that important?  Because in this
    phase, the question that you must consider is
    whether it's necessary today in 2015 to punish and
    deter.
         So let me ask you to think about something:
    After hearing from Dr. Lipowicz about the Philip
    Morris of today, do you want to punish Philip Morris
    for what they're doing today, or do you want to
    encourage them?  Do you want to acknowledge the
    steps they made in the right direction and encourage
    them to continue down that path?
         All I ask is that you think about the message
    that you want to send with the verdict that you
    reach today.
         Now, before I talk more about the Court's
    instructions, I want to spend just a few minutes
    talking about the comparative fault.
         In your Phase I verdict, you decided that
    Mr. Marchese shares some of the responsibility for
    his decision to smoke, and you allocated 55 percent
    fault to him.
         But because you answered yes to Questions 5 and
    6, there will be no reduction in damages. Comparative fault will not apply, and Mrs. Marchese
    will receive 100 percent of the million dollars that
    you awarded.
         Now, there's no way for me to look at the
    verdict form and know if you meant to award her
    45 percent of that, or if you wanted her to get the
    entire million dollars.  I can't tell that.  But I
    just wanted to bring that to everyone's attention so
    we're all on the same page about the Phase I
    verdict, and the verdict in this phase as well.
         In this phase, if you award punitive damages,
    they will not be reduced by the amount of
    Mr. Marchese's fault.  You know, obviously it's your
    decision, but I just want to, again, make sure that
    we all understand exactly the effect of the
    decisions that you make.
         So in any event, in this phase of the trial,
    you will have to determine, based on everything
    you've heard, whether there is a need to award
    additional money to Mrs. Marchese to punish and
    deter Philip Morris and other companies.
         You have to decide whether awarding
    Mrs. Marchese additional money is necessary under
    the law that Judge Murphy has instructed you.  The
    instructions will tell you that it is not appropriate to award any money in punitive damages
    today unless the plaintiff persuades you that
    they're necessary for punishment and to deter future
    conduct.
         You know, one thing we know is that people
    change.  And we know that companies can change, too,
    because all a company is are the people who work
    there.  That's all Philip Morris is, is the sum
    total of the men and women who work at Philip
    Morris.
         Now, Mr. Oliver spent time with you talking
    about the evidence in Phase I, and he showed you
    some financial data.  We brought you Pete Lipowicz.
    He talked with you about the Philip Morris today.
    He answered your questions, and he told you that he
    stood ready and willing to answer whatever questions
    that the jury may have.  He told you that it's a
    changed company.
         Members of the jury, those changes we discussed
    are significant, and we think they should play an
    important role in your decision whether to award
    additional dollars to Mrs. Marchese to punish Philip
    Morris and deter it and others.
         So let's talk about the law in the
    instructions.  Judge Murphy read those to you yesterday.  You will have a copy of these.  The
    Court's instructions tell you that you can only
    punish for harm for conduct that actually harmed
    Mr. Marchese.
         The law does not permit you to punish Philip
    Morris in this case for harm to anyone other than
    Mrs. -- Mr. Marchese.
         Now, you know, throughout this trial, you
    repeatedly heard about other people who smoked and
    got sick and -- and who died.  You've heard those
    numbers.  And I know that's troubling.  Of course it
    is.  But here's the fact.  Under the law, you cannot
    punish Philip Morris in this case for harm to anyone
    else.  The law doesn't permit it.
         But let me tell you why.  If other people think
    they've been harmed by Philip Morris's actions, they
    can bring their own lawsuits, and they can have
    their own juries hear the evidence and decide
    whether they're entitled to recover money.
         You know, lots of people, you heard, have
    brought their own lawsuits, their own Engle
    lawsuits.  Lots of people have not.
         There are people who honestly believe that, you
    know what, it's my right to smoke.  I made those
    decisions with my eyes wide open, and I'm willing to accept the consequences of my choices.  There are
    people who feel that way.
         And, again, you know, we as a society have
    decided that people, that adults have the right to
    make that choice to decide how they want to live
    their lives.  You know, there have been warnings on
    cigarette packs for nearly 50 years, yet people
    still choose to smoke.
         That's a choice that people still exercise.
         So let me just say, I understand -- and believe
    me, I understand those numbers upset you.  But I ask
    you this:  If in the jury room someone suggests that
    Philip Morris be punished for harm to someone else,
    would you please speak up and tell them that they
    can't do that?  Would you please speak up and tell
    them that the law doesn't permit that?  Would you
    please tell them that the burden is on the plaintiff
    to prove and to show that Mrs. Marchese is entitled
    to recover punitive damages in this case based on
    the conduct that actually harmed Mr. Marchese?
         You've heard about the Engle case.  You started
    hearing about that class action back in jury
    selection.  But this is an individual case.  This is
    Mrs. Marchese's case.
         You know, I know when you hear all these topics about youth smoking, you know, you look at the
    documents, again, it's easy to get mad.  But I
    remind you, this is Mrs. Marchese's case.
         I want you to think back to closing arguments.
    In Phase I, Mr. Oliver told you that once plaintiff
    proved her husband was a class member, that she was
    entitled to recover compensatory damages.  But that
    is not true in this phase of the trial.
         Punitive damages cannot be based on the fact
    that cigarettes are addictive, or that they're
    inhalable, or that the product is defective.
         Mr. Oliver this morning suggested that you
    should punish defendants because cigarettes are
    addictive.  When you read the instructions, you will
    see that the law does not permit that.  That
    misstates the law.  Defendants can only be punished
    for the conduct that caused you to answer yes to
    question 5, concealment; or question 6, conspiracy;
    and even then, plaintiff has to show that that
    specific conduct actually harmed Mr. Marchese.
         So, again, Mr. Oliver talked about the fact
    that cigarettes are addictive, and he told you what
    the standard was for compensatory damages that you
    have awarded.  But under the law, you cannot punish
    Philip Morris because cigarettes are inhalable and addictive.
         And, finally, when you're thinking about
    whether to award punitive damages in this case, ask
    yourself if it is necessary to punish Philip Morris
    today in 2015 for things that happened in the past
    that cannot happen in the future.
         In Phase I, you heard about the conduct of the
    companies in the 1950s, the '60s, the '70s and the
    '80s, and, you know, after hearing that, you might
    have felt it would have been completely appropriate
    for someone to step in and put a stop to it.
         With all the power that the Court has, there is
    one thing that no one can do, and that is, turn back
    the hands of time.  The past is the past.  What is
    important in this phase of the trial is the present
    and the future.
         Now, it's plaintiff's position that because
    Philip Morris has the same name and sells cigarettes
    that nothing has changed.  But think about it.  Your
    common sense tells you that the people who made the
    decisions 50 or 60 years ago and wrote the documents
    and made the statements are different people.  They
    are long gone.
         The people who are working at Philip Morris
    today are literally generations removed from the decisions that were made that you heard in Phase I
    that caused you to render your verdict.
         So what would happen if you went to Philip
    Morris today, if you went to Richmond (indicating),
    you knocked on the door, you meet somebody like Pete
    Lipowicz?
         Pete was three years old.  He was born in 1960.
    He was three years old when the Surgeon General's
    Report --
         MR. OLIVER:  Objection, relevance.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.  This is argument,
    Counsel.
         MR. COFER:  He was three years old when the '64
    Surgeon General's report was published.  He was five
    years old when the first warning label went on the
    package.  And in response to Mr. Oliver's objection,
    I'm going to tell you in a minute and show you the
    jury instructions exactly why it's relevant.
         Pete Lipowicz is from a completely different
    generation.  He is literally a lifetime removed from
    the conduct you heard about in Phase I.
         Philip Morris may have the same name, just like
    I have my grandfather's name, but we're two very
    different people.
         When considering whether to award punitive damages, you might ask yourself if it's
    appropriate -- is it appropriate to punish Philip
    Morris today for things that were done by different
    employees decades ago.
         And the instructions at the bottom of Page 4
    tell you -- and I'll read them to you, but they're
    right here at the bottom of Page 4 -- "in
    determining the amount of punitive damages, if any,
    to assess against a defendant, you should consider
    the extent to which the defendant's conduct has
    changed from the conduct on which you base your
    determination that punitive damages may be warranted
    and the extent to which the circumstances have
    changed."
         You are entitled to conclude that this conduct
    that occurred in the distant past and involved
    actors who are no longer associated with the
    defendant need not be punished or that it should be
    punished less severely than recent misconduct.
         The law has a lot of common sense, and when
    Mr. Oliver asks you to punish Philip Morris, and he
    asks you to render punishment, think about who he's
    asking you to punish.
         Why punish Philip Morris's current employees
    for decisions they didn't make, for decisions that occurred decades ago by other people?
         What purpose would that serve?
         With your verdict, you compensated, to the
    extent that the law allows, to the extent that money
    can, Mrs. Marchese the amount of damages that you
    thought was fair.
         Whatever additional money you award goes
    directly to her.  It doesn't go to stop-smoking
    clinics.  It doesn't go to scientific or medical
    research.
         It doesn't go to programs to help people quit
    smoking.  It's additional money that goes to
    Mrs. Marchese.
         So let's talk about Philip Morris of today, in
    2015.  What is Philip Morris like today and what has
    it been doing differently for the last 17 years?
    Let's start with 1998.
         You heard about the Master Settlement
    Agreement.  You know that it was an agreement that
    Philip Morris and the other companies entered into
    to settle lawsuits with the 50 attorney generals.
         You heard that the MSA imposes a number of
    significant restrictions on the way that Philip
    Morris does business and that the attorney generals
    had the power to monitor and enforce these agreements.  The MSA placed significant restrictions
    on advertising.
         Remember, in Phase I you saw a lot of ads.
    Since the MSA, the companies can no longer advertise
    on billboards.  They don't sponsor sporting events.
    They don't advertise on buses or mass transit or in
    stadiums.
         They don't sponsor concerts.  There is no more
    branded merchandise.  No one has made a Marlboro cap
    or Marlboro T-shirt for 15 years.
         While it's still legal to advertise in
    magazines, in 2005 Philip Morris voluntarily took
    their ads off the back of magazines because they
    didn't want kids inadvertently to see it.
         That was in 2000.  In 2000.  In 2005 they took
    all their ads out of magazines.
         You can go to the bookstand today and you can
    look through every magazine there is.  You can look
    until the cows come home and you would never see a
    single ad for any brand that Philip Morris
    manufactures.
         Since 2005, the last decade, the only place you
    see Philip Morris ads are in the stores where you
    can buy the product.
         You heard about how Philip Morris updates plans.  It works with its retailers to reduce
    smoking.  You heard about the "We Card" program.
    You heard about the payments that Philip Morris
    makes each and every year to the states.  $70
    billion to the 50 states just from Philip Morris
    alone, and four billion right here in the State of
    Florida.  Those payments will continue as long as
    Philip Morris is in business.
         You learned that Philip Morris has rigorously
    complied with provisions of the MSA.  Nowhere in the
    country has a single attorney general brought a
    single action anytime, anywhere suggesting that
    Philip Morris hasn't lived up to their part of the
    bargain.
         And finally, you heard that in 2009, Congress
    passed the Tobacco Control Act that gave the FDA
    regulatory authority over the design, manufacture,
    and marketing of cigarettes.
         You know, we know from your Phase I verdict
    that you heard things that concerned you and because
    I haven't had a chance to talk with you, I don't
    know exactly what concerns you.  But I want to try
    to put on some evidence to address some of the
    things that may be troubling you.
         If you were concerned about cigarette advertising, what you've learned now is that the FDA
    governs, regulates and restricts where, when, and
    how cigarettes are advertised.
         And the only place Philip Morris advertises
    cigarettes is in stores.
         If what concerns you is ingredients and
    additives, you heard that the companies now provide
    the FDA with a list of everything that goes in their
    cigarettes.  In fact, they give them the Marlboro
    formula.
         In addition, they put all the brands and
    ingredients on the Web site, not the formula, but
    the brands, the ingredients and additives on the
    Web site for the public to see.  And the FDA has the
    authority to tell any company, I don't like that
    additive.  I don't like that ingredient.  Take it
    out.
         If what concerns you was the level of nicotine
    in cigarettes, what you now know is the FDA has the
    authority to tell the companies, you can reduce that
    to any arbitrary amount.  You can't completely take
    it out, but you can -- you've got to reduce that to
    any arbitrary amount.
         If what concerns you is filtered cigarettes,
    the FDA can tell the companies, you can't sell filtered cigarettes anymore.  Take the filters off.
    They are no longer legal.
         If what concerns you was the internal company
    documents, you now know that they're on the
    Internet.  They basically go on in realtime.
         You've heard how the FDA monitors the
    companies; that the FDA has the right to come in and
    inspect anything.  They can show up unannounced.
    They can spend days.  Show me your documents.  Show
    us your manufacturing facilities.  Show us your
    marketing documents.
         You've heard how they've done it.  You've heard
    the FDA has the power to seize Philip Morris's
    products.  They have the power to shut down the
    factories.  They have the power to impose fines.
         If what concerns you was the public statements
    that Philip Morris and the other companies made that
    disagreed with the Surgeon General, you know that
    those were no longer made and they haven't been made
    for 17 years.
         You know, throughout this trial you heard a lot
    about youth smoking.  And it's natural to be
    concerned with protecting our kids.  But what you
    now know is that nationwide, nationwide youth
    smoking is at an all-time low. Mr. Oliver said they can talk about declining
    smoking rates; I agree, that's a good thing.  And it
    is a good thing.  The youth smoking rate in Florida
    is at 4.3 percent.  An all-time low.  It's much
    lower than the national average.  The number of
    children who smoke in Florida has dropped in half
    since 2006.
         In fact, overall smoking rates, adults and
    overall smoking rates are at 15 percent.
         You heard from Dr. Lipowicz that they dropped
    from 18 percent to 15 percent in just the three
    years since the Tobacco Control Act took place.
         Things are different now.  And Philip Morris is
    different too.  And there is no question, members of
    the jury, that Philip Morris operates in a much more
    transparent, restrictive, and controlled environment
    than any time in the past.
         So, members of the jury, the evidence is that
    it's not necessary to award punitive damages to get
    Philip Morris to change because they have changed.
    They changed dramatically.
         And based on what you've seen, the conduct that
    upsets you in Phase I, can't and won't happen again.
         So where does that leave us on the question of
    whether it's necessary to award Mrs. Marchese more money to punish Philip Morris today?
         You heard in Phase I that Mr. Marchese was born
    in 1932; began smoking sometime in the '40s.
         Well, clearly -- and you heard this throughout
    the trial -- that was a different time then.
         And Philip Morris was different back then too.
    And let me just give you an example, which I think
    kind of puts it all in context.  I want you to think
    about a 15-year-old boy today.  2015.  He would have
    been born in 2000.
         He never would have seen a Philip Morris
    advertisement on television or radio or on a
    billboard or in the stadium or on a bus.
         If you walked into a retail store, his access
    to cigarettes would be dramatically limited.
         To the extent he saw any ad for cigarettes, it
    would have a federally mandated warning on it.
         He never would have heard a statement from the
    Tobacco Institute or the Council for Tobacco
    Research or the TIRC because they didn't exist in
    his lifetime.
         From the day he was born, literally millions of
    internal tobacco company documents would have been
    available on the Internet.
         And what would he have heard from Philip Morris?  The only thing he would have heard is that
    cigarettes cause cancer and other diseases, that
    nicotine is addictive.  There's no such thing as a
    safe cigarette.
         During his lifetime Philip Morris would have
    paid $70 billion to the various states in the MSA
    and they would have paid $4 billion right here in
    the State of Florida.
         And I'll tell you the fact that the tobacco
    settlement money is being used here in Florida to
    reduce youth smoking rates, I think is very
    important because that evidence shows that the
    tobacco settlement really made a difference.
         That's an example of the real-world, positive
    consequences that Philip Morris and the other
    companies' decision to enter into the agreement with
    the State of Florida and that money is used to fund
    smoking prevention efforts.
         And that fictional boy, he would be growing up
    at a time with high school smoking rates and youth
    smoking rates are one of the lowest rates recorded
    here in Florida by any state.
         Now, notwithstanding all of these changes,
    Mr. Oliver is asking you for $5 million per company
    for a total of $10 million, over and above the amount that you've already decided was fair to
    compensate Mrs. Marchese for her loss.
         Members of the jury, that is not a number
    that's tied to any evidence in this case.  That's a
    number you read about in lotteries.  They instruct
    you that any award of punitive damages must have a
    reasonable relationship to the amount of
    compensatory damages.  How does that bear a
    reasonable relationship to the one million in
    compensatory damages that you found was fair?
         That request is contrary to the law and the
    jury instructions.
         And I want you to think about the message that
    you would send if you -- to other companies if you
    awarded $5 million.
         It would say that even if, as a company, you
    enter into legally binding agreements that
    fundamentally change the way you do business; even
    if you subject yourself to significant government
    oversight; even if you agree to pay substantial sums
    of money to address past conduct, you'll still be
    forced to pay significant punitive damage awards.
         So what's the incentive to change?  If you want
    to encourage other companies who are watching, the
    goal not be served by punitive damages here.      If you award punitive damages, you're sending a
    message to other companies they'll be punished
    whether they reform or not.  Members of the jury,
    reform must make a difference.
         Mr. Oliver has suggested that you send a
    message to other companies with your verdict.
         And respectfully, the message that I suggest
    you send is, step up to the plate.  Be transparent.
    Change your ways.
         Agree to significant, meaningful government
    oversight.  Sure, you have to compensate for the
    harm that you caused.  That's only fair.
         But you won't be punished today, in 2015, for
    moving in the right direction.  Awarding a large sum
    of money to Mrs. Marchese isn't going to send a
    message to Philip Morris to change, because they
    have changed their ways.
         Philip Morris may have the same name, but it's
    not the same company.
         But if you disagree with me, and if you think
    Mrs. Marchese has satisfied her burden of proof
    today that in 2015 there is a purpose to awarding
    punitive damages, then let me suggest this:  In your
    Phase I verdict you awarded $1 million to
    Mrs. Marchese.      No matter what the future holds for
    Mrs. Marchese, one thing you can be sure of is that
    financially she will never want for anything
    throughout the rest of her life.
         Mr. Oliver suggested you award $5 million for
    Philip Morris; $10 million total.  If juries in the
    State of Florida in the Engle cases awarded -- in
    even half of the Engle cases.  You heard there are
    3200 Engle cases.  If juries in even half of those
    cases awarded $5 million against Philip Morris, that
    would be --
         MR. OLIVER:  Objection.
         THE COURT:  What's the objection?
         MR. OLIVER:  This is inappropriate argument
    about what happens in other lawsuits.
         THE COURT:  Thank you.  The objection is noted.
    It's overruled.
         MR. COFER:  You heard there are over 3200 Engle
    cases pending against Philip Morris in the State of
    Florida.  If jurors in even half of those, 1600,
    awarded the $5 million that Mr. Oliver asked, that
    would amount to $8 billion.
         If you believe that punitive damages are
    appropriate in this case, what I suggest you do is
    award an additional $225,000, and let me tell you why I suggest that.
         You decided in Phase I that Philip Morris
    was -- their actions contributed 22.5 percent to
    Mr. Marchese's injuries.
         So I suggest you multiply the 22.5 percent that
    Philip Morris's actions contributed to the million
    dollars that you awarded Mrs. Marchese and that's an
    additional $225,000.
         That is an amount that would take the average
    household in Florida over five years to earn.  And
    if you do that, one thing you can be assured is that
    Mrs. Marchese will leave the courtroom with $1.225
    million.  And if you did that, then the twin goals
    of compensation and punishment will be served.
         Now, this is my last chance to talk with you
    and as I told you yesterday, I want to thank you
    again for your service in this case.
         The fact that you found against my client does
    not, in any way, diminish my appreciation for your
    service or my respect for the work that you've done
    in this case.  So I'm going to sit down.  You don't
    have to listen to me anymore.  Thank you.  You put
    up with the -- and Mr. Isasi is going to have a
    chance to talk with you.  And then at the end
    Mr. Oliver is going to get a chance to step up one more time.
         And all I ask that you do as you listen to
    Mr. Oliver and his impassioned rebuttal is just to
    ask yourself what purpose -- what purpose would be
    served by awarding a large punitive damage in this
    case.
         You've heard the evidence.  We respect your
    decision, and we trust you to make a good decision.
         And, again, thank you very, very much for your
    attention and your service in this case.
         That's all I have, Your Honor.


                    CLOSING ARGUMENT
         MR. ISASI:  May it please the Court,
    Mrs. Marchese, and counsel.
         Good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. You heard a lot of arguments from Mr. Oliver
    about punishment and deterrence.  There are a couple
    of things you didn't hear about.
         What the purpose of the punishment would be.
    And I start where -- where Mr. Cofer ended.  What
    would the purpose of that punishment be?  What would
    it accomplish that hasn't already been accomplished
    over the last 15 years?
         You didn't hear the evidence to support their
    punishment and deterrence arguments.
         They put some documents in front of you from
    the '70s and the '80s and 1990.
         But they didn't explain to you how that
    evidence supports their argument that punishment and
    deterrence is needed.
         And remember what I said at the very beginning
    of this phase, the one thing that didn't change from
    one phase to the other was that the burden of proof
    was on the plaintiffs to come forward with that
    evidence.
         So that's what we're going to do right now.
    We're going to discuss the evidence and the law, and
    I submit to you that when we do that, when we walk
    through that, what you will see is that the
    plaintiffs are seeking punishment without purpose. And awarding punitive damages to the
    R.J. Reynolds of 2015 would serve no purpose.
         Now, Mr. Cofer has already addressed much of
    the evidence in general.  So I'm going to stay
    focused on what you've heard about the R.J. Reynolds
    company here.
         Let me grab the clicker.
         So first thing right off the bat is that
    Reynolds can only be punished for concealing
    information and agreeing to conceal information.
    This is -- this was your verdict.  This is what you
    determine, the concealment and the conspiracy to
    conceal is what got us to Phase II for you to
    consider the evidence in this phase.
         So the evidence that the plaintiffs needed to
    present to you had to be related to concealment.
    And that's why we spent time on that issue in
    talking about the Reynolds of 2015.
         So this phase is not a vote on whether or not
    cigarettes should be legal.
         It isn't a vote of whether or not we
    individually approve of the business that -- that
    Reynolds is in.
         And so the question you're posed here is quite
    simple:  Are punitive damages needed to prevent Reynolds from concealing and agreeing to conceal
    information today?
         The evidence you heard is that Reynolds
    discloses information, doesn't conceal it.
         Those are both the disclosures that are
    required under federal law, and I agree getting --
    we shouldn't get credit for agreeing to comply with
    the law, but that's not what we're talking about
    here.
         You also heard evidence that Reynolds goes
    above and beyond what's required by federal law.
    Discloses more.  You heard that from Dr. Figlar, and
    we'll go over that in a moment.
         Here's our punitive damages instruction.  This
    is the top of Page 4 of your instructions, and it's
    about mitigating evidence.  And that's a -- a lot of
    the evidence we presented to you falls into that
    category.
         It's evidence which may demonstrate that there
    is no need to impose punitive damages or that a
    reduced amount of punitive damages should be
    imposed.
         Now, as we're going to discuss -- you'll see
    later when we go through the instructions -- changed
    circumstances, changed circumstances are a type of mitigating evidence that you are entitled to
    consider on whether or not to award punitive damages
    or if you're going to award them, how much.
         But let's first talk about the evidence from
    this phase of the case and how it shows there's no
    purpose in punishing Reynolds today.
         Here's the evidence, and it's uncontradicted.
         As a result of the Master Settlement Agreement,
    to date, Reynolds has already paid over
    $50 billion -- $50 billion to 46 states, and then
    paid individually in the State of Florida
    $3 billion.
         These are enormous, enormous sums.
         When we talk about punishment and you talk
    about deterrence, preventing others from engaging in
    the same conduct, money talks.
         This (indicating), this is the price that
    Reynolds has paid for its past conduct and continues
    to pay.  Because, as you heard from Dr. Figlar,
    these payments are going to go on and on and on.
         Now, another aspect of mitigating evidence that
    you are allowed to consider is the amount of
    litigation that Reynolds has faced.
         You heard about the thousands and thousands of
    other lawsuits that are currently pending against Reynolds just here in Illinois [sic].
         And you heard that in some of those cases,
    there have been -- some of them have gone to trial.
    And in some of the cases that have gone to trial
    involving other smokers with other facts, some other
    juries have awarded punitive damages.  And, in fact,
    Reynolds has already paid over $100,000,000 in
    punitive damages.
         And under Judge Murphy's instructions, you are
    entitled to consider that on the question of whether
    or not to award punitive damages; and, if so, how
    much.
         Again, on the topic of money:
         This is -- this is a very unusual situation
    here.  There are a lot of regulated industries out
    there.  A lot of companies fall under the umbrella
    of the federal government and have rules that they
    need to comply with and things like that.
         But here, Reynolds and the other tobacco
    companies actually have paid for that -- they've
    paid the government to set up the center -- the
    center of tobacco [sic] that is within FDA to then
    enforce the rules.  They -- this doesn't come out of
    the taxpayers' dollars at all.
         You've seen what those payments total.  In the first six years alone, $883 million.  You heard
    Dr. Figlar sort of (inaudible) $200 million a year.
         So we're talking about billions and billions of
    dollars that will ultimately be paid by the industry
    to the FDA to regulate the industry.  And you've
    seen the changes that have occurred.  You know, both
    from the evidence and from your own life experience,
    that things are different.  Ads, sponsorships gone,
    things like that.
         This is part of -- this is part of the
    punishment and deterrence.  Reynolds is now an
    industry that is totally dominated by the federal
    government.  We're going to discuss a little bit
    about that right now.
         Let's just talk about some of the -- some of
    the things that the FDA now requires.
         I'm actually going to focus just sort of on
    these first two bullet points for a second.
         Smoking and health research, smoking addiction
    research.  There can't be any more secret studies
    about smoking and health.  If Reynolds does a study
    on smoking, smoking and health, it is required to
    turn that over to the federal government.
         You saw our Web site where we disclose both
    the -- the product ingredients by brand to -- to consumers; but remember what Dr. Figlar said,
    there's an additional level to the FDA.  We have to
    give them not just the ingredients.  We have to give
    them the quantities.  We have to give them the
    recipes.  So the federal government knows right down
    to the ingredient exactly how the products are made.
         Remember the federal government hasn't told us
    to stop using any particular ingredient, any
    particular product, but all of this -- bless you --
    all of this is the consequence of Reynolds's prior
    conduct.
         Now, let's talk about concealment for a second.
    This morning Mr. Oliver put some documents down on
    the screen.  I just wanted to make sure there was no
    confusion here.
         No one came into this courtroom and told you
    that Reynolds has conspired to conceal information
    or concealed information since 1999.  You heard
    Dr. Proctor's testimony on that, that the conspiracy
    ended at that time.
         So that's important because, of course,
    concealment is what led you to your Phase I verdict
    and brought you here today.
         The fact is it's been many, many years since
    there was any kind of conspiracy to conceal the health effects of smoking.  And this is one of the
    changed circumstances that we're going to talk about
    in a moment under the jury instructions you are
    entitled to consider.
         So no -- no conspiracy, no concealment.
    Neither exists anymore.  Hasn't existed for years.
    You heard about the online document depository.  You
    can go very soon, if you wanted to -- after this,
    maybe not -- but you can go and click on links and
    look at those documents yourselves.  You can search
    for the documents yourselves.  Millions and millions
    of documents.  There's a Web site that Reynolds
    maintains and pays for that purpose.  No
    concealment.
         Let's talk about cigarettes themselves.
         I mentioned to you earlier the ingredients,
    additives, anything in cigarettes are there
    available for anyone to look at.  And this is
    voluntary.  Not required by the FDA.  It's there,
    not because it has to be, but because Reynolds
    believes it's the right thing to do.  It's what you
    heard Dr. Figlar say what a responsible company
    should do.
         So smokers or anybody can go, check out the
    additives on a certain product, look at them by brand individually, see how they're used.
         Also, while we're talking about the Web site,
    talking about the guiding principles of the Reynolds
    of 2015.  What Reynolds now tells smokers and the
    public (indicating):
         "No tobacco product has been shown to be safe
    and without risks."
         Actually, right below that you see:
         "Nicotine in tobacco products is addictive."
         There's no confusion.  There's no doubt about
    this.  It's clear and, again, voluntary.
         No one requires Reynolds to say these things.
    But it is decided it's the right thing to do.  The
    Reynolds of 2015 wants to be clear to consumers
    about the risks of smoking.
         It's trying to be a responsible company within
    what is a controversial industry.
         It tells consumers just a couple bullet points
    down:
         "Quitting smoking significantly reduces the
    risk for serious disease."
         And Mr. Oliver said we don't admit that
    cigarette smoking can cause disease.  That's simply
    not true.  It's right there.  It's right there.  Of
    course, we do.  Of course, we do. There's no confusion, no doubt; and, again,
    statement that's voluntarily made.
         What do we tell consumers?
         Right there, tobacco consumers:
         "The best course of action for tobacco
    consumers concerned about their health is to quit."
         No confusion, no doubt about that.
         Again, a voluntary statement made by Reynolds.
    This is what the Reynolds of 2015 tells its own
    consumers.  If you have health concerns and you want
    to, you should stop smoking.  Period.
         There are people who are comfortable with the
    risks of smoking and will continue to smoke.
         And that's -- that's fine.  In this country
    we've decided that's appropriate.  Adults get to
    make that decision.
         But what we tell people, if you are concerned,
    best thing you can do is quit.
         Can you imagine another industry doing -- I
    mean, imagine the liquor industry putting on their
    Web sites, "You know, if you're worried about the
    health effects of drinking too much, just stop
    drinking.  Just stop drinking."
         Now, we brought you Dr. Figlar to testify, vice
    president of R.J. Reynolds.  And -- and he was there primarily to -- to talk about a couple different
    things.  He -- to describe for you Reynolds's
    efforts at disclosing information, on smoking and
    health; and how Reynolds is trying to transform
    tobacco and become the very different company that
    it is today.
         He talked to you about the work that they do on
    tobacco, including ZMapp.  That's the -- that's the
    drug that was used to treat the Ebola patients that
    were brought back to the United States and is being
    used in West Africa to treat Ebola patients.  Coming
    from the tobacco companies.  Engineering the tobacco
    plant to help manufacture antibodies to cure Ebola.
         Now, with respect to tobacco that is being used
    by consumers, you saw Reynolds acknowledges that no
    tobacco product is without risk.  But what
    Dr. Figlar described for you is Reynolds's risk
    migration strategy, their plan to move consumers
    down this risk continuum, move them away from the
    cigarettes that have the highest risk for health
    towards lower risk products for those people who
    choose to use products that contain nicotine in
    them.
         So what you heard him explain to you is that
    Reynolds has invested billions and billions of dollars in this -- in this strategy.  And there's no
    other company that has that broad portfolio of
    products available to it.
         You heard about Eclipse, which is the successor
    to Premier.  That's the heat-not-burn cigarette.
         And as you've heard during the course of the --
    the testimony, the -- the biggest risk with smoking
    is when you light the tobacco on fire, you combust
    it, and the carcinogens end up in the smoke which
    you inhale.  Heat-not-burn technology, you don't
    actually burn the tobacco.  And so you saw the
    studies that showed the significantly lower
    exposures to carcinogens, and that's moving people
    down the continuum.
         But you also heard about -- about VUSE.  VUSE
    is an E-cigarette, which doesn't burn anything.
    It's an aerosol, and it has flavorings in it.
    Mr. Oliver said, I wrote it down, that Mr. Figlar
    admitted it's just like a cigarette in response to
    one of the questions you asked.  That's not what he
    said.  That is absolutely not what he said.
         The question was whether or not VUSE contains
    nicotine, and it does.  But if you heard the
    testimony from Dr. Figlar, what he showed you, and
    the science backs him on this, is that because you are using a capsule with liquid that becomes an
    aerosol, you're not burning anything.
         And so those carcinogens -- I mean, there is an
    actual tobacco leaf in VUSE.  And so what he told
    you was that for people who want to use a product
    that contains nicotine, VUSE is an alternative.  And
    people smoke for the nicotine, but they get sick
    because of the tar.  There's no tar in VUSE.  So it
    is -- it's not just like a cigarette, and it is a
    substantially -- it's a product that exposes people
    substantially to fewer chemicals.
         That's what he told you.  It's -- it's -- no
    one is going to tell you that any of these products
    is risk-free, all right, there's no zero down here.
    But these are products that are legal and available
    for adults to purchase, and that's what Reynolds is
    doing.
         He told you about snus.  Snus is a -- it's a
    special form of smokeless tobacco.  The way it's
    prepared, it's not -- it's not cured the same way as
    some other smokeless tobacco.  And so you can put --
    it's a little pouch, put it in your mouth, doesn't
    require you to spit.
         And -- but the most important thing is that he
    pointed -- it's a product that they developed from Sweden.  And then in Sweden, because of their
    migration to this product, they've seen cancer rates
    drop dramatically, well below even the targets that
    had been set in -- in Europe for that, the --
    another product that Reynolds offers to try to move
    people from the high risk to the low risk.
         And, of course, for people who want to quit
    altogether, there's ZONNIC, which is the gum that he
    talked to you about, the nicotine replacement
    therapy.  Still contains nicotine, but it's designed
    in a way to help people stop smoking cigarettes.
         Dr. Figlar said it would take time to implement
    this migration strategy, moving people from the high
    risk to low risk.  But that they're committed to it,
    they've spent money on it, and they're continuing to
    do it.  That's the Reynolds of today.  That's the
    company that they want you to punish.
         But Reynolds has already been punished.  And
    Reynolds and other companies are being deterred.
         I'm just -- I put together a slide here that
    just sort of brings it all together for you and
    what's going on from -- just from Reynolds's
    standpoint.
         Master Settlement Agreement of 50 billion and
    counting; the Florida settlement agreement, 3 billion and counting; payments to FDA to regulate,
    883 million and counting.  By the end of this year,
    it will be a billion dollars.
         The conduct -- the conduct that -- that
    resulted in these billions and billions of dollars
    of payment, the conduct that you-all found in
    Phase I, entitled us to get to this phase.  It's the
    concealment.  This is the direct consequence of the
    concealment.
         The results of it are staggering levels of
    punishment.  It's unprecedented.  These kinds of
    fees, settlements, punitive damages -- all of those
    things are already in place.
         "Deterrence," that word has been used a little
    bit, but you have to think about what "deterrence"
    is.  "Deterrence" is something to convince others
    not to act in a certain way.
         Does anyone believe that the -- this message,
    not to act the way the tobacco companies did 40,
    50 years ago, does anyone believe this message
    hasn't been heard by others?
         Is there anyone out there who thinks that
    looking at this (indicating), domination by the
    federal government, billions of dollars of payments
    being made, anyone who thinks that there's another company out there that's not sure about whether or
    not concealment will work or not, that there is
    going to be a -- that it needs more to be deterred
    from that?  You've got 5,000 suits currently pending
    against Reynolds because of this, manufacturing
    plants subject to surprise inspections, product
    being taken off the shelves by the FDA.  There is
    already substantial deterrence.
         And where is the evidence, by the way?  If
    they -- where is the evidence of -- of the other
    company that -- that -- that is looking at this and
    going, this isn't enough?  We need -- we need
    another -- we need another punishment out there to
    convince us.
         So I'm going to come back to this instruction
    on mitigating evidence.  This is, again, at the top
    of page 5 of your instructions.
         Everything that I've just discussed with you
    demonstrates that there is no need to punish
    Reynolds further for concealment.
         The concealment is over.  There are laws in
    place that would prohibit Reynolds from ever
    engaging in that kind of concealment again, and then
    Reynolds goes above and beyond the law in terms of
    what it discloses. So I want to talk about two more instructions
    here.  This is your instruction.  It's at the bottom
    of page 4 of your instructions, and it goes up to
    the top of page 5.  And it says that, "In
    determining the amount of punitive damages, if any,
    to assess against the defendant, you should consider
    the extent to which the defendant's conduct has
    changed from the conduct on which you base your
    determination that punitive damages may be warranted
    and the extent to which the circumstances have
    changed."
         So you should determine this -- I'm sorry, you
    should consider this, and it's as to the question of
    whether to award or how much to award.  And among
    the things you can consider are how circumstances
    have changed, how conduct has changed.  That's what
    Judge Murphy has instructed you.
         So compare the conduct which brought us here,
    the -- the fraud and concealment, to what's going on
    today.  Changed circumstance.  Couldn't be more
    changed.
         Compare the Reynolds of 2015 when it
    communicates about its products versus what it did.
    Factor that into your decision.
         Other things.  Other circumstances.  Think about something as simple as the Internet.  Today it
    is so much easier for people to get information.
    Concealment can be eliminated by simply adding
    information into the public domain on Web sites,
    things like that.  That's why it's so powerful.
         That's why this information being out there is
    so powerful and why it's so different from the times
    past.
         If you carry on to the rest of the top of
    Page 5 of your jury instructions, you'll see this
    instruction continues, and it says, "You are
    entitled to conclude that misconduct that occurred
    in the distant past and involved actors who are no
    longer associated with the defendant need not be
    punished, or that it should not be punished, or it
    should be punished less severely than recent
    misconduct."
         So when you're considering whether or not to
    award punitive damages, you do get to look at the
    question of who is at the company now versus then,
    and what they did.
         And Mr. Oliver told you, he said the fact
    that -- that the folks like -- like Claude Teague,
    Allen Rodgman, Robert Heimann, folks like that, no
    longer with the company, he said it was irrelevant. His word, "irrelevant."
         That's also no true.  This instruction makes it
    relevant.  You are absolutely -- you are entitled to
    conclude -- based on that, that fact alone, you are
    entitled to conclude that punitive damages are not
    warranted.
         So let's just talk about your verdict form for
    a second.  A much simpler one than last time.  This
    is -- this is the business end of it right here.
         There are three parts.  All right?  It starts
    off "we, the jury," so it's got to be a unanimous
    verdict.  All of you have to agree.  And then it
    says here (indicating), "What is the total amount of
    punitive damages, if any" -- if any -- "which you
    find by the greater weight of the evidence should be
    assessed against these defendants?"
         So, again, "if any."  Just because we're here
    in Phase 2 doesn't mean that punitive damages get
    awarded.  And you have to find it by the greater
    weight of the evidence.  That's the burden.  If you
    are -- if you go back into that jury room and -- and
    you're not convinced, you're unsure, the plaintiffs
    haven't met their burden.  And under the
    instructions, that would mean that they are not
    entitled to an award of punitive damages.  And you may choose not to award punitives at all.
         Listening to Mr. Oliver's argument, it seemed
    like he was treating it like it was a done deal,
    that there was going to be some number.  But as
    Judge Murphy has instructed you, it's within your
    discretion to award nothing, because you conclude
    that it would be punishment without a purpose.
         You've heard a lot of new things about
    R.J. Reynolds in this phase.  A lot of things that
    we had to wait until now to bring to you about the
    Reynolds of today on this question.
         And you have already sent a powerful message
    with your $1 million jury award.
         A million dollars.  And that million dollars
    that they're asking you to put $10 million on top
    of, that's -- it's in addition to an award that you
    unanimously agreed was the amount of money to fully,
    justly, and fairly compensate Mrs. Marchese.
         A million dollars, I'm not going to belabor, is
    a significant amount of money.  The plaintiffs are
    asking you to award more than that.
         To be clear, that money is going to
    Mrs. Marchese.  Now, there's nothing wrong with
    that.  That's the way that our legal system here in
    Florida works.  And I'm not suggesting that.  But I do think it's important that you realize how this
    will operate.  This money isn't going to public
    health or antismoking or other smokers.
         And there's one thing that's important to keep
    in mind.  Mr. Cofer talked about it a little bit.
    It's so important I just want to touch on it just
    briefly again.
         Other smokers can and have brought their own
    lawsuits.  Their cases are where the harm to them
    gets decided.  We've got more than 5,000 people who
    have brought suits against Reynolds.  You cannot
    punish Reynolds in this case for any harms that you
    may believe have been suffered to others.
         Those smokers will have their own day in court.
    They'll be able to present their own arguments to
    their own juries.
         This is -- your determination in this case has
    got to be focused on Mrs. Marchese.
         Here's another thing that is not supposed to
    enter the deliberations.  The judge has instructed
    you that the manufacture and the sale of cigarettes
    is a lawful activity, and you can't impose punitive
    damages on a defendant simply because a manufacturer
    sold or advertised cigarettes.
         The arguments by Mr. Oliver talk about how the companies continued to sell cigarettes.  I'm not
    sure why he made them.  You're not entitled to --
    the -- the judge has instructed you that's not a --
    that's not supposed to go into your determination.
         You can't allow someone's argument, no matter
    how much they believe it, to overwhelm the law that
    you've been instructed on.  This is the law.  This
    is what Judge Murphy has told you (indicating.)
         Now, we respectfully submit that we have
    provided you evidence that the Reynolds of 2015 is
    acting as a responsible participant in what is a
    controversial industry.  And we'd ask you to
    consider that evidence when it comes to the question
    of whether or not punitive damages should be
    awarded.
         So let me try to pull this all together.
         Over the last 15 years Reynolds has turned a
    corner and changed.  Took the position that smoking
    was dangerous, that it's addictive, and tells
    everyone so on its Web site.
         It broke its connection to the CTR, TI, TIRC --
    all those alphabet letters you heard about.  They
    were disbanded.  It publishes documents on its
    Web site.  It publishes all the ingredients in its
    cigarettes and informs smokers that smoking is dangerous, can be addictive, and that the best
    course of action for them is to quit smoking.
         And if you think about it, ladies and
    gentlemen, there has been zero evidence, zero
    evidence presented by the plaintiffs that
    R.J. Reynolds has concealed any information or
    entered into any agreements to conceal information
    since 1999.  No evidence.  They're not even -- they
    haven't even tried to make that case to you.
         The people involved in the conspiracy that you
    found was a cause of Mrs. -- Mr. Marchese's COPD and
    cancer, they're gone.  None of them are left to
    punish.  And this company is now one that is fully
    regulated by the federal government, its future
    actions controlled by the FDA.
         Ladies and gentlemen, I submit to you there is
    really no valid purpose to punitive damages awards
    in this case because punitive damages are not needed
    to punish the Reynolds of 2015.  It's punishment
    without purpose.
         And I would encourage you to exercise your
    discretion and award no punitive damages.  Have that
    conversation, talk about whether or not they're
    really necessary.
         Because, as you saw, you've already fully compensated Mrs. Marchese with your award of
    $1 million.
         You sent a loud and clear message with that
    award.
         Now, I do have to talk about the -- what the
    plaintiffs have put forth as a number.  I think they
    want -- they want you to award $10,000,000 in total.
    So that would be a grand total of $11 million.
         Now, we submit that punitive damages award
    that -- is not just punishment without a purpose;
    it -- it doesn't bear a rational relationship to the
    evidence you saw.
         There is a word we use to describe punishment
    without a purpose like that, and it's
    called "revenge."  That's what I would submit
    punitive damages award at that level is.
         Now, you all in your discretion you could end
    up discussing numbers of punitive damages.  I
    understand that, and I respect that.  So let me
    speak to that for a second.
         If that discussion is going to occur, the only
    thing that we would ask is that it be a commonsense
    discussion.  I thought Mr. Cofer's discussion of
    that on damages, it made sense.  It was tied to
    something in this case. (To Mr. Quinlan) Thank you.
         It wasn't pulled out of the air.  He suggested
    out of the million dollars that you awarded and
    you've assigned each of the defendants 22.5 percent
    responsibility, that you take 22.5 percent of a
    million dollars and you make that the punitive
    damage award.
         And if you did that and if you did that for
    both defendants, that would be a grand total award
    of almost $1 1/2 million.
         And you can go lower than that in your
    discretion.  You can go higher than that in your
    discretion, but that number is tied to this case and
    has the benefit, therefore, of having some common
    sense behind it.
         But remember, the evidence you've heard means
    that you can consider not just on the question of
    whether or not to award punitive damages, but if you
    want to use it to reduce the amount of the award.
    So please keep that in mind as well when you're
    having your discussion.
         Now --
         THE COURT:  Would you start to wrap it up,
    Counsel?
         MR. ISASI:  Absolutely.  On my last page. So let me thank you, again, for your patience.
    I know it's been a long time -- and your service in
    this case.
         We know how seriously you have taken your oath
    and, frankly, the incredible commitment that you've
    demonstrated here.  I'm afraid we've gone a little
    bit longer, I think, than most of you-all were
    expecting.  Nevertheless, you were here.  You were
    here on time, you were here early.  We couldn't have
    gotten through it as well as we did without your
    commitment.
         And on behalf of everyone -- and I do mean that
    all the lawyers in this case have talked about
    this -- and we do appreciate the -- the -- the
    commitment you've demonstrated to the parties.  And
    that's why we have so much confidence in this
    process at the end.
         So I'm going to sit down because the plaintiffs
    have the burden of proof.  They get to go a final
    time, and I won't be able to respond to some of the
    points they raised.  I'm sure you will see me
    hopping up and down in the chair, but what you can
    do for me is, as you -- you've heard our arguments.
    As you listen to what Mr. Oliver says, think to
    yourself, "So what would Jose say in response to that," and think about that in -- in the jury room.
         On behalf of our client and -- and our team, we
    wish you the best in your deliberations.  We -- we
    will respect your decision, and I thank you kindly
    for your attention.
