MR. BELASIC: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I took your verdict very seriously. The people, the employees, the executives at R. J. Reynolds, the people that run the company, the people who work for the company took your verdict very seriously on Friday.
You found conspiracy in addiction. You awarded $5 million. You were told by the Court to consider
economic damages, emotional damages, pain and suffering, the loss Mrs. Martin has suffered, and I'm sure you took that all into account. And you decided -- and you were the best judges and the only judges of the facts in this case -- you decided to award the $5 million to Mrs. Martin.
I assume that you made that verdict because you believed that fully compensated her for all of the injuries that she claimed, as the judge had instructed you to find. I'm not here to dispute that.
The issue now is -- knowing that nothing can bring back Mr. Martin, but that your award has made it certain that Mrs. Martin won't lack for money or want for money in the future. The issue is whether Mrs. Martin should receive additional money.
You saw her counsel today has suggested a figure of $20 million. I'm going to respectfully suggest that a further financial windfall would be inappropriate in this case.
One of the reasons is that you have been instructed by the judge. Mr. Loehr showed the instruction up on the screen that you can award punitive damages to punish or send a message to R. J. Reynolds to deter future misconduct.
I think I heard Mr. Loehr say that you should
send a message to Reynolds because it might send a message to other companies, other companies that aren't defendants in this case, and I'll talk about that later.
I think you have a right to know that your verdict would lead to responsible behavior. You have a right to make up, in your own mind, what should and what would a responsible company do in response to a very large verdict like you found.
I think that you'll find that most of those things have been done.
The evidence that you saw in this case demonstrates that, first of all, in 2009 there's no more American Tobacco Company. You all remember -- it was played several times -- the sort of pudgy-faced guy that seemed a bit pompous saying, well, I think the surgeon general is dead wrong. That was Mr. Heimann. He's long gone.
There's no American Tobacco Company. There hasn't been an American Tobacco Company since 1994. It's R. J. Reynolds now. The company that sold Lucky Strikes to Mr. Martin doesn't exist.
They sold the Lucky Strikes, and you found the injury, you found the conspiracy, and you determined what was the full compensation for the injuries that
Mrs. Martin has incurred.
But to send a message -- there's no American Tobacco Company to send a message. There's never going to be future wrongdoing by Mr. Heimann or anyone else at American Tobacco Company. They're not going to do what they did in the 1930s and the 1940s and the 1950s.
Secondly, in 2009 there's no conspiracy.
Plaintiff's experts made it clear from the beginning that the conspiracy was this group TIRC that met in '53, started about seven years after Mr. Martin started smoking. That group became CTR -- the same thing. And then there was also the organization called the Tobacco Institute or TI.
None of those companies exist today. They were shut down. They went out of business in 1998, 11 years ago. There's no TIRC to send a message to or punish. There's no CTR to send a message to. There's no TI.
R. J. Reynolds hasn't started up any other organizations like this. R. J. Reynolds isn't in any conspiracy. There's nothing to send a message to.
They were abolished. There's no agreement between the companies now to do anything other than to comply with the law.
The third change, and maybe the most important, there is no more fraud, no more denial. Mr. Loehr
showed you four documents. I think one of them was from Hill & Knowlton from the '50s. They were part of this TIRC. They don't exist. TIRC and CTR doesn't exist. One was from the Tobacco Institute about 30 years ago. The Tobacco Institute doesn't exist. The R. J. Reynolds documents he showed you were from the 1970s, 30 years ago.
Well, the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company of today is very different. As you saw from the beginning, R. J. Reynolds admits that smoking causes lung cancer. R. J. Reynolds admits that smoking is addictive. You heard the evidence that it's right on their website for billions of people to see.
Never again will anyone see some grainy videotape from a 1950s footage from some TV show or a 1970 statement or 1990s. Never again is anyone going to see a tobacco company executive, whether it's from R. J. Reynolds or the other companies, say that smoking doesn't cause lung cancer or that smoking isn't addictive. Those days are over. Those days ended years ago. It's a new company with new conduct. They admit the very issues that are here. There's nothing to send a message to.
Now, a responsible company would look at that $5 million verdict and say we have to change. Well,
R. J. Reynolds has changed, and they changed years ago. There's no need to award a further -- what would in effect be a financial windfall of millions of dollars, in addition to what Mrs. Martin has already been awarded, to send a message to conduct that the companies have now admitted will never occur in the future.
The fourth change -- and I think you saw plaintiff's experts agree on this -- is that now there are universal warnings.
Remember at the very beginning of this case they brought Dr. Burns by video? I asked him on the video, isn't it true that about 30 years ago, 1981, you said that more people knew that smoking caused disease than knew who the president was -- universal knowledge. He said that's true. That was a speech he gave in 1981.
Well, the warnings have been on the pack since the 1960s, and for a quarter of a century the mandatory warnings have included this warning.
Could you put up number 110? For the last 25 years, the surgeon general's warning on the pack has said that smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy.
It's not the 1930s. It's not the 1940s. There's no debate now about whether smokers know or smokers are
being -- R. J. Reynolds admits smoking causes lung cancer. The packs of cigarettes that R. J. Reynolds sell say on it, it causes lung cancer. Reynolds own website says it causes lung cancer. Reynolds has gotten the message. The conduct has changed.
Now, the fifth change is in advertising. This case started out when Dr. Kyriakoudes came in and showed you some advertisements from the 1930s, 70 years ago. Those advertisements aren't around. There aren't any more cigarette advertisements on television. In fact, one of the TV shows you saw was the government actually praising the tobacco companies for voluntarily offering to pull their ads off TV in response to government protests.
There's no more cigarette ads on TV. There's no more cigarette ads on the radio. You look around, and it's a completely different situation from what Dr. Kyriakoudes told you was back in the '30s and '40s. There's no ads on billboards of sides of buses. As I'm going to show later, R. J. Reynolds has agreed to some very specific restrictions on their advertising here in Florida.
You heard some references to youth advertising, talking about the 1970s. From the very beginning in this case, when Dr. Burns showed us video, he showed
you a chart of youth smoking rates. Youth smoking rates have plummeted.
In 2009 the advertising restrictions have changed the field. You're never going to see the kinds of ads that they showed, the kinds of ads that you based your decision on. That message has gotten through.
Finally, the change in the design of cigarettes.
Now, you saw Dr. Figlar testify that in the 1950s the public health groups said they should reduce the tar by 40 percent and that over the course of the next 20 years they did reduce the tar by 1940 by about 40 percent.
But what I want to remind you is that starting in the 1960s the tobacco working group, R. J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies, started working with the government, and they did it voluntarily.
Now, that evidence wasn't disputed. There aren't a lot of industries that you can think of where the companies that make the product voluntarily joined some effort with the government to change the design of their cigarettes.
You saw that for those ten years in the 1960s and the 1970s, R. J. Reynolds was voluntarily working with the government to change the design of their cigarettes.
Now, it was undisputed that some of the advice the government had was, see if you can make an ultra low-tar cigarette, but it has more nicotine so people could avoid the tar that causes the danger, but still get some nicotine. That was the government. We showed the government documents. R. J. Reynolds was working with the government.
By the 1980s, R. J. Reynolds had gone way beyond anything that the government had thought of, way beyond anything the government had ever thought of as a safer cigarette.
Dr. Figlar showed you, and his testimony was undisputed, that R. J. Reynolds spent an enormous amount of time, effort, and money in the '80s to make Premiere, the smokeless cigarette, a cigarette where it only heated tobacco and people inhaled that vapor without all of the carcinogens that were associated.
Now, you saw this document -- can we put up AN-002470, please? Remember, this is from the government, the Office on Smoking and Health, works with the surgeon general, their 1989 meeting. If we could go to the next page.
You see here the government -- we discussed this with Dr. Figlar. The government said, "There's no need to wait for the scientists to complete research on the
new brands of products. While research should continue, there's no need to wait for results to initiate a war against new tobacco products."
Can we go to page 3, Chris -- page 3. This is the Premiere cigarette. And this, as we showed you, was a secret meeting by the government in 1989 to discuss R. J. Reynolds' breakthrough.
Now, remember what Dr. Figlar said? It took them almost ten years in the 1980s, an enormous sum of money, and scientific research to do it.
Can you blow that up, Chris? Counsel, I'll move this for you. Look at the results. This government panel, they were concerned about a cigarette. The reason they were concerned was not that Reynolds had made something dangerous, but look what they say -that it's actually safer than current cigarettes.
The Premiere studies -- and remember, we showed the huge book. Reynolds didn't suppress the results of the research like the document Mr. Loehr showed you from 30 years ago. The new Reynolds published their research on the cigarette. That was undisputed.
Look what the government says. "The Premiere studies indicated that the cancer risk associated with smoking Premiere was lowered significantly".
So even the government admits that R. J. Reynolds
had finally made a cigarette that lowered the risk of cancer significantly.
If we can go to page 8, Chris. You've already seen what the government's response was. They didn't say, "Great job. We never thought of this. Finally, a cigarette that will lower the risk of cancer. This is good news for smokers." They didn't say that. You saw what we saw earlier.
Their response was to, "initiate a war -- a war against new tobacco products."
We highlighted this before. Mr. Budich, one of the government officials that was here, said the FDA was moving towards banning Premiere when it was pulled off the market.
You've seen all the evidence of all the times that R. J. Reynolds and the other tobacco companies disagreed and they criticized the government. You decided that Reynolds was liable for conspiracy. You reached that conclusion and the fact that $5 million was full compensation for Mrs. Martin.
But now today the conflict Reynolds is having with the government was, it made a cigarette that the government thought was safer, that the government thought reduced cancer, but yet the government still wanted to ban.
It's a new company. Giving or awarding another $20 million is not going to send any message to R. J. Reynolds that they didn't already get 20 years ago when they were working hard to make cigarettes that reduced cancer. It's not the 1930s or the 1950s or even the 1970s like the documents that Mr. Loehr showed you.
When you look at the jury instructions that Judge Terrell gives you -- Mr. Loehr showed you Jury Instruction 2, and it does say that you can decline to award any punitive damages -- but I'd ask you to look carefully at Jury Instruction 3 that talks about whether or not punitives are necessary to deter future misconduct.
I think we've seen, this is a different company. There's no conspiracy. There's no fraud. They admit the dangers of their cigarettes. They've worked actively to reduce the dangers of their cigarettes.
There are universal warnings. There's no more advertising like the type that the plaintiffs complained about anymore.
There's also something that's very significant.
R. J. Reynolds was sued by the State of Florida for fraud, Medicaid issues, and other claims. R. J.
Reynolds and the other companies, the other companies that are in the conspiracy that plaintiffs have talked
about, settled with the State of Florida -- did not take the case to a jury verdict, and agreed to both pay the State of Florida significant amounts of money to be used for tobacco prevention programs, to be used for health care, and agreed with the State of Florida to the advertising restrictions that the State of Florida wanted.
When Judge Terrell instructs you, he's going to give you a very important instruction, and that's No. 4, and I'd ask you to take a look at it when you get it. It's only two sentences, and it says, "You should also take into consideration any -- any mitigating evidence. Mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages or that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed."
Let's look at what R. J. Reynolds has already agreed to and what R. J. Reynolds is already paying the State of Florida to settle past conduct that was fraud.
Could you put up, Chris, Exhibit ANS-1787? You see here, this is a report on the Florida tobacco settlement, and it was prepared by the Senate, the Florida Senate, specifically the Committee on Regulated Industries, and the date of this report was about five years ago, November, 2004.
Chris, could we go to page 1, and could you blow up the highlighted material?
Do you see, in 1997, R. J. Reynolds settled -reached a settlement agreement with Florida, but it was all the other companies, too, the companies you've heard about in this conspiracy, Brown & Williamson, Philip Morris, et cetera, and Lorillard.
Brown & Williamson, by that time, had already taken over American Tobacco Company, so all the major companies.
They entered into an agreement with Florida, and look what it says -- "for all past, present and future claims by the State, including fraud."
Now, they brought fraud claims and a conspiracy for fraud in this case. R. J. Reynolds and the other companies entered into this settlement. Look at what the settlement included.
The nonmonetary provisions involve restrictions on billboard and transit advertisements, merchandise promotions, product placement.
Look at the money the State of Florida is to receive. Florida was to receive $11 billion over the he next 25 years -- 11 billion -- and an additional 1.7 billion over the next five years.
Now, since that time the State of Florida has
received an incredible amount of money as a result of the settlement of these claims, claims that included fraud.
Chris, could we move to page 7 of the document? Could you below that up? Remember, this is as of 2004 the payments have continued, but as of five years ago the State of Florida had already received about 4.1 billion, $4,149,000,000 from the settlement agreement.
Now it's true that money doesn't go to Mrs. Martin. You've already awarded millions of dollars to Mrs. Martin. What this money goes for and what the State and what this money is used for is for health programs for the State of Florida.
Chris, could we put up document ANS-001788?
This is the official budget page of the State of Florida. It's on the State of Florida's website.
There's the governor, and there's the budget highlights page.
Could we go to the next highlighted area -- to the next page? Chris, could you just highlight that whole section?
This is the work they're doing on the current budget. It's the governor's recommendation for tobacco. This is what the tobacco money goes for, the
Agency for Healthcare Administration, $170 million, Children and Family Services, $147 million, general health, $114 million, elder affairs, $24 million.
R. J. Reynolds is paying an incredible amount of money to the State of Florida every year as a result of settling the claims for fraud that the State of Florida brought.
It's true that money doesn't go to Mrs. Martin, but the issue here is whether Mrs. Martin should receive additional money, whether or not you should send a message and try to punish R. J. Reynolds for the same type of fraud it has settled, the same type of claims that money is flowing into the State of Florida as this point.
When Judge Terrell says you can take into account any mitigating evidence, I would respectfully suggest that that is very strong mitigating evidence.
R. J. Reynolds, in effect, is paying for health care throughout the state as part of a voluntary agreement that it reached with the State of Florida to settle those fraud claims.
Now, at the end of this case Mr. Loehr talks about sending a message, and he said $20 million is just a traffic ticket. That message was received. The conspiracy has been dismantled. American Tobacco
Company doesn't exist. The fraud is over.
In its place are universal warnings, an admission by Reynolds that smoking causes lung cancer that smoking is addictive, the restrictions on advertising and work to make safer cigarettes.
I'm sure each of you could say, "Why didn't you do that back in the '30s and '40s?"
Well, you reached that decision when you found against R. J. Reynolds and when you awarded $5 million, and I respect that decision, but now it's 2009, and that message has been received, and I respectfully suggest that there is no grounds to award any further money to the plaintiff.
I'll ask you to reach the best decision you can make based on that evidence. Thank you.
