MR. LOEHR: May it please the Court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of jury, you indicated by your verdict last week that you felt that the conduct of
R. J. Reynolds that you saw during the first three weeks of trial warranted punitive damages, warranted an amount in addition to the compensatory damages for Ms. Martin that would punish R. J. Reynolds for their conduct over the decades that you saw and that would hopefully deter or stop other corporations from similar types of conduct.
We're back here today, as the Court has told you, to consider the appropriate amount of those punitive damages. That's why you heard a stipulation read to you as to what their net worth is, what their net earnings were over the last several years.
If we could go ahead and show jury Instruction No. 2. The Court will instruct you, after these arguments, that you will now determine the amount of punitive damages, if any, to be assessed as punishment and as a deterrent to others. The amount would be in addition to the compensatory damages you have previously awarded.
In making this determination, you should consider the following: The nature, extent, and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances, and the defendant's financial resources. However, you may not award an amount that would financially destroy R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company. You may, in your discretion,
decline to assess punitive damages.
So the two main things that you are to consider are the nature, extent, and degree of misconduct and the related circumstances and the defendant's financial resources.
As you can see from our very brief presentation of evidence, neither side intends to go back over all the evidence that you've heard. You already paid close attention to it. You reached a conclusion that punitive damages were warranted under these circumstances.
My only purpose right now is, I want to show you perhaps one document from each decade that we've gone through during this trial.
The purpose of showing this is not to rehash everything, but to focus, once again, on how decisions have been made at R. J. Reynolds, to focus on whether they're looking at all about the human cost of what they're doing.
I think it becomes overwhelmingly clear, as you look at this, that somehow in this process R. J.
Reynolds J. Reynolds lost all sense of humanity, all feeling for what they were doing. They somehow transformed human beings into mere numbers, and they were very, very good at counting those numbers, as
you'll see in just a few moments when we start talking about their financial resources.
If we could start with LP-185, please. This is a document from Hill and Knowlton shortly after they met with the executives of the tobacco companies.
Hill and Knowlton is the company that ultimately got hired to serve as the public relations arm back in 1953 and '54 when the health risk of smoking started to become more known in the public after the mouse painting studies, after those studies that showed the statistical relationship between smoking and lung cancer.
If we could go to the second page, please. The first paragraph of this talks about the charge that Hill & Knowlton had. What were they there to do, and what did they learn from the tobacco executives they met with?
"The attitude of the men we must directly deal with in the industry is at once interesting and important for us to understand. That is why notes on the four interviews with research directors are given at some length. You'll get from them little real information about lung cancer, pro or con, but you'll find some mighty interesting opinions. One of the men said, 'It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a
habit they can't break.' Said another, 'Boy, wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? What we could do to the competition.' Said another, 'Suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. That would be maybe 40 billion a year.' And again, the stock market fall is terrible when you remember dividends are going to be much larger next year without the EPT."
I confess I'm not sure what EPT is, so I'm not sure exactly what that refers to. But the rest of this, I think, is very clear what it refers to.
It's just been discovered that the product that they're selling that they know is addictive, has now been proven by the public health officials and by private doctors that it causes cancer, and they know that it's addictive, and they say, "It's fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they can't break."
It's fortunate for us that they're not going to be able to stop smoking. It's fortunate for us that we can keep counting these numbers -- not people, not human beings. They -- it's a habit they can't break.
Said another -- even this. "Wouldn't it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. What we could do to the composition."
Not how many lives could we save? Not how many families would we not put through the torture of watching somebody waste away from a horrid disease, but what we could do to the competition.
Then they started counting what would happen if people just smoked one cigarette less a day. That would be maybe 40 billion a year. Nothing but numbers. Nothing but numbers.
We go to the next document I'd like you to look at, LP-313, please. This is a document from several Philip Morris executives who were also serving their role in the Tobacco Institute. This is ten years later, ten years of the conspiracy going strong, 1964, and this is dealing with the Surgeon General's Report.
The office says, "I thought I would pass on to you some of my thoughts regarding the recent release of the Surgeon General's Report. While the propaganda blast was tremendous and the penetration of public opinion very widespread, I have the feeling that the public reaction was not as severe, nor did it have the emotional depth I might have feared."
We move down. "The restraint and unity of the industry has been very effective in this period. The opponents have had their inning. The industry has demonstrated its seriousness and responsibility in
saying we would study the report."
Go down to B, please. "However, at some point, reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, we must, in the near future, provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. These answers must also point up the weaknesses in the report and the path for future research."
So after the surgeon general came out with their findings, the same findings that everyone knew back in 1953, or at least Claude Teague for R. J. Reynolds had concluded was very strong evidence that the cigarettes were causing lung cancer, the surgeon general is referred to as the opponent.
"The opponents have had their inning" like it's a baseball game. And now, under public relations, we've got to figure out a way to get a psychological crutch to these smokers.
Again, no sign of humanity, no sign of how many people are going to end up dying as a result of this.
We move on to the 1970s, if I can look at LP-0166, please. This is another document from the Tobacco Institute, the mouthpiece for the industry. R.
J. Reynolds contributed money every year to keep the Tobacco Institute in business and keep it going strong.
And this is a nice self-congratulatory statement:
"For nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and public opinion. While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it's only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. On the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charges without actually denying it."
Come on down. "On the litigation front for which the strategy was designed, it has been successful."
A holding strategy. What exactly are we holding? We're holding the numbers. We're holding the people who are becoming addicted -- the people that we're now two decades after the mouse painting studies, two decades after the epidemiological evidence that was so clear.
We're now nearly -- well, we're eight years after the Surgeon General's Report. We're going to keep a holding strategy so that we can keep people smoking. We're doing this to be successful on several different fronts -- litigation, politics, and public opinion.
About the same time at R. J. Reynolds -- LP-0448, please. This is by Claude Teague, a research scientist
who was with Reynolds for decades, a research planning memorandum on the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine therein.
If we could turn to page 003, please. "Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in the variety of physiological actions.
Hence, no other active material or combination of materials provides equivalent satisfaction."
At this point we not only know that human beings have become nothing but numbers, human beings who are becoming addicted to a product that R. J. Reynolds knows is deadly, now we see that they're happy about the addictiveness of the cigarettes. Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique," et cetera.
If we look to the very next page, come down to the -- do away with that for just a moment.
Starting here with "However" and coming down, "However, if we knew more about nicotine absorption, action, elimination, enhancement and the like, it should, in theory, be possible to more precisely specify and deliver the optimum amounts of nicotine activity in sophisticated products, which would be more satisfying and desirable to the user. This area merits consideration and activity."
Happily, for R. J. Reynolds it's addictive.
Happily, more and more people are going to be smoking and becoming addicted, but if we only knew more. If we could only look at ways to enhance the nicotine, man, what could we do then -- maybe some pH manipulation to get more free nicotine, get it going to the brain faster, maybe some other things you looked at that talk about getting more of the nicotine receptors in the brain to fire off to make it even more addictive.
They're happy it's addictive. They just really wish they could make it more addictive, and you saw the evidence that for decades they tried.
You know, we had some very odd moments in the courtroom, especially with Dr. Figlar, a very decent seeming young research scientist, vice president of R. J. Reynolds. J. Reynolds. He knew everything about the product and all the harm that they had tried to reduce, until you started talking to him about addiction. He couldn't define it, didn't know what a person who was addicted looked like, couldn't imagine why they would try to study reducing addiction.
I asked him those questions. I said, there's 300 scientists at R. J. Reynolds J. Reynolds. You mean no one just raises their hand and says, "We could reduce the harm if we reduce the addiction." Nobody raises
their hand.
And remember his testimony? We have freedom of expression at R. J. Reynolds. We write things that we want to write. Nobody chastises us for what we say.
And yet nobody, nobody talks about addiction. It's like there's a huge elephant in the room that they're all walking around, and they won't talk about it, won't study it, won't look at how to reduce the addiction.
If we could look at LP-1230, please. Although this document from 1978 -- we're almost up to the '80s. Although this document looks at a different subject matter, I think it answers a lot of questions.
"I discussed with Mr. Max Crohn, legal, your September 20 memo on our Ames testing program. Your proposal and the specific advantages of investigating tobacco smoke condensate fractions, including denicotinized smoke condensate."
This is R. J. Reynolds. This is from Alan Rodgman, a name you've heard many times, to a Dr. Chin K. Lee.
"Mr. Crohn remains adamant -- Mr. Crohn from legal -- "remains adamant that investigation of the mutagenicity of tobacco smoke condensate fractions is unwise from a legal point of view. To conduct such experiments will compromise the philosophy of our
defense against claims raised in the smoking-health issue. This refusal and the reasons for it parallel previous ones by legal to permit study of smoke condensate fractions in mouse skin painting experiments. In fact, legal has been and is even unwilling to permit denicotinization of whole smoke condensate prior to study of its effect in mouse skin painting or mutagenicity studies. In accordance with legal's wishes and reasons, permission to examine the mutagenicity of smoke condensate fractions and denicotinized tobacco smoke condensate is refused."
Do you find it a bit odd that Dr. Figlar and Dr. Cook didn't mention to you, when they talked about reviewing documents from R. J. Reynolds -- they talked about, oh, we had freedom of expression. We could say anything we want. They didn't mention to you that the proposals had to go through legal and that to do research at R. J. Reynolds you had to make sure that the experiments would not compromise the philosophy of the defense against claims raised in smoke-health issues.
No wonder they're not investigating addiction.
This very study -- they wanted to take denicotinized smoke, take the nicotine out, paint it on the backs of mice, and let's see if they still get cancer.
In other words, if they don't, the whole smoke condensate gives them cancer. Then there would be another problem with nicotine, wouldn't there? In addition to its addictive qualities, these scientists were thinking, maybe it assists in causing cancer as well. Maybe it doesn't just make people smoke more. Maybe it actually acts in some sort of synergistic way with the other carcinogens, but that obviously might compromise the philosophy of their defense.
They're counting -- counting profits. People have just become numbers. They don't have any reference, whatsoever -- and keep in mind, this trial went on for a long time. If there were documents of R. J. Reynolds that counter-balanced this, that said, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. Nobody overruled this. Nobody said, no, we've got to let this go.
If we could now play video clip LP-1794. The other thing it would get in the way of would be testimony, not only in lawsuits, but in Congress as well.
This testimony was from 1994, the year that Benny Martin was diagnosed with cancer.
(Playing of video clip.)
Q Let me begin my questioning on the matter of
whether or not nicotine is addictive. Let me ask you first -- and I'd like to just go down the row -- whether each of you believe that nicotine is not addictive.
I heard virtually all of you touch on it. And just yes or no. Do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
A I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
Q Mr. Johnson?
A Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no --
Q We'll take that as a no. Again, time is short.
If you could just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. We would just like to have this for the record.
A I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
A I believe nicotine is not addictive.
A I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
A I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
A And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(End of playing of video clip.)
MR. LOEHR: It would have been a little difficult
to give that testimony if you had hundreds of
scientists back at R. J. Reynolds who were actually
studying ways to reduce the addictiveness of cigarettes, wouldn't it?
You might save some lives, but they would have really interfered with the ability to count those numbers. When humans become numbers and corporations lose sight of humanity, you hope -- you hope that there's some watch dog there to protect us. You hope the government, for example, would do something about it. But I'll tell you, when humans become numbers, it seems like we see America at its worst.
The best country in the world has been reduced, at various times in our history, into a very disturbing pattern of turning a blind eye to horrendous suffering, all so they don't interfere with corporate profits.
How can your verdict do anything about this? I mean, what is it that you're here for? You could have said no at the end of Friday and gone home. You said, yes, the conduct that you saw, you felt, warranted punitive damages. And the instruction you're going to get, again, will say that the purpose of this is to send a message, not only to R. J. Reynolds, but to other corporations.
You're going to hear in a little while, with the documents that R. J. Reynolds put into evidence, that they've kind of already been busted a little bit.
They've already entered into an agreement years ago with the State of Florida to compensate the State for some of the same conduct that you saw here today, the conduct that they denied today, denied had anything to do with Benny Martin.
There's already been an effort by the State of Florida to deal with it on behalf of the State, not on behalf of any individual, not on behalf of Benny or Hilde Martin.
There's still a message here. There's a message not only to R. J. Reynolds, but to other corporations, and it's really pretty plain and simple. It's not hard to understand, it wouldn't seem.
Number one, you research your products before you spend millions of dollars to market them, before you go out there and sell them. You don't sit back and wait for the government or private companies to go research your products and tell you that there's something wrong with them. It's your job. The message we send is, you need to do your job before you start selling the products.
Number two, make the results of your research available as soon as you know it and tell us everything you know right off the bat. Don't fight with the public health organizations. Don't spend decade after
decade after decade saying things like the surgeon general's irresponsible, the surgeon general is the opponent, and we have to fight against him.
Number three, don't cover up, don't hide, don't deny, and don't conspire with others to help you do that.R. J. Reynolds will tell you that they're under all sorts of advertising restrictions now from the State of Florida, so maybe this last one is a message to other corporations more than to them since they've already been stopped.
But those advertisements you saw from the old days, the days when Benny Martin was a child, the last message that you send is unless you're selling Disney movies or baseball cleats, Santa Claus and Father's Day don't belong to you. They belong to our children.
Leave them along. It's a very clear message.
Now, the question is, how do you send it? This may end up actually being a bit disappointing, frankly. You heard the net worth of R. J. Reynolds in round numbers. If you take those few years and put them together, 8 billion is probably the easiest way to think about it, some years a little more, some years a little bit less.
I read the other day about a movie star got a speeding ticket or DUI or something, and they fined
them $200 -- $200 to a movie star. What in the world does $200 mean to a movie star? To a single parent trying to pay the bills and feed their children, $200 would be a big fine, a big impediment. To other people, they just reach into their pocket and toss it on the table.
You know, I don't know why most of our laws don't allow what the jury instructions not only allow, but instruct you to do, and that is to take into account R. J. Reynolds' financial ability to pay. They actually recognize that if a movie star tosses a couple hundred dollars to pay his fine, it's a wholly different thing than the single parent trying to come up with $200 out of the rent money or food money.
We've put together something to try to illustrate this. With R. J. Reynolds having a net worth of $8 billion, that is 8,000 million dollars. We've come up with something we call the lucky American, an American with a net worth of $80,000.
Now, net worth means what you've got in assets above and beyond what you owe in debts. So a very lucky American perhaps has some equity in his home, perhaps some sort of retirement plan with value to it. You add those together, subtract out all the debts, and this person has a net worth -- we made him up, but he's
got a net worth $80,000. I chose him because it makes the math easy.
So if you look at 10 percent of R. J. Reynolds' net worth and compare it to 10 percent of this lucky American's net worth, you see that R. J. Reynolds has -- 10 percent of their net worth is $800 million.
10 percent of this lucky American's net worth is $8,000.
If we go on down there to 1 percent of R. J. Reynolds' net worth is $80 million. 1 percent of even a lucky American's net worth is $800. You go down to half a percent, 40 million for R. J. Reynolds, $400 for the normal person on the street -- actually, a lucky person on the street.
If we go down to .25, one-quarter of 1 percent for R. J. Reynolds is $20 million. For this lucky American, it's about $200 or about the amount of a speeding ticket you get for speeding out on the interstate.
A $20 million punitive damage award against R. J. Reynolds would have about the same effect as a $200 speeding ticket would for an American -- a relatively wealthy American.
Another way to look at this is, if you visualize R. J. Reynolds' net worth, each of these little green
dollar signs is $20 million. Each of those is $20 million.
This isn't what R. J. Reynolds has earned over the last number of decades. This isn't their total sales or total earnings. This is what they've saved.
This is what their assets are today, minus their liabilities, minus what they owe. Just like I talked about the average American or the lucky American, this is the lucky R. J. Reynolds. Each of these is $20 million.
I would suggest to you that $20 million -although, as you can see, it's not going to have a tremendous impact on R. J. Reynolds. It really isn't.
Can we look at that again? I mean, if you awarded that amount of money, the green is what they have left, and the red is what you fined them.
That's why the jury instructions say you have to take into account the financial resources of the defendant. It says you shouldn't do something that will financially ruin them. Obviously this wouldn't cause a ruin, but it also keeps them from just kind of reaching in their pocket and tossing out a couple hundred bucks, even though it has about that same impact compared to another American.
You could look at this and say that doesn't have
the impact that we want it to have, that's not why we checked the yes box and came back here to leave them with all of that but, you know, our legal system is such that with very, very large awards, they have a way of going away. They have a way of making a nice newspaper headline and then disappearing.
We've suggested something that we think is real, something that, maybe even though it doesn't have much more effect than a speeding ticket, maybe it's a speeding ticket they'll actually have to pay.
You know, we've seen corporate irresponsibility in America lately in our financial crisis. We've seen what happens when banks start counting the numbers, totally ignoring the fact there were human beings behind those numbers. We've seen people lose their homes, lose their jobs, lose their life savings.
When you look at what's happened here, it's been so much more tragic. The results to the Martin family, to Billy Martin, to Hilde Martin, have been so much more egregious than what's happened in the financial markets.
The government couldn't be counted on to do anything about it. R. J. Reynolds wasn't going to do anything about it. They didn't even deem it important enough to send somebody from the company here along
with their lawyers.
You can't count on the government. You can't count on the corporations. But we count on juries. Today we count on you. Thank you.



MR. LOEHR: Thank you. May it please the Court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, one of the things that you just heard was that R. J. Reynolds now admits that cigarettes are addictive and cigarettes
cause lung cancer, and it's right there on their website.
You saw in court what that admission means. It causes lung cancer. They flat out denied it with Benny Martin, who smoked cigarettes for 47 years and contracted the type of lung cancer that nearly 98 percent of it is caused by smoking.
Did they admit it in this courtroom? Have they really changed? Or have they put something on their website, something that they now say that seems to cover them a little bit and allow them to keep coming into courtrooms and doing the same thing they've done for all of those decades that you looked at.
R. J. Reynolds admits cigarettes are addictive.
They just couldn't figure out if Benny Martin was addicted, smoking for 47 years, two packs a day, one pack a day, whatever, barely missing a day, trying to quit over and over again. Was he addicted? They flat-out denied it, or they brought Dr. Seiden -- I'm sure a very good psychiatrist -- to do some sort of testimony that never once mentioned the word "addiction."
Do they admit that cigarettes are addictive?
Only in the world of R. J. Reynolds, only the way they use those words.
They admit cigarettes are addictive and cause lung cancer, but they couldn't figure out if Benny Martin was addicted to cigarettes and that it caused his lung cancer? They haven't changed a bit.
The new company -- the new company doing all of this research to try to lower the harm of their products tell you honestly, under oath, it's really just never dawned on us -- it never occurred to us,
Mr. Loehr, that maybe we ought to try to reduce the addictiveness of our products. You know, we've got 300 scientists. Can't figure out why in the world that never came up.
Now, yeah, we did look at manipulating the pH to try to get the nicotine to your brain quicker, looked at levulinic acid, hoping it could hit on more receptors in the brain.
We did have documents we wanted to enhance the addictiveness, but we're a new company now, and we can't figure out what addiction is. We don't know what an addictive person looks like, in the words of Dr. Figlar, but we do know this. It certainly isn't Benny Martin. Have they changed?
Some of their conduct has been changed because of courtrooms just like this because of what happens in these courtrooms.
Now, I ask you, do you really think that Mr. Figlar, Dr. Figlar, is back at R. J. Reynolds now saying, you know, I just got a great idea. It came from a plaintiff's lawyer, of all places. We need to study the addictiveness of our products and see if we can't do something maybe to slow down the nicotine to the brain. We already have the research on how to speed it up. Couldn't it just be the opposite? We need to figure out how to make less of the nicotinic receptors in the brain fire off. We already know how to make more of them fire off. I got a great idea down in that courtroom. Do you think that's what he's doing today?
You know, it is good that as a result of governmental action and lawsuits like this that all those cigarette documents got pried out of their hands. They didn't give them up. They didn't put them on the website because they're a changed company.
They've become somewhat of a changed company, however much you want to believe they've changed, because of actions like this, because of the settlement with the State of Florida that you heard about.
You saw a document talking about hundreds of millions of dollars. You've got to go back and look through the document because that lumps together all
the money spent on health care in Florida, not just what came from tobacco.
They showed you a page that said 'Tobacco" on the top, but when you start looking through the document, it comes from general revenue funds, it comes from all sorts of other sources. That document doesn't just show you what comes from tobacco. It certainly doesn't just show you what came from R. J. Reynolds. You need to take a look at that and see.
If you got the impression that that's what you were told during closing argument, look in the pages behind and see the large amounts that come from general revenue and large amounts that come from other sources to see what the real story is.
You know, the jury instruction that you're going to see talks about punishing them for the harms they caused to Benny Martin.
Now, what did you hear about that? What did you hear about what they did in the past decades? Well, we bought out one company and changed its name. And then, you know, we kind of got busted on the conspiracy in a number of different places and had to give up all our documents, so the conspiracy isn't going on anymore.
Advertising, yeah, well, the government was breathing down our neck on that. Is any of it
voluntary, or does all of it come from people like you, people like Mrs. Martin who have the guts to take them on? They haven't done anything voluntarily.
You know, the conduct that injured Benny Martin occurred in the very times we were talking about. You know, when you get punished for something, it helps, and it's good if you actually do change. If you truly change, it's good, but it doesn't mean you don't get punished for what you did. You don't get off a DUI because you sobered up in jail. You just don't.
That's not the way our law works. This law is meant to punish them for what they did to Benny Martin.
If they cleaned up their act because they've been beaten around by the government and by juries, so be it. Good for them.
Maybe now, maybe if you send them a message, maybe if you tell them, through your verdict, what you think of their conduct today, what you think of what unfolded on this witness stand, when the company in an industry that has addicted more human beings than anyone else in the history of mankind cannot tell you what addiction is, doesn't know it when they see it, and sure as heck won't touch it.
That document from 1973 from Claude Teague saying, "Happily for us cigarettes are habituating,"
they're just as happy now. Do you think that's changed one bit?
That's what we're here about. That was the first question on the verdict form, the addiction that they can't recognize and don't believe in based upon the one witness they brought to this courtroom, Dr. Seiden.
That's what we're here for, and that's what they refuse to change, refuse to study, or refuse to even acknowledge. That's why I suggested that you send them a message. And it may be an amount of money that, to a normal American, would be not much more than a traffic ticket, but I think it will accomplish its goal.
THE COURT: Mr. Loehr.
MR. LOEHR: Thank you.
