MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
THE JURORS: Good morning.
MR. GERAGHTY: At this point, you know that my name is Bill Geraghty, and along with Andrew Brenner, we represent Philip Morris USA. And I think we can all agree it's been a long trial.
Some of you have been here for close to three weeks.
And I want to really start by thanking you for your jury service. We know it has been a sacrifice for all of you to be here with us, but our system
of justice wouldn't work if we didn't have good people like all of you who are willing to make the sacrifice of your time to be here to help us decide this case.
So let me just say thank you. And I think I can speak on behalf of everybody involved, the Court, the lawyers, and the parties, we know you have been paying very close attention to the evidence in the case, and we appreciate that very much.
The good news is we're getting close to the end of the case, and hopefully, that's music to everyone's ears. Judge Murphy has already read to you the final legal instructions, and you'll get a verdict form shortly, and then you'll be asked to head off and deliberate and decide the issues in this case.
But before you do that, this is my opportunity, our opportunity, to summarize the evidence that we've seen and heard over the last two weeks.
And before I start, let me say something about the findings that you heard Judge Murphy read from the earlier class action, and there is no debate about this particular issue, ladies and gentlemen,
those findings don't tell you how to answer any of the questions on the verdict form, and that's because, ladies and gentlemen, you get to decide, based on the evidence you've heard over the last two weeks, whether those findings have any applicability to Martin McCall and the lifestyle choices that he made.
When we spoke to you almost two weeks ago, we told you that the plaintiff would spend a lot of time talking about statements and ideas made by Philip Morris, many of which were made 30, 40, and in some instances, more than 50 years ago.
And we told you we would not try to defend all those statements. Philip Morris made statements and had ideas that today no one would say or think.
But I also told you that if that was all this case were about, if all the plaintiff had to prove was that cigarette company executives made inappropriate statements, we wouldn't be here, we wouldn't have spent the last two weeks here together. But we did, and that's because, ladies and gentlemen, this case isn't about all cigarette smokers. The case isn't about whether you believe people should or should not smoke cigarettes.
This case is about Martin McCall, his life,
and the decisions that he made. And that's why, when you get the verdict form from Judge Murphy, you will see that every question asks you specifically about Martin McCall, not all cigarette smokers, and not the general public.
Now, you heard from Dr. Proctor, and Dr. Proctor told you he's made almost $4 million testifying against Philip Morris and other cigarette companies. He showed you many of the same documents and videotapes that he has shown in the hundreds of other cases in which he has testified. But what did he also tell you? He told you that he knew absolutely nothing about Martin McCall. He told you he had no idea whether Martin McCall ever saw, read, or heard any of the statements or any of the documents that he showed you. He told you nothing about Martin McCall, but now you know that that's what the case is all about.
You learned that Mr. McCall was strong, intelligent, and capable, a man who chose to live his life the way he wanted to live it. You heard that Martin McCall was a man who overcame his addiction to alcohol. He became a trained and certified addiction expert. He helped other people
to overcome their addictions. Despite having all that knowledge, he never once said or considered himself to be addicted to cigarettes.
What else have you learned about Mr. McCall in this trial that is undisputed? He made lifestyle choices that he knew came with health risks. His wife, Bernice McCall, told you her husband was the kind of man who made his own decisions in life.
She told you he did what he did.
She told us her husband read the newspaper every day cover to cover. He was interested in current events. He ran political campaigns for candidates here in Fort Lauderdale. He knew cigarette smoking was dangerous for many years before he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
So ask yourself why Mr. Alvarez spent most of his time trying to persuade you that Mr. McCall was tricked into smoking cigarettes. That's what Bernice McCall wants you to believe after she has sued Philip Morris now for $11.5 million.
But what she has told you, what Mr. Alvarez told you is completely inconsistent with the evidence you've heard about Mr. McCall over the last two weeks.
Mrs. McCall and her lawyers are asking you to
award her millions of dollars for her husband's decision to smoke cigarettes, something that we all know now he enjoyed doing for many years.
So when you think about the issue in this case, ask yourself, are you going to hold Philip Morris legally responsible for Martin McCall's decision to smoke cigarettes and award Mrs. McCall millions of dollars in money damages when the evidence you've heard clearly demonstrates that he lived his life the way he wanted to do it, he smoked cigarettes because that's what he wanted to do, and he had no interest in quitting until the very end of his life. You know that he did not make a single attempt to quit smoking until he was 48 years old, after he had been smoking for almost 3 0 years.
You are the only jury that has heard the story of Martin McCall, and you get to decide the issues in this particular case.
Now, we're going to walk through all of the significant events in Mr. McCall's life because this case is about him, and we'll show you that everything that myself and Andrew showed you during our opening statement has proven to be true.
At the very beginning, I talked to you about
what I called the sources of evidence, and I asked you to pay very close attention to the sources of evidence. And what did I mean by that. Everything you saw during this trial came from either Martin McCall's own medical records, from what Mrs. McCall herself told us in her deposition, or from what one of her close family members said in their deposition. But Mrs. McCall was the only person who came here and testified to you live to tell you that her husband was addicted and that he believed that a filter made cigarettes safe.
And as we predicted two weeks ago, many of the things that Mrs. McCall told you right from this witness stand during the trial was contradicted by or inconsistent with what her husband told his own doctors many years before this lawsuit was filed, what she told us in her sworn deposition testimony several years ago, what she put in her own sworn written answers to interrogatories, and by what her close family members told us in their depositions.
And I told you that you would get to be the judge of the facts. You get to decide what testimony you believe in this case.
Judge Murphy has given you the instructions, and one of the instructions is on what's called the
believability of witnesses. It's Instruction Number 3. And in deciding what testimony you choose ultimately to believe, you can consider, and here's what it says, "In evaluating the believability of any witness and the weight you will give the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider: Any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case." Like a financial interest to the tune of $11.5 million.
You can consider "the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness, considered in light of all the evidence in the case and in light of your own experience and common sense."
Ladies and gentlemen, we welcome you to use your common sense when you examine the evidence in this case. We welcome you to do that. We want you to do that.
This is particularly important when it comes to Bernice McCall. Judge Murphy has told you that you can accept or reject any testimony you hear in this case from any witness, that is your job and your job alone as the jury.
So let me give you some examples of when Mrs. McCall told you one thing from this witness stand here in court, but she was contradicted by
other evidence created before we started this trial.
And we call it the inconsistencies in the evidence. On the left-hand side are the things that Mrs. McCall told you during the course of the trial, and on the right are the things that we know were established before the trial ever started.
Mrs. McCall told you advertisements were, quote, very prevalent, very prevalent in the 1960s.
But what happened when we confronted her with her deposition? Her deposition showed that she acknowledged that she did not remember any cigarette ads before she met her husband in 1971.
She said she didn't remember, from the witness stand, whether her husband had chemotherapy. But you now know, based upon what she told us in her deposition, Mrs. McCall said, "My husband had radiation, he did not have chemotherapy," and that's exactly what her sister, Dorothy Madore, told you yesterday. She told you that, "My sister told me, no, Martin McCall had" chemo -- excuse me -- "had radiation, not chemotherapy." That's what Dorothy Madore told you on the videotaped testimony you saw just yesterday afternoon.
Bernice McCall tried to tell you that her
husband smoked at least two packs of cigarettes per day, but you now know that Martin McCall many years ago, when he was having a cataract surgery, told his doctor that he smoked one pack per day for 3 0 years. One pack per day for 3 0 years.
Mrs. McCall told you, my husband was addicted, and I have no doubt in my mind that he was addicted.
Well, when we confronted her with her former testimony, she acknowledged, my husband enjoyed smoking, and he never told me, never told me he thought he was addicted or that he was trying to quit smoking.
And then this issue came up yesterday based on one of the questions that one of you posed.
Mrs. McCall told you from the witness stand that she didn't think her husband had ever had pneumonia before he had that ravaging pneumonia in November of 1992. Well, you saw the records where the history was taken from his cataract surgery, I'll show it to you later, he said he had a history of pneumonia.
So ladies and gentlemen, you get to use your common sense and your personal life experiences to draw conclusions from the evidence and decide
whether or not you are going to believe some of the things Mrs. McCall and her attorneys have told you. And that is your job and your job alone.
Now, you may remember at the very beginning of the case we showed you this slide, and I told you that this case was about three words, causation, control, and responsibility. And we're going to walk through all the evidence we've seen and heard about Martin McCall, and as we do that, I want you to again just ask yourself the following series of questions.
What was the cause of Martin McCall's death? Did Martin McCall's smoking of brands of cigarettes made specifically by Philip Morris cause him to develop lung cancer? Who was in control of Mr. McCall's lifestyle choices, his decision to smoke cigarettes? Who was in control of his efforts to quit smoking? Who controlled his motivation to quit? Was Martin McCall addicted, and if so, was he someone whose addiction was so strong, so substantial, that he was robbed of his free will? Or was he someone who enjoyed smoking cigarettes and, as you've heard, for many years, had no real interest in quitting.
And finally, did Martin McCall rely on
anything that Philip Morris said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking?
And when you answer these questions, you will know that Martin McCall was always in control and always responsible for his own actions.
In this country, ladies and gentlemen, we all have the right to make decisions for ourselves, even decisions that today, with the benefit of hindsight, we might say were not in his best interests. We believe in free will. That is a fundamental principle upon which our country was founded. You have the right to make your own decisions in life, but with that right comes the obligation to accept responsibility for the consequences of those actions.
Now, before we get into the timeline and talk about all the significant events in Mr. McCall's life, let me talk briefly about the burden of proof.
You've seen various documents, you've heard testimony from witnesses. Bernice McCall and her lawyers bear the burden of proof on all of her claims in this case by what is called the greater weight of the evidence. That means that Mrs. McCall and her lawyers were required to bring
you more persuasive, more convincing evidence than the mountain of evidence we have presented during this trial that shows you that Martin McCall was always in control, that he was not some hopeless addict, that cigarette smoking and his lung cancer was not a legal cause of his death, and that the smoking of Philip Morris cigarettes was not a legal cause of his lung cancer.
And I'll point all that out as we go through the evidence, but with that in mind, let's walk through the significant events in Mr. McCall's life.
So, ladies and gentlemen, this is the same exact timeline that you saw during opening statement when Andrew Brenner walked you through all of the significant events in Mr. McCall's life. And we're going to show you that everything we told you in opening, we have proved during the course of this trial. I'm going to do this a little quickly because I know you know a lot of these details, but bear with me, if you could.
You know that Mr. McCall was born in Ohio in 1940. He was the oldest of four children. You heard, and I'm going from now left to right here, you heard, and this is in that second line on the
timeline there, that he began to experiment by stealing cigarettes from his mother's pack of L&M cigarettes. His brother, Stephen McCall, told you he began to do that around the age of 12 or 13.
But what else did Stephen McCall tell you? Stephen McCall told you that their parents told them, the message was, don't smoke. Don't smoke.
What did he also tell you? He also told you that those L&M cigarettes smoked by his mother back in 1952 and 1953 were filtered cigarettes.
Filtered cigarettes.
Now, you know that his father passes away, the children are separated, and from 1954 to 1958,
Mr. McCall goes to various different schools in Ohio, in Indiana, and here in Fort Lauderdale. That's what's happening in him -- in his life.
If we drop below the timeline bar, we have a reference there that studies are beginning to be published that link cigarette smoking with lung cancer. This is happening in 1950, 1951, and 1952.
Let me just show you two examples. You'll remember the article from LIFE magazine "Smoke Gets in the News," noting that "Doctors report tobacco tar induces mouse cancer, note rise in cigarette use and human lung cancer." This is 1953.
You heard that six months after this article was published in LIFE magazine, a poll was taken that showed that 90 percent of the people in this country had heard something to the effect that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer.
Martin McCall would have been 13 years old when this study came out.
You heard also that their family had Reader's Digest in the home. Stephen McCall told you that.
You saw many articles from Reader's Digest, but here is one example. This is from December 1952, the article is "Cancer By the Carton."
"Recent medical researches on the relationship of smoking and lung cancer." That's the information that's being published here in the United States in 1952, 1953, and 1954.
Now, if we move forward to 19 -- to the late 1950s, I think this is important, Stephen McCall testified that he believes, and let me actually go forward here to this page of the timeline. It's the end of the 1950s on to 1963.
His younger brother, Stephen McCall, believes that it was sometime between 1958 and 1963 that his older brother becomes a regular cigarette smoker,
meaning someone who is smoking on a more regular basis.
And as a matter of fact, if you see that point we have on the far left, the medical records we have, the only two medical records we have where Mr. McCall talked about his smoking history to his own doctors are entirely consistent with that.
In 1990, Mr. McCall told his doctors that he had been smoking about a pack a day for 30 years, which would take us back to about 19 60.
Now, if we move forward, we're still above the bar there in the middle, you heard evidence that beginning in the -- around the early 1960s,
Mr. McCall begins to have a serious drinking problem, he describes himself as an alcoholic. And there is really no dispute about that. You've heard the details that we have. I don't need to go into any of those specifics, I don't believe, at this point. That's in the early 1960s.
Let's drop below the black bar in the center there and talk about what's happening here in the United States with respect to cigarette smoking and health.
In January 1964, the Surgeon General of the United States issues a report that says "Cigarette
smoking causes lung cancer." Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. And you heard that this report was front-page news in newspapers and magazines all across the United States of America.
We showed you the January 12th, 1964 cover page from The New York Times. "Cigarettes Peril Health, US report concludes; remedial action is urged."
We showed you the broadcast from Harry Reasoner on CBS news. So you know that every American, including Martin McCall, who would have been 23 years old at this time, was told in 1964 cigarette smoking causes lung cancer.
Even plaintiff's expert, Dr. Drobes, told you that as this information is coming out, Mr. McCall is becoming more aware of information about the health risks of smoking.
Now, if we go two years forward to 1966, you heard that the very first warning label starts to appear on all packs of cigarettes. "Caution: Cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health."
What's important for purposes of what you've heard Mrs. McCall and Mr. Alvarez tell you is that warning label goes on every single pack of cigarettes, filtered, unfiltered, high tar, low
tar, menthol, non-menthol. Every single pack of cigarettes sold in this country carries the same exact Surgeon General's warning. Martin McCall would have been 25 years old.
So let's go back to the timeline here for a second. And we're in this period, we're now going back up above the black bar in the center there, and we are at this point in November of 19 71.
You heard that in 1970, Mr. McCall acknowledges to himself that he's got a drinking problem and he makes a decision to do something about it. He decides to start attending Alcoholics Anonymous and he uses the 12-step program to quit smoking in 19 70.
And we heard testimony that quitting drinking -- I think I may have said quitting smoking. He quit drinking in 19 70.
We heard testimony that quitting drinking was not easy for Mr. McCall. It took him several attempts before he successfully quit. He had withdrawal. He had the shakes. But he overcame his addiction to alcohol and quit drinking and he continued to go to Alcoholics Anonymous almost every single day from that point on.
We know he went on to become a certified
alcohol addiction counselor. He opened a program called BARC, Broward Alcohol Receiving Center, and he helped other alcoholics deal with their addictions.
Now, let's go below the timeline. In around that same period of time, 1970, a new warning is put on all packs of cigarettes. And that warning says, "Warning: The Surgeon General has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health."
"Cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." This is 1970. Martin McCall is 29, about to turn 30 years old. Again, same warning label appears on every pack of cigarettes, filtered or unfiltered. That's the testimony you've heard in this case.
Now, if we go back to the timeline, one year later, in 1971, we're below the black bar there, you heard all cigarette ads are taken off of television and radio here in the United States, and one year after that, in 1972, every cigarette ad, on a billboard, in a magazine, in a newspaper is required to carry the Surgeon General's warning right on the ad itself. And that's the undisputed testimony you've heard in this case.
Now, you know that in November of 1971, and I'm going back up above the bar there, on Thanksgiving, at an Alcoholics Anonymous dinner, Bernice McCall and Martin McCall meet. He's been sober now for about a year.
At the time they meet, Bernice McCall herself is a social smoker and they smoke together. But she ultimately quit smoking about two or three years after they meet in 1973.
Now, as we've already discussed, during this period of time, the 1950s, the 1960s, and the 1970s, lots of information is coming out telling the American public that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health, that it causes lung cancer and other diseases. You saw those public service announcements.
You heard a lot from Dr. Proctor, but what did Dr. Proctor tell you? Dr. Proctor told you that between 1964, when that very first Surgeon General's warning was issued, and 197 9, 30 million Americans quit smoking. 2 million people quit every single year during that 15-year period. And that's while The Tobacco Institute is making all of the statements that Dr. Proctor told you. Notwithstanding all of that, 30 million Americans
make the decision to quit and they quit for good.
So let's move to the next page of the timeline. There we go.
We're now into the 1980s. Mr. McCall is not drinking, he's attending AA. He's still smoking. And at this point in his life, he's never even expressed an interest in wanting to quit smoking.
In 1985, you heard that there were a series of rotating warnings that go on every pack of cigarettes, one of those four warnings, and one of the warnings reads "Smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy."
That warning or one of the other rotating warnings appears on all packs of cigarettes as of 1985.
So at some point after these warnings are put on cigarettes, you heard some testimony that Mr. McCall smokes Parliament cigarettes for about a year or two. Mrs. McCall wants you to believe that he switched to Parliament cigarettes and this recessed filter because he thought they were safe or safer.
But let's look -- we'll talk about the facts of that as we get a little bit deeper into some of
the issues in the case.
In 1988 or thereabouts, Mrs. McCall tells us that her husband makes the first attempt to quit smoking for the very first time in his life. She testified that she thought he may have gone to a Salvation Army smoking-cessation clinic. She mentioned the patch, she mentioned the gum, she mentioned acupuncture. She claims that these things occurred sometime in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
But ladies and gentlemen, what did Mrs. McCall tell you? She told you my husband never told me he was actually ever trying to quit, and I never observed him stop smoking for more than 24 hours. That's her testimony. That's what she told you yesterday and on Friday.
That brings us to August of 1992 on the timeline. You heard that Mr. McCall started to have symptoms of a cough and heartburn, and that led him to go to the hospital. He goes into the hospital, they have an x-ray and a bronchoscopy is performed, and that, unfortunately, shows that he has cancer in the right upper lobe of his lung.
You know that a couple weeks thereafter, on September the 21st, he has surgery to remove the
cancer from his lung. You've heard that not long thereafter, he has a ravaging pneumonia. He's admitted to the hospital on November the 3rd, and about two weeks later, he unfortunately passes away on November the 18th from the pneumonia which caused ARDS, adult respiratory distress syndrome.
And I'm going to talk about the remaining facts concerning Mr. McCall's medical treatment and the cause of his death when we get to the actual questions on the verdict form.
So I told you, ladies and gentlemen, that this case was about causation, control, and responsibility. And even though that's what this case is all about, you won't see those specific words on the verdict form.
So what I would like to do now is walk you through the specific questions you're going to be asked to decide on the verdict form, and the various first question, same question Mr. Alvarez showed you, "Was Martin McCall addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?"
And this question can be broken down into two pieces. Was Martin McCall addicted, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and
death? If you answer no to this question, question 1, that is a verdict for Philip Morris. Keep in mind that the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on this question.
So the first part asks was Mr. McCall addicted to cigarettes?
Now, in the Court's instructions, the Court did not give you a definition of addiction or a set of criteria to use to determine whether someone is addicted. But you heard about the DSM-5.
You heard it is used to diagnose people with addictions to all sorts of substances. And both plaintiff's expert, Dr. Drobes, as well as our expert, Dr. Agharkar, used the DSM-5 to help answer the question of whether Mr. McCall was really addicted.
So what's the evidence you heard? Well, plaintiff brought you Dr. Drobes. Now, remember, Dr. Drobes is not a medical doctor. He is a researcher who does not diagnose or treat patients with addictions as part of his day-to-day job.
The only time Dr. Drobes ever diagnoses anyone as addicted is when he's in a courtroom testifying to juries like you. Outside of litigation, he's never asked to determine whether someone is
addicted.
He talked a lot about criterias and tests and he talked a lot about technical terms, but at the end of the day, what did he tell you? He said anybody who smokes cigarettes on a daily basis and smokes first thing in the morning is addicted. As complicated as Dr. Drobes tried to make it sound, it turned out to be that simple for him.
So ask yourself, ladies and gentlemen, is that how we diagnose people with a serious mental illness or disorder in this country? Of course not. Of course not.
Remember Dr. Drobes told you that to be addicted, you have to have a brain disease. But he treats the diagnosis as something as simple as knowing how many cigarettes you smoke and how soon after you wake up do you have your first cigarette.
Addiction is a mental disorder, just like Dr. Agharkar told you. And we just don't brand or label millions of people as addicts because they smoke a certain number of cigarettes. That makes no sense. That's a label, not a diagnosis, under the DSM-5.
But Mrs. McCall and her lawyers know they cannot meet the requirements of DSM-5.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, comments about the lawyers, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. They can't prove to you that Mr. McCall meets the requirements of the DSM-5, and that's why they want you to believe that Mr. McCall was some chain smoker who smoked at least two packs of cigarettes per day, because they want it to be all about the number of cigarettes he smoked as opposed to whether or not to demonstrated loss of control or clinically significant impairment.
So they refused to accept Mr. McCall's -MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge, commenting on -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. The plaintiff is trying to tell you that what Mr. McCall told his own doctors, his own doctors when they were asking about a smoking history is false. They tell you you should reject that.
But this is the record from 1990 where Mr. McCall is speaking to his own doctors when he's about to go under anesthesia for a serious medical procedure. He was asked are you a smoker, he
checks yes. He's asked packs per day, he says one pack per day, and then years, 30.
Why on earth would Mr. McCall lie to his doctors about this? This is a serious medical procedure. You want your doctor to know everything, to have all the facts so that that doctor can treat you appropriately.
But Mrs. McCall told you, no, he smoked at least two packs per day.
The only other person you've heard from in this case who told you that Mr. McCall was addicted was Bernice McCall herself. And, of course, it's not a surprise at this point that she would say her husband was addicted after she's filed a lawsuit and now asks you to award her $11.5 million.
But ladies and gentlemen, it will be up to you to decide whether that's enough in a court of law, where the plaintiff and her lawyers tell you that addiction is a brain disease that involves complicated medical and scientific issues. Ask yourselves have they really proven that he was addicted.
The evidence we've heard demonstrates that Mr. McCall was not addicted. We brought you Dr. Agharkar. He testified yesterday afternoon.
He's a medical doctor and board certified psychiatrist. He's diagnosed and treated thousands of patients to addictions to all sorts of substances, including nicotine addiction.
Unlike Dr. Drobes, he sees patients on a weekly basis that have substance abuse and addiction problems. He evaluates them. He determines that they are addicted. And he helps them to stop or quit using the drugs. And he told you that 80 percent of his patients are cigarette smokers.
Dr. Agharkar read all of the medical records, and unlike Dr. Drobes, he read all of the depositions in the case. He provided you with a real medical criteria, the DSM-5. He put it on the screen, he explained it to you.
And after evaluating all of the evidence we have available to us today, he told you Mr. McCall was not addicted to cigarettes. And he spent several hours explaining all of the reasons why he came to that conclusion.
Finally, both Dr. Agharkar and Dr. Drobes told you that addiction requires that you show something called clinically significant impairment or distress, which simply stated means, did the person
lose control of their lives because of their use of the drug. Did you lose control?
Well, ladies and gentlemen, we know exactly what addiction and loss of control really looks like in Mr. McCall's life, and we know that because of his alcohol addiction.
This is the slide Dr. Agharkar showed you yesterday. These are the things that were happening in Mr. McCall's life for that roughly ten-year period when he was addicted to alcohol.
This is what loss of control and significant -- clinically significant impairment looks like, ladies and gentlemen. That's what it looks like from Martin McCall.
And none of this occurred when Mr. McCall quit drinking, but continued to smoke cigarettes. In fact, you heard he was a high-functioning individual who accomplished many things after he became sober. There was no impairment or loss of control.
He met and married his wife, Bernice McCall.
He repaired his relationship with his brother, Stephen. He became a certified alcohol and addiction expert. He helped other people overcome their alcohol addictions.
You heard no evidence that his smoking caused him any issues at work, at home, or with any of the people he cared about in his life. Where is the evidence of loss of control? Where is the evidence of clinically significant impairment?
Now, we know there is one other addiction expert in this case who thought for darn sure that Martin McCall was not addicted to cigarettes, and that's Martin McCall himself.
He was a firm believer in the 12 steps of Alcoholics Anonymous. And the first step is you have to acknowledge that you have a problem, that you're addicted, and that you don't have control.
Don't you think if Mr. McCall really and truly believed that he was addicted to cigarettes, at some point during their 19-year marriage he would have turned to his wife Bernice and said you know what, I'm addicted to these cigarettes. I want to quit and I can't. I need help.
But Ms. McCall testified and told you pointblank that conversation never happened in 19 years of marriage. And that's because Mr. McCall didn't believe that he was addicted to cigarettes.
So at the end of the day, you have to ask yourself whether the plaintiff's evidence is
sufficient or whether more should be required, like tangible, reliable evidence that comes from a source that does not have a financial interest in the outcome of the case.
Based on the two weeks that we've been here, ladies and gentlemen, the answer should be obvious, Mr. McCall was not addicted. He was not some hopeless addict, some tortured smoker. He was a strong, intelligent, and hard-working man who made his own decisions in life. And your answer to the first part of this question should be no, Martin McCall was not addicted.
But even if you were to answer yes to the first part, your work is just beginning, because you still have to address the second part of this question. The plaintiff still has the burden to prove was his addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death.
And the Court has given you an instruction for legal cause, and candidly, the language can be a little bit difficult to follow, even if you're a lawyer, so let me give you a thought to help you understand that concept.
Imagine someone walks across the street and they get hit by a bus. Well, the bus is the
medical cause of why they were injured. But in order to know the legal cause, you would need to know more.
Did the person have the right-of-way when he or she crossed the street? Was he paying attention? Did he look both ways before he crossed the street or was he distracted? Was he texting on his phone? Was he listening to music with his earbuds in? Did he cross the street knowing every day that that bus would be there at the same time?
You would need to know all of those things in order to understand legal cause in a case like this.
And in a case like this, the question of legal cause really boils down to the issue of quitting, quitting smoking, and motivation to quit smoking.
Ask yourself, based on all the evidence you've heard, was Mr. McCall's claimed addiction so strong, so substantial that it prevented him from quitting when he was motivated to do so, when he was truly motivated to do so?
The truth is, based on the evidence you've heard, Mr. McCall was never motivated to quit smoking before he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1992.
If you decide that Mr. McCall could have quit smoking whenever he was motivated to do so, then addiction is not a legal cause of his lung cancer.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, improper -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: What better evidence of lack of motivation can there be than the fact that Mr. McCall smoked for nearly 30 years before he made even the slightest attempt to quit? How can someone claim that Mr. McCall's addiction to smoking prevented him from quitting when he didn't really try?
Rather, it was Mr. McCall's decision to smoke cigarettes long after he knew the dangers, and his decision not to make a motivated and committed effort to quit until after he was diagnosed with lung cancer that is the one and only legal cause in this case.
You have concrete evidence of the kinds of things Mr. McCall would do when he was highly motivated to change his behavior and stop using an addictive substance.
Think about it. Mr. McCall quit drinking after a decade of alcohol-related problems that nearly ruined his life.
This is the slide that Dr. Agharkar showed you. On the left-hand side are all of the things that Mr. McCall did to make sure that he stopped drinking and that he maintained his sobriety for the next 2 0 years.
You know he invested a tremendous amount of time and energy to make sure he never drank again. But he infer applied any of these principles or his training as an alcohol counselor or anywhere near the time and effort to quit smoking.
Ms. McCall wants you to believe her husband was addicted and that he tried to quit smoking, but what did she tell you? What did Ms. McCall tell you?
She told you her husband never told her that he wanted to quit smoking or that he was trying to quit. She told you he never tried to quit smoking before 1988. She told you he never stopped smoking for more than one day in his entire life. And she told you he never threw away his cigarettes, his ashtrays, or his lighters.
Actions do speak louder than words, and the truth is, Mr. McCall enjoyed smoking for many years and was not truly interested in quitting until after he was diagnosed with cancer. Think about
it. Mrs. McCall is in this courtroom telling you how much her husband desperately wanted to quit smoking, but he never told her once in all the years they were married that he wanted to quit smoking.
So to answer this question, you don't have to look any further than the plaintiff's own expert, Dr. Drobes. Despite everything you've heard during this trial about cigarettes and nicotine and additives and ingredients and brain receptors, what did Dr. Drobes acknowledge?
Dr. Drobes told you anyone can quit smoking if they are motivated and determined to do so. He told you 60 million Americans have quit smoking for good. Most of them would be considered addicted according to his criteria.
Nevertheless, he told you most of those people quit cold turkey, without any assistance whatsoever.
Just like Dr. Agharkar told you, the nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent these people from understanding that smoking is dangerous and from exercising their free will to stop.
And during the past two weeks, ask yourself, have you heard any evidence that Mr. McCall was any
different? He wasn't some hopeless addict who had lost his free will. His wife told you, he was strong, he was intelligent, he was capable. The truth is that for most of his life, Martin McCall enjoyed smoking cigarettes and simply did not want to stop smoking.
He received many warnings over the years, and he smoked in the face of those warnings because that's what he wanted to do, and he had every right to make that choice.
But it was his informed choice to smoke for many years in the face of those warnings that was the one and the only legal cause of his cancer in this case.
Ms. McCall claims her husband was addicted, but addiction did not force him to smoke for 30 years. He smoked because he enjoyed it, because that's what he wanted to do.
You know Mr. McCall was always in control, and that's, ladies and gentlemen, what this second question -- the second part of this question is all about.
Martin McCall was always in control of his own decisions, not Philip Morris, not the nicotine in cigarettes. And so your answer to this question
should be no, and your answer to question 1 on the verdict form should be no as well.
It's probably a good point to take that lunch break, Your Honor.
[#DELETED RECESS#]
MR. GERAGHTY: Thank you, Your Honor.
Good afternoon. Hopefully, you all had a nice lunch, and I'm sure you appreciated the break from nonstop lawyers talking at you. So I'm glad we were able to do that.
Just to briefly recap before we broke for lunch, this is the first question you'll see on the verdict form. And as I was talking earlier, I was breaking this question down into two pieces. But
the question you'll be asked is, "Was Martin McCall addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?"
For all the reasons I told you earlier, I think both parts of those questions, the answer should be no. We believe the answer to that question should be no. And if so, that would be a verdict for Philip Morris.
But what I would like to do is, in the event you were to disagree with us and you were to move on, let's talk about the remaining questions that are on the verdict form.
So the next question, question number 2, asks, "Was Martin McCall's lung cancer a legal cause of his death?" That's question number 2. And to answer this question, we need to look at the medical issues in the case.
And I want to start with what the plaintiff told everyone, told you they were going to prove in opening statements. And the plaintiff, this is the chart that the plaintiff actually showed you during their opening statements. And they said it was going to be a sequence of events.
Now, there is no dispute that Mr. McCall's
lung cancer was surgically removed on September the 21st, 1992, and that the cancer did not actually cause his death. The pneumonia, the fungal pneumonia, which led to the ARDS, are the cause of his death.
So what was plaintiff's theory? Plaintiff's theory is that Mr. McCall's cancer treatments, and they told you specifically radiation and chemotherapy, radiation and chemotherapy caused Mr. McCall to become immunosuppressed, get pneumonia, develop the ARDS, resulting in him passing away on November the 18th.
Andrew told you in opening that plaintiff would be unable to prove that those sequence of events occurred. He told you that the key link in plaintiff's theory of causation in this case was that Mr. McCall received chemotherapy and that chemotherapy caused him to become immunosuppressed, which led to the pneumonia and led to the ARDS and led to his death.
We told you plaintiff would not be able to prove that Mr. McCall was given chemotherapy, that he ever received chemotherapy. We also told you that the only expert in the case, the only expert who actually has experience in prescribing
chemotherapy, Dr. Villa, would testify that even if Mr. McCall got chemotherapy, it would not have been in an amount sufficient to cause him to become immunosuppressed.
And we told you that the very limited and local radiation that Mr. McCall received to his right lung was not sufficient to cause the immunosuppression.
And now we're at the end of the case, you've heard all the witnesses testify, and the evidence has come in exactly as we told you it would two weeks ago. Each of plaintiff's experts has refuted the plaintiff's theory of causation in this case. Dr. Villa came out and told you so expressly. But both Dr. Scott and Dr. Bakken essentially did the same when they admitted to you, both of them admitted to you that there was no way, no way Mr. McCall would have been treated with chemotherapy between November the 3rd and his death on November the 18th because he was fighting a life-threatening, ravaging pneumonia during that time.
And since everyone agrees there is no evidence that Mr. McCall received chemotherapy before November 3rd, there is no evidence to support that
Mr. McCall ever had chemotherapy at all.
So let's walk through the testimony on these issues. And what I want to keep in mind is, the question is not whether or not Mr. McCall was immunosuppressed. That's not what plaintiff has to prove to you. The plaintiff has to prove to you that Mr. McCall's cigarette smoking was a legal cause of that immunosuppression and the events that resulted thereafter.
So let's review the evidence we've heard in the case.
Now, let me address one thing at the outset. You've heard some testimony about a mass that was found on Mr. McCall's adrenal gland. And right up front, I want to dispel the notion that that's an issue that you should be concerned about at all.
Mr. Alvarez didn't mention the adrenal mass in his opening, he didn't mention the adrenal mass earlier this morning.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: There was no mention of the adrenal mass at all earlier this morning. No one has suggested to you that the adrenal mass had anything to do with Mr. McCall's death, and that's
because it didn't.
So let's focus on the medical issues that you'll be asked to decide.
Mr. McCall had lung cancer. No question about it. But did the lung cancer, the fact that he had lung cancer alone cause Mr. McCall to become immunosuppressed in early November.
All of plaintiff's medical experts said the answer to that question was no.
So let's take a look at what Dr. Villa, the only cancer expert you heard from, said.
Dr. Villa, the question was, "You agree that the cancer in Mr. McCall's lung would not typically cause the level of immunosuppression you would look for if you were talking about Aspergillus pneumonia or herpes infection; right?"
Dr. Villa's answer was, "I agree."
Dr. Bakken and Dr. Scott told you essentially the same thing.
Likewise, all of the doctors who testified about the impact of the surgery on his lungs also agreed that the surgery to remove Mr. McCall's cancer did not cause him to be immunosuppressed.
Here is what Dr. Villa had to say again. This is his testimony last week.
Question: "You agree that the surgery to remove the tumor from Mr. McCall's lungs would not cause the level of immunosuppression that you typically see lead to Aspergillus pneumonia or herpes infection?"
His answer, "I agree."
So now let's talk about the radiation. It is true that you could get localized radiation therapy after you've had successful cancer -- or successful surgery to remove cancer, and there is no dispute that Mr. McCall did have radiation. In fact,
Dr. Scott told us it is not uncommon to give small amounts of radiation to the tissue surrounding the area where the cancer was removed.
Ms. McCall told us that her husband had limited localized radiation therapy as a, quote, precautionary measure. But again, all of the experts told you that radiation alone is not enough to cause immunosuppression. Chemotherapy is the key.
Now, it's true that after he finished testifying, Dr. Bakken was asked a question by one of you ladies and gentlemen if radiation alone could be enough to cause the immunosuppression.
And Dr. Bakken reiterated that chemotherapy is the
key in the case, but that it was possible, possible that radiation could be a cause of immunosuppression in some people.
Here is what Dr. Bakken said. And this is the question that one of you posed to him in writing. "Can the four treatments of radiation therapy which Mrs. Madore's notes indicate Mr. McCall received cause someone to become immunosuppressed if they did not also receive chemotherapy?"
Dr. Bakken's answer, "The -- becoming immunosuppressed is more likely with a combination of both chemotherapy and radiation, but the administration of four radiation treatments alone could cause a person to be considered as immunosuppressed."
Now, he said the opposite of this earlier during cross-examination. And let's show you what Dr. Bakken said when we cross-examined him on this very point.
This is the question we posed to Dr. Bakken, I posed to him during my cross-examination.
Question: "Just so it's clear, your opinion is, if he had not undergone both radiation and chemotherapy, you don't believe Mr. McCall would have been immunosuppressed?"
Dr. Bakken's answer, "Based on the definition of immunosuppression, that's correct."
And it wasn't just Dr. Bakken who told you that radiation isn't enough. Dr. Scott told you the same thing.
Here is the questions that Mr. Brenner asked
him.
Question: "You can't say with any degree of certainty that if Martin McCall had localized radiation therapy alone, he would have become immunosuppressed?"
Dr. Scott's answer, "I can't say for sure,
no."
Question: "Now, you don't have any medical records or other records showing that Mr. McCall was immunosuppressed either during the time or -during the time he received radiation therapy; correct?"
Dr. Scott's answer, "Correct."
And Dr. Villa told you the same thing. Here is Dr. Villa's testimony. "You agree that any radiation in this case that you saw in the records would not be sufficient to cause immunosuppression to the point where you're looking at the types of infections that caused Mr. McCall's death?"
Dr. Villa, "I agree."
So the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is that all three of the plaintiff's experts who came to testify told you the same thing. Radiation alone doesn't cause immunosuppression. All of the plaintiff's experts agree.
So then let's move on to the issue of chemotherapy. Before walking through the testimony, let me ask you to consider one point.
As we've just discussed and as we told you in our opening statement, the plaintiff's entire claim that smoking was a substantial contributing cause of Mr. McCall's death rises and falls on proving that Mr. McCall did, in fact, have chemotherapy.
And plaintiff's entire claim that he had chemotherapy rises and falls on a single line in an AFLAC insurance bill indicating a possible chemotherapy treatment between November 3rd and November the 18th.
Let me show you that.
This is a bill. It's a little tough to read from where you are, but this bill will be received in evidence.
And we've blown it up a little bit. You see the dates are highlighted 11/3rd/92 through
November 18th, 1992.
This page from AFLAC is the only piece of paper you've seen in the entire case that suggested even remotely that Mr. McCall had chemotherapy.
It's not a medical record. It's not a medical bill. It's not generated by a doctor or even a hospital.
So the plaintiff has shown you this one page, but now let's look at all of the evidence you've heard over the last two weeks that shows there was no chemotherapy. And let's start with the most important piece of evidence of all, and that's the testimony of Bernice McCall.
Now, when I asked Mrs. McCall here the question point-blank when she was on the witness stand, she said I don't remember if my husband had chemotherapy. That's what she said on the stand. But remember what Dr. Scott told you about the side effects of chemotherapy. He said the side effects are severe. You can vomit. You can lose your hair. And Mrs. McCall doesn't remember whether her husband had chemotherapy?
It makes no sense.
But this is what she said in her deposition, her sworn deposition under oath about two years
ago. And we confronted her with this testimony when she said on the stand I can't remember. And these are the questions that she answered in her deposition.
Question: "Did he, referring to your husband -"Yes.
-- "undergo chemotherapy or radiation?"
Her answer, "He had two, I think two radiation treatments."
Question: "Did they recommend chemotherapy?"
Answer: "No."
That's what she said in her deposition under oath back in 2014. And then I confirmed, I asked her, "Those are the answers you gave to those questions under oath in your deposition; correct?"
And she said, "That's -- that's correct. I don't remember them saying they were giving him chemo. I don't know if they did. I couldn't say for sure."
Question: "Ma'am, in your deposition under oath, you said that he had radiation, but not chemotherapy."
Her answer, "That's correct."
That's Mrs. McCall's testimony.
But then you heard the testimony of her sister, Dorothy Madore, yesterday by videotape.
This is what you saw less than 24 hours ago.
Question: "Do you know if Marty ever underwent chemotherapy?"
Answer: "No. My sister said he just had radiation.
"I see. That's what you remember Bernice telling you?"
Answer: "Yes. Yes."
That's the testimony of Dorothy Madore. I want to talk about her and her notes for a minute. You saw the video yesterday. You know she is Bernice McCall's older sister. She's been a registered nurse for her entire professional career.
And as Mr. McCall became more and more ill with the pneumonia, he asked his wife, "Will you please call your sister and ask her if she can come down? It would be a comfort to me. It would help us understand what's going on medically."
So what did Dorothy Madore do? She wrote down everything her sister told her about Martin McCall's care and treatment from October the 29th to November the 19th in those handwritten notes
you've heard about through the testimony.
After she arrived in Fort Lauderdale, she wrote down what she saw and heard from the doctors. Those handwritten notes from Dorothy Madore are truly the best evidence we have today of the medical care and treatment that Martin McCall received in the final weeks of his life.
We know that Bernice McCall herself reviewed those notes and agreed with every word in them.
And most importantly, not once in her detailed set of notes did Dorothy Madore mention that Martin McCall ever had chemotherapy.
Why would Ms. McCall tell you from the witness stand that she couldn't remember whether her husband received chemotherapy? That's a question you'll have to think about as you go back and deliberate on the evidence in the case.
Now, in addition to what Ms. McCall told you, the doctors also told you that Mr. McCall could not and would not have received chemotherapy from November the 3rd to November the 18th, as the plaintiff claimed.
Dorothy Madore's notes tell us that Mr. McCall saw his doctors on November the 3rd because he was feeling very sick. He had a chest x-ray done that
day. The chest x-ray showed that he had a ravaging pneumonia. The pneumonia was in both of his lungs.
He was examined by Dr. Coopersmith, who said the pneumonia is serious, and this man needs to be admitted to the hospital immediately. And that's exactly what happened.
You heard that Mr. McCall's feet and legs were swollen, his abdomen was distended, and that he had puffiness in his hips. And, of course, you now know this wasn't the first time that Mr. McCall had ever had pneumonia.
This is the medical record from July 31st, 1990. This is from the cataract surgery. It's one of the few pages of medical records we have. A history and physical was taken and he's asked,
"Have you had or do you have any of the following?"
And Mr. McCall indicated to his doctors back in 1990 that he had had a history of pneumonia. That's what he said.
And this document was filled out by Mr. McCall years before anybody was thinking about filing a lawsuit.
As Dr. Bakken confirmed for us, there is nothing in the notes to suggest that the doctors thought Mr. McCall's cancer had returned on
November the 3rd or that he was being hospitalized or treated because of a return of the cancer. Instead, the notes reveal the truth, that on November the 3rd, the doctors thought Mr. McCall had a severe life-threatening pneumonia. And they were right. And they did their best at that point forward to try to treat it and save him.
And Dr. Scott confirmed for all of us that that pneumonia Mr. McCall came to the hospital with on November 3rd never resolved and was ultimately the cause of his death.
And Dr. Scott and Dr. Bakken agreed, they both told you, you do not give chemotherapy, a highly toxic mix of drugs, that cause all sorts of side effects, to someone who is seriously ill with pneumonia like Mr. McCall.
Use your common sense. What would reasonable doctors have done?
You remember we walked Dr. Scott and Bakken through the timeline events while Mr. McCall was in the hospital starting on November the 3rd. When Andrew was cross-examining Dr. Scott, he drew a timeline on that white flip board and, of course, he joked that his handwriting isn't all that good, and I think we can all agree that's a fair
characterization, but this is a copy of that flip chart where Dr. Scott said, you're right, no evidence of chemotherapy before November the 3rd, and no evidence of chemotherapy after November the 3rd. That's what Dr. Scott told you.
The doctor that they claim is the one that tell -- is going to tell you adenocarcinoma of the lung was the cause of death.
And you remember Dr. Scott agreed, he agreed with everything that we told you he would agree with.
And finally, we heard from Dr. Villa on this issue. Again, he's the only doctor who's ever administered chemotherapy. And he tells us that even if, even if hypothetically he had ever had chemotherapy, the amount suggested in that AFLAC bill would not have caused Mr. McCall to become immunosuppressed.
This is Dr. Villa. "And you would agree with me that even if you believed that bill, even if you give credit to that bill, the amounts shown there would not be sufficient to cause immunosuppression to the point where you're looking at the types of infections Mr. McCall had?"
"I agree. The document that chemotherapy and
radiation there is unlikely to cause immunosuppression." So that's the actual medical evidence you've heard.
There is no doubt we are missing a massive amount of medical records. You heard in opening statement the plaintiff told you that luckily,
Mrs. McCall had saved some of the medical records. But we now know that she had a lot more records that she did not save.
Instead, as she told us, she originally had a big black trash bag full of documents related to her husband. She told us the big black bag contained medical records and medical bills related to her husband's care and treatment. The bag was so heavy she told you she couldn't carry it. But she also told you that over the years, she got rid of many of the records in that bag.
So consider what Mrs. McCall saved and what she didn't save.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: I would object to this, Judge, this is improper.
THE COURT: Overrule.
MR. GERAGHTY: She saved a total of 52 pages of medical records. That's what we have. Well over half of those are from the 1990 cataract
surgery. Mrs. McCall also saved 17 pages of records that showed that he was diagnosed with lung cancer and that he had the bronchoscopy in early to mid September.
She saved a handful of lab records from October the 4th, but we have no more records for the remainder of Mr. McCall's life. We don't have any records, Mrs. McCall did not save any records showing that he had successful lung surgery on September the 21st. She didn't save any records relating to Mr. McCall's battle with the ravaging pneumonia from November 3rd through November the 18th.
The truth is many of the records that would answer the questions in this case were not kept by Mrs. McCall. Instead, she saved only the death certificate, which says adenocarcinoma of the lung was the cause of death, and part of an autopsy report that mentions that adrenal mass.
Ask yourself why those were the only records that were saved.
So what did Mrs. McCall not save? She didn't save the part of the autopsy report that states the cause of Mr. McCall's death, which was the reason why she told us she ordered the autopsy in the
first place. Why else would you order an autopsy?
Dr. Villa told us an autopsy is the gold standard in determining the cause of death. The evidence you've heard suggests strongly that Mrs. McCall had that information, but didn't save it.
Let me make just a couple of comments about the death certificate. Dr. Scott did sign the death certificate. He does say in there that adenocarcinoma of the lung is the cause of death, in his opinion, but the judge has instructed you, you'll see it in instruction number 10, the death certificate does not constitute prima facie proof of the cause of death, nor does it create conclusive proof of any fact related to the death. As it relates to cause of death, it simply states the ultimate opinion of the attesting physician, Dr. Scott.
So the death certificate is not an official statement of the cause of death, and you now know that many of the things that Dr. Scott put in that death certificate are just wrong.
The fungus that he identified in the death certificate is wrong. And most importantly,
Dr. Villa told us that the autopsy shows that lung
cancer was not the cause of Mr. McCall's death.
This is Dr. Villa's testimony, the cancer expert.
"You know that the autopsy report resolved the clinical question in favor of cancer not being the cause of Mr. McCall's death; correct?"
Answer: "That is correct."
Question: "You can't say the lung cancer was directly related to the infectious process that is the immediate cause of Mr. McCall's death?"
"Not based on the documented data, no."
That's Dr. Villa.
To sum it, the plaintiffs cannot prove that Mr. McCall's lung cancer, the surgery for the lung cancer, the radiation, or this so-called chemotherapy caused his immunosuppression that led to the pneumonia, the ARDS, and his death.
Again, the question is not whether Mr. McCall was immunosuppressed. The question is whether plaintiff has proven to you by the greater weight of the evidence that he was immunosuppressed because a chain of events that began with his cigarette smoking that led to his lung cancer and his treatments.
Plaintiff can't prove her case. And on this
issue, I'll leave you with the testimony of Dr. Villa one more time.
This is one of the final questions that Andrew Brenner asked Dr. Villa.
Question: "So based on the data and the evidence that you have in this case, you cannot say with a reasonable degree of medical certainty that Mr. McCall's smoking or his smoking history played any role in his cause of death on November the 18th, 1992; correct?"
And Dr. Villa says, "Based on the data? That is correct, yes."
Dr. Villa told you exactly what we told you he would say two weeks ago during opening statements.
The answer to question number 2 on the verdict form should be no, lung cancer was not a legal cause of Mr. McCall's death.
Now, I don't think you'll get this far, but let's move on to question number 3 on the verdict form, and I want to discuss this question, because Mr. Alvarez mentioned it.
If you get this far, you've determined that Mr. McCall was a member of the Engle class, and question 3 asks, "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris a legal cause of
Martin McCall's lung cancer?"
It's important again on this issue to consider what Mrs. McCall has said at various times as this litigation has progressed.
Back in 2008, she provided a written interrogatory answer under oath that asked what brands of cigarettes her husband smoked and for what dates and lengths of time did he smoke them.
Here is her answer under oath before the trial back in 2008. "State the brand names of all tobacco products the decedent ever used and identify the dates and length of time that the decedent used each brand and product." She lists 19 brands and then she says, "Dates and length of time unknown." Dates and length of time unknown.
Then when we get to trial, the story changes. With Philip Morris being the only defendant in the case, she told you that Mr. McCall always smoked Marlboro, and she said that when they met, her husband told her he had been smoking Marlboro for, quote, as long as he could remember. As long as he could remember.
This last part is especially odd since Mrs. McCall also told you that when she met her husband in 1971, remember this, she said you know
what, he said I don't want to talk about the past,
I want to talk about the future.
And so she agreed they would not discuss anything about his past. But apparently, the two exceptions to that were, well, how long did you smoke Marlboro before I met you? And did you believe that filters made cigarettes safer? Those are the two exceptions to this agreement that they would never discuss the past.
So during cross-examination, we pointed out that in her deposition under oath, Mrs. McCall testified that she had no idea what brands her husband had smoked before they met. She had no idea what he smoked in the '50s or the '60s or from 1970 up to the point they met in 1971.
She agreed that we read all of her deposition testimony correctly.
She also then told you that her husband quit smoking Marlboro in the mid to late 1970s.
"Mr. McCall only smoked Marlboro for a few years after you were married until the mid to late '70s; isn't that true?"
"Yes."
"All right. And then sometime in the mid to late '70s, Mr. McCall quit smoking Marlboros and
started smoking another brand called Raleighs; correct?"
Answer: "Yes."
And that was her testimony here in court. But she wants you to believe that her husband always smoked Marlboro and never smoked Marlboro until he died [sic]. And you'll have to decide whether you find her testimony at trial on those issues to be believable in light of the things that she said under oath before this trial started.
Bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, and let me get to this, this is the evidence. This is the reliable evidence you've heard. This chart demonstrates it.
From the time he started stealing his mother's cigarettes, the L&M filtered cigarettes from his mother in 1953 or thereabouts to 1970, nobody has any idea what brands of cigarettes he smoked. His brother testified, said I have no idea. He's the only one who knew him.
Ms. McCall, her testimony, in her deposition before trial, was he smoked Marlboro, that's the sort of grayish area there, from 1971 until the mid to late 1970s. And we've got it there about 1977 or '78.
You then heard that he quit smoking Marlboro and started smoking Raleigh because he and his wife wanted to collect those coupons from the Raleighs.
You also heard he smoked Parliament for maybe a year or two in the mid to late '80s, and then he smoked Salem, Kool, and Vantage until the end of his life.
The only two brands on here are Marlboro and Parliament. That's about eight or ten years of Philip Morris cigarettes over the course of nearly 40 years of smoking. And that eight to ten years is nearly exactly the question that was posed to Dr. Villa that he was asked to assume by Mr. Alvarez about the amount that Martin McCall smoked of Philip Morris brand cigarettes.
No doctor came here and told you that less than ten years of smoking was enough to cause Mr. McCall's lung cancer. Dr. Villa didn't tell you that. Nobody told you that.
It is plaintiff's burden to prove to you that smoking Philip Morris cigarettes, not all the cigarettes he smoked over the 30 to 40 years they claim he did, was a but-for cause, a substantial contributing cause of his lung cancer. You've heard no reliable evidence to support that in this
case. And your answer to question number 3 should be no.
So again, I don't think you're going to get this deep into the questions, but there is a question 4 and there's a question 5. And these are very wordy questions so I am going to read one of them and I'm going to paraphrase the other.
Question number 4 says, "Please state whether Martin McCall reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by Philip Morris USA which concealed or omitted material information not already known or available to him concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of Martin McCall's lung cancer." It's a mouthful, right? No question about it.
The companion question 5 asks a similar question, but it broadens it to include companies other than Philip Morris.
But here is the instruction that you need to be focused on. The plaintiff has to prove detrimental reliance on a statement that omitted material information.
So instruction number 13 tells you that "plaintiff must prove that but for Martin McCall's
reliance on a statement by PM USA concealing or omitting a material fact not otherwise known or available, he would have acted differently and he would have avoided his injuries." In other words, if Philip Morris had said something different, he wouldn't have smoked cigarettes. That's what we're talking about here.
But you know what Mrs. McCall said about this. Mrs. McCall told you flat out, I asked her these questions, she admitted to these things on the stand.
Question: "Mr. McCall never told you that he had ever heard anything that Philip Morris had ever said about cigarette smoking and health; right?
Her answer: "No."
And I wanted to clarify that, "No, meaning no, he never told you that he heard?"
Answer: "He never told me."
And I asked her about every single tobacco entity that Dr. Proctor had ever mentioned under the sun, TI, CTR, R.J. Reynolds. I mentioned them all. She said the same exact thing.
So what did plaintiff tell you? Well, you heard this story about a plane ride that Mr. and Mrs. McCall took to San Diego. Remember the plane
ride? She said they were sitting in the smoking section of the plane in the back. They were near the bathroom. There was odors coming from the bathroom. The smoke from all the cigarette smokers was bothering her and she didn't like the smell and she said to her husband, she said, "Martin, can we move? I would like to move."
And she told you that Martin McCall said, "Honey, don't worry, everyone is smoking a filter. They're safe."
Ask yourself if that response and the entire story makes any sense. Why would her husband, unprompted, say, oh, honey, don't worry, filters are safe, when the concern that Mrs. McCall was expressing is not the concern about whether smoking causes lung cancer among the people who are smoking, but I would like to get out of the smoke because I don't want to smell the smoke and I don't want to smell the bathroom.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would ask you to use your common sense when you evaluate whether that testimony and that evidence is remotely credible, remotely credible.
Mrs. McCall also claims that she and her husband saw an ad for Parliament cigarettes
sometime in the late 1980s, and that ad said that the recessed filter made Parliaments safe or safer.
And according to Mrs. McCall, he pulls out a Parliament cigarette and he cuts open the filter and they inspect or examine the inside of that filter.
Again, ask yourself whether that story makes any sense. Why would Mr. McCall be so interested in the recessed filter if, as Ms. McCall has told you, he believed for years that filters make cigarettes safe? Why was he concerned?
If he truly believed that the filter was safer, why did he only smoke Parliaments for about a year or two?
And remember what I told you earlier, ladies and gentlemen, all cigarettes at the point in time that the story apparently occurred had those rotating warning labels. Every single cigarette, filtered or unfiltered, had the same warning label, "Cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, and emphysema."
I want to highlight real briefly -- can we have the Elmo for just two seconds?
There is an instruction that I think's important for you to consider when you look at
this.
Okay. There we go.
This is instruction number 22. This is directly on point to this whole issue that has been raised by plaintiff. The judge has already instructed you, and you'll take this back into the jury room, "As long as the cigarette packs bear the federally mandated warnings, cigarette advertising after July 1, 196 9, cannot be the subject of any claim that the advertising undermined or neutralized the warnings or made them less effective."
This instruction kills the plaintiff's whole claim. Kills the plaintiff's whole claim.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Move to strike.
THE COURT: Jurors disregard. This is argument. You have the instructions that I gave you, ladies and gentlemen. You are to rely on those instructions.
MR. GERAGHTY: When you go back and you read the instructions and you consider the evidence, you'll see that the plaintiff can't maintain their claim when you consider the evidence we've just
talked about and the Court's instructions.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: You know, Judge, can we approach on this issue?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
(The following proceedings were had before the Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: This is why -- this is why I didn't want this instruction. Because this instruction is supposed to prevent me from arguing that there is liability because of this.
What he's done now is completely use it as a sword that says because of this, because of this, I can't meet my burden of proof. That is completely inappropriate. You know it's -- he knows it's inappropriate. He continues to do it.
And I don't know what to do about it now because now the jury is under the impression that because of that jury instruction, that I have to -I can't meet my burden because of that jury instruction.
That jury instruction is not meant to do that. That jury instruction is meant to say that I can't have liability -- they can't have liability for doing that.
So, you know, I think you need to instruct
this jury on the proper use of that instruction, because what he just did is wrong.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I don't think anything I did was wrong. You sustained the objection where probably I went a little bit over the top, but when I rephrased my instruction -- my rephrasing was perfectly appropriate and consistent with the Court's instruction.
What Mr. Alvarez is asking you to do, you can't do. You can't change the instructions once you've already started to argue the case to the jury, so it's completely improper. I'm moving on anyway, so.
THE COURT: Well, I sustain the objection.
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, may I ask a quick question? I apologize. I did not ask you for warnings. What do you have down as the time remaining?
I appreciate that.
THE COURT: I don't know how long we were here at sidebar, but I had you ending at 2:07.
MR. BRENNER: And, Judge, as an officer of the court, I'll tell you, I had, stopping at sidebar, I had -- so he's got seven or -MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: That's fine. That's fine.
MR. GERAGHTY: That's correct, I'll be done in about two minutes.
(The following proceedings were had in open court before the Court and jury.)
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. I'm running out of time, ladies -THE COURT: I'm sorry.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: I had an objection.
THE COURT: I sustained the objection. I instruct the jury to disregard the last comments of the counsel.
Proceed.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. I've got to move quickly because I'm quickly running out of time, but the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is look at the evidence that's been admitted to the case.
The plaintiff showed you all sorts of ads when Dr. Proctor was on the stand. You'll see the Philip Morris ads. There is not a single Philip Morris ad that says that a filter makes cigarettes safer, and you won't see a single Parliament ad in evidence.
If this story is true, if what Mrs. McCall told you is really true, where is the Parliament ad that she claims says filters makes cigarettes
safer. Use your common sense. He was smoking a filtered cigarettes all the way back in 1953 and 1954. He was a strong, intelligent, and well-educated man. The answer to question numbers 4 and 5 should be no.
So let me move on here with the little bit of time I have.
Can I go back to the -- thank you.
Need to reboot here for just one minute.
Is it -- I'm trying to go back to the -MR. FORD: Oh.
MR. GERAGHTY: Yeah, yeah, sorry.
Okay. So here we are, these are verdict form questions 6 and 7, "Was there fault on the part of Martin McCall which was a legal cause of his lung cancer? And state the percentage."
Again, I don't think you get this far, but I want to respond because Mr. Alvarez did address the issue.
So what does it mean to accept responsibility for the decisions we make in life? Imagine, if you will, someone like Mr. McCall who did drink alcohol. Many people have had that experience. Imagine a person who has a few too many drinks one night, they wake up the next day with a hangover,
their eyes are bloodshot, they're blurry, they stumble into the bathroom, they look themselves in the mirror, how many people say to themselves, you know what, I'm only 1 to 5 percent responsible for my decision to have all those drinks last night.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Golden Rule violation.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: Mr. McCall was not the kind of person who would have said anything like that. He took responsibility for his drinking, he made the decision to quit, and he did it.
Accepting responsibilities means just that. Accepting full responsibility for the consequences of one's actions. And that's why you should put down for Martin McCall, if you get to this question, there should be no question that he is 100 percent responsible for the decisions he made in his life.
Now, let me move on to the issue of damages. Again, I don't think you will get this far on the verdict form, but I need to respond to what Mr. Alvarez said. He asked you to award a total of $11.5 million to Mrs. McCall for the decisions that Mr. McCall and only Mr. McCall made. That's an
incredible sum of money.
Ask yourself how did Mr. Alvarez come up with that number?
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: That would be no different than me simply suggesting that the number ought to be $100,000.
The plaintiff has the burden of proof on damages. She has the burden to prove every single dollar of damages that Mr. Alvarez asked for.
Judge Murphy has already instructed you that's the law.
Is there any evidence to support plaintiff's number? Of course not. Mr. Alvarez pulled that number out of thin air.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Ob- -- Judge.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Move to strike that.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard.
Counsel.
MR. GERAGHTY: I'll move on.
Mr. Alvarez's arguments to you, ladies and gentlemen.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, anything that
starts like that.
MR. GERAGHTY: The arguments that were made by plaintiff's counsel is not evidence. Where is the evidence to justify such a huge number based on what you've heard during this trial? Knowing the plaintiff has the burden to prove every dollar. There is none. How do you get to $1 million, let alone 11.5 million? And in a case like this, that defies common sense.
We're talking about a case where every pack of Philip Morris cigarettes from the time Martin McCall started smoking them had a warning label required by the government. Smoking was something Mr. McCall wanted to do, something he enjoyed.
His wife never encouraged him to quit. She never told him I think you should quit smoking.
Yet here she is asking you to award her an exorbitant amount of money. And he never expressed any interest in quitting until the late 1980s or early 1990s.
If you get this far, I would suggest that you use your life experiences and common sense when deciding how much money you believe would compensate Mrs. McCall for her loss. And I would suggest to you that $100,000 is, indeed, far more
consistent, fair, and appropriate given the evidence you've heard as opposed to the number that Mr. Alvarez gave you.
Now, you also heard Mr. Alvarez talk about a survival claim, and I want to talk about this because closing argument is the first time you've heard about this survival claim.
The entire trial you heard that this case was about Mr. McCall's death. And you heard the plaintiff tell you they were going to prove that smoking was the cause of Mr. McCall's lung cancer and death.
Now all the evidence has come in, and they are telling you that even if you determine that smoking had nothing to do with his death, well, then you should still award Mrs. McCall money.
But what you need to know is if you get to those alternative questions, 9 and 10, the damages are only for Mr. McCall's pain and suffering from the date he was diagnosed with lung cancer until he passed away.
You may not award any damages for Mr. McCall's death, you cannot take into account any emotional damages that may have been suffered by Mrs. McCall due to the loss of her husband if you get to those
two particular questions on the verdict form.
Now, I don't think you will reach this point, but if you do, I would submit that this answer should be a very small amount, much lower than the amount we just discussed.
Plaintiff has the burden of burden of proving every dollar that they have requested, and there was simply no evidence about the pain that Mr. McCall himself experienced. All you heard was Mr. McCall's pain and suffering related to the ravaging pneumonia and the final hospital stay in the last two weeks of his life.
You can't consider any pain and suffering that Mr. McCall may have experienced related to his pneumonia or his death when making a determination of the appropriate amount of damages under that survival claim.
Now, the last question on the verdict form asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against Philip Morris. If you answer no to that question, you never get to the issue of punitive damages. So let me talk briefly about it so you understand what you're being asked to decide.
You are not being asked to decide the amount
of punitive damages. The issue is whether by clear and convincing evidence Mrs. McCall has shown that she's entitled to punitive damages.
The question before you right now is has Ms. McCall shown under the evidence and under the law that she's entitled to punitive damages. If you decide that she is, there will be another phase to the trial.
Now, I want to make sure that if you get to this issue on the verdict form, you clearly understand what you have to decide. You'll see that clear and convincing evidence is defined in the instructions. It's a much higher burden than the greater weight of the evidence.
You'll see that the evidence must be precise, explicit, and lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. In other words, you need to be really, really, really, really convinced.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection, that's not the standard.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: You need to be persuaded that punitive damages are appropriate under that
standard.
Let me tell you one more thing. You have to decide, if you get there, that punitive damages are warranted based only on conduct that relates specifically to Martin McCall. This case is about Martin McCall, not all smokers, and not the general public.
Based on the evidence you've heard, nothing Philip Morris did or did not do harmed Martin McCall. Philip Morris made and sold cigarettes.
The instructions the Court gave you says that alone cannot be a basis for liability. The defendants can't be liable, Philip Morris can't be liable for manufacturing, selling, and advertising cigarettes.
You heard that The Tobacco Institute and the CTR have been disbanded. Philip Morris no longer advertises in magazines. The FDA has regulatory authority over Philip Morris in cigarettes now. Philip Morris pays large sums of money to the FDA and the states to enforce the regulations and restrictions that govern the way Philip Morris does business today.
Mr. McCall always had the information available to him to make an informed decision about whether he would smoke cigarettes or whether he
wanted to quit. He always had the ability to quit when he was motivated to do so.
THE COURT: You need to wrap it up, Counsel.
MR. GERAGHTY: Okay. Your answer to that question should be no.
I'm going to sit down here in a minute,
Mr. Alvarez is going to have one more opportunity to speak to you, and that's because, as you've heard, the plaintiff bears the burden of proof.
And I don't know exactly what Mr. Alvarez will say, but I can imagine -MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Objection.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: But I expect that he will say things very critical about Philip Morris. But as you listen to the things he says, ask yourself what does this have to do with Mr. McCall?
The truth is we do enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. We have the right to make decisions and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interest. And with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. And in the end, ladies and gentlemen, that's what this case is all about.
Mr. McCall was always in control of his life. He showed everyone that he took control when he quit drinking alcohol. He did not make similar efforts to quit smoking despite having the ability to do so.
But Mr. McCall was always in control, and because he was in control, he is responsible.
So based on all that evidence, ladies and gentlemen, the answer in this case should be clear. Based on the evidence you've heard in the case of Martin McCall, the evidence supports one and only one true verdict, and that is a verdict in favor of Philip Morris.
So, ladies and gentlemen, this is our last opportunity to speak to you. And on behalf of myself and Andrew, I really just want to say thank you very much. You have been extremely patient during the process, patient with me, patient with Andrew, and I really want to let you know that we appreciate that very much. So thank you.
