         MR. TRENTALANGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         Good afternoon, folks.  It's been a long time
    since I spoke to you at the beginning of this case
    on the first day of jury selection when you were 4690 sitting in a crowd with everybody else.  It's kind
    of like a marathon.  I'm sure you feel like it's a
    marathon.
         And a marathon is 26 miles, 385 yards.  And
    that 385 yards is really important, because that's
    what makes it a marathon and not just running 26
    miles.  And that may be a small distinction to some
    people, but not to marathoners.
         The point is, you got to finish.  This is the
    part of the case where you finish.
         Now, you found by the -- by clear and
    convincing evidence that the circumstances of this
    case warrant the imposition of punitive damages, and
    you found that based on your collective wisdom.  And
    it might have been easy to forget about that,
    listening to this witness talk this morning and
    early into the afternoon, but that's what you found.
         You found that the defendant, R.J. Reynolds,
    bore responsibility for causing the death of a human
    being.  By clear and convincing evidence you found
    the circumstances were such -- and you don't have to
    go into what they are, they're going to be in the
    instructions, but -- or they were in the
    instructions yesterday.  Mr. Paige showed them to
    you in opening.  Basically, reprehensible conduct, 4691 conduct that exceeds the bounds of what we consider
    the acceptable in a civilized society.  So you found
    that, and we're going to build on that.
         But don't forget, in all this, we've changed
    business, that you found them responsible for
    causing the death of Dorothy Jane McCabe, a living,
    breathing, human being who had dreams and hopes and
    aspirations and was connected and interwoven with
    other people.
         And during the first part of the case, the
    defense talked all about Ms. McCabe and her choice
    and her alcoholism and all the things that she did
    and -- and you've already dealt with that.  This is
    not about her actions.  This is about the
    defendant's actions, RJR's actions.  This is the
    part of the case we focus on their conduct.
         And this is the part of the case where you
    write in dollars the amount of money that's going to
    punish these folks for what they did.  And what they
    did was the worst thing that you can do.  They
    marketed defectively dangerous -- unreasonably
    dangerous and defective cigarettes.  Every single
    one of them that they made over the 50-plus years
    that Mrs. McCabe smoked, over the course of time
    they were doing business, and even after her death, 4692 okay?  And they negligently placed those cigarettes
    on the market.  So they did that over and over and
    over and over again for a long time.
         And they came in here today, and if you listen
    to the evidence, they compounded the situation,
    because there is a difference between "I'm sorry"
    and "I'm sorry I got caught," okay?
         And there's a -- there's a saying, "Too little
    too late."  None of the changes that they've talked
    about took place during Dorothy Jane McCabe's
    lifetime.  They had multiple opportunities to change
    their course of conduct when it would have made a
    difference to Jane McCabe, and they didn't do it,
    okay?
         And you're going to get instructions that say
    the amount of punitive damages you award must not be
    unreasonably large when considered in relation to
    the amount of compensatory damages you have awarded
    to the plaintiff.
         And defense counsel got up here and said that
    the amount of damages -- in opening, said the amount
    of damages, compensatory damages, that you awarded
    to the plaintiff, James McCabe, was a million
    dollars.  Well, that's not exactly correct.  Because
    if you remember, there were five lines on that 4693 verdict form.  There were five people on that
    verdict form.  And the total compensatory damages
    that you awarded were $5 million.
         James McCabe is the personal representative of
    the estate.  He brings the lawsuit in that capacity,
    but he's also a survivor, because he was one of Jane
    McCabe's kids.  So he recovers, as a survivor, a
    million dollars along with the other survivors.
         The plaintiff recovers compensatory damages on
    behalf of all the survivors, so the number that's
    kind of the anchor ain't a million dollars, it's $5
    million.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection.  Misstates the law,
    Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Let's move on.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So the number that you -- you
    have to follow this instruction that the Court has
    given you.  The amount of punitive damages you award
    must not be unreasonably large when considered in
    relation to the amount of compensatory damages you
    awarded to the plaintiff.
         And the amount of compensatory damages was only
    yesterday.  You don't -- it's not like you're going
    to forget.  It was $5 million, okay?
         So -- and you can consider harms allegedly 4694 suffered by persons who are not parties to this case
    for the limited purpose of any light it might shed
    on the blame worthiness of defendant's acts that you
    found to have caused Jane McCabe's lung cancer and
    death.
         So you heard, you know, reference to this being
    about Jane McCabe and harms to others and not
    talking about that.  You can consider harms to
    others if you find -- if it will shed light on the
    blame worthiness of defendant, okay?
         There are a lot of others in the similar
    situation with Jane McCabe who smoked unreasonably
    dangerous cigarettes, developed lung cancer, and
    died.  A lot of others who were in very similar
    circumstances.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  It's
    improper basis for punitives.
         THE COURT:  The jury will rely on the
    instructions as I give them.  Thank you.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  And you're going to have
    these instructions, just like the other ones, to
    take back at -- take back with you.  I've
    highlighted on my copy, but read it.
         If it doesn't say that, then, you know, don't
    do what I'm asking you to do.  But if it says you 4695 may consider evidence concerning harms allegedly
    suffered by persons who are not parties to this case
    for the limited purpose of any light it might shed
    on the blame worthiness of defendant's acts you
    found to have cause Jane McCabe's lung cancer and
    death.  However, you may consider such evidence of
    conduct causing harm to persons, other than
    Ms. McCabe, only to the extent it was substantially
    similar to the specific conduct that actually caused
    Ms. McCabe's lung cancer and death such that it
    essentially replicated the conduct -- that conduct,
    okay?
         That's what I'm talking about, the other Jane
    McCabes.  People that were roughly the same age,
    smoked cigarettes like she did that were placed on
    the market that were unreasonably dangerous and
    defective.  All of those people, okay?
         And you remember the testimony as to how many
    there were.
         You heard testimony about e-cigarettes and Snus
    and smokeless tobacco, and there was testimony about
    whether or not it was going to be safe.  And you
    heard the defense witness, Dr. Figlar, say, Well, it
    hasn't been proven unsafe yet.
         And Mr. Paige asked, You mean you put them on 4696 the market without determining them being safe?
         And there was an eerie, eerie echo, a voice
    from the past in the newspaper ads around the
    country saying, If we ever find anything on a
    product that's dangerous, we'll take it out.
         We've heard that song before; the Frank
    Statement in 1953.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  Refers to
    fraud and conspiracy.
         THE COURT:  Let's move on, please.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  So in considering whether or
    not they've changed, they're still putting products
    on the market they don't know to be safe.  And,
    folks, there's a difference between -- when somebody
    says it's safer, that's a comparative.  Safer than
    what is what you have to ask.
         These products, these new products, Dr. Figlar
    said are safer than cigarettes.  So safer than what
    is important.  That's called the referent.  Safer to
    the most dangerous product that's ever been placed
    on the market any time in human history.  They're
    safer than that.
         That's what they brought you to show that
    they've changed.  They're directing people away from
    something that's unreasonably dangerous towards 4697 something that's a little bit less dangerous.
    That's not somebody who's changed.  That's not
    conduct that should be rewarded.
         How do you come to a punitive damages trial and
    not know the amount of profits that your company
    made when you're here to testify about how your
    company has changed and you're going to be talking
    about the financial condition of the company?
         You heard from Dr. Cummings.  And this is one
    of the instructions.  "You should consider this
    additional evidence along with the evidence already
    presented and you should decide any disputed factual
    issues by the greater weight of the evidence."
         We talked about greater weight of the evidence.
    I'm only telling you this to remind you that the
    entitlement to punitive damages was clear and
    convincing evidence.  You found by that standard.
    Now we're back -- when it comes to the amount, we're
    back to greater weight of the evidence.
         So if somebody tells you, I'm just not sure
    that amount of money is right, remind them they
    don't have to be sure as long as that's the correct
    amount by the greater weight of the evidence.
         The youth marketing that went on in this case
    is -- Jane McCabe was caught up right in the middle 4698 of it.  You saw PT4014, the letter from 1927 from
    R.J. Reynolds.  And you saw the ads.  That looks
    like 1952, the 1952 prom.  There's a picture of
    Jane McCabe when she's somewhere around 11 or 12
    years old.  She got caught up right in the middle of
    that.
         And conduct, it's just horrible.  Look at the
    number up there.  They're keeping track of the
    percent of 12-year-old -- 12.  You got to say that a
    couple times just so you don't think it's a
    misstatement or that somebody misspoke.
    Twelve-year-olds.  Replacement smokers.  You know,
    there's almost nothing you can say.  That's -- takes
    your breath away, 12-year-olds.
         This is a 50-year lookback.  So this is not an
    accidental document taken out of context.  They're
    looking back in 1984 over what they've been doing
    for the past 50 years, which, of course, includes
    Jane McCabe and others exactly like her -- or almost
    exactly like her.
         They had the filters.  Jane McCabe switched to
    filters.  She was intercepted.  Again, eerily
    reminiscent.  They're switching them to e-cigarettes
    now.  Eerily reminiscent of the switch to filters
    for health reasons.  And you have those documents, 4699 you can take a look at them.  3615, 00692, and 2023.
         You know, I think it was George Santayana said,
    "Those who can't remember the past -- those who do
    not remember the past are condemned to repeat it."
         They manipulated nicotine levels.  They
    designed, engineered, and manipulated nicotine in
    cigarettes to promote and sustain addiction in
    people like Jane McCabe.  And you look at these
    documents -- and there are a lot of them.
    "Cigarette smoke should contain sufficient nicotine
    to supply the necessary requirements of the smoker
    with respect to this compound.  A high pH smoke is
    strong due a high concentration of unbound free
    nicotine."
         Remember the freebasing of nicotine so that it
    got to the brain quicker and gave that kick?
         PT3219, "As smoke increases above 6.0, an
    increasing proportion of the total smoke nicotine
    occurs in free form, rapidly absorbed by the smoker
    and believed to be instantly perceived as a nicotine
    kick."
         So this wasn't some accident that they found
    out about and went, oh, my goodness, we didn't mean
    to be doing this.  They designed, engineered, and
    manipulated nicotine levels in tobacco to promote 4700 and sustain addiction.
         The PT numbers 1835, they want to know how low
    can they afford to get nicotine and still get the
    smoker's addicted.
         PT1552 saying just what I said, "Nicotine
    levels are not obtained by accident."
         PT2141, I read that a moment ago.
         PT3569, "A high pH smoke is strong due to a
    high concentration of unbound or free nicotine in
    the smoke."
         Then PT1635, "Ammonia, when added to a tobacco
    blend, reacts with the indigenous nicotine salts and
    liberates free nicotine."
         So that's one of the chemicals that was used to
    manipulate and produce free nicotine.
         And then PT3291, I read.
         So there was the suggestion that there is some
    kind of mitigation or credit that should be given
    because Reynolds contributed to the FDA's regulatory
    program.  No.  No.
         When you have to be dragged into compliance
    with regulation that you've avoided for 50 years,
    that doesn't count.  I mean, they were unregulated
    up until 2009 and they're paying a fraction of the
    cost of what they caused in terms of damage.  That 4701 doesn't count.
         That's not mitigation when there are health
    care costs that your product has incurred and you
    pay back pennies on the dollar.  You don't get
    credit for that.  That doesn't diminish the harms
    that were caused, the damage that was done to
    Jane McCabe.  They had to be forced to make these
    payments to police their own industry.  That doesn't
    count either.
         So I told you about the amount of punitive
    damages that you should award in this case.  It
    should not be unreasonably large when considered in
    relation to the amount of compensatory damages
    you've awarded.
         Now, you awarded $5 million.  Now, it's kind of
    like Goldilocks and the Three Bears, right?  You
    can't have porridge that's too hot or too cold; it
    needs to be just right.  So you get an instruction
    on damages that can't be too large.  It's kind of
    implicit that if they're going to send a message,
    they got to be large enough.  All right?
         And so the amount that we would suggest to you
    is three times compensatory damages to send a
    message to this company with a $70 billion market
    cap -- that's the value of its stock, 70 billion -- 4702 with a "B" -- billion dollars.  We suggest, in this
    case, $15 million is the amount of money that would
    be appropriate to send a message.
         Now, unlike compensatory damages where you
    were -- collective wisdom and your view of the
    evidence has a wide amount of latitude and respect,
    punitive damages are different because of the unique
    purpose of punitive damages.
         So I'm asking you, don't award more than $15
    million.  Okay?  When I talked to you about
    compensatory damages, I gave you a range to work in
    and I told you that you could use your judgment in
    view of the evidence.  The law views punitive
    damages differently.  Okay?  You don't have that
    same discretion.  And we don't want you to get
    carried away.  It would be easy, when you look at
    this conduct, to get very angry, okay?  And it's
    wrong and it's bad and it needs to be punished, but
    you can't get carried away.  Our system believes in
    fairness, and we're not here, you know, for anything
    other than justice.  And just like too little
    damages would be unjust, too much punitive damages
    would be unjust as well.  Okay?  And I'm not telling
    you that as any kind of , you know, rhetorical ploy.
    I'm telling you that because that's the truth, okay? 4703      Fifteen million dollars.  Don't award more than
    $15 million.  I don't think you should award less
    than $15 million either because of the conduct in
    this case.  So you can disagree with me on the low
    side.  Don't disagree with me on the high side,
    because more than $15 million would not be just in
    this case.
         So that's our suggestion.  That's my
    suggestion.  And if you look at the evidence in this
    case, I frankly would submit to you that it would
    dishonor this evidence to award less than
    $15 million.
         So what do you do -- what do you do in a case
    like this when you got this kind of conduct, you
    know?  What do you do?  It's an unusual situation to
    sit in a punitive damages phase of a case after you
    found this kind of conduct.  It happens infrequently
    because this kind of conduct, thankfully, is not
    that frequent.
         We've all heard about the wolf in sheep's
    clothing.  Sometimes the wolf comes as a wolf.
    Sometimes things are every bit as bad as they
    appear.  This is one of those times.  This is one of
    those times when you have to take the sword and dole
    out the kind of punishment that's required.  And, 4704 you know --
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection to "sword," Your Honor.
         THE COURT:  Overruled.
         MR. TRENTALANGE:  You need to punish the
    defendant.  That's what that, I submit, symbolically
    represents.
         The blindfold is the equality, not
    discriminating against people when meting out
    justice; the scale is weighing of the evidence; and
    the sword is the punishment part.  Okay?  And these
    are punitive damages because you have to punish.
    That's what the sword represents.
         I'm not suggesting that you actually use a real
    sword on anybody.  In case anybody's going to make
    that argument, I'm talking figuratively.  This is
    the part of the trial when to do justice, you have
    to punish.
         And I remember promising my grandmother to
    always do the right thing even if it was the hard
    thing.  And I'm asking you to do the same thing.  Do
    the right thing, even if it's the hard thing.  It's
    hard to sit in justice of anybody.  Corporation,
    individual, it's hard to sit in judgment, but it's
    right in this case.  It's right to punish this
    defendant. 4705      And I'm going to sit down.  This is the last
    time I'm going to have an opportunity to talk to
    you, because Mr. Paige is going to give the rebuttal
    for the plaintiff.  I appreciate your time on this
    journey and I appreciate the effort that you put
    forth.  I don't usually say that in closings because
    I think, you know, everybody has got his obligation
    to do a job and you don't thank somebody for doing
    their job, that's what they're supposed to do.  But
    I'm making an exception here because I think you've
    done an exceptional job as jurors in the attention
    that you've paid.  And I'm confident you'll continue
    doing that kind of job throughout the rest of your
    deliberations.
         Thank you very much.


         MR. PAIGE:  Good afternoon.  This is the last
    time, and you go back to the jury room and you do
    what's right and what's fair.
         The Judge just told you -- you know, we've had
    this dispute, what was the amount of compensatory
    damages that you awarded.  There's no mistake about
    it.  It's $5 million.  It's not a million dollars,
    not $300,000, it was $5 million.
         That was an amount to compensate the children
    for what happened to their mom.  And you know what,
    it was a fair amount.
         You know -- oh, I'm sorry.  If I lean on this,
    it's her microphone, so wait a minute.
         I'm left-handed, so -- but I'll try this.
    There's wires here.
         Last try.  I spilled water at this stage.
         But anyway -- the -- forgot what I said.  Oh, 4729 okay.
         So we know that you awarded what you thought
    was fair and reasonable compensation for what
    happened to Jane McCabe.  That's not why we're here
    anymore.  This is different.
         You know, we're here for what's fair and
    reasonable for punishment for what they did.  And
    you all know, you know, he put up a bunch of things
    about why -- is that slide ready, Baron?
         MR. PHILIPSON:  No.
         MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  Why they shouldn't punish,
    why you shouldn't punish anymore.  And you saw the
    evidence, and I don't need to repeat it to you again
    and go through all of the bad things they did for 50
    years and why they did it.  We know why they did it.
         You know, you do something like that for 50
    years, 50 years day in, day out, executives,
    scientists -- you know, they're going to work every
    day.  They know what's happening.  They know what's
    happening.  It's not a secret what's going on with
    teenagers, what's happening with people, mothers,
    fathers, children, Jane McCabe -- it's secret to
    them, and they're doing it for a reason.
         And the reason is, is that profits are more
    important to them than the health of their 4730 customers.  That's the bottom line.
         All they care -- and now they're here asking
    you with a straight face.  First, saying it's only a
    million dollars, it's only 300,000.  It's $5 million
    for compensatory damages.  You know that now.  And
    they're asking you now, "Don't punish us with money.
    Don't punish us with money.  Please, please."
         But you know the only thing they care about is
    what?  What is the only thing that makes them
    change?  What's the only thing that will help -- you
    know, part of it is to punish them for what they
    did.  Okay.  And they say, "Well, all these people
    are gone now.  They're gone now.  We don't need to
    be punished."
         Think of the message you will be sending to
    other companies if you said, "If you could do this
    for long enough, carry it on for long enough until
    you have to admit on your web page 50 years later
    and then we won't punish you," it would only be
    encouraging people to do the same thing.  And that's
    not right.  Okay.  That's not something to be
    rewarded for.
         They fought off FDA regulations for 50 years,
    and now they go kicking and screaming and fighting
    FDA regulation and they come here and say mitigate 4731 us, mitigate us, because now we're regulated like
    everybody else.  That's not a mitigation.  That
    doesn't -- to reward them for that.
         You know, they say -- Mr. Belasic,
    respectfully, he said, Well, we have 2900 other
    cases.  And if you give everybody the same amount of
    money, $15 million, it's going to be $40 billion.
    $40 billion.
         First of all, you know 2900 cases is going to
    take over 100 years --
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  That's
    improper.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Move on, please.
         MR. PAIGE:  If every plaintiff won, okay, if
    every plaintiff won and every plaintiff got punitive
    damages, however long it took, and they had to pay
    $40 billion, that would be a lot of things.
    Everybody would have to get their day in court.
    Everybody would have to win.  Everybody would have
    to win punitive damages to get to that number.
         He's now saying $40 billion is too much.
    That's what they pay to the MSA.  That's less than
    what they pay to the MSA, which is a fraction of the
    health care cost that they're causing, 170
    billion -- 4732      MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  You
    sustained the objection to that.
         THE COURT:  Let's move on, please.  Thank you.
         MR. PAIGE:  Thank you, Your Honor.
         So, you know, they talked about why they
    shouldn't be punished, but this is why you found
    they should be punished.  This is what you already
    decided.  Let's not forget.  Don't -- there is no
    doubt, there is no confusion why you're here.
         And, you know, we -- we spoke to you in jury
    selection.  And there were a lot of people who said,
    Hey, I have a problem if punitive damages are going
    to go to a plaintiff and not an organization.  You
    know what?  That's the law.  That's the way the law
    is written.  And you see, with FDA regulations, it
    takes nine years to get an act passed by Congress.
         The law is if you -- if they deserve to be
    punished and if the other companies need to be
    deterred, the law provides that that's where the
    money goes.  We can't help that.  That's what the
    law is.  That's not a reason to say, "Well, don't
    punish us because you don't like the law."
         We went over that with you in jury selection.
    Everyone agreed that you would follow the law, that
    if punitive damages were warranted, you would do 4733 that.
         And you know what?  You mentioned McCabe.  He's
    a nice guy.  This is no longer about his mom.  This
    is about making sure that they hear you, that they
    get the message, and that other corporations don't
    do the same thing so that what happened to Jane
    McCabe doesn't happen to others.  Others need to be
    deterred and they need to be punished and that's
    part of your job.
         But these are reasons why you punish them.  The
    conduct that you heard about was so gross and
    flagrant and shows a reckless disregard to human
    life.  You know, that's the conduct you heard about;
    marketing to teenagers, manipulating nicotine,
    intercepting people who want to quit, telling them
    filters are safer; them believing -- you know,
    people smoking filters that don't filter anything.
         That's not good things to do to other human
    beings.  They know that.  They know better.  And now
    to come in here and say, "Well, we're migrating."
    Do you really think they're migrating?  Do you
    really think they are?  They just bought Newport,
    the number two cigarette, last year.
         They bring in Dr. Figlar.  He's under oath.
    He's got to tell you the truth.  He has to.  And 4734 he's speaking to you on behalf -- and you're all
    here.  You're here giving us your time.  And he's
    got to tell you the truth.  And his story is, "We're
    migrating.  We're getting out of the cigarette
    business.  It's too dangerous."  Then they go and
    buy Newport.
         And all the while they are selling all these
    other things, Snus.  Hey, maybe we have a little
    pressure here with the cigarettes, we'll give them
    these e-cigarettes, we'll give them VUSE.  We don't
    know if they're safe or not.  Maybe they are, maybe
    they're not.  Who knows?
         Maybe they should find out before you sell
    them.  You don't find out after the fact.  That
    didn't work.  It didn't work for a lot of people.  A
    lot of people, millions of people, it didn't work
    out for them.  They know that.
         MR. BELASIC:  Harm to others.  This is the
    sixth time, Your Honor.  Motion.
         THE COURT:  Deny the motion.
         MR. PAIGE:  You can only punish for the harm
    done to Jane McCabe.  There is nothing worse you can
    do to a human being than what they did to her.  She
    was a human being, she was a mother, she was a
    teenager.  This is what they did to her life.  That 4735 wasn't right.  They know better.  And they know
    better now and they knew better then.
         You know, the conduct showed an entire lack of
    care, that they were consciously indifferent to the
    consequences.  They were.  That's why they need to
    be punished.
         You know, if -- you know, the punishment,
    whether it's with children or whether it's a
    corporation, the punishment has to fit what they
    did.  Okay.
         And, you know, you can have a child, you know,
    who goes to a store and he steals something.  You
    tell him, You know what, you got to pay the store
    back, you have to.  Your kid can't come home and
    say, "Okay, Dad, I'm going to watch TV."  That
    doesn't work.  That doesn't work, because he won't
    learn.
         You know who else won't learn?  All the other
    brothers and sisters, because they'll think it's
    okay.  They need to know it's not okay.  It's not
    right.
         And it's not right and they know that.  They
    know that right now.  It's not a secret.
         The conduct showed an entire lack of care, that
    they wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety 4736 of the public.  Yes, that's a reason to punish.
    That's why we're here.  That's why we're here.
         The fact that they changed and they put
    something on a website that nobody goes to and they
    come here and they flaunt it to you and say now
    we're telling people they can quit, when we know
    when Jane McCabe was alive, they were intercepting
    people, they were telling them low tars were safe.
         MR. BELASIC:  Objection, Your Honor.  Fraud, no
    basis for punitives.
         THE COURT:  Sustained.  Let's move on, please.
         MR. PAIGE:  Okay.  I'm going to say this.  I
    went through my notes.  I think I've said
    everything.  I think you all know enough already.  I
    don't think there is anything I'm going to say now
    that you don't know already.
         Basically, what we would ask you, respectfully,
    is to go back there, render a fair verdict.  Mike
    asked you not to give more than 15 million.  There
    is a reason for that.  We don't want and they don't
    want an award that's too high.
         We know that 15 million, we believe, is
    supported by the evidence in this case and the law.
    And we would respectfully ask that you do that.  I
    will tell you, if you do that, they will know, they 4737 will hear you back in R.J. Reynolds' headquarters
    and know they've been punished and know what they
    did is wrong.
         And I thank you all very much for your time.
    Thank you.
