MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: May it please this Honorable Court, Counsel, Ms. McCall, Counsel.
Good morning.
THE JURORS: Good morning.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: The first thing I want to do is on behalf of Bernice McCall and the rest of us is thank you for your service. You know, some of you have given three or four weeks of your lives to come here and do your civic duty, and we understand that, you know, we took you away from your day job, so we appreciate that. That's number one.
Number two is, you know, I promised you at the beginning that I would take you on a journey. And I want to thank you for coming on that journey with me. Because we went back, you know, decades and decades and decades of what life was like for Martin McCall and for people who lived during his time. And it was an interesting journey. I hope that you learned something. I hope that somehow this experience enriched your lives in a better way, that you leave here knowing something that you didn't know before. And we want to, you know, thank you for the journey, and it's all about the journey, and we really appreciate that.
So let's talk about the case. Okay? And let's talk about what you have to decide.
So I want to talk to you first about class membership, you know, what it is to be a class member and what it is not about.
If we could put that up.
Oh, I have it? Okay.
So let me tell you what class membership is not about. It's not about the fault of either party. You're going to get a different question on the verdict form that's going to talk to you about that. So whether -- whether he is a class member is not about whether he's at fault, whether they're at fault, in the apportionment of fault, it's not about that.
And it's also not about whether addicts can quit smoking. It's not about that. And let me tell you why. You heard from, you know,
Dr. Drobes, and you also heard from the defense addiction expert that said just because you can quit does not mean you weren't addicted in the first place.
So whether someone can quit is not a determinative factor or criteria for whether that person was addicted. So class membership's not
about whether somebody can quit.
And whether the smoker shares some responsibility, like I said, you're going to get a separate question on the verdict form that you, if you decide that you get there, to that part, whether there is shared responsibility.
And lastly, it's not about reliance on a statement from the tobacco industry. It's not about whether Martin McCall was misled, relied on a particular statement, things like that. That, there's a separate question -- I promise you, there's a separate question about all those issues. Okay?
So what's class membership about? This is the question. This is the question. There is 11 -- 11 questions on the verdict form. Okay? This is the very first question. And if you answer no to this question, then we all go home, it will be a quick day. You go home and move on for the rest of your lives and, you know, we accept your verdict.
But this is the vary first question. The very first question is: "Was Martin McCall addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?"
Okay? This is the class membership. You
decide class membership on this issue. Okay? So let's talk about that. Let's look at the evidence in this case, was he addicted. Let's look at the evidence, because, you know, lawyers make flowery speeches, you know, and you hear from experts.
But, you know, one of the things the judge told you to do is use something that you've had for a very, very long time, and you know what that is? Common sense. Your common sense.
And so let's look at the evidence in this
case.
He started smoking when he was about 12 or 13, in 1952 or 1953. He smoked for 40 years, since he was 12, until he died when he was 52. That's a long time. That's a very, very long time. He smoked initially a pack, and it went up to two packs a day. And there's evidence that he even smoked more than that.
He smoked first thing in the morning and the last thing before he went to bed. He smoked everywhere. He smoked in the house. He smoked at work. He smoked in the car. He almost burned down the car. He smoked in bed.
He smoked when he was sick. He smoked constantly. He smoked before and after breakfast,
before and after lunch, before and after dinner.
He burned furniture at home. He chain smoked. He lit one cigarette after another.
He would wake up in the middle of the night and smoke. Just think about -- think about a person's life who at every part of the day, it's accompanied with a cigarette. That's addiction.
He couldn't sit through a mass or an Easter service without having to go out and have a cigarette.
He tried many times to quit cold turkey. He tried cutting down. He tried cessation classes through the Red Cross. He tried acupuncture. He tried the nicotine patch. He tried the nicotine gum.
If he wasn't addicted, if -- think -- use your common -- if he wasn't addicted, then why with one of those things wasn't he able to quit?
He was addicted. That's a sign -- that's a sign of addiction that you have to try multiple things to try to quit.
Continued to smoke after the diagnosis.
And here's the important thing, because I told you that -- at the beginning that there is no definition of addiction, that you decide if this
person's addicted. You don't have to use any -you don't have to use the DSM, you don't have to use the Fagerstrom, you don't have to use the Heaviness of Smoking Index. You don't have to use any of those things. You can use your common sense. You decide. You decide. You decide if he was addicted. Use your common sense, look at the evidence.
The evidence is the strongest indicator that you could use in this case, not what experts say, not what lawyers say. Look at the evidence.
And let's look at the evidence, some of the things. This is the testimony for Ms. McCall.
"You told me that Marty, when you met him, was smoking about a pack or more a day?
"Yes.
"Did that increase over time?
"Yes, it did.
"How much did it -- how much did he smoke?
"He was smoking at least two packs a day, if not more.
"How soon after he would get up in the morning would he smoke?
"He would reach for a cigarette as soon as he woke up."
And why is that important? Because that's one of the strongest indicators to show that a person is addicted, because after you've been sleeping for six, seven, or eight hours and the first thing you do is reach for a cigarette, you're doing it because you have a physiological response because you're in withdrawal and you want that drug.
That's the number one indicator.
"And before getting out of the shower in the morning, would he smoke?
"Oh, he would have -- he would have several cigarettes before he even got outside the door to go to work.
"What was your memory of a typical day when he would walk out the door?
"When Marty walked out the door, he always had a cigarette in his hand. He had a cigarette in his hand when he opened the car door and when he got into the car.
"Would he smoke when he was driving?
"Yes, he would.
"Was there ever an incident in the car where cigarettes caused a problem?"
And she talked about that, how he threw it out the window and it came in through the back window
and burned the back seat of the car.
"Would he smoke in the house?
"Yes.
"Was there ever a time when you told him that he wouldn't -- that he -- that you didn't want him to smoke inside the house?
"Yes.
"Did he stop smoking?
"No.
"What would he do?
"He would go to the Florida room or go to the back bedroom and crack a window and smoke out through the -- blow the smoke out the window.
"When he got home from work, would he smoke? "Yes.
"Would he smoke before dinner?
"Yes.
"Would he smoke after dinner?
"Yes.
"Would he smoke in bed?
"Yes.
"Would he smoke before he went to bed?
"Yes.
"Did he ever burn the bed?
"Yes. Burned the --
"Just once?
"No, many times.
"Burned the bedsheets?
"Always had cigarette holes in the bedsheets.
"Did he ever get up in the middle of the night to smoke?
"Yes.
"Did he ever burn any furniture?
"Yes.
"Tell me about that."
And then she talked about the coffee table and the chairs and the sofa and the rugs that he smoked.
That's evidence of addiction. Who does that? You're burning down, you're causing property damage to your house. If that's something that he could easily give up or he wasn't addicted, he would stop doing. That's evidence of addiction.
"Do you know what a chain smoker is?
"Yes.
"Was Marty a chain smoker?
"Yes, he was.
"Did he ever go to, for example, an Easter mass or Christmas mass which, you know, usually they're a little longer than normal masses?
"Yes. I was Catholic, so he went to the holiday services with me.
"Would he -- would he be able to sit through the entire service?"
Answer: "No."
"What would he do?
"He would get up and go outside and have a cigarette."
Look at the evidence. Look at the testimony. Look at the testimony. Why would someone smoke a pack, two packs a day for decades, for decades? There's 20 cigarettes in a pack. It takes between six and ten minutes a cigarette. You're talking about 20 to 40 to 60 cigarettes a day, that's hours out of your day. Why would you do that unless you are addicted?
"Now, after his diagnosis of cancer, was he able to quit?
"No.
"In which decade was it the first time he tried to quit?
"In the 80s.
"Do you know what the term 'cold turkey' means?
"Yes.
"Did he try that?
"Yes.
"Was it just -- just one time or many?
"I don't know how many times, but he definitely tried it several times, yes.
"Did he ever try to cut down the amount of smoking?
"Yes, he tried that, too.
"Did he ever go to any smoking-cessation classes or courses?
"Yes, he went to the Red Cross class.
"Did he ever try acupuncture to try to stop smoking?
"Yes, he did.
"Did he ever try nicotine patches?
"Yes, he did.
"Did he ever try -- did you see him on the patch?
"Yes, I did.
"Okay. Did he ever try nicotine gum?
"Yes, he did.
"Did you see him chewing the gum?
"Yes.
"When Marty was trying to stop smoking and he wasn't smoking, did his personality change?
"Yes.
"How?
"He would get irritable. He would almost get
mean.
"Was that typical of him?
"No."
Look at the evidence. Actions, actions speak louder than words. Look at his actions. Look at his actions.
"Ma'am, was Marty addicted?
"Yes, he was.
"Any doubt in your mind?
"No."
The lady that lived with him for 19 years, was his spouse, knew him better than anybody else.
Testimony of his brother, started smoking at 12 or 13, smoked more than two packs a day.
And who did we bring you? You know, we brought you some world-class renowned experts.
Look at Dr. Henningfield. He testified by deposition. He's a professor at Johns Hopkins Medical School. He was the lead scientist for the FDA in connection with tobacco -- nicotine addiction.
He's written over 400 peer-reviewed articles,
two-thirds of them on just on nicotine addiction.
He contributed to the Surgeon General Report. He's consulted for the CDC. He's on the standing committee of the World Health Organization. He's testified before Congress of the United States.
This is a man who knows addiction, who studied it.
And what does he say? He says 400 percent or more nicotine receptors in the brains of smokers. Time to first cigarette of the day, one pack per day or more is heavily addicted. Fagerstrom is the most widely used, and the DSM-IV. And why do we mention the DSM-IV? We wanted to give you both. Because when he was smoking in 19 92, the DSM-IV was in effect.
So we brought you Dr. Henningfield to talk about the DSM-IV and his qualifications, and we talked to you with Dr. Drobes who came in live and talked to you about the DSM-5 and how he met the criteria of the DSM-5 currently. So we covered both bases.
We talked about the Heaviness of Smoking Index and how much and when you smoke are the two most important things. If you get up in the morning and the first thing you do is reach for the cigarette and you are smoking a pack or more a day, you are
addicted. You are addicted. By every classification definition there is.
And what does he say?
(Videotaped deposition played as follows:)
MR. HENNINGFIELD: Addiction is a biological barrier to acting on free choice. So addiction does not -- addiction to cocaine doesn't mean you can't quit cocaine, but the addiction means that there is a powerful biological driving force that makes it more difficult for the person that wants desperately to give up cocaine to actually give up cocaine.
Same applies to nicotine and heroin and alcohol for an alcohol addicted person.
Single, in my opinion -- well, it's really two. It's number of cigarettes, so if somebody is smoking more than a pack of cigarettes per day, virtually every day, that is a sign that they are very likely heavily dependent. People seem to get more nicotine out of each cigarette, as far as we know.
And the waking-up cigarette. People that smoke more quickly when they get out of bed regularly are more likely to have higher cotinine levels, higher nicotine levels in their blood,
stronger withdrawal, greater difficulty in quitting and so forth. So those two items are probably the most powerful two items.
Addiction is the interface, it's the driver, it's the interface between the product, the cigarette, and the disease.
(Videotaped deposition stopped and the following is in open court.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: I mean, world-class experts. Now you know. You didn't know before, now you know. This is how you tell if someone is addicted. How soon after he gets up in the morning does he smoke and how much he smoked, those are the two strongest indicators.
And what do we know from the evidence in this case? We know from the evidence in this case as soon as he got up in the morning what did he do?
He reached for a cigarette. And he was smoking more than a pack a day for decades.
And then we brought you Dr. Drobes. He's with Moffitt Cancer Center. He's a professor. He's a director of the smoking cessation clinics. I mean, he's written over 60 peer-reviewed articles just on smoking and nicotine addiction. He's conducted over 30 scientific studies on nicotine and effects
of smoking. He's written seven chapters in books and he's lectured all over the world.
I mean, he's a well-qualified scientist who studied, treated -- and treated addicted persons.
He knows nicotine addiction. He's made it his lifelong profession to study this.
That's what we brought you. People like Proctor, people like Drobes, people like Henningfield, world-class experts in their field.
What does he say? That Martin McCall meets not just one, not just two, but nine, he went through every single one of those criterias explaining why he met nine out of the 11 criterias in the DSM. He said he was severely addicted.
He's never seen a smoker that smoked one pack a day for ten years and not be addicted, and Martin McCall tripled that or quadrupled that.
Martin was addicted under the Fagerstrom, he was addicted under the Heaviness of Smoking Index. The evidence is that he smoked first thing in the morning, he smoked more than 31 cigarettes per day. He smoked after he was diagnosed with cancer.
Nicotine addiction was the substantial contributing cause of his smoking, from a world-class expert who made his life career doing
this.
Look at the facts. Look at the evidence.
Look at the law. And look at the quality of the people who have come here to teach us about what nicotine addiction is. Look at that. Consider that.
And who did they bring in? Dr. Agharkar.
Nice fellow. If you're suffering from depression and you've got a kid with ADD, maybe he's the guy. Okay? Maybe he's the guy. He was a very, very nice guy. But you know what he is not? He is not an expert in nicotine addiction.
He has never conducted any research in the area of nicotine addiction. He's never conducted any research on smoking cessation. He's never conducted any research on cues and triggers. He's never conducted any research on smoking and health. He's never conducted any epidemiological studies on nicotine addiction.
He's never -- he's not written one published in any areas of nicotine addiction, smoking and health, smoking cessation. No one's ever asked him to speak to his peers about this.
And he's never even worked in a smoking-cessation clinic to try to help people quit
smoking. That is who they brought you, a guy with no formal specialized training on the issue of addiction.
And he's taken extreme positions, extreme positions, minority view positions if you compare him to the people who know what they're talking about.
A hundred percent of the cases he's completely reviewed, the smoker was not addicted.
And when he talks about his clinical experience, "my clinical experience," well, let's look at your clinical experience. What's his clinical experience? You know what his clinical experience is? Not one person has ever come to him exclusively to treat for nicotine dependence. Not one. That's his clinical experience?
Not one person. Of all the experts in the world, they bring a guy who's never had one patient come to him and say, "Help me stop smoking. That's what I'm here for." That's who they bring.
In fact, if you look at his experience, 60 percent of his time, his professional time, what does he do? He sits there and testifies. 60 percent of his day, of his week is testifying in court.
He only spends 25 to 30 percent of his time actually treating patients. The minority time that he has in his life, he treats patients. That's the guy who you're going to take advice about whether this person was addicted or not, a guy who spends most of his time testifying in court, not treating patients, and is not even an expert in nicotine addiction? That's who they bring? Really?
He ignores that testimony that Martin smoked two packs per day. He ignores the motivators of why this man stopped smoking. He wanted to come and say he wasn't motivated to smoke, he didn't stop -- try to quit until 1989.
Well, Doctor, don't you think he didn't think it was bad for him because he thought the filters were safer and there was still a controversy? No, everybody knew. Well, how do you know that?
That's not the world.
He came in private practice in 2005. This man died in 1992, he wasn't even a doctor -- he was born in 1976. The world was a different place. That's who they bring. That's who they bring. Use your common sense.
If you look at the DSM-5 criteria and you remember it, met nine out of 11. Only two are
required. And if you look at it, six or more is severe.
He had nine. And use your common sense. A man that smokes about two packs a day for over 3 0 years, you think he's doing it to keep his hands busy? 40 times a day he needs to keep his hands busy?
Come on. Use your common sense. Of course he was addicted.
And look at the time, the one to three packs a day, we're talking about a lifetime exposure of nicotine of 2.5 to 7.6 million exposures of nicotine, and the person is not addicted. Really?
Let's talk about the definition of addiction, because addiction to cigarettes contained -addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was "a legal cause." It doesn't say the, it says "a legal cause." It doesn't say the legal cause, it says,
"A legal cause of his lung cancer if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer, so that it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such lung cancer would not have occurred."
Let's break that out. So legal cause if directly produces or contributes substantially to produce cancer. Contributes substantially, did his addiction play an important role? That's all that means. Did his addiction play an important role in his getting the lung cancer?
So how do you want to think about that, but for the addiction the lung cancer would not have occurred. But for the addiction, if he was not addicted, think about it this way, if he was not addicted, would he have smoked one to two packs or more a day for 30 years and developed lung cancer?
Of course not. Of course not. Use your common sense.
That's all that legal -- that's all that legal cause means, was it an important factor? Was his addiction an important factor to him getting lung cancer?
And you know what's missing from the instruction? There is one important word missing from that instruction. Let me see if I can get to it. Let's go back to that instruction.
Look at that instruction the judge gave you, whatever number it is, I forget what number it is. What word is missing from there? Choice. See
choice anywhere in there? It's not there. It's not there because it's not about choice.
So let's apply the facts to the law. Okay? Because that's what you've got to do. The judge gives you the law, you apply -- you decide the facts and you apply them and you come out with your verdict. Let's look at it.
Okay, legal cause exists if it directly produces or substantially contributes to the cancer.
Addiction caused him to smoke, which directly produced his lung cancer. Right?
But for smoking one to two packs a day for 30 years, Martin McCall would not have gotten lung cancer. That's the way you've got to think about it. It's a very, very simple analysis. Very simple analysis.
So when you get to this question, question number 1, you answer, we think we've met our burden of proof on this issue by the greater weight of the evidence. And the answer should be yes.
The answer's no, sign it, come back, we go home. If you think this man smoked one, two, or three packs a day for 30 years and he did it because he wasn't addicted, then put no.
But I think if you use your common sense, apply the evidence to the law, the only reasonable outcome you could come is that he was addicted.
Now, here is question number 2. Question number 2 is "Was Martin McCall's lung cancer a legal cause of his death?" So this question now, if you've answered that he was addicted, now we want to find out whether his lung cancer caused his death.
Because you heard the defense try to poke holes into our experts to say, well, the pneumonia caused his death, and pneumonia had nothing to do with the lung cancer. So his death was not caused by the lung cancer. So you should answer no to this question. That's what they want you to do. They want you to answer no to this question.
But let's look at the evidence, again, because you guys are the trier -- you guys are the judges of the evidence. Okay?
Let's look at what Dr. Bakken -- Dr. Bakken is an infectious disease specialist. We brought him because oncologists, pathologists, pulmonologists, when they have someone with an infectious disease and they want him treated and diagnosed, who do they call? They call an infectious disease,
because that's what they do, they specialize, they have more training in this area of medicine.
And what does he say? "Doctor, how likely is it -- how likely is it that an otherwise healthy person who is not immunosuppressed can get a pneumonia?"
Answer: "It is highly unlikely, it is almost close to impossible." So they're trying to prove to you something which is close to impossible.
"I mean, it could occur, but patients who have what is called chronic Aspergilla pneumonia, it's a different horse. Patients become sick over a period of like months, and it's not a disease such as we see with Mr. McCall where he became acutely ill and between November 3rd and his death on November 18th. So it was approximately a two-week course."
"Yes. And my opinion is that the treatment modalities which Mr. McCall received in late October and early November would render him as being immunosuppressed. Yes, my opinion is that the treatment modalities which Mr. McCall received in late October and early November would render him as being immunosuppressed.
"Yes. And my opinion is that Mr. McCall's
death was caused by the coinfection of the Aspergillus and herpes simplex virus and that the major actor or the one that was the dominant organism was the Aspergilla, and that this infection led to him developing acute respiratory distress syndrome and ended up with his death.
"Those infections occurred because of the primary problem, that being his bronchogenic carcinoma, which was diagnosed two months before and required that he undergo surgery, which is the appropriate modality for treatment, and then because of the findings at that time, he subsequently received radiation therapy, chemotherapy, which basically was because of his bronchogenic carcinoma that was diagnosed in September of 1992."
And this was a question from the jury. This was a question from one of you. It said, "Can the four treatments of radiation therapy which Mrs. Madore's note indicate Mr. McCall received cause someone to become immunosuppressed if they did not also receive chemotherapy?
Here is the answer. "The -- becoming immunosuppressed is more likely with combination of both chemotherapy and radiation, but the
administration of four radiation treatments alone could cause a patient to be considered as immunosuppressed."
Okay? Use your common sense. The greater weight of the evidence. Okay? Look at the evidence in this case. People do not die of Aspergillus or herpes infections that live inside of us unless one thing, you become immunosuppressed. And the only way you become immunosuppressed is what happened to him, is for the treatment modalities that he had.
This is Dr. Scott, his doctor, the one who signed the death certificate. Look what he says. "Doctor, do you have an opinion on whether Martin McCall was immunosuppressed?"
"I do."
"And was he immunosuppressed?"
"Yes."
"And what caused the immunosuppression?"
"Chemotherapy and, to a lesser extent, radiation therapy."
"And as a result of those immunosuppressions, did it result in a fungal and viral infection?"
"It did."
"And did those infections result in
pneumonia?"
"It did."
"And did those pneumonias result in ARDS?"
"Yes."
"And did that ARDS finally result in his death?"
"Yes."
"And are those opinions to a reasonable degree of medical certainty?"
"They are."
"And, sir, Doctor, did the lung cancer and the subsequent treatment [sic] would Mr. McCall have become immunosuppressed and ultimately died?"
"No."
"Is there any other -- is there any way he could have died without being immunosuppressed?"
"In my opinion, the organisms recovered by the pathologist is an organism that only will kill you if you are immunosuppressed."
Dr. Villa. "Doctor, do you have an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty whether Mr. -- whether Martin McCall's lung cancer was terminal?"
"Yes. I think he would have died because of the metastatic disease, probably within six, nine
months, six to nine months after the surgery."
"Doctor, do you have an opinion how Mr. McCall's death occurred?"
"Yes. He died of bilateral pneumonia."
"And do you have an opinion of what causes bilateral pneumonia?"
"The bilateral pneumonia was caused by mostly a fungal infection, the Aspergillus."
"And why, why did he have a fungal infection that was sufficient enough to cause a pneumonia?"
"He has an autopsy, had an autopsy, a bilateral fungal pneumonia which is overwhelmingly seen only, only in patients that have an immune deficiency."
Think about what their doctors are telling you. We brought you three doctors, okay. The only way you could die from this is if you are immunosuppressed.
And think about this. This man has lung cancer, he has surgery, right? He gets radiation. He gets chemotherapy. He gets a pneumonia. He gets ARDS. And he dies. And they're trying to convince you that his lung cancer didn't cause any of this and the treatments caused nothing and that this was just a coincidence, a coincidence that in
the middle of all this, he gets a fungal infection and a herpes infection that has nothing to do with this and he dies because of that, which has nothing to do with that? You know how unlikely that is?
And the organisms that he had can only happen if he's immunosuppressed? And what does the guy have? Radiation and chemotherapy? And they're trying to convince you that he didn't have any of that? And this is just a big coincidence? Come on. Use your common sense.
Look at the records. You know, we don't -- we don't have the medical records, but we have the bills. Okay? And we know he had four radiations. Here we have a bill for one of them. Okay? Why would they bill you for something you didn't get?
And here's the other thing. Look at the chemotherapies, $5,580; right? If you look through the bills, it's probably the biggest charge.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. That's not what the record says, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Okay. When you look at that, when you look at that, it's the highest charge of any bill in there. Look at that. If
this is just about pneumonia and nothing to do with his cancer and they're not treating him for cancer, then why are they even talking about chemotherapy? Why are they even billing for chemotherapy? Why would anybody put on a medical record to submit a bill for chemotherapy if they're treating the guy only for the pneumonia? Think about that. How does that even make any sense?
They're going to argue that the lack of records, the lack of records prevents us from meeting our burden. Okay? I think the lack of records, the lack of records, if that -- we have enough records to show -- we know what happened in the end, and the only way you get there, the only way you get there is how these doctors say it happened.
And when Dr. Scott signed that death certificate, he had the benefit of all the records, all the labs. That's what he said happened.
Take it from the man who was -- who had the boots on the ground, this is how it happened.
The underlying -- "Enter the underlying cause of the disease that initiated events resulting in his death."
"Adenocarcinoma of the right lung."
But think about that. He has lung surgery -he has lung cancer. He has surgery to remove part of his lung. There is no -- here's the other thing. There's no evidence, when they did the bronchoscopy initially, when they found the lesion that they took out for -- took it out for a biopsy, they checked for fungal infection, herpes. Guess what they didn't find. They didn't find anything. Right? They didn't find anything. Okay?
He has four radiation therapies. The radiation itself we know is enough from -- from a specialist, from a infectious disease specialist who treats people specifically for this, who has more training and a specialty more than Dr. Villa, more than Dr. Scott.
We know he has chemotherapy from the bills, why else would they bill him for something he didn't get?
Aspergillus pneumonia, it's not going to kill you. Herpes simplex 1 is not going to kill you.
It had progressed to ARDS, progressed to his death. The only way you could die that way is if you are immunosuppressed. The only way you're going to get immunosuppressed is if you're getting these treatments for cancer, and that's exactly what
happened.
And it's just a coincidence that within 75 days of his bronchoscope, he dies, and they're saying this is unrelated? Do you know what the odds of that happening are, how remote, how rare, how ridiculous that sounds?
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: Move to strike Counsel's comment.
THE COURT: Jury is to disregard the last comment.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Why is there a bill for chemotherapy if they're only treating him for pneumonia? Think about that.
So here's -- here's the legal cause instruction for lung cancer. "Directly and in natural consequences" -- "sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer, so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such lung cancer would not have occurred."
And remember this. This is an important one. "In order to be regarded as a legal cause of his
lung cancer," it doesn't have to be the only cause. It could operate in combination with other things. And here's the other thing, apply the facts to the law. It was smoking that caused his lung cancer, it caused him -- the treatments for the lung cancer caused him to become immunosuppressed, caused him to get a fungal and a viral infection, that caused the ARDS, and that caused his death.
Even though it operates in combination with some other causes. There's another interesting instruction. There's another interesting instruction you're going to see. This is Instruction Number 19. Remember this one. It's in your packet. 19. This is what it says. "If you find that Philip Morris caused the loss, injury, or damage to Martin McCall, then Philip Morris is also responsible for any additional loss, injury caused by the medical care or treatment reasonably obtained by Martin McCall."
So they are responsible. They are responsible. If this man, because of the lung cancer, needed surgery and that surgery required him to get radiation treatment, if that radiation and chemotherapy resulted in his immunosuppression, which resulted in the fungal pneumonia, which
resulted in the ARDS, this instruction tells you that if they caused his lung cancer, and all those things happened, and that caused him additional injury and damage, they are responsible.
That's what that instruction says. 19, remember that one.
And how do we have to prove our case? Just by the greater weight of the evidence, but we've proven it much more substantially than that.
So when you're asked, was Martin McCall's lung cancer a legal cause of his death, the answer to that is obviously yes.
Let's go to the next question. Question number 3. This is about whether it was their cigarettes that caused his -- which were a legal cause of Martin McCall's lung cancer. Okay? Not the only cause. Was it a legal cause? A legal cause.
So let's look at that. "When you met Martin" -- "Marty in 1975, was he smoking?
"Yes, he was [sic].
"Do you know what brand of cigarette he was smoking?
"Yes, I do. He was smoking Marlboro.
"And how much was he smoking in terms of packs
per day when you met him?
"He was smoking a good pack a day at that
time.
"Do you know how long your husband had been smoking Marlboros?
"Marty told me he'd been smoking Marlboro for a long time."
What did they think, that he woke up that morning when he met -- when he met Bernice and started smoking Marlboros that day?
And you heard the testimony that people are brand loyal, that they tend to stick with brands for years and years and years.
And here's the question when you show her the photograph, "Who is that? Do you recognize -"That's my husband.
"And what -- do you recognize the pack of cigarettes?
"Yes.
"What brand is that?
"That's Marlboro."
And there's a picture of him with a Marlboro.
"And was that brand that Marty smoked also" -"what was the brand that Marty smoked the most?
"Marlboro.
"And when he went from brand to brand and when he was between brands, what would he smoke the most?
"Marty always smoked Marlboros. I don't think he ever -- he never gave up the Marlboros."
Okay?
And by the way, the other brand that he smoked that -- for two, three years, the testimony is Parliament, and Parliament is also, also made by Philip Morris. So we have more than ten years, much more than ten years of smoking history for Marlboros.
And what does Dr. Villa say about that?
"Doctor, I want you to assume that of the 30 pack-year history, Mr. McCall smoked Philip Morris brands for approximately seven to ten years.
Would that be sufficient to be a significant contributing cause of his lung cancer?"
That's what we have to -- that's a legal cause, a significant contributing cause of his lung cancer.
"In my opinion, anything over five years," is enough.
So when you're asked this question, was it their brand that was the -- look, we have to prove
it. We have to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that it was a substantial contributing cause, and it was. This is the brand that he smoked the most. This is the brand that he smoked the longest. And you heard from a medical doctor -- and by the way, you know what you didn't hear? You did not hear from any other doctor to dispute anything that Dr. Scott -MR. GERAGHTY: Objection. Improper -THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. GERAGHTY: -- comment on the burden of proof.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: We have the burden of proof.
MR. GERAGHTY: And move to strike, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Jurors disregard the last comment.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: We have the burden of proof. We have the burden of proof. There is no evidence disputing, no evidence disputing what these doctors said.
MR. GERAGHTY: Same objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: So "Was smoking cigarettes manufactured by Philip Morris a legal cause of Martin McCall's lung cancer?" The answer is yes.
So now we got past the first three questions. And question 4 and 5 are very important. Let me tell you why they're very important. Because this is the path to punitive damages. These next two questions, these next two questions, you have to answer yes to one or both of them, and we think both, okay, in order to -- for it to be a path to punitive damages.
MR. GERAGHTY: I object. This is improper argument, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Okay. You have to -you're going to see this verdict form. And you have to answer either yes to 4 or 5 in order to get us into a position so that we could decide punitive damages. Okay?
MR. GERAGHTY: Improper argument.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: So what does it say?
Number 1, "Please state whether Martin McCall reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by Philip Morris which concealed or omitted material information not already known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking, and if so, whether such reliance
was a legal cause of Martin McCall's lung cancer."
And the next one is the conspiracy. "State whether Martin McCall reasonably relied to his detriment on any statements made in furtherance of Philip Morris Inc.'s agreement with other tobacco companies or organizations to conceal." Remember, it says to what? "To conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of Martin McCall's lung cancer."
Okay? Let's walk through the evidence. Let's look at the facts. Let's look at how it impacted him. Let's look at the documents. These are the documents. Okay?
"We need to know above all things is what constitutes a hold of smoking, that is, to understand addiction. We now possess a knowledge of the effects of nicotine far more extensive than exists in published scientific literature."
1962.
Here it is. "Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are then in a -- the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanisms."
1963.
Okay? And remember, if Marty -- if Martin relied on omissions of material information by another tobacco company, they're responsible for that because they are responsible for the acts of their co-conspirators.
Let's look at the evidence. "Moreover, nicotine is addictive. We are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug."
Here is a Philip Morris document in 1978. "We think that most smokers can be considered nicotine seekers.
"Nicotine deliveries -- nicotine deliveries of these low brands -- low-delivery brands may be low enough to constitute a partial weaning of the smoker. They may find it -- he may find it easier to quit entirely. If the industry's introduction of acceptable low-nicotine products does make it easier to quit, then the wisdom of the introduction is open for debate."
You know what one of the things you won't see in any of these things? Concern over the smokers. And this is information they concealed. And they have a responsibility to tell the truth, not to conceal. Okay? To disclose, not to conceal.
That's what this case is about.
"Therefore, in designing any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be delivery of nicotine. Nicotine is a potent drug. Our industry is based upon the design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine.
"We provide a product" this is Philip Morris, "we provide a product that is an essential commodity in a habitual act."
And it talks about how, you know, they studied how the rats -- and they -- and they -- and they draw the comparison between the lab -- you know, the pulling of the lever by a rat and the acts of smoking. That's how they studied smokers.
"Without the chemical compounds, the cigarette market would collapse, Philip Morris would collapse, and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees." That's what they cared about. They cared about themselves. They didn't care about the people they were hurting. They cared about concealing information, not disclosing the truth.
"That is to say that if the exit gates from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight.
"We have deliberately played down the role of nicotine, hence nonsmokers have little or no knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him, and no desire to try it. Instead, we must somehow must" -- "we must somehow convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking, in hopes that he will for himself then discover the real, quote, satisfaction obtainable."
And let's talk about what they said. Let's talk about -- let's talk about what they went on the public airwaves. They purpose- -- this is a campaign made that was well funded, well organized, well conceived, by very smart individuals, with one plan and one plan only, to conceive -- to conceive this plan so that they can keep smokers addicted, keep them buying their cigarettes for one purpose only, so they can make money. And they knew the truth. They've lied to the American public.
They've lied to this man's to -- to this man. And he bought it, they broke it, and they're responsible for it.
(Video clip played as follows:)
MR. CULLMAN: I don't believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. I'm convinced that eventually, they will find some element, through a
filter or through leaf growing or special type of seed growing, that will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking for. We want to be the detectives just as much as the Surgeon General or the AMA, and we will cooperate in every way.
I don't think the industry admits there are any bad elements. If there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the Surgeon General, through the AMA, through acts of God and luck, we hope we may find them, and if they are found they will be removed, but at this point, we do not know.
We do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. We don't accept that. Because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient.
MR. DWYER: To this question, it must be answered insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. It may, it may not.
MR. HORRIGAN: It is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer.
MR. KOPPEL: All right, sir.
MR. HORRIGAN: It has not been causally established.
MR. KOPPEL: Cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema?
MR. HORRIGAN: Despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established.
MR. KOPPEL: No causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease?
MR. HORRIGAN: No. As a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: This was a well conceived, well funded plan to do exactly what happened to this man, to convince him that there was a controversy, to convince him to smoke a filtered cigarette, to keep him buying -- so people would keep buying cigarettes while all the time we know now, because we have the internal, that that was a lie, people got hurt. This man died, this woman suffered, and it's wrong.
"The individuals we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer." This is 19- -- this is 1958 when British American Tobacco came over here and interviewed the scientists from Philip Morris and all the major tobacco companies.
And this is what they said in 1958, they concealed that.
"Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke." This is a Philip Morris document in 1961.
"Obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. The evidence challenging such an indictment scant," meaning little.
1963,	"Cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects, they cause lung cancer." Well, unattractive side effects? That's what they -that's how they describe it. Unattractive side effects. It's killing people.
"Emphysema is often fatal either directly or through other respiratory complications. A number of experts have predicted that the cigarette industry ultimately may be in greater trouble in this area than in the lung cancer field."
This is in 1963. So they're already --
they're already convinced about cigarette smoking, and now they're like, we're convinced this is also about COPD/emphysema. They knew it. And they waited till 2000 to publicly admit that, eight years after this man died?
And they make these ridiculous statements, they spend this money, millions, hundreds of millions of dollars on The Tobacco Institute and the Center for Tobacco -- and they put out this lie to influence politicians, scientists, doctors, people, with these ridiculous statements?
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: Dr. Herbert L. Ratcliffe has noted a significant increase in the frequency of lung cancer in water fowl, especially in two species of ducks at the Philadelphia Zoo located in a typical city air pollution area.
SPEAKER: Two Chicago doctors implicated fresh air is a health hazard, claiming it leads to insomnia and nightmares. Apricots have been questioned because of their cyanide component.
Betel nut chewing was linked with intestinal cancer. Old books were cited as a source for a viral infection. Cats and dogs are on the list as are milk, butter, eggs, cauliflower, peanut butter,
potatoes, corn, peas, brussels sprouts, and spinach, to name just a few foods whose consumption has been linked with human disorders.
Sex also is on the health hazards lineup, along with wax milk cartons and Worcestershire sauce.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: You know, they -- they -they wouldn't stop. They had a theme and a speech for everyone. They had something on the menu for everyone to bite on, with one goal and one goal in mind, to keep people -- keep the controversy alive, keep people smoking, so that they can make profits.
"The publicity emanated from the medical profession, linking cigarette smoking with cancer, gave some of the smaller companies an opportunity to promote their sale of filter-tip cigarettes, making use of the therapeutic claims. It is purely a merchandising and sales promotional proposition."
This is 1953. This is about filters and whether filters worked, and they knew that filters didn't work. They did this purposely. Remember in 1950, less than 1 percent of the market was filters. So what did they do? They created this filter fraud so that people would switch to filters
believing that filters were safer, when all the time they knew it was a life.
This is a Philip Morris document. "The illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration.
"As we know, all too often, the smoker who switches to a hi-if cigarette," meaning a filtration cigarette, "winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before.
"In most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. He had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the grounds of reduced risk to health.
"We say here is our triple, quadruple or quintuple filter, capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspected while delivering full flavor, and incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. And if we were the first to be able to make a sustained" -- "and sustain a claim, what price for Kent?" Kent, meaning the one that was taking over the market.
Think about what they're doing here. They
realize this whole filter thing is a fraud, and people who are smoking filters are getting more tar and nicotine because the filter actually compresses the smoke and makes you smoke in deeper, harder, and you end up getting more nicotine, more tar and more of the carcinogens.
They knew that. In fact, they knew that by introducing the filter market, they were making cigarettes even more dangerous, and those are one of the reasons that punitive damages are warranted in this case.
"If the committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry would be now in a deplorable position. The TIRC has been a successful defensive operation. Smokers" -- "We must in the near future provide an answer which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue to smoke." Not help it by telling the truth.
Here's the confession. Here's the confession. Here's the confession. "Our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and we may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
1968. They recognized they were lying, they
said it internally, they knew it, and they kept lying till the year 2000, eight years after this man died.
Obviously, the key word here is confusion. "Anything we can do to confirm such a situation would work to our advantage." They wanted to confuse people, not tell people the truth.
For nearly 2 0 years, the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and public opinion. "While the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years," they are patting themselves on the back, this was a great job, guys, great job, "over the years helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. On the contrary, it has been always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charges." Actually, these are very smart people. They knew exactly what they were doing. Look how they -- how cold and calculating they are when they describe their actions.
This is 1961. This is Philip Morris. "Carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. Present technology does not
permit selective filtration of particulates of smoke." That's what they say internally. Look what they say externally, two years later, when Philip Morris, on behalf of all the other tobacco companies, submits the information to the Surgeon General, they say the complete opposite. They say, "None of the chemical compounds listed herein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of smokers in the amounts reported in smoke."
And here it is, "It is possible, of course, to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters."
The whole time they knew that was a lie. That was a lie.
"Happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological action. Nicotine is a sine qua non of tobacco products.
"If we move towards reduction or eliminating of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business." That's how important they knew what they were selling was an addictive drug. If we take it out, we're going out of business. No way they're doing that. No way
they're doing that.
"Thus Marlboro and Kool smoke contains more free nicotine than other comparable brands. Hence, would be expected to show more instantaneous nicotine kick than other brands."
And here's one. This document, this is the notes from a scientist within the company, within Philip Morris, who breaks up with his girlfriend, forgets that he left the records in the basement, and hell has no fury like a woman scorned.
And what does she do? She gives it up. She turns it over. And when you look at the notes, look what the notes say. Enough -- "We are studying enough nicotine to keep smokers hooked." That's what they cared about.
This isn't something that grows naturally in tobacco and all this stuff that you heard. This is a well engineered, well studied product made for one reason, one reason only, to sustain addiction.
And here you have the Marlboro ads. It was the number -- Marlboro is still today the number one brand of cigarettes.
And how -- they -- they bought a lab to do studies that they were afraid to do in the United States. What do they do? "We have a major program
at INBIFO and since this is a locale where we might do some things which are we are reluctant to do in this country, I recommend that we acquire INBIFO either in toto or to the extent of controlling interest. We have gone to great pains to eliminate any written contact with INBIFO, and I would like to maintain this structure. If this procedure is acceptable to you, perhaps we should consider a dummy mailing address in Cologne for receipt of samples."
This is how they did these things. They -they do things in a terrible fashion to hide, to conceal the truth, and to do studies that they don't want the government and the people to know about. The dummy mailing addresses. Covert actions.
"The long-term scientific program should be carefully planned such the results obtained should not be able to harm the industry."
Okay. This is when they're talking about what type of scientific studies the CTR should do. "Attempt to relate human disease," these are subjects to be avoided. Don't -- don't do any studies that relate human disease to smoking.
And here's -- "If, however, the results with
nicotine are similar to those gotten with morphine and caffeine, we want to bury it." They don't want to come forward and tell people the truth. This is not a company who cares about people. This is not a company who cares about telling the truth. This is not a company who is coming and telling them, let me tell you what we know about our products. It's killing millions of people. It's very, very addictive. We shouldn't do it. You know? We're going to do things about nicotine so we can -- we can make it a more safe, a safer product. What do they do? They lie to people, and people got hurt, and it's not right.
And it talks about how they don't -removing -- removing reports, rewriting reports, destroying reports.
Does a reasonable corporation act that way?
It was set up, they're talking about CTR was set up as an industry shield. CTR acted as a front. The Surgeon General's media event was preempted by an Institute first-strike news conference.
What did they do when public health authorities came out to try to help people and tell the truth? They attacked them. They attacked
them. Is that what a reasonable corporation does?
Play it, Danny.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: The record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenge anti cigarette claims.
MS. BROWDER: The case is still open. The jury has not come in.
SPEAKER: They are not harmful, you are not convinced.
MS. BROWDER: It may be or it may not be. We don't know.
SPEAKER: We don't know what causes cancer in general right now, so I think that we may find out what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: When he said that, this was 1994, he knew the truth. It's 1990 -- this is two years after -- this is two years after this man died. He knew the truth.
They chose profits. In fact, if there was funding for, like, this guy, Leo Abood, Dr. Abood, they said, listen, we're not going to -- we're going to dig our own grave. If this guy is
successful in finding an antagonist for nicotine, why are we funding this guy? Cut him off.
They knew -- this is in 1980. Cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin -well, they're quoting, they're quoting here someone. And they said, "The lawyers remind us,
I'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case." That's me; right?
"We can't defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." 1980.
What they said, "Our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and we may be subject to a finding, that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
Why they said it? "Who ain't for more money? Do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? It is, of course, but there are dangerous FDA implications to having such conceptualization go beyond these walls."
That was their whole thing, create doubt, confusion, keep it within the walls, keep people believing the controversy, keep filters out there,
let them think it's safe. Let's keep -- let's keep it going, guys. Let's keep it going.
And the whole time people are continuing to smoke. People believing, addicted smokers, if they hear two competing messages, the addicted smoker is going to believe which one? The maker of the product who is telling them it hasn't been proven, and even if it is, smoke a filtered cigarette. And when people believe it and they get hurt by it, what happens? Who is responsible?
They show up.
THE COURT: Ten more.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Thank you.
They go to Congress, they start in 1953. 1994 they're still swearing in front of Congress, and they're still spewing their lies. They spend over
356	-- Philip Morris spent over 356 million funding these organizations. $356 million funding this campaign of lies, deceit, controversy, doubt.
This is the president of American Tobacco Company.
(Video deposition of Robert Heimann played as
follows:)
Q. Throughout your tenure with American, it was not only American's position, but your position that
cigarettes weren't injurious to health; is that accurate?
A. Through my tenure?
Q. Yes.
A. Yes, that is so.
Q. That's something American Tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct?
A. Yes.
Q. It's a statement that American Tobacco placed great reliance on?
A. We -- we issued that statement, yes.
Q. And as far as -A. Certainly, we wanted them to believe it.
Q. As far as you're concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: A person is justified on relying on those statements. And what do they say? Yes, we made those statements. And so when people believed those statements, people took those statements, and acted on those statements, what's the evidence of that?
"How is it portrayed in the movies?
"Very sexy, glamorous.
"How was it advertised in magazines and billboards?
"Yes.
"Was Marty aware that there was a controversy about smoking and health?
"Yes, he was aware.
"And did you have conversations with Marty about what he believed?
"Yes.
"Did you have discussions about that?"
And talked about the flight, how he said,
"Here they are. I'm smoking filter tips. Don't worry about it. They're safe."
That's exactly what they want people to believe. They got what they wanted. He was part of -- you saw polls of millions and millions of Americans believed -- Marty wasn't like the -- like the only guy. He was -- he was in a pool of millions and millions of Americans that believed it. Millions. They got what they wanted. It worked. They had a lot of money behind that push.
"Did he tell you what he believed about the filter in Marlboro?"
They believed that they were -- they were
safe, they were safer. Then he goes on and talks about the advertisement. He talked about Parliament. He talked about seeing the ad for Parliament. He talked about how he cut -- it had a recessed filter. He talked about how he cut it open. He opened up the filter, and there were little -- it was a different color, and there were little specs. And he said, "You see, it's working. It's safe. It's taking about the bad stuff." They duped him.
What's the purpose of a filter if not to filter out the bad stuff? And the whole time they know internally it's not taking out the carcinogens, and they didn't tell the public. In fact, they said the opposite.
"Did you ever discuss cigarette advertising with Marty?
"Yes.
"Okay. Kool cigarettes?
"Yes?
"Salems?
"Yes.
"Marlboro?
"Yes.
"And did these cigarette advertisement and
Parliament?
"Yes.
"And did those commercial advertisements encourage Marty to continue to smoke?
"Yes."
And let me tell you about what they concealed from him. What -- what Marty didn't know -- what he didn't know was that they formed the conspiracy in '53 to conceal the health effects, that they hired scientists and doctors to mislead the public, that they misled the Surgeon General, that they studied nicotine and knew it was a highly-addictive drug, that they knew that 90 percent of all smokers start as teens, they knew that 50 percent of all smokers -- 50 percent of all regular smokers will die from a smoking-related disease.
They know that, and they didn't tell people that. They knew that smoking was killing hundreds of thousands of Americans every year. They knew that they manipulated -- they didn't tell Marty. What they concealed from Marty was that manipulated the levels of nicotine, that there were 70 cancer-causing agents in cigarettes from every puff that he smoked, that there was chemicals like arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium-210. They
concealed that.
They concealed the fact that they knew that filters were no safer than non-filters. They knew that, they failed -- they concealed that, and just based on that and the evidence, we have enough for our case of reliance and that cigarettes were no safer. Philip Morris and their co-conspirators purposely misled the public about the safety of filters and low-tar cigarettes so that people could continue smoking. They concealed those facts.
THE COURT: Five minutes, Counsel.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Yeah. I may go into my -my other time.
And so, you know, we put the five -- you heard the depositions of the five CEOs, five CEOs, several from Philip Morris, two from Philip Morris, one from American, and two from Reynolds. And let's look at this because this is 1998, 1993,
1997, 1994, 1997.
"So there's no question that this was their public position after this man died, and it was before their position when he was alive; right?"
And what do they say?
Not proven. Not addictive. Disagree with the Surgeon General. Disagree with the warning labels.
Low tar and nicotine, that -- that they don't know whether low tar and nicotine are any safer. They said there is no secret documents. They have a budget of $200 million in advertising.
Members of the CTR -- they're part of the CTR, the TI, and not a single person died of a smoking-related disease. Right? This is -- in substance, this is -- this is what these men say; right?
So let me ask you. Think about it this way. This was after -- this is the position even after he died. Was he justified in relying on what they were saying? Think about that. When there was so much effort, media attention, money behind what they were saying. And he believed it. Don't deny it. Don't deny this man.
So when you asked -- when you're asked about these two questions, the answer should be yes, yes.
I'm going to go over this one very quickly.
"Was there a fault on the part of Marty McCall which was a legal cause of his cancer?"
Okay? How can you compare lies to what he did? He relied on what they told him. How could he be at fault? How could he be at fault any percent?
When you -- when two people are entering into a contract or a relationship and one is lying to you, how can it be the other person's fault if they are lying to you and concealing information from you and duping you and providing you with false and misleading information and concealing false and misleading information? How can he be negligent? How could it be his fault?
So the answer to that is no.
That's the only question on the verdict form that should be no. Everyone else should be yes.
But if you decide, hey, look, maybe he should have tried harder, maybe he should have known better. And you say, okay, well, I'm going to give him some responsibility, he has some fault, some fault; right? You've got to compare the fault about who knew more and who concealed, who had a duty to tell the truth.
And the reality is, if you do that, Philip Morris is between 95 and a hundred percent responsible, and Marty's is just de minimis compared to what they did, compared to what they did.
And so if you get to question 11, if you answer -- if you answer yes to question 4 and 5,
you get to question number 11. And it says, "Under the facts and circumstances of this case, state by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted."
I mean, this is a very -- if you don't answer yes to this question, we don't go to punitive damages, okay? So what is the evidence of punitive damages? How -- did their actions rise to the level of are they warranted? This case screams for punitive damages. Look what these people did.
"The lack of backlog of youth who have refrained from taking up smoking in face of this report. A substantial number of these can be expected to join with this year's crop of prospects."
That's what they wanted, they wanted the youth. They knew if they catch the youth, when you are a teenager you become a regular smoker, after you're a teenager, they don't care about you because they know people don't start smoking at 30. That's what they cared about. They cared about hooking our kids, hooking the teens. That's how they got Marty.
"Marlboro shares needs to be checked. College students living on campus, young people 14 to 17,
young people to 14 to 17, Marlboro shares among teenagers not covered in the benchmark study." They're targeting kids.
They do these little Johnnies. They send them out to promote children. "Induce pre-smokers and nonsmokers to become habitual smokers." "We have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. Instead, we somehow must convince of wholly irrational reasons and he should try smoking in the hopes that he will for himself then discover the real satisfactions attainable."
MR. GERAGHTY: Your Honor, I object. May we approach very briefly about this one?
THE COURT: Yes, sir.
(The following proceedings were had before the Court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.)
MR. GERAGHTY: Let me take -MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Yeah, you can take it down.
MR. GERAGHTY: Here is my objection. Talking about punitive damages, punitive damages have to be assessed specifically for conduct of Philip Morris. We're the only defendant in the case.
That's a Reynolds document he's putting up there. He's quoting Reynolds documents and saying we should be punished for things that R.J. Reynolds
says on their documents. That's not the law in the state of Florida.
And if he wants to talk about -- earlier when he was talking about conspiracy, that's one thing, but now they are talking about punitive damages against the only defendant in the case.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: I'll move on. You know what? I'll move on, it's not a big deal. That's not a big deal.
THE COURT: Objection sustained.
(The following proceedings were had in open court before the Court and the jury.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Danny, move to the next slide.
THE COURT: You may continue, Counsel.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: I'm running out of time so I'm sorry if I'm speaking fast. I'm talking fast, but I'm running out of time. Okay?
So this is 1994, they stood before Congress and they lied, two years after this man died.
(Video clip played as follows:)
SPEAKER: Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth?
WITNESSES: I do.
SPEAKER: Please consider yourself to be under
oath.
REP. WYDEN: Let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive, let me ask you first, and I would like to just go down the row whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. I heard virtually all of you touch on it. And just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive?
MR. CAMPBELL: I believe nicotine is not addictive, yes.
REP WYDEN: Mr. Johnston.
MR. JOHNSTON: Congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. There is no intoxication.
REP. WYDEN: We'll take that as a no and again, time is short. If you could just -- I think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, we would just like to have this for the record.
MR. TADDEO: I don't believe that nicotine or our products are addictive.
MR. TISCH: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MR. HORRIGAN: I believe that nicotine is not
additive.
MR. SANDEFUR: I believe that nicotine is not addictive.
MR. DONALD JOHNSTON: And I, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive.
(Video clip stopped.)
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: So this is a company, you saw Philip Morris, he was the first CEO,
Mr. Campbell, you heard from him yesterday, yesterday morning, when we read his deposition, that's him. That was him. Still 1994 not telling the truth about whether nicotine was addictive.
So "Under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against Philip Morris." The answer is resounding yes.
Now, let me talk to you a little bit about this question, because there is two parts to this question. Question number 8 assumes that you answered yes to question number 2 that his lung cancer was the cause of his death. Okay? They want you to say no to question number 2 so that you can answer question 9 and 10. Okay?
But let's talk about this. "What is the total
amount of damages sustained by Bernice McCall for the loss of her companionship and for the mental pain and suffering as a result of Martin McCall's death?"
This other one talks about, well, it didn't cause his death, but he had lung cancer that was caused by smoking, so she's entitled to some damages -- he's entitled to damages for those two month's period, and he's entitled to damages for those two month's period.
And they want you to say no to number two and say that the damages are only for two months, and that would being question number 8 -- I mean, number 9 and 10.
That's what they want, but I'm going to focus on what the evidence showed, and what the evidence showed was his lung cancer was a direct result of -- or his death was a direct result of his lung cancer, but for the lung cancer, he wouldn't have gotten this treatment and he wouldn't have died.
Look, there is no book, there is no book that you can go to that says what this lady suffered for the last 23 years and what she's going to continue to suffer.
You saw the type of relationship she had. You
saw the love that she had. There is nothing more beautiful than to watch two old people, elderly people, walk hand in hand down the street. There is nothing more beautiful than enjoying your life at the end, the sunset of your life, with a person that you loved the most? She doesn't have that. She'll never have that, and she hasn't had that.
And that's a huge loss. And that's an enormous loss.
And there is no book that you can go to, there is no table that you can go to. But you could tell that what she suffered was real, was sincere. And you only get there by loving someone more than you love yourself. And for the last 23 years, she's waited for this day. It's here today.
And -- so those are pictures of them when they were younger. They made a beautiful couple. They wanted to live the rest of their lives together in health, in peace, in harmony, and he was a humble man, she was a humble woman and even humble people have a right to be happy.
And when you're asked what the value of that is, like I said, there is no -- I can only give you a suggestion. You may think it's too low, you may think it's too high, you may think it's -- it's up
to you. Whatever you think is fair and reasonable. She is going to have to live with the verdict that you render. She has to live with that verdict for the rest of her life, what we do here today.
So I would suggest to you, I recommend to you a figure of $11.5 million for the 23 years that she's suffered and what she's going to suffer into the future.
And think about what this loss means to someone like her and what they had and what they will never have.
Thank you.



MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: May it please the Court.
May it please the Court.
He talked about freedoms, he talked about
rights, he talked about privileges, he talked about responsibilities, but you don't have the freedom, the right to lie, to misrepresent, to conceal the truth with the intention of harming people. They don't have that freedom in this country. That freedom does not exist in this country.
This country is meant for more and greater things, to protect people, not to harm people. And not to wrap yourself in freedoms to try to say that it's okay to lie and misrepresent.
It was argued to you that he smoked for 30 years because he enjoyed it. Use your common sense. He would wake up in the middle of the night to smoke. He burned his furniture. He enjoyed -I guess he enjoyed it so much that he went to acupuncture and stuck needles in himself because that's how much he enjoyed smoking. He wore a patch and chewed gum because he enjoyed so much smoking.
You were shown -- can we put that up?
You were shown this document to say, look, he had pneumonia. But when it's asked there, "If you have answered yes to any of those questions above, please explain," it says, "Asthma as a child, hayfever, and a history of bronchitis several years
ago."
The next page, here, talks about comments, "Good health, chest x-ray." This is two years before. "Good health, chest x-ray. Possible COPD," which is another smoking-related disease that the judge read to you that's caused by smoking. And it says, "No acute distress."
There's no evidence he had pneumonia at the time. In fact, the bronchoscopy, when they found the cancer, checked for that and found nothing.
And they tried to suggest that Mrs. McCall is a liar, that he didn't smoke more than a pack a day. What did his brother say?
"But he was a regular smoker in 1965?
"Yes.
"Can you estimate how much he was smoking a
day?
"A minimum of a pack a day back then."
Then it goes on. "Do you know how much he was smoking in '70 to '72?
"Over a pack a day.
"How do you know this?
"Because when I was around him, it was like one after another."
They cherry-picked a lot of the testimony that
they read to you.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Sustained.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: Let's look at the testimony. Let's look at what Dr. Bakken said, okay, because when they asked him what could have -- you know, this man got diagnosed with cancer when he got back to the hospital on November 3rd. Why would they give him chemotherapy if he had pneumonia?
And this is what he says. "And you were asked -- you were asked about whether it would be appropriate to give a patient like Mr. McCall on November 3rd chemotherapy, and you said not necessarily. Remember that?
"I remember that question.
"Okay. Why don't you explain to us.
He says, "Not necessarily means that we don't have all the facts of the case as to -- as to what was transpiring on November 3rd, and that -- and that one of the possibilities would be that he a recurrence of the cancer, and that would be a reason to administer chemotherapy after he received a number of treatments with radiation therapy.
"Is the return of the cancer a lethal
diagnosis?
"Yes, it -- it certainly can be, yes."
And what does she say about that?
Go ahead.
"Okay, your husband" -- and this is during cross-examination.
"Okay, your husband, Mr. McCall, did not undergo chemotherapy?
She says, "I have no knowledge of that. When he got sick and they brought him to the hospital, they said he had cancer, and I was -- they treated him for cancer right away, sir. They had so many intravenous bags hung up there, I don't know what those --" "what was in those bags."
And we know he got it because we have a bill that shows it. And it's reasonable to believe that when he came back, what was going to kill him was the cancer, and they wanted to stop it. Why else would they give it to him?
And they accused this lady of destroying evidence, of destroying -- there's no evidence of that. What she said is there was a bunch of documents that are unrelated to his medical care that got thrown out. There's no evidence she destroyed any medical records.
The only evidence here of who destroyed records is Philip Morris and their co-conspirators. There's documentary evidence that they did do that because they admit to doing that.
When he argued -- when you were given a scenario that, you know, legal cause and, you know, it's like a bus accident, you're crossing the street, you know, well, listen, that's an accident. This wasn't an accident.
MR. GERAGHTY: Objection, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Overruled.
MR. ALEX ALVAREZ: What they did wasn't an accident. It was intentional. They knew what they were doing. They purposely did it. They funded it, they perpetuated it, they planned it, and they executed it, and they got what they wanted.
And because of that, a woman lost her husband. And for decades, he did what they wanted him to do. He did what they wanted him to believe. And now it's just not convenient for him.
