MR. ALVAREZ: May it please the Court, Counsel.
I promise to be brief.
First of all, I want to thank you for your verdict on behalf of Ms. McKeever. It recognizes your hard work and your attentiveness in this case.
This case brought you back 50 something years to a different time, to a different place and it was very educational for me and I hope it was educational for you. I wish they'd give college credits for these trials because you really learned a lot of history, you really
learned a lot of science, you really learned a lot of medicine. So I hope -- at the beginning of this trial I told you when you were sitting out there as one of the people waiting to get chosen that at the end of this, you know, you're going to find this is a pleasant experience and I hope that it is for all of you.
So let me go through my presentation.
There's a reason that the law allows companies or people who behavior badly to be punished under the law. There's a reason. And when a company like Philip Morris behaves the way they did, they should be punished for what they did to Mr. McKeever. And she has the right to bring this lawsuit and she has a right under the law to ask for punitive damages. And your verdict yesterday told us that, your verdict told us yesterday that she is entitled to punitive damages.
So let's look at the conduct.
1980. "The lawyers remind us, I'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. We can't defend continued smoking as a 'free choice' if the
person was 'addicted.'"
And this is back in 1980. They knew this.
They knew this back in the '80s, and yet they lied to the public, they continued to misrepresent to the public.
MR. STERN: Objection, Your Honor, "continued to misrepresent to the public."
THE COURT: Thank you. Objection noted.
It's argument, counsel.
Ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence.
Proceed.
MR. ALVAREZ: 1968 memo from the Tobacco Institute. "Our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and may be subject to a finding, that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes."
1968. This is a confession. This is a confession.
1978. "Dr. Seligman brought up the grant by Dr. Abood in which one of the stated aims was to make a clinically acceptable antagonist to nicotine. This goal would have the potential of putting the tobacco manufacturers out of
business."
There's no question in their mind what they were doing to people, what they were doing to Ted, the suffering that they were going to cause, the devastation to families that they were going to cause. They did it intentionally, they did it purposely and they need to be punished to deter other corporations from doing the same thing.
MR. STERN: Objection to "other corporations," Your Honor.
THE COURT: Objection noted. It's overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: In 2001 the Monograph 13 talks about how "internal tobacco company documents demonstrate that the cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent deception of advertising that offered cigarettes as 'light' or 'ultra light' or as having the lowest tar and nicotine yields."
They knew that whole thing was deceptive.
They did it on purpose and they did it so that the addicted smoker would continue to smoke so they can make a profit while all the time they knew it was killing people and causing COPD,
lung cancer in thousands and thousands and millions of other people.
MR. STERN: Objection, harm to others, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Objection noted. Overruled.
MR. ALVAREZ: 1977. "Without the chemical compound the cigarette market would collapse."
This is a Philip Morris document.
"Philip Morris would collapse and we'd all lose our jobs and our consulting fees." That's all they cared about. That's all they cared about.
"However, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. That is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." 1982.
They had an opportunity. They knew what they were doing. They did it purposely. And now they've got to get punished.
And the level of the dishonesty went further. It went further than just concealing and making false statements. They manipulated the science and when they found out that there
was documents in their archives or in their libraries look what they said about that, that could hurt them.
"We do not foresee any difficulty to remove certain reports from research files. Once such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports...as an alternative to invalidation we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the report which appear objectionable."
They knew what they were doing. They knew they were going to get sued. They knew they could rewrite reports. They knew they were going to destroy reports. This was all a scheme premeditated with one goal in mind, it's to sell cigarettes and hurt people in the meantime in doing it.
You just heard from Mr. Jupe. Mr. Jupe would not even admit that nicotine in cigarettes was highly addictive. He couldn't look you in the face and admit that they had lied and concealed for over 50 years. Couldn't do it.
MR. STERN: Objection.
THE COURT: What's the objection, counsel?
MR. STERN: Improper argument, Your Honor, with respect to Mr. Jupe's testimony.
THE COURT: Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence and the instructions that I gave you.
Proceed, counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: He couldn't do it. He couldn't do it. He talks about all these things that happened after 2009 and after 1999, it was too late for Ted who had been smoking for 56 years. That's something they should have done in 1953 when they knew the truth. They had a chance in '63, '73, '83. They had countless opportunities to do it and they failed. And people suffered like Ted McKeever.
Remember the standard here is the greater weight of the evidence. It is not clear and convincing, it's the greater weight of the evidence.
So it's a one-question -- it's not 10 questions, it's only one. And I was thinking how do you -- you know, how do you come up with a number to punish? You know, punishment means that you feel it, right? If you want to punish
a corporation they've got to feel it or else it's not punishment. I mean, if you punish them with $100,000 or a million dollars, you know, to them this company they're not going to feel it. Punishment is meant to deter, right? They have to feel it. They don't feel it you're not deterring and you're not punishing and that's what the law is asking you to do is to punish them, to be an instrument of the law.
So when we played Dr. Raffa's deposition he says the daily excess cash that they make on one day, just one day is $12,054,795. That's how much they have in excess cash on hand every single day that they make. And we would think that somewhere between a day or two is a reasonable amount. They would feel it.
So we would suggest to you 20 million dollars and that that should be the top end of it. Okay. We're not asking for anything above that. We think 20 million dollars, in that range, is a fair and reasonable punishment that will deter others from this behavior.
MR. STERN: Objection, deterring others, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Counsel, I apologize.
Proceed, counsel.
MR. ALVAREZ: So we want to get the case to you as soon as possible, so I'm not going to take up anymore time. You've given up enough time for us and we appreciate that. And thanks for your consideration, thanks for your attentiveness, thanks for your verdict. And on behalf of Vickie McKeever and the rest of the team, we want to thank all of you.
