MR. STERN: Thank you, Your Honor.
Ladies and gentlemen, for the last time, good afternoon and the last time, thank you again for your attention.
And I'm going to be brief as well, ladies and gentlemen, but I do want to review some of the evidence and talk to you about what we think that evidence means.
With respect to the first part of the case, much of the first part of that case focused on the Philip Morris of a long time ago, the '40s, the '50s, the '60s and the '70s. And I told you the very first time that I talked to you in opening statements that a lot of the things that
were said and some of the things that were done back then by my client, by Philip Morris, I said they were inappropriate. I said some of them were wrongheaded. I said some of them were downright offensive. And I told you I wasn't going to try to defend those statements now and I wasn't -- I wasn't going to try to defend them then and I'm not going to try to defend them now. That's what I told you.
And then we had our trial and we received your verdict yesterday. And we spent some time, Ms. Sastre and I, looking over your verdict and trying to understand, as I said earlier, what evidence would be important to you in this phase of the case. And we were trying to understand what your verdict told us and how we could use that information to be helpful to you in this phase.
And one of the things that we thought your verdict told us was that you had found that the concealment -- there was no concealment or omission of material information by Philip Morris Inc. on which you found Mr. McKeever reasonably relied to his detriment on or after May 5th, 1982. And we also
understood from your verdict with respect to agreement to conceal same thing, that he didn't reasonably rely to his detriment on anything that happened after '82.
So what we took from that was that you believed that the matters that he relied on to his detriment were before May 5th, 1982.
We also understood from your verdict, looking at the allocation of fault, the percentages, we also understood from your verdict that we thought that you had found that Mr. McKeever's smoking was to some extent a shared responsibility. That's what we thought, that allocation, that's what we understood that allocation of fault to mean: 60 percent to Philip Morris and 40 percent to Mr. McKeever.
And on that point we thought that you may be under the impression that the amount of your award of compensatory damages might somehow be reduced by that percentage. And I want to tell you right now that that's not the case. The amount of compensatory damages is not going to be reduced by that percentage. With respect to the amount it's as if you had written a zero for Mr. McKeever and 100 percent for Philip Morris.
And why is it important for you to understand that your compensatory damages verdict isn't going to be reduced? That's important because of what the Judge just instructed you. He said that any amount of punitive damages you award must bear a reasonable relationship to the amount of compensatory damages which you've awarded to the plaintiff.
So -- and while I'm on the topic of the instructions, I want to point out two other instructions to you. One is that you may not seek to punish Philip Morris for any harm suffered by any individuals other than Mr. McKeever. That's in the instructions that you have. And, again, you know it's my theme that you need to keep your eye on the ball that this case is about Mr. McKeever.
We accept your verdict of yesterday. We respect your verdict of yesterday. We're going to accept and respect your verdict of today.
But we ask you once again to keep your eye on that ball and understand that we're still talking about harm suffered by Mr. McKeever.
The last thing about the instructions that I want to mention before I spend a few minutes
talking about the evidence is that you will see in the instruction that you should consider not only evidence which may seem to you evidence to support an amount of punitive damages, but also what's referred to in the instructions as mitigating evidence. And His Honor defined mitigating evidence as evidence which may demonstrate there is no need to impose punitive damages or that a reduced amount of punitive damages should be imposed against the defendant. And that last part relates to the overall principle here and that is, it's totally up to you. His Honor instructed you that you have the discretion, the ability to award nothing or, obviously, you can award more than nothing and so long as the amount bears that reasonable relationship to the amount of compensation, compensatory damages that you awarded to the plaintiff, you have full discretion and authority.
So I'd like to talk to you for just a few minutes about some of the evidence and information you got that we believe bears on the decision that you're being called upon to make today.
And we brought you one witness, Mr. Jupe.
And Mr. Jupe, as you know, works at the company today. He's in charge of cigarette design. And he told you about the Philip Morris of today. Because the Philip Morris of today is the company that we're talking about. We're talking about whether the Philip Morris of today needs to be punished to serve as a deterrent in the future, a deterrent for future conduct. So that's why we brought you somebody who can tell you what the company is like today, what the restrictions are on the company today, what the limitations are on the company today. And we also found out from him whether those restrictions are going to extend into the future. And you heard with respect to those agreements that he talked about the "in perpetuity," forever. As long as Philip Morris wants to be in the completely legal cigarette business they have to do all of those things.
They have to continue making payments. They have to continue abiding by those restrictions.
And I'm going to talk a little more specifically about those in a moment, but I'd ask you to keep in mind what Mr. Alvarez just told you, that
this is about punishment as a deterrent to future misconduct. So -MR. ALVAREZ: Objection, that's an improper instruction, Judge, it's not what it says.
THE COURT: Ladies and gentlemen, just remember you have a set of the instructions.
You rely on the instructions that I gave you.
This is counsel's argument.
Proceed, sir.
MR. STERN: Now, what did Mr. Jupe tell you about? He told you about three principal things. And I'm just going to touch on each of them briefly. He told you about the Master Settlement Agreement. Well, first he told you about the website, then he told you about the Master Settlement Agreement, then he told you about FDA regulation.
And, of course, it's Ms. McKeever who has the burden of proof on these issues, but we wanted to bring you some evidence so that you can assess what you need to assess to make the decision you need to make today.
So what did he tell you? He told you that the Master Settlement Agreement was signed -well, the agreements were signed in 1997 and
1998. And, again, we're talking about events that occurred after 1982. And we're talking about the present going forward. And you heard Mr. Jupe tell you about the restrictions that were imposed by the Master Settlement Agreement.
You may recall from the first phase of the trial I was talking to Dr. Proctor and we were talking about the radio and television ads going off the air in 1971. Then he said, oh, but there can still be ads in stadiums, there can still be branded merchandise. Well, all that is gone, no more. All of those things that Mr. Jupe told you about that are prohibited under the Master Settlement Agreement are no longer available for advertising by Philip Morris. And they never will be as long as Philip Morris wants to stay in business.
There's a ban on the use of product placement in movies. Remember the Superman clip? That can't happen anymore. That is banned. It is banned as of 1998 and will be banned for as long as Philip Morris wants to stay in business.
You also heard that under the terms of the MSA Philip Morris has to make payments to the
states every single year forever. You also heard -- you also saw the website and I'm not going to take too long to talk about this because you all saw, the basic idea when you go to the Philip Morris website, what's the message that you get as a smoker or as anybody else?
The message you get is the message of the public health community. The message you get is cigarette smoking is addictive. The message you get is, if you want more information about these issues, go to these websites. And then it links to the reports of the Surgeon General and it links to public health community websites and sources of information.
So what Philip Morris is making available to the public as information today is the very information that the public health community has to offer about health -- the health risks of smoking and the topic of smoking and health in general.
And, finally, you heard about FDA regulation of Philip Morris and the other tobacco companies. And Mr. Jupe told you that starting in 2009 Philip Morris is under virtually complete control and scrutiny by the FDA in
many, many, many aspects of its operations.
You heard about the requirements that not only the requirements that ingredient lists be provided, but also the requirement that the design of the cigarette not be changed one bit, locked down was Mr. Jupe's phrase, without prior approval of the FDA.
You learned that Philip Morris has agreed that the FDA inspectors can show up any day, any time of day and go anywhere they want to in the Philip Morris facilities. They can make any request that they want to and Philip Morris has to respond. So if one of the things that you were concerned about by your verdict and we took from your verdict that you did not believe that Mr. McKeever relied to his detriment on concealment after 1982, but we didn't miss the first part, you found that he relied to his detriment on concealment before 1982. So if what you were thinking about when you were thinking about information being concealed was, gee, they weren't saying what was in their cigarettes; gee, they were hiding what's going on at their facilities; gee, they're hiding things in their documents, you know from
Mr. Jupe's testimony that that can't happen again. So when you're thinking about deterrence you know that there is absolutely no need with respect to deterrence to award any punitive damages, because if we're talking about making sure that documents aren't concealed or that the facility is available for inspection or any of those things, they're happening already.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I will wrap up by just pointing out that we understand what you found yesterday and we understand what we're here for today. But we just would like you to consider in deciding whether to award more money to Ms. McKeever on top of your compensatory damages, we'd ask that you take all of these things into consideration. We'd ask you to take into consideration that we're talking about the Philip Morris of today not the Philip Morris of 30 and 40 and 50 years ago, which we understood from your verdict to be the Philip Morris that concealed information that Mr. Jupe [sic] reasonably relied on.
We would just ask you to take into consideration in deciding what to do today what Mr. Jupe told you about all the restrictions
that are in place today and will remain in place forever.
And then, ladies and gentlemen, as we did yesterday, we do again today, we leave this matter in your hands. We respect your judgment. We respect all the time and attention you've given to us, to all of us. We know that you will consider that evidence carefully, you will consider His Honor's instructions and you will render a fair and just verdict today.
Nothing further, Your Honor.
